@@@@@


doc= 60214


Macpherson, Ian (1905-1944), novelist, was born in Leslie Place, Forres, Moray, on 5 October 1905, the middle of three children, and the only son, of Ewen Macpherson ('b'. 1863), sheep dealer, and his wife, Mary, whose maiden name was also Macpherson ('b'. 1870). The family moved to a hill farm at Glensaugh, in Kincardineshire, and Macpherson was educated at Mackie Academy, Stonehaven, where he was dux in 1924. He went to Aberdeen University and in 1928 graduated with first-class honours in English, being awarded the Seafield gold medal. Professor A. A. Jack described him as 'the most distinguished student in the English classes during his four years' study in Aberdeen' (private information), and appointed him to a two-year post as his assistant. 
During this period Macpherson wrote his first novel, 'Shepherds' Calendar', which is largely autobiographical, set on a Kincardineshire farm that is recognizably Glensaugh, during and just after the First World War, charting the adolescent development of John Grant. It was published in 1931, the year before Lewis Grassic Gibbon's 'Sunset Song', to which it has been compared; but the distinctive strength of Macpherson's novel lies in the acute psychological perception with which he delineates the triangle of forces within the Grant family, father and mother and son, and the very convincing picture of the day-to-day work of the farm. 
In 1930 Macpherson was expected to go off to Cambridge to do postgraduate work to further his academic career, but instead he chose to take a remarkable change of direction. On 10 May of that year he married Elizabeth Cameron (1905-1989), the daughter of the Revd John Cameron and the novelist Margaret Isabel Cameron, 'nee' Noble, and together they bought a van and spent the summer hawking fruit around Speyside. When winter came they found an abandoned and isolated cottage between Laggan and Dalwhinnie, where they spent the next six years, leading a hand-to-mouth but happy existence, during which period Macpherson did most of his writing. He also pioneered radio discussions with his friend and fellow author John R. Allan. 
Macpherson's second novel, 'Land of our Fathers', was published in 1933, and is set virtually on his doorstep in Badenoch and Strathspey. It is a historically significant novel in that it is one of the first to deal with a theme, the highland clearances, which was to become important for other modern Scottish novelists such as Neil Gunn. The novel is centred on George Graeme, a borderer, and his struggle to establish his sheep-farming empire against local antagonism. Like Gunn, Macpherson is anxious to see the clearances as not simply a matter of good and bad. While Graeme rides roughshod over much that is valuable in the old culture, he does produce efficiency and a kind of prosperity. 'Pride in the Valley' (1936) is in a sense a sequel to 'Land of our Fathers', in that it is set in the central highlands in the latter half of the nineteenth century, when sheep farming is itself coming under threat from afforestation and deer-stalking. It is a more bitter novel, with a strong sense of the betrayal of the people by the old chief, Cluny Macpherson, in the face of the new commercialism. 

'Wild Harbour' marks a new departure for Macpherson as a novelist, in that instead of being about the past it was about the future. Published in 1936, it is set in 1944, and Macpherson predicts the outbreak of the Second World War, questioning the possibility of isolation and detachment in the face of the horror. His two central characters go off to live in a cave in the highlands, but their sense of natural well-being is undermined by their feeling of betrayal of their kind. As the war intrudes upon them more and more, with armed deserters and marauders scouring the country, they decide they must return. The tragedy is that the dark destiny of modern man belongs to us all, whether we like it or not. 
In 1936 Macpherson ended his own isolation when he took a job with a government agency, the Scottish Country Industries Development Trust, which involved his touring the south-west of Scotland, providing support for rural craftsmen. In 1938 he became tenant of the hill farm of Tombain, near Dunphail in Moray. He continued to produce regular journalism but there were no more novels. On 15 July 1944 Macpherson was killed in a motorcycle accident near his home. He was survived by his wife and two young daughters, and was buried in Newtonmore on 17 July 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 60215


Marshall, (Claude Cunningham) Bruce (1899-1987), novelist, was born on 24 June 1899 at 8 East Fettes Avenue, Edinburgh, the son of Claude Niven Marshall, a stockbroker, and his wife, Annie Margaret Seton Bruce. After schooling at Edinburgh Academy (1906-9) and at Trinity College, Glenalmond (1909-15), he read classics at the University of St Andrews in 1916-17, but his studies were interrupted by the First World War, in which he served from 1917 with the Royal Irish Fusiliers. Shortly before the armistice he was wounded and taken prisoner, subsequently losing a leg because of poor treatment. 
In 1919 Marshall published the first of more than forty books: his only collection of short stories. He did not return to St Andrews, but in 1922 took up his studies again at the University of Edinburgh, graduating MA in 1924, the year in which he published the first of what he himself described as nine very bad religious novels, inspired by his conversion to Roman Catholicism. In 1925 he graduated BCom at Edinburgh and the following year, after qualifying as a chartered accountant, joined the Paris branch of Peat Marwick Mitchell. In Paris, on 31 October 1928, Marshall married Mary Pearson Clark (1908-1987), known as Phyllis, daughter of William Glen Clark, a schoolmaster. Their only child, Sheila Elizabeth Bruce Marshall (later Ferrar), was born on 19 March 1931. In that year he also produced the first of his novels to be widely noticed (although more so in the United States than in Britain), and the first the older writer wished to acknowledge: this was his tenth novel, 'Father Malachy's Miracle', a humorous clerical fantasy set in Edinburgh. Revised in 1947, it was a bestseller in Italy and Germany in 1949 and 1950, and in Britain, as a children's book, survived the author's death. 
In the years leading up to and including the Second World War Marshall's stream of novels kept flowing, and he continued his accountancy work until June 1940, when, two days before the Germans entered the French capital, he returned to Britain. He served in the Royal Army Pay Corps before joining intelligence, where he was valued for his perfect French and knowledge of France. From 1945 to 1946 he was in Rome and then Vienna, working with displaced persons; these experiences of international bureaucracy inspired 'The Red Danube' (1947), later filmed, and 'A Girl from Lubeck' (1962). 
After Marshall was demobilized in 1946 he and his wife returned to Paris, then in 1948, when he retired from accountancy to devote himself to writing, moved to the south of France, where he found the climate kinder to his war wound. Here he wrote the book by which he was best-known; ironically, it was not a novel. 'The White Rabbit' (1952), the harrowing story of the capture and torture by the Gestapo of the resistance hero Wing Commander F. F. E. Yeo-Thomas, was a book that Marshall, who also served in the Special Operations Executive, of which his hero was an agent, was ideally qualified to write. It was acclaimed for its graphic power, and successfully dramatized on television. 
As Marshall's own experiences helped with the biography of Yeo-Thomas, likewise his life invariably fed into his novels. Examples, apart from those already cited, are not hard to find, and too numerous to list exhaustively. His own schooldays informed 'George Brown's Schooldays' (1946), trenchant on savagery and homosexuality in public schools. His knowledge of accountancy enabled him to write 'The Bank Audit' (1958), perhaps the most technical of financial novels. Memories of St Andrews lent colour to 'A Thread of Scarlet' (1959), a novel about priestly ambition that showed that the convert could still criticize the church he loved. That church's attitude towards birth control and celibacy was tackled in 'The Bishop' (1970), a novel Marshall thought one of his best, and best-written. However, he suffered by the inevitable comparison with two other novelists who were converts to Roman Catholicism, Evelyn Waugh and -- especially -- Graham Greene. Marshall's achievement is altogether lighter, and slighter; but it is equally distinctive and wide-ranging, and in his accessible and enjoyable farces he comes across to readers as more warmly humorous than either of his greater contemporaries. 
In the south of France the Marshalls lived first at Juan-les-Pins and then went to the Cap d'Antibes; they spent the last thirty-four years of their lives at Clos Riant, 104 boulevard du Cap, shared with up to ten cats. The writer had many good friends, who regarded him with great affection, and many visited him in France and were welcome, though unexpected invasions of his privacy by acquaintances making Antibes a stepping-stone on their holiday journeys could elicit unfavourable comment from the very forthright Scot. He was also notably cheerful, which may be partly why he got on especially well with children, enjoying long conversations with them. He was particularly delighted that his granddaughter followed him in becoming a chartered accountant with his old firm, now called KPMG, in which he accurately predicted she would become a partner, though he did not live to see this. Marshall died in hospital in Biot on 18 June 1987, a month after being operated on for cancer. After his funeral in Biot, his ashes were scattered in the garden of the crematorium at Nice. His widow survived him by only two months. 


@@@@@


doc= 60216


Morrison, Agnes Brysson Inglis (1903-1986), writer, was born on 24 December 1903 at Merchiston, Scotstounhill, Renfrew, near Glasgow, the fifth of six children of Arthur Mackie Morrison, engineer, son of a Glasgow baillie, and his wife, Agnes Brysson Morrison CBE, 'nee' Inglis, who invented and organized flag days during the First World War. She was educated at the Park School for Girls, Glasgow, and briefly at Harvington College, London, and came from a family of writers: five out of the six Morrison children went on to have a career in some way connected to literature. Morrison herself began writing as a child and describes herself rising 'early in the morning to do it in secret', claiming 'as far back as I can remember I have had the wish, or urge, to write. It goes right back to my nursery days' (NL Scot., MS 27354, fol. 36). 
Morrison's first novel, 'Breakers', notable for containing one of the earliest fictional depictions of the highland clearances, was published by John Murray in 1930, and she went on to publish nine more, as well as biographies of Mary queen of Scots, Henry VIII, the Brontes, and Thomas and Jane Carlyle. Between the years 1942 and 1959 she also published twenty-eight romantic novels under the pseudonym Christine Strathern. A lifelong and committed member of the Church of Scotland, many of Morrison's novels are set in manses or reflect church life, and some of her non-fiction, such as 'The Keeper of Time: Stories of the Disciples' (1953) and 'They Need No Candle: the Men who Built the Scottish Kirk' (1957), has a more overt Christian content. 
During her own life Morrison's fiction met with much acclaim, being commended for its 'painting of Scottish scene and character' and its blending of 'literary delicacy and terse, ironic realism' (NL Scot., MS 27373, fol. 27). 'The Gowk Storm' was a Book Society choice when it was first published in 1933 and was later adapted for radio, stage, and film, and 'The Winnowing Years' (1949) won the first Frederick Niven award. Her fiction also gained praise from her contemporaries, including Edwin and Willa Muir. Morrison's work was highly regarded in the United States where her last novel, 'Thea' (1962), was published and where her biography of Mary queen of Scots received a Literary Guild award in 1961. Literary interest in Morrison's work began to revive in the late twentieth century, particularly in relation to her treatment of women. 
Nancy Brysson Morrison never married and was an extremely private person, but it is clear that her family was of lifelong importance to her. For much of her life she lived with her sister Mary, first of all in Glasgow, and then from the sixties in Edinburgh. Later, she moved to Hampstead, London, to be near her brother Tom. This importance is reflected in literary correspondence, much of which, in particular from her eldest sister Peggy (who published romantic novels under the name March Cost), involves detailed commentary on drafts of her work along with suggestions and encouragement. 'Another advantage of all being writers', writes Morrison, 'is that we can discuss ideas, themes, and situations amongst ourselves' (NL Scot., MS 27354, fol. 41). 
As a young woman Morrison enjoyed riding and walking, and, throughout her life, travel. She visited Italy and Switzerland in the thirties, and Sweden in 1946. She was also an active member of PEN, believing firmly in its principles of free speech and taking a strong interest in its debates after the Second World War. 
After her death, Nancy Brysson Morrison's literary papers were deposited in the National Library of Scotland, and they show that in her working practices Morrison was both disciplined and methodical. Notebooks give evidence of meticulous research, along with ideas for themes, settings, and even words and phrases jotted down over a number of years. 'My brothers and sisters can write anywhere, in a room with other people talking,' writes Morrison, 'but neither my sister Peggy nor I am like that. We have to have peace and quiet. That is why I have a small office in town, with no telephone, where I work and keep business hours' (NL Scot., MS 27354, fols. 38-9). Nancy Brysson Morrison died of cancer in St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, on 27 February 1986. Her ashes were taken north to be buried in her sister Mary's grave in Ballater, Deeside. 


@@@@@


doc= 60217


Power, William (1873-1951), writer and journalist, was born at 16 Arlington Street, Glasgow, on 30 August 1873, the eldest of the five children of William Power (1839/40-1886/7), shipmaster, and his wife, Ada, 'nee' Denham (1839/40-1904). Both parents came from Brechin, Forfarshire. He attended Woodside School in the west end of Glasgow, but had to leave at the age of fourteen as a result of his father's death at Gibraltar from west African fever. In 1887 he obtained a position with the Royal Bank of Scotland in Glasgow, where he was employed for twenty years. On 20 August 1906, he married Giulia Dick (1871/2-1922), a schoolteacher, and the following year, encouraged by the success of essays he had contributed to the 'Glasgow Herald', he joined the paper as a full-time member of its editorial staff and remained there as essay and leader writer for nearly another twenty years. His first wife died in 1922, and in 1924 Power married Williamina Mills (died 1946); there were no children of either marriage. In 1926 Power resigned from the 'Glasgow Herald' to become editor of the 'Scots Observer', a new weekly supported by the Scottish churches. The paper was not successful and he left the editorship in 1929 to work for Associated Newspapers. 
William Power was much more than a journalist. Although forced by circumstances to be largely self-educated, he had a wide knowledge of his country's history and literature, and of literature generally, together with a keen critical understanding, qualities developed through his mother's love of the songs and sayings of her native Forfarshire. He was a considerable essayist and critic himself, and a supporter of the new writing of the inter-war Scottish cultural revival -- he was in touch with all the major figures of the 'Scottish renaissance'. His autobiography is significant for its contemporaneous perspectives on the events of that period, both within and outside of Scotland. His first published work, in 1893, was an extended blank verse poem, 'Clutha', about the river-spirit of the Clyde. Among his many subsequent writings about Scotland, his principal publications include 'The World Unvisited' (1922), 'Robert Burns and other Essays and Sketches' (1926), 'My Scotland' (1934), 'Scotland and the Scots' (1934), 'Literature and Oatmeal' (1935), 'Should Auld Acquaintance... : an Autobiography' (1937), and 'The Culture of the Scots: its Past and Future' (1943). He stood unsuccessfully as Scottish nationalist candidate in the parliamentary by-election in Argyll in 1940, and was associated with the movement for a parliament in Edinburgh as chairman and then president of Scottish Convention. 
Power was no narrow nationalist, however. Like Hugh MacDiarmid and Neil Gunn he saw nationalism and internationalism as being essentially complementary. He was a founder member of Scottish PEN and its president (1935-8), and was latterly a president of the Glasgow Esperanto Society. Other interests are seen in his presidency of the Scottish Ramblers' Federation (1934) and his membership of the Glasgow Art Club and Edinburgh Arts Club. 
Power lived principally in Glasgow and later at Corra Linn, Stirling. He died in hospital in Alloa, Clackmannanshire, on 13 June 1951; his funeral service was held at Glasgow Cathedral on 16 June, and he was buried in Old Eastwood cemetery, Glasgow. Obituaries commented on his intellectual curiosity, his kindness towards young writers, his humour, his love for his country, and on his being 'a good European and a world citizen'. His own words from his autobiography make a fitting epitaph: 'To help in the restoration of national culture was my central aim'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60218


Taylor, Rachel Annand (1876-1960), poet and literary scholar, was born on 3 April 1876 at 51 Queen Street, Aberdeen, the second of the five children of John Wilson Annand, mason and socialist pioneer, and Clarinda Dinnie of the Deeside highlands. She was influenced by her father's passionate intellect and her mother's knowledge of highland mythology. She had a robust 'disregard for the more bourgeois virtues of prudence and respectability' (Grierson, 153) and her awareness of the effects of poverty mingled with pride in what could be achieved under its constraints is evident in one of her most often anthologized poems, 'The Princess of Scotland'. 
Rachel Annand trained as a teacher at Aberdeen Training Centre (1894-7), where she was eligible to attend university classes. Although she did not graduate, she was one of the first women to take arts classes after the admission of women to the university, and in 1943 was awarded an honorary doctor of laws degree by Aberdeen University. She studied philosophy and English literature with Herbert J. C. Grierson, who remembered her as 'a young woman with a startling shock of red hair whom, when an essay came to be read, I placed alone in the first class' (Grierson, 152). She continued to excel in her studies and some early poetry was published in the 'British Weekly'. Rachel Annand taught at the High School for Girls in Aberdeen before marrying Alexander Cameron Taylor (1875-1943), an Aberdeen graduate, on 15 July 1901. Alexander Taylor was a classics teacher in Dundee, where the couple settled at 9 Balgon Avenue. 
Taylor's first volume of poetry, 'Poems', which clearly demonstrates her links with aestheticism, was published in 1904. Sir Patrick Geddes, with whom Taylor became acquainted in Dundee, raised a subscription to bring out her second collection, 'Rose and Vine' (1909). She wrote two further volumes, 'The Hours of Fiammetta' (1910), a sonnet sequence, and 'The End of Fiammetta' (1923). Fiammetta, the muse of Boccaccio, is used as a symbol of the feminine 'behind all the processes of art' ('The Hours of Fiammetta', preface). 
When her husband's mental health collapsed and he was institutionalized, Taylor embarked on a precarious writing career in London, describing the trauma of the previous period to Geddes as, 'the dim nightmare called Dundee' (NL Scot., MS 10572, fol. 25). Her niece, the Glasgow artist Louise Annand, believes Taylor supported herself by reviewing. She stayed at 17 Jenner House, Hunter's Street, Bloomsbury, within easy reach of the British Museum reading room, where she conducted research into medieval and Renaissance literature. At the request of Gilbert Murray, Taylor produced 'Aspects of the Italian Renaissance' (1923) which, together with 'Leonardo the Florentine' (1927), contained 'a vividly imaginative interpretation and recreation of the picturesque past' bringing the aims of Pater, Symonds, and Wilde to their apotheosis (Aldington, 6). Taylor's scholarly work, though largely disregarded by subsequent commentators, also contains evidence of attitudes towards contemporary cultural debates. Her chapter 'Women of the Renaissance' in 'Aspects' is an important early twentieth-century reflection on the significance of female gender. This theme is revisited in the preface to 'Hours', where she describes herself as 'equally inimical... to the opposing camps of hausfrau and suffragist' ('Hours', 5-6); and in 'The End of Fiammetta', where Taylor writes regretfully about not having had children because of her devotion to writing ('End', 100-01). 
Taylor's poetic style was criticized by C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) because its aesthetic embellishment and non-Scottish focus was, by his modernist analysis, merely effete, 'It is mostly very preciose, very far-fetched, very mannered, very unreal' (MacDiarmid, 326). In 1931 Taylor published a monograph, 'Dunbar: the Poet and his Period' (1931) on the medieval poet, her contribution to the renewed interest in Scottish literature encapsulated in MacDiarmid's phrase 'Not Burns, Dunbar!' 
Louise Annand remembers her aunt as a somewhat 'formidable' woman whose 'dress could only be described as 'Celtic'!' (Forrest, 28). Towards the end of 1959 Taylor sustained a fall in her home. She died of non-alcoholic cirrhosis of the liver and heart failure on 15 August 1960 at the Elizabeth Garrett Hospital, St Pancras, London, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 18 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 60219


Trocchi, Alexander Whitelaw Robertson (1925-1984), writer, was born on 30 July 1925 at 29 Smith Street, Glasgow, the third son of Alfredo Luigi Trocchi (died 1963) and Annie Jack Langley, 'nee' Robertson (died 1942). His father, child of an Italian immigrant, had been a music-hall performer and musician, then turned to managing orchestras and bands. By the time of his youngest son's birth he had partly Anglicized his name to Alfred Louis Trocchi, and mindful of anti-Italian prejudice in Glasgow, his elder sons later dropped his surname in favour of Robertson, their mother's maiden name. Her family were irreproachably middle class. Changing musical tastes and ill health made Alfredo permanently unemployable. The Trocchis moved from the south side to the centre of the city, where Annie ran their premises as a boarding-house. Like his brothers Alexander Trocchi was educated at the very reputable Hillhead primary school and high school, where he did well in his studies and as a sportsman. The school was evacuated to Galloway when the Second World War started, but in January 1942 Alex was called home. His mother had died suddenly, poisoned by a can of pilchards, and was lowered, as he put it, 'into a grave that was my destruction'. He was consciously marked by this blow for the rest of his life. 
Trocchi enrolled at Glasgow University later that year, but in February 1943 was called up for war service. He trained as a Fleet Air Arm pilot, partly in Canada, but for reasons not clear was transferred before qualifying into the Royal Navy as a seaman. He performed well in escort duties on the icy and perilous Arctic convoy route to Murmansk. Before demobilization in November 1946 he was offered a commission, but chose instead to re-enter Glasgow University as a student of English and philosophy. 
Two reputations -- for brilliance and for deviance -- began at university, where Trocchi displayed his capacity to draw people to him with his charm, and then manipulate them. He lived with a veterinary student, Betty Whyte, in a shepherd's cottage 10 miles out of Glasgow, where he attempted for a time to raise pigs. On 15 January 1947 they were secretly married, and their first daughter, Jacqueline, was born exactly a year later. Betty's studies had lapsed, but in 1950 Alex sat his final exams. Due to a miscalculation in his use of benzedrine Alex fell asleep in a philosophy final, but very good marks in English obtained him second-class honours, and his tutors, who had thought him worthy of a first, secured him the Kemsley travelling scholarship. Alex, however, did not want to become an academic. He had for years been experimenting with creative writing, and with wife and daughter he travelled widely in Europe before settling in a suburb of Paris. In 1951 a long poem by Trocchi appeared in the very prestigious Rome-based journal 'Botteghe Oscure', and launched him as an 'international' writer. A second daughter, Margot, was born in May that year. 
In 1952, when Trocchi committed himself to living in Paris, there were thousands of expatriate Americans in the city, many of them aspirant creative writers. Drugs -- not only benzedrine, but hashish and cocaine -- were part of their culture. Invited by a rich American to edit a new magazine, Trocchi was attracted by Jane Lougee, an American woman with means, from Maine, designated his assistant. He demanded a separation from Betty who eventually, after Trocchi had secured a Mexican divorce in Paris, went to bring up their daughters in New Zealand. In May 1952 the first of eleven issues of 'Merlin' appeared. Its 1000 copies were peddled by young avant-gardists in Amsterdam, London, and New York as well as Paris. During its brief existence the journal published work by Sartre, Genet, Eluard, Ionesco, Hikmet, Italo Svevo, Robert Creeley, Pablo Neruda, Henry Miller, and Samuel Beckett. Trocchi and his fellow enthusiasts established Collection Merlin to publish books, and it brought out Beckett's first major English-language publication, 'Watt'. 
This publishing enterprise came under the control of Maurice Girodias, who backed it on the understanding that Trocchi's circle would supply texts -- 'dirty books' -- for his Olympia Press, founded in 1953 to take advantage of the absence of censorship in France and to tap the local and international markets for English-language pornography. Trocchi himself supplied seven such texts over three years, five under the pseudonym Frances Lengel: 'Helen and Desire' (1953); 'The Carnal Days of Helen Seferis', 'Young Adam', 'School for Wives' (all 1954); and 'White Thighs' (1955). In 1954 he contributed 'Frank Harris -- my Life and Loves: Volume 5', a concocted continuation of an existing 'dirty book', and, in 1955, 'Thongs', the 'memoirs' of Carmencita de las Lunas. These books later appeared, with variant titles, in many editions, some pirated, and in numerous languages. They should not be regarded as mere hackwork; Trocchi composed blatant pornography with the skills of a remarkable prose stylist. 'Thongs', for instance, is detached, parodic, and largely hilarious, and involves sharp implicit satire of the Catholic church. 'Young Adam' was Trocchi's first 'serious novel', and Trocchi later removed gratuitous sexual episodes on which Girodias had insisted, and published it as his own work. This latter novel was treated respectfully by critics who noted its close relationship with Camus's 'L'etranger'. The unlikeable protagonist, Joe, encountered working on a barge on the Forth and Clyde Canal, is and is not responsible for the death of his lover by drowning. Eroticism pervades the book, connected with what may be called Trocchi's major philosophical preoccupation -- for the solipsistic narrator the world should exist 'not as a foreign element to be looked at' but as 'an extension of myself'. The proprieties of respectable society prevent us breaking into true continuity of self with others, self with world -- 'the profoundest experiences are in the ordinary situation locked out from one's arena of experience by the inflexible barrier of good character' (1996 edn, 69, 36). 
In August 1954 Jane Lougee went back to America, where she soon afterwards married; Trocchi's already exuberant promiscuity was accentuated. 'Merlin' folded in 1955, and Trocchi decided to quit Paris. After some time in London, in April 1956, he followed Jane to the United States, where by the autumn he was a 'scow captain' with the New York Trap Rock Corporation, on a barge shifting heavy cargoes on the city's waterways, a job which gave him much free time for writing. By now his addiction to heroin was confirmed for life, and the country in which he found himself was unsympathetic to drug addicts. From the sphere of high Parisian literary talk Trocchi had descended into a hell of heavily stigmatized criminality. But it was at a literary party in Greenwich Village that he met a respectable 21-year-old, Marilyn Rose Hicks. He left the scows and they drove to Mexico, where Trocchi divorced Betty for a second time and, on 13 August 1957, married Lyn. They wintered in Venice West, Los Angeles, where the new 'beat generation' of writers had one of its epicentres. Trocchi impressed Allen Ginsberg and met Kerouac, Corso, Snyder, and Ken Kesey. They travelled on in April 1958 to Las Vegas, where Lyn made money for heroin through prostitution. Back in New York, their first son, Mark, was born on 2 October. 
The following March Trocchi signed a contract with Grove Press for 'Cain's Book', which came out in 1961 and is without doubt Trocchi's major achievement. It had been years in the making, as the book itself explains: it is a book about the writing of a book by another protagonist called Joe who is and is not Trocchi himself, working on a scow in New York and digressing back to experiences in Europe, mostly in Glasgow. It displays Trocchi's range, intellectually evoking existentialism, the beats, surrealism, a species of revolutionary socialism, and a Beckett-like ideology. Stylistically it mixes careful, lucid, naturalistic description with philosophizings which are sometimes pretentious and often opaque, and passages of hilarious or eerie fancifulness. Drug addiction is painfully presented. The solipsism of the book's first-person consciousness, shifting between abjectness, anger, and arrogance, is mitigated by the warmth of unsentimental feeling expressed towards Joe's Scottish-Italian parents. In American and British reprints, and in translations into half a dozen languages, it sold a great many copies. Meanwhile in 1959 Trocchi brought out two more pornographic works with Castle Books of New York, a firm as unscrupulous as Olympia, but less distinguished. Payment for these and other writings was not enough to deter Trocchi from sponging off well-to-do American friends whom he had met in Paris, or from sending Lyn out again to sell her body. The US authorities were cracking down harder than ever on heroin use. Trocchi, sometimes held overnight in police cells, was pusher as well as addict. In April 1961 he was charged with supplying the drug to a minor, and faced a possible death penalty. George Plimpton, a young man of distinguished family, put up bail of $5000, and, wearing two of Plimpton's suits which he had stolen, Trocchi escaped over the Canadian border. The singer-songwriter Leonard Cohen took care of him as he waited for a steamer for the UK. 
Britain was a calmer world. The country then had comparatively few heroin addicts and there was as yet little public outcry over drug abuse. Trocchi was still an 'outsider', but merely as an unusual kind of writer, radiating alien influences and uttering heterodox views -- though by the end of the decade these would be components, almost drearily familiar, of the more extreme wing of sixties 'youth culture'. In August 1962 Trocchi clashed at a writers' conference during the Edinburgh Festival with the irascible doyen of Scottish literature, Hugh MacDiarmid, who described him as 'Cosmopolitan scum' and as 'A writer of no consequence whatever'. The two men shortly made a truce, and the controversy increased Trocchi's fame. 
Secure in supplies of legally prescribed heroin, Trocchi fitted into the emergent 'sixties' culture of rock music and performance poetry with an ease which perhaps destroyed his talent. Arrogant, paranoid isolation had been his posture. After 'Cain's Book' appeared in a British edition from Calder Books (Beckett's London publishers), Sheffield magistrates' court pronounced it obscene but the resulting ban had no effect beyond the city boundaries. Again, the publicity was good for Trocchi. In 1966 the mainstream New English Library republished 'Young Adam' in Trocchi's final version. This and his other books continued to sell well, though because of the shaky nature of his contracts with Girodias and other publishers Trocchi never reaped the full benefits of his international fame. Meanwhile, basing himself in London, where Lyn and his son had joined him, he functioned as a guru of the new avant-garde. Thus he compered an international reading by beat and 'underground' poets at the Albert Hall with an audience of several thousand. In his Paris days he had helped to found the Situationist International, a revolutionary groupuscule which operated with explosive -- destructive -- effect in the student revolt which hit Europe in 1968-9. In 1964 his essay 'Invisible insurrection of a million minds' announced the formation of 'sigma', a situationist initiative, 'a kind of spontaneous university', designed to link 'thoughtful individuals all over the world' in an assault on capitalist order through such means as privately circulated essays, poetry on toilet rolls, sale of artworks cutting out the middleman, and 'happenings' -- bizarre events. A number of significant writers and artists took sigma seriously. Such were the times. Trocchi was fashionable. Dabbling in art now, he was asked to lecture in the sculpture department of the distinguished St Martin's School of Art. The Arts Council gave him a writer's grant of $500 in 1970, though 'The Long Book' which Calder had announced for publication in 1966 -- perhaps, in fact, merely a collection of occasional writings -- was never finished. An unsuccessful collection of poems, mostly written in the fifties, 'Man at Leisure' (1972), was to be Trocchi's last book. 
Lyn had produced a second son, Nicolas, in December 1966. She was worse hit by her addiction than Trocchi, and in November 1972 she died, aged thirty-five, of chronic hepatitis with complications. In May 1977 their promising son Mark died of cancer of the throat. A young New Zealand woman, Sally Child, moved in to console Trocchi. He had lived since the mid-sixties in a penthouse flat in Observatory Gardens, a desirable address in Kensington. Income came from various sources -- translations from the French, film rights (a film of 'Cain's Book' with major stars came tantalizingly close to realization), and profitable second-hand book stalls. The 'monster' demonized by the press (his pornographic books were still subject to well-publicized seizures and bans) was at last a melancholy, soft-spoken, middle-aged gentleman, to be seen acquiring rare books at Sothebys sales. On 15 April 1984, some time after an operation for lung cancer, Trocchi died at his home of lobal pneumonia. He was cremated at Mortlake crematorium, London, on 25 April. In December of that year fire mysteriously swept through his flat. His son Nicolas shortly afterwards committed suicide by jumping off its roof. 
To declare that Trocchi had been unjustly forgotten became at once a favourite posture of those admirers who preferred to think of the man as rejected, misunderstood and, as a result, their private property. In his last twenty-three years he had published no new fiction. Andrew Murray Scott's biography, published in 1991, showed the continuity of academic interest in him in his native Scotland. The biography antedated by two years the wave of Scottish fiction about a new youth 'drug scene' which was launched by Irvine Welsh's immensely successful 'Trainspotting' (1993). This provoked further reprints of Trocchi, but, as Welsh's partly dismissive comments about him suggest, the drug scene of the 1950s and 1960s in Britain, when there were few addicts, was very different from that of the 1980s and 1990s, when drugs became a problem affecting a much greater number of people, and engrossing a larger proportion of police time. Trocchi, with his relentless intellectualism and his generally fastidious, often 'poetic' prose, might well strike Welsh as an interesting middle-class antique. And yet, with the publication of 'Cain's Book', Trocchi was established as one of the main Scottish writers of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 60220


Clark, Elizabeth Thomson (1918-1978), writer, was born on 22 June 1918 at 31 Fenham Road, Wallsend, near Newcastle upon Tyne, of Scottish parents, John MacFie Carswell and Janet (Jenny) Love Thomson. Her father was an engineering draughtsman for Vickers Armstrong. Elizabeth was the eldest in a family of two sisters and a brother, and spent most of her life in and around Glasgow. When she was twelve her mother developed tuberculosis, and she assumed the multiple role of daughter, housewife, and surrogate mother to her siblings. Despite the wishes of her teachers, she left school (Langside Academy) at fourteen and combined her domestic duties with work as a clerk. On 15 July 1939 she married a Glasgow businessman, John Lochhead Clark ('b'. 1912/13), with whom she had a daughter, Frances, the same year. She raised her single-handedly while her husband fought in the Second World War. 
Her brother, Ian, recalled that in childhood Elizabeth would write and narrate stories and poems for him and his sister. He also remembered her as typically being last home from school, dreamily walking backwards along the pavement, mulling over the day's discoveries, and recalled weekend visits to their grandmother's home where there was much singing led by several aunts and uncles from the Greenock Gaelic Choir. When she began to write publicly in the 1950s, Elizabeth adopted a pseudonym, Joan, the name of her sister, who had committed suicide soon after the war, and Ure, because she liked the sound. 
Ploughing a lonely furrow in the Scotland of the 1950s, Elizabeth veered more and more towards the particular challenge of playwriting, one especially daunting for a woman in a heavily male-orientated society. Strikingly beautiful, but physically fragile from the tuberculosis and the anorexia nervosa which were to lead to her comparatively early death, and constantly aware of the conflicting demands of conventional marriage and deeply committed writing, she gradually found, or created, platforms for her work. 'Punctuated Rhythms' was staged at the Falcon Theatre, Glasgow, in 1962, 'I See myself as this Young Girl' at Glasgow Citizens' Close Theatre in 1965, several plays by the Arts Theatre Group at Glasgow University from 1965 to 1971 and then by the touring Stage Company (Scotland), which she helped to found, through to 1973. Thereafter her plays were presented at theatres throughout Scotland, and several broadcast by BBC Radio Scotland. 
Given Elizabeth's personal history and the climate of the times, the plays may initially appear examples of conscious, even didactic, feminism. But they transcend rigid categorization, ranging over such areas as love, its end, the role of the artist, the state of Scotland, religion, marriage, the Scottish mother, the Scottish father, even the Scottish soldier. Like her poems and essays they display an affectionate though measured appreciation of male attitudes and responsibilities, an awareness of the price women may pay for asserting their independence. Generally short and moderately cast, partly for economic reasons but also reflecting the elegant conciseness of her rhetoric, they dance off the page with wit, subtlety, sheer fun, and a poet's precision. She was, though, a poet who exploited the additional possibilities of the stage: she incorporates a jazz combo in 'Punctuated Rhythms', a dancer in 'Scarlet Mood', a blues singer in 'Nothing may Come of it', a solitary double bed (and two actors) in 'My Year for being Rich and Famous is Nearly over'. Of more than thirty plays, perhaps the two which best encapsulate her art are 'The Hard Case', originating in the Ibrox Stadium football disaster of 1971 when sixty-six mainly young Glaswegians died in a crowd stampede, and 'Seven characters out of the dream (a comedy for 7 costumes left over from a Shakespearean production -- made in one piece)'. Elizabeth Clark died of respiratory failure caused by asthma on 24 February 1978 in Ballochmyle Hospital, Mauchline, Ayrshire, and was cremated at Linn crematorium, Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 60221


Amis, Sir Kingsley William (1922-1995), writer, was born on 16 April 1922 at 102 South Side on the edge of Clapham Common in south London, the only child of William Robert Amis (1889-1963), a senior clerk in the London office of J. J. Colman & Co., the mustard manufacturer, and Rosa Annie (Peggy), 'nee' Lucas (1891-1957). The family milieu was suburban and lower-middle-class. 
Amis was raised in Norbury, a ward of the borough of Croydon, and educated at St Hilda's primary school and Norbury College, and, in 1934, as a fee-paying pupil at the City of London School, located at Victoria Embankment, which his father and two uncles had attended before him (from 1935 he attended the school on scholarship). In August 1939 City of London was evacuated to Wiltshire, where it shared facilities with Marlborough College. Here Amis spent the final two years of his secondary education as a boarder. In 1940 the family moved to Berkhamsted in Hertfordshire within commuting distance of London (and outside the flight path of enemy bombers). 
In April 1941 Amis went up to St John's College, Oxford, to read English as an exhibitioner (during the war the university allowed undergraduates to matriculate at the beginning of Hilary or Trinity terms). A week after his arrival in Oxford he met Philip Larkin, also reading English at St John's, and quickly formed a friendship which became the most important of both men's lives and a crucial shaping influence on post-war literature. At Oxford Amis was an open and active communist (he joined the party in June 1941), sang in the University Labour Club choir, and edited the club's 'Bulletin' for a term. He also wrote poems for university periodicals and collaborated with Larkin on poems, stories, and parodies (often of writers on the Oxford syllabus). Amis's literary ambitions at Oxford were largely poetical. The most important contemporary influences on his early poetry, aside from Larkin, were W. H. Auden and William Empson; among living novelists, he and Larkin admired Christopher Isherwood, Graham Greene, Henry Green, and Julian Hall, author of 'The Senior Commoner' (1933), 'a wonderful marsh-light of a novel whose influence in 1946 or so was to help to render unpublishable the predecessor of 'Lucky Jim' [a novel entitled 'The Legacy']' (K. Amis, 'Memoirs', 55). 
Amis's undergraduate education was interrupted by the war. In July 1942 he joined the Royal Signals and in November 1943 was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Second Army headquarters signals, landing at Normandy in June 1944. He travelled with the Second Army through France, Belgium, and Germany, never once encountering enemy fire. During five months stationed at Sonnis in Belgium he attempted his first adult fiction, 'Who Else is Rank', an unfinished and unpublished 80,000-word novel jointly written with a fellow officer, E. Frank Coles, and closely based on the authors' wartime experiences (several stories in 'My Enemy's Enemy', 1962, his first collection of stories, were also inspired by the war). Amis was demobilized and returned to Oxford in October 1945. 
Though Larkin had finished his studies at Oxford in June 1943 (he had been exempted from military service because of poor eyesight) the two friends kept in close touch by letter and through occasional visits, Larkin to Oxford and Amis to Leicester, where Larkin worked from 1946 to 1950 at the university library. Amis's first book of verse, 'Bright November', which drew on his wartime experience, was published in 1947. In December of that year he was awarded a first-class degree and began work on a BLitt thesis entitled 'English non-dramatic poetry 1840-1900 and the Victorian reading public', first under Lord David Cecil, then under F. W. Bateson (the thesis was not completed until May 1950 and was failed in November, partly, Amis suspected, because of opposition from Cecil, one of its examiners). On 21 January 1948 Amis married Hilary Ann (Hilly) Bardwell (1928-2010), a student at the Ruskin School of Art, Oxford (and daughter of Leonard Sidney Bardwell, a retired staff officer at the Ministry of Agriculture), whom he had first met in January 1946. Their first child, Philip, was born on 15 August 1948; their second son, the writer Martin Amis, was born on 25 August 1949; a daughter, Sally, was born in 1954. 
In October 1949, after several unsuccessful applications to universities in Britain and abroad, Amis was appointed an assistant lecturer in English at the University College of Swansea. Amis enjoyed teaching there and got on well with his colleagues, but the family had very little money. Amis had to supplement his income by outside examining and extramural teaching, while his wife took on part-time work as a cleaner. Despite his failure to find a publisher for his novel 'The Legacy', late in 1949 he embarked on a second novel, provisionally titled 'Dixon and Christine'. With Larkin's help and encouragement, plus Hilly's timely inheritance of a small legacy (enabling the family to move into a bigger house, one with a room of his own for writing), a first draft was finished in November 1951. In April 1953 a much revised version of this draft, retitled 'Lucky Jim', was accepted by Victor Gollancz and its publication in January 1954 transformed Amis's life. 'Lucky Jim' was soon a financial and critical success: 7500 copies were in print by mid-February, 12,000 by the end of the year, in sixteen Gollancz-style mini-impressions; the American rights were sold to Doubleday, and film rights were sold to the Boulting brothers. 

'Lucky Jim' has been described as the finest comic novel of its generation, the earliest and most influential of 'campus' or 'redbrick' novels, and a key text both of the Movement, the pre-eminent poetical grouping of the period, and of the 'angry young men'. According to Amis, its success derived from traditional comic ingredients: 'a young man at odds with his surroundings, and trying to make his way, and suffering comic misfortunes, and getting the girl -- it can't fail, really' (McDermott, 54). Others saw it as heralding important social changes. To the novelist David Lodge, Amis 'articulated through his hero, Jim Dixon, the feelings of a much larger number of people in the next generation (my own) who were products of the 1944 'Education Act' and the Welfare State. Through the comedy of Jim's private fantasies and accidental breaches of social decorum, Amis gave us, as it were, permission not to be overawed by the social and cultural codes of the class to which we had been elevated by education. It was enormously liberating. ('The Independent')' Amis was not always comfortable with such readings. Though Jim is often at odds with polite or established codes and norms, he is no rebel, which is in part why Amis consistently deplored the novel's association with the angry young men. 'There was no anger', Amis has declared, 'unless a mild, usually amused and very intermittent irritation can be called anger' (McDermott, 21). As for the angry young man phenomenon itself, Amis called it 'a phantom creation of literary journalists' ('Letters of Kingsley Amis', 704). The novel's association with the Movement, in contrast, was more substantial. The term itself was coined in 1954 by J. D. Scott, literary editor of 'The Spectator', who applied it to Amis, John Wain, Elizabeth Jennings, Thom Gunn, John Holloway, Donald Davie, D. J. Enright, and Iris Murdoch (Larkin was a later addition). Movement writers, Scott claimed, were 'bored by the despair of the Forties, not much interested in suffering, and extremely impatient of poetic sensibility, especially poetic sensibility about 'the writer and society''. The Movement was 'anti-phoney', 'anti-wet', its prevailing tone was 'sceptical, robust, ironic, prepared to be as comfortable as possible' ('The Spectator', 1 Oct 1954, 399-400). This description Amis characterized as 'useful up to a point' ('Letters of Kingsley Amis', 405), and though he often resisted the Movement label also helped to publicize it. 
The success of 'Lucky Jim' coincided with Amis's growing visibility as a poet. Both Amis and Larkin, as well as other poets soon to be associated with the Movement, were represented in 'New Poems 1952', a PEN publication. At a party to celebrate the book's launch, Amis met Robert Conquest, who became a lifelong friend and collaborator (notably as co-author of the 1965 novel 'The Egyptologists'). John Wain, a former student and fellow at St John's, and lecturer in English at Reading, was the most energetic publicist both of Amis and of the Movement writers in general. Wain not only commissioned an extract from 'Lucky Jim' to be broadcast on the first programme of the radio series 'First Reading', but helped to arrange for the publication at the end of the year of a second volume of Amis's poems, 'A Frame of Mind', as part of a series of limited editions of new poets. A third slim volume, 'Kingsley Amis: No. 22, the Fantasy Poets', was published in the same month as 'Lucky Jim'. Despite Amis's association with the Movement, these early poems are often obscure, impersonal, 'difficult', unlike the more mature verse, which is closer in manner and subject matter to the fiction. 
Amis's second novel, 'That Uncertain Feeling' (1955), shared the provincial setting and subversive humour of 'Lucky Jim'. It also contained a satirical portrait of a poet very much like Dylan Thomas, among the most prominent of Movement 'betes noires'. It was published several months after Amis's return from a summer in Portugal, a trip financed by a Somerset Maugham award for 'Lucky Jim'. Though Amis professed to hate foreign travel, his experiences in Portugal provided him with the materials for a third novel, 'I Like it Here' (1958). Between 1955 and 1958 Amis published a fourth volume of poems, 'A Case of Samples: Poems 1946-1956', and appeared in two influential anthologies: D. J. Enright's 'Poets of the 1950s', considered something of a Movement manifesto, and Conquest's 'New Lines', both published in 1956. He also took on a number of literary and journalistic commissions: he published fiction reviews, essays, and short stories in 'The Spectator' and elsewhere (for the most part Amis's literary criticism, collected in 'What became of Jane Austen? and other questions' (1970) and 'The Amis Collection' (1990) appeared initially in non-academic periodicals); edited 'Oscar Wilde: Poems and Essays' (1956); began reviewing jazz records for 'The Observer' (from 1956 to 1958); wrote a BBC radio play, 'Touch and Go' (1957), the first of several commissions for radio and television; and a pamphlet for the Fabian Society, 'Socialism and the Intellectuals' (1957). 
After his return from the war Amis had allowed his membership in the Communist Party to lapse. The Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956 turned him into a firm and total anti-communist. Though in March 1956 he publicly protested against the Anglo-French-Israeli invasion of Egypt, he described himself in 'Socialism and the Intellectuals' (1957) as anti-activist. Self-interest, he now declared, was 'the best and most trustworthy political motive' (though he also lamented the absence of more respectable motives in the current political climate: 'no Spain, no fascism, no mass unemployment'; pp. 13, 7). In the years to follow, Amis moved steadily to the right, in part out of principle, in part out of a congenital opposition to fashion, though he continued to vote Labour until the general election of 1966, when he voted for the anti-Common Market candidate. 
Chief among the offshoots of Amis's growing fame in the late 1950s was an invitation from R. P. Blackmur to spend a year at Princeton University as a visiting fellow in creative writing and to deliver the Christian Gauss seminars in criticism, in the spring of 1959. Somewhat to his surprise, Amis enjoyed his year at Princeton; he even enjoyed teaching creative writing. At Blackmur's suggestion, he chose science fiction, a lifelong interest, as the topic of his Gauss seminars. These were eventually published in 1960 as 'New Maps of Hell: a Survey of Science Fiction', the first book-length study of the genre to be written by a critic from an academic background. Amis kept up his association with science fiction both by reviewing it for 'The Observer' (from 1960 to 1965) and by a five-year stint co-editing 'Spectrum: a Science Fiction Anthology' (1961-5), with Robert Conquest. While at Princeton, Amis also lectured at a number of east coast universities, reviewed 'foreign' films for 'Esquire', and frequented jazz clubs in Manhattan. Though sorely tempted to stay on in the United States, he and his family returned to Swansea in July 1959. 
In 1960 Amis published 'Take a Girl Like You', his fourth and longest novel, and mostly told, unlike its predecessors, from the heroine's point of view. This story, derived in part from Richardson's 'Clarissa', is of the protracted seduction of Jenny Bunn, a sexually and socially innocent primary schoolteacher. Jenny's seducer, Patrick Standish, is as clever, witty, and subversive as previous Amis heroes, but much more predatory. Patrick inaugurates a line of deeply flawed male characters in Amis's writing of the 1960s and early 1970s, one that includes Dai Evans, the hero of 'The Evans Country' (1962), a sequence of six poems (expanded to eleven when it appeared in a subsequent volume, 'A Look Round the Estate: Poems 1957-1967'); Roger Micheldene, in the novel 'One Fat Englishman' (1963); Ronnie Appleyard, in 'I Want it Now' (1968); and Sir Roy Vandervane, in 'Girl, 20' (1971). Amis identified 'Take a Girl Like You' as his favourite novel, but its cruelty, particularly that of its ending, in which a drunk Jenny is seduced by Patrick, shocked many readers, beginning with its American publisher (who sought to have the ending rewritten). The novel anticipates and dissects the new sexual morality of the 1960s, and may have been fuelled in part by tensions in Amis's private life. Amis's marriage had been stormy from the start, largely because of his compulsive philandering, but in the late 1950s and early 1960s it was especially troubled. 
In April 1961 Amis was offered a fellowship in English at Peterhouse, Cambridge, making him the college's first fellow and director of studies in English. Though largely content at Swansea, he accepted the new post in the hope that it would afford him more time for his own writing. This hope proved unfounded, and the life of a Cambridge don was not to his taste. In December 1962 he resigned his fellowship, though he continued teaching at Peterhouse until the end of the academic year. At the same time the tensions in his marriage came to a head. In the previous October he had begun an affair with the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard (1923-2014), a much more serious affair than its predecessors, and one which precipitated a split with his wife and family the following summer. In September, Amis moved to London to live with Jane Howard (her name to friends and family) and to pursue a full-time writing career. They married on 29 June 1965. 
Amis's fifth novel, 'One Fat Englishman' (1963), set on a college campus in the United States, draws on his experiences at Princeton. Its obnoxious hero, Roger Micheldene, is pathologically aggressive: 'Of the seven deadly sins, Roger considered himself qualified in gluttony, sloth and lust but distinguished in anger' (p. 10). This anger is manifested in a sneering attitude to all things American, an attitude Amis meant to discredit, in part because it was so common among educated Englishmen. Roger is a lapsed Catholic, and beneath his anger sounds a note of metaphysical or religious despair, one Amis would develop in subsequent novels, in particular 'The Anti-Death League' (1966). Amis's own religious upbringing had been low-church, 'strong in morality, rudimentary and quite uninsistent in matters of doctrine', and though he claimed never to have attended, 'voluntarily or otherwise, any act of worship as such', or to have consulted the 'Bible' or any other religious writing 'in the hope of spiritual comfort or ethical guidance' (McDermott, 9), he was well versed both in scripture and in Christian doctrine. 

'The Anti-Death League' mounts a ferocious attack not only on those who would deny or refuse to contemplate the evils of the world, but on the Christian God. It also marks a formal as well as thematic departure for Amis. Though the most self-consciously serious of his novels, its plot draws on elements from popular or genre fiction, including espionage, fantasy, and science fiction. This interest in popular fiction, heralded by two 'studies' of James Bond novels ('The James Bond Dossier' and 'The Book of Bond, or, Every Man his Own 007', both published in 1965), was developed in his own Bond thriller, 'Colonel Sun' (1968), published under the pseudonym Robert Markham; in 'The Green Man' (1969), a ghost story (as concerned with theological or religious questions as 'The Anti-Death League'); in 'The Riverside Villas Murder' (1973), a classic detective story; and in 'The Alteration' (1976), an 'alternate world' novel. Of these experiments with genre fiction the most important are 'The Alteration' and 'The Riverside Villas Murder'. 'The Alteration', an attempt to imagine what England would have been like in 1976 had the Reformation never occurred, is among the most intricate and inventive of Amis's novels; 'The Riverside Villas Murder', while strictly honouring the conventions of the murder story, is also a loving and meticulous reconstruction of suburban life in the 1930s, drawing on many details from his own childhood. 
Amis's oppositional character, and increasing conservatism, brought him much into the public eye in this period. With Robert Conquest, he contributed several articles to Brian Cox and A. E. Dyson's anti-progressive 'Black papers on education' (1969-77), opposing university expansion, as well as other educational reforms and trends (he had already published an influential article in 'Encounter' in 1960 deploring the expansion of higher education, partly on the grounds that 'More will mean worse', a phrase which gained wide currency). He also became involved in a long and acrimonious correspondence in the popular and periodical press over the Vietnam War, which he supported. His anti-communism took on a new intensity in these years, inspired in part by Robert Conquest's powerful exposure of Stalinist atrocities in 'The Great Terror' (1968). He spearheaded a campaign in 1968 against Yevgeny Yevtushenko's candidacy for the chair of poetry at Oxford University, an elective post. He publicly condemned the left totalitarianism of Che Guevara, Mao Zedong, and Ho Chi Minh. Yet he was also an outspoken opponent of racism and capital punishment. In 1967 Amis was invited to lecture for a term on modern British fiction at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee, where the racism he and Jane Howard encountered distressed them not only for its own sake, but because of its likely effect on conservative causes: 'It would take some strength of mind not to say, in effect, 'anybody who thinks like that about Negroes must be wrong about everything. Stop US murder in Vietnam!'' ('Letters of Kingsley Amis', 689). 
On their return from Tennessee (and a brief trip to Mexico) in March 1968, Amis and Howard purchased a large house in Barnet, Hertfordshire, the upkeep of which, both financial and physical, contributed to tensions in their marriage. These were the years when Amis's drinking became especially heavy. Amis was a lifelong drinker and connoisseur of drink, and though alcohol rarely interfered with his capacity to work, it could make him irascible and paranoid. It may also have impaired his sex drive. In the mid-1970s Amis and Howard consulted several sex therapists after what, in his 'Memoirs' (1991), he describes as 'various difficulties had arisen between us' (p. 117). These difficulties, and the therapy sessions themselves, are drawn on to comic effect in 'Jake's Thing' (1978), a novel marked by a newly pointed animus to women. In July 1976 he and Jane Howard moved to Gardnor House, in Flask Walk, Hampstead, but the marriage continued to deteriorate; in September 1979 Amis announced to Larkin a 'total loss of sex-drive' ('Letters of Kingsley Amis', 876). Less than a year later, in November 1980, Jane Howard left him, refusing to return until he promised to give up drinking totally. 
The breakup of Amis's second marriage occasioned the longest gap between novels in his career. Two years after 'Jake's Thing', Amis published 'Russian Hide-and-Seek' (1980), the second and weaker of his 'alternate world' novels (it is set in a twenty-first-century England ruled by the Soviets). Two years between novels was a standard interval for Amis. 'Stanley and the Women' took him four years to complete, and, as his correspondence suggests, caused him uncharacteristic difficulty and self-doubt. During these years Amis busied himself with other projects: he campaigned in the press against arts subsidies, slovenly and incorrect language use, and a mentality labelled 'sod the public' ('the working slogan not only of government, the service industry and the retail trade, but also... of interior designers, providers of culture, playwrights, composers and many more'; 'The Spectator', 19 Oct 1985, reprinted in 'The Amis Collection', 229); he edited the anthology 'The Golden Age of Science Fiction' (1981); started a column on drink in the 'Daily Express' (1982), which became 'Every Day Drinking' (1983); and was appointed poetry editor of the 'Daily Mirror', choosing and introducing a poem a day, Monday to Friday (both poems and introductions were reprinted in 1984 as 'The Pleasures of Poetry'). Though he continued to write the occasional poem after the publication of 'Collected Poems, 1944-1979' (1979), he produced no further collections of verse. 
The darkness and aggression of 'Stanley and the Women' mark a nadir in Amis's life. Though the novel had its defenders (even among female reviewers), the harshness of its treatment of women was much deplored, and rumour had it that its initial failure to find an American publisher derived from opposition among feminist editors. Amis was an increasingly embattled and embittered figure in these years. Though slim and handsome in youth and early middle age, he began to put on weight and his face grew puffy and red. Though a gregarious and clubbable man, as funny in person as on paper, he developed a reputation for rudeness and impatience, an impression he partly cultivated. Amis was prone to neuroses and hypochondria throughout his life, but was especially anxious during these years. Always frightened of flying and unable to drive a car, he now feared travelling of any sort, and was terrified of being left on his own at night. His life was ruled by an increasingly rigid and narrow routine: writing in the morning, drinks and lunch at his club, the Garrick, writing again in the late afternoon, perhaps after a nap, then supper, television, more drink, and a sleeping pill. 
After the breakup of his second marriage, Amis's sons devised a remarkable plan for his living arrangements. They suggested that he move in with his first wife, Hilly, her third husband, Lord Kilmarnock, and their son Jaime. Much to the amazement of all concerned, the arrangement lasted. Amis paid the bills and the Kilmarnocks did the housework and cooking. The result, Martin Amis has suggested, was a return to creative health (M. Amis, 312-13). Two years after the publication of 'Stanley and the Women', Amis published 'The Old Devils', a work every bit as darkly comic, caustic, and clear-sighted as its predecessors (including 'Ending Up' (1974) an earlier novel of old age), but also suffused with regret and affection, both for Wales and for lost (and recovered) love. 'The Old Devils' won the Booker prize and was followed in customary two-yearly intervals by four other novels: 'Difficulties with Girls' (1988), a sequel to 'Take a Girl Like You' (in which Jenny Bunn is again a wholly sympathetic heroine); 'The Folks that Live on the Hill' (1990), published in the same year Amis was knighted (he had been appointed CBE in 1981); 'The Russian Girl' (1992); and 'You Can't Do Both' (1994), perhaps Amis's most autobiographical novel. Amis's final novel, 'The Biographer's Moustache', was published in 1995 (to poor reviews, unlike its immediate predecessors). During this period of late productivity Amis also edited 'The Great British Songbook' (1986) with James Cochrane; reissued an expanded version of his 'Collected Short Stories' (1987, originally published 1980); edited 'The Amis Anthology' (1989), described in the introduction as 'a collection of my favourite poems'; began several restaurant columns in magazines; published his 'Memoirs', 'We are All Guilty', a novel for young adults (both in 1991), and a final collection of short stories, 'Mrs. Barrett's Secret and other Stories' (1993). 
Late in August 1995, while on his annual summer holiday in Swansea, Amis had a fall and suspected stroke. He was hospitalized in London, his condition deteriorated, and on 22 October, after contracting pneumonia, he died in St Pancras Hospital. At the time of his death he was at work on a new novel, provisionally titled 'Black and White', and had all but completed the posthumously published 'The King's English: a Guide to Modern Usage' (1997). His body was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 31 October and a funeral service was held at St Mark's Church, near the home he shared with the Kilmarnocks in Primrose Hill. A year later, at a packed memorial service in St Martin-in-the-Fields, he was hailed as the funniest and most gifted British novelist of his generation. A selection of his letters was published in 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 60222


Pears, Andrew (1846-1909), soapmaker and perfumer, was born on 21 January 1846 at 55 Wells Street, near Oxford Street, London, one of several children of Francis Pears, soapmaker, and his wife, Mary Williams. He was the great-grandson of Andrew Pears (1766/7-1845), also a soapmaker and perfumer, who developed a soap formula in which ordinary soap was dissolved in alcohol, distilled, and shaped into individual bars. Born in Cornwall, Andrew Pears senior was apprenticed to a barber and went to London to establish his own barber's shop in Gerrard Street. It was there that he began making and selling his unique transparent soap in 1789. The popularity of the soap -- and the eagerness with which enterprising competitors produced imitation soaps -- led Pears to sign the wrapper of each bar as proof of its quality. In 1835 he established a partnership with his grandson Francis, centred on his unique formula, and founded the family business as A. and F. Pears. Andrew Pears senior resigned in 1838 and died on 24 April 1845 at his home, 55 Wells Street, London. 
Andrew Pears junior was privately educated before being apprenticed to the family business. In 1862 at the age of sixteen he entered the soapworks at Isleworth, Middlesex, then newly built by his father, Francis. While still in his teens, Pears was placed in charge of the soapworks, retaining this responsibility throughout his forty-odd years with the firm. In 1865 Pears joined his father as a partner in the firm along with Thomas James Barratt, who had recently married Pears's oldest sister. Placed in charge of the London shop in Great Russell Street, Barratt began an ambitious programme of expansion which included increasing amounts of advertising. It was Barratt who paid $2000 for Sir John Millais's painting 'Bubbles', and turned it into one of the most famous brand advertisements of all time. 
Francis Pears retired in the mid-1870s, perhaps out of a reluctance to participate in the firm's increased use of advertising, leaving the firm in the hands of his son and son-in-law. With Andrew Pears to direct the soapworks and Barratt in charge of sales, A. and F. Pears continued to expand, even briefly considering establishing a soapworks in America. Barratt's daring and innovation in advertising Pears soap outraged and delighted the British public by turns, making Pears a household name. Profit grew apace with advertising expenditure and in 1892 the firm went public with Pears as director and Barratt as chairman. During Pears's years of stewardship the firm expanded production and achieved a steady increase in sales, and Pears Soap became one of the first British soaps to reach a national and international market, and one of the most recognized products of the nineteenth century. 
On 5 August 1869 Pears married Mary Ann Pearson, daughter of Edward Hollingham, confectioner; they had six sons and three daughters. Pears typified the successful industrialist of the day: a sportsman, active in public service, he still saw to the day-to-day running of the soapworks. He served as justice of the peace for Middlesex and as an alderman, and was an active member of the local Liberal Party. He was known and much loved for his charity and concern for his workers. Shortly before his death he donated several acres of ground to be used for playing fields. 
Pears died on 10 February 1909 at Mevagissey, his home in St John's Road, Isleworth, and was buried at Isleworth cemetery three days later. He was survived by his wife. His place on the board was taken by Joseph Beecham, of Beecham's Pills, and Barratt continued to serve as chairman. With Pears's death A. and F. Pears ceased to be a family concern. His oldest surviving son, Thomas Pears, was rejected by Thomas Barratt at the annual meeting of the board in the spring of 1909, when 'The Times' noted that 'The name Pears has nothing to do with father or son' (4 May 1909). In 1912 Tom Pears died in the sinking of the 'Titanic', and in 1914 A. and F. Pears was bought by its most important competitor, Lever Brothers. 


@@@@@


doc= 60223


Walter Alexander (1902-1979) was born at Bonnybridge on 16 February 1902, left school at fourteen and joined his father in the business. When their first bus was obtained in 1919 he drove it on an extension of the Falkirk-Bonnybridge route to Kilsyth. Tours were advertised, and a private party was taken on an extended tour to John o' Groats in 1920; probably this was the first time a charabanc had made the journey. 


@@@@@


doc= 60224


Claude Crosland Taylor (1889-1935), who was born on 28 September 1889 at Ravenscar, Helsby, Cheshire, did not complete his engineering course at Liverpool University, perhaps due to Edward's departure; he took over the running of the company, and by 1914 had brought it into profit. Some expansion took place during the war years, centred on the munitions factory at Queensferry, while by 1915 a service to Crewe justified opening a depot at Nantwich. The company also undertook haulage and tractor-drawn ploughing at that time. 


@@@@@


doc= 60225


Winthrop James Crosland Taylor (1894-1967) (always known in the industry as W. J. Crosland-Taylor), was born at Ravenscar in 1894. He embarked on an engineering course at Liverpool University but did not return from military service to complete his degree. He served in the Royal Navy and the Royal Marines and was awarded the Military Cross, a very rare achievement for a sailor. He joined Crosville in 1919 to help his brother and father run the company in a period of rapid expansion that continued throughout the 1920s, including numerous acquisitions -- an unusual policy at that time. 


@@@@@


doc= 60226


Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of 


@@@@@


doc= 60227


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60228


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60229


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60230


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60231


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60232


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60233


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60234


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60235


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60236


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60237


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60238


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60239


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60240


Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404), administrators and landholders, were prominent in Wales from at least the thirteenth century. Ednyfed Fychan (d. 1246), dynast and administrator, was the son of Cynwrig ab Iorwerth ap Gwrgant; the family came from the cantref of Rhos in north-east Wales and still had lands there in the fourteenth century. 
Ednyfed (whose epithet means 'little') is said to have become the steward or 'distain' of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240), prince of north Wales, about 1215, when he first appeared as witness to a charter, although the earliest reference to him as holder of that office was when he witnessed a grant by Llywelyn in 1225. He appeared on a number of occasions as witness, arbitrator, and diplomatic representative of the prince; his last appearance was in 1245, when he led a delegation sent by Llywelyn's son and successor Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246) to meet Henry III and his council at Deganwy. In 1235 he had been granted a safe conduct by the king to travel through England on his way to the Holy Land and Henry gave instructions for a silver cup to be presented to him during his stay in London, although the gift does not seem to have been made. At his death, almost certainly in 1246, he was described by the Chester annals as justiciar of Wales, although one of his sons, Tudur, may already have taken over the post of steward from him in 1241. Ednyfed's elegy was sung by the poet Elidir Sais. 
Ednyfed was the leading servant and adviser of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. The 'distain' had originally been responsible for the domestic organization and economy of the royal court, but by the thirteenth century he had come to be the prince's chief counsellor. The value of Ednyfed's service was reflected in the lands and privileges granted to him by Llywelyn. His descendants held these lands by a tenure described as that of 'wyrion' 'Eden' ('the grandsons of Ednyfed'), which involved exemption from all rents and obligations except suit to the prince's court and military service. In the cantrefs of Rhos and Rhufoniog these privileges were enjoyed by all the descendants of his grandfather; it has been suggested that here the tenure was connected with the defence of one of the main routes into Snowdonia. Lands, including Penmynydd in Anglesey, which came to be regarded as the traditional seat of the family, were also granted to him in other parts of Gwynedd. 
According to the pedigrees Ednyfed was twice married, his first wife being a daughter of the Anglesey nobleman Llywarch ap Bran and his second Gwenllian, a daughter of Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1197), the ruler of Deheubarth; she died in 1236. Through Gwenllian the family acquired some small lordships in the later counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen. He had several sons and daughters; one son, Iorwerth, is said to have been a leper, one may have been one of the Welsh prisoners killed by Henry III's invading army in 1245, and one, Hywel, was bishop of St Asaph from 1240 to 1247. Three other sons, Tudur, Gruffudd, and Goronwy, and their descendants, continued the tradition of service, both before and after the conquest of 1282, while his nephew Goronwy ap Heilin served both the crown and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) at different times and died in action in 1283 as the steward of the last native prince, Dafydd ap Gruffudd (died 1283). 

Tudur ab Ednyfed (d. 1278), administrator, was described as Dafydd ap Llywelyn's steward in 1241. In 1245-6 he was a prisoner in England and on his release he had to hand over two sons as hostages. For several years he seems to have been in the service of Henry III and in 1259 and 1260 he represented the king in negotiations with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd about a truce. It has been suggested that it was after the release of his son Heilin by the king in 1263 that he joined Llywelyn; he appeared subsequently as witness and arbitrator and he was one of the prince's sureties under the treaty of Montgomery in 1267. In 1268 he succeeded his brother Goronwy as steward and he is described on a number of occasions as steward or justiciar. In November 1277 he and his cousin Goronwy ap Heilin were Llywelyn's plenipotentiaries in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Aberconwy. He died in the following year. Tudur's descendants had lands at Nant near Prestatyn in Flintshire; his great-great-grandson Gruffudd ap Gwilym ap Gruffudd ap Heilin (died 1405) married a descendant of Goronwy ab Ednyfed and inherited extensive lands in Anglesey and Caernarvonshire from his maternal uncle. Two of Gruffudd's sons, Gwilym and Robin, were the ancestors of the Caernarvonshire families of Penrhyn and Cochwillan. The well-timed submission of Gwilym ap Gruffudd (d. 1431), landholder, during the Glyn Dwr revolt enabled him to add substantially to his lands at the expense of some of his kinsmen and to become the most powerful figure in the principality of north Wales, where his family, the Griffiths of Penrhyn, were to dominate until 1540. 

Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (fl. 1246-1256), administrator, is traditionally said to have been obliged to seek temporary refuge in Ireland because of a slander about Joan, the wife of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. He may have been the steward of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, probably between 1246 and 1255, when Gwynedd west of the Conwy was divided between Llywelyn and his brother Owain; he appeared for the last time in 1256, when he led a delegation to England for talks with Henry III. The date of his death is unknown; his elegy was sung by Dafydd Benfras. It is possible that his relations with Llywelyn had deteriorated; certainly the loyalty of two of his sons, Rhys ap Gruffudd and Hywel ap Gruffudd ['see below'], was less than wholehearted, and they fought for Edward I in the war of 1282. Rhys ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1284), landholder, had been in the service of the prince but in May 1277, during the first Anglo-Welsh war, he and Hywel came into the king's peace and a third brother, Llywelyn, the prior of the Dominican friary at Bangor, acted as an intermediary. The treaty of Aberconwy stipulated that Llywelyn should restore Rhys to the position he had occupied before his submission, and in 1281 he undertook to pay the prince $100 because of his disobedience and contempt to him. The fact that Rhys was married to Margaret Lestrange, whose sister was the wife of Llywelyn's opponent Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) of Powys, may have contributed to the breakdown of relations. In 1278 he had been a member of the mixed Anglo-Welsh commission appointed by Edward to deal with pleas in Wales and the marches. 
The English conquest of Wales made no difference to the influence and authority of the descendants of Ednyfed Fychan. Rhys's son Gruffudd, known as Sir Gruffudd Llwyd (d. 1335), spent many years in the service of the crown. By 1301 he had been knighted and between 1302 and 1317 he was, at different times, sheriff of Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, and Merioneth. During the troubles of Edward II's reign he was the leader of the royalist party in north Wales; after Edward's deposition in 1327 he was one of several prominent Welshmen imprisoned for a time. But his loyalty was not unquestioned; during Edward Bruce's invasion of Ireland, which began in 1315, he was in correspondence with the Scottish leader, promising him support in the event of a landing in Wales. It may have been a memory of his dealings with Bruce that gave rise to the story that he had led an unsuccessful revolt and had been executed. He died in 1335, leaving several daughters and one surviving son, Ieuan (died 'c'.1352), who became archdeacon of Anglesey. 

Hywel ap Gruffudd ab Ednyfed (d. 1282), landholder, was killed at the abortive crossing of the Menai Strait on 6 November 1282. His son Gruffudd (died 1308) had two sons, Rhys and Robert. Like his kinsman Sir Gruffudd Llwyd, Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd (d. 1356) had a long career in royal service. His first appointment was as steward of Cardiganshire in 1308 and this was followed by a succession of offices, culminating in two terms as deputy justiciar of south Wales. He also built up a substantial estate in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire. Rhys was frequently summoned for military service; in 1315 he was leading troops against the Glamorgan rebel Llywelyn Bren (died 1317) and he led Welsh troops to Scotland and France, serving at Crecy in 1346. Like Sir Gruffudd Llwyd he remained loyal to Edward II until the end. The failure of his attempt to rescue Edward from captivity in 1327 forced him to flee for a time to Scotland and in 1330 he fled abroad after the failure of the earl of Kent's plot against Mortimer. The fall of Mortimer later the same year restored him to favour and for the rest of his life he was the effective ruler of the principality of south Wales. He had been knighted by 1330. He married an English heiress, Joan Somerville, and through her acquired lands in five English counties; he died on 17 May 1356. An elegy, according to which he was buried at Carmarthen, was composed by Iolo Goch ('fl'. 1345-1397); he was related, through his mother, to the leading poet of the time, Dafydd ap Gwilym ('fl'. 1330-1350). Not long before his death he inherited the lands in south Wales of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd; most of his lands and those of his wife passed to his eldest son, Sir Rhys the younger (died 1380), but those held by Welsh tenure passed to a younger son, Henry. 
The activities of Sir Rhys's brother Robert and Robert's son Rhys were mainly in the north-east. Rhys ap Roppert (d. 1377), administrator, held various local offices and from 1349 to 1351 he was joint sheriff of Flintshire. From 1357 to 1360 he was sole sheriff; his term of office was marked by complaints about his oppressive behaviour and in September 1358 the men of the cantref of Tegeingl submitted a massive and detailed petition complaining about the extortionate and oppressive activities of Rhys and his former colleague in the shrievalty, Ithel ap Cynwrig Sais. This misrule was the result of the widespread practice of farming offices to the highest bidder. There were also more serious accusations. On 20 January 1372 a jury at Flint stated that Rhys's son Ieuan was a traitor and that he was in the company of Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri 
(Owen of Wales, died 1378)
in the service of the king of France. Rhys knew this and had sent him substantial sums of money. A further inquisition on 25 September 1374 stated that Rhys and his son Madog were adherents of Owain Lawgoch (Owen of Wales) and Ieuan ap Rhys ap Roppert, traitors, that they had received treasonable letters from them, and that Rhys had sent them gold and silver on various occasions. Madog had subsequently gone to France to join Owain and Ieuan. Although no further action was taken against Rhys, these indictments are particularly interesting because they suggest that Owen of Wales could have depended on influential support had either of his two abortive expeditions been successful. The sons were certainly in French service; Ieuan was probably the Ieuan Wyn who was Owen's lieutenant and who took over his company after his assassination in 1378, while Madog was still serving the French crown in 1392. Rhys married Gwladus, the daughter of Madog Llwyd ab Iorwerth Foel of Nanheudwy. He died in 1377. 

Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1268), administrator, like his brothers, was in the service of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. He may have become steward about 1258 and he appears on various occasions as an arbitrator and a witness. In 1258 he was one of the Welsh leaders who made an agreement with a faction of Scottish lords and in 1263 he led a military campaign in Gwent. He died in 1268 and his elegy was sung by Bleddyn Fardd ('fl'. 1268-1284) and Y Prydydd Bychan ('fl'. 1222-1268). He had at least three sons, Tudur, known as Tudur Hen (Tudur the Old), Hywel, and Goronwy Fychan. Tudur Hen ap Goronwy ab Ednyfed (d. 1311), administrator, was probably in the service of Llywelyn before 1282; in 1294-5 he and Goronwy Fychan were involved in the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn and in one document he is described as Madog's steward. But he was soon back in favour and in 1296 he was a member of a deputation from north Wales which expressed the community's concern to Edward I about rumours that the Welsh were disloyal. In 1301 he did homage to the new Prince Edward of Caernarfon and in 1305 he submitted several petitions to that prince. He died in 1311 and was buried in the Dominican friary at Bangor, a house with which the family had a close relationship. 
Tudur's son Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1331), administrator, held local offices in Anglesey and served in Scotland; he may have fought at Bannockburn in 1314. In 1318 he followed Sir Gruffudd Llwyd as forester of Snowdon and like him he stood by Edward II at the end of his reign. When an action was brought in 1331 against the former deputy justiciar of north Wales, William Shalford, accusing him of having encompassed the king's murder, Goronwy and Sir Gruffudd were among the sureties. He died in 1331 and was buried at Bangor; he had three sons, Hywel, Tudur, and Gruffudd (died 'c'.1344). 

Hywel ap Goronwy (d. 1366?), cleric, and Tudur ap Goronwy (d. 1367?), landholder, were among the leading figures in the principality of north Wales in the mid-fourteenth century. Hywel became archdeacon of Anglesey. An apocryphal story related how Tudur called himself Sir Tudur; on being summoned by Edward III to explain himself, he answered with such spirit that the king immediately knighted him. The story, attributed to the antiquary Robert Vaughan (1592-1667), may have originated in the sixteenth century, the implication being that Tudur foresaw that his descendants would have the power to confer knighthood. Hywel and Tudur were involved in an episode in 1345 which probably reflected contemporary unrest among the leaders of the community. On 14 February Henry Shalford, the prince's newly appointed attorney, was travelling from Denbigh to Caernarfon when he was attacked and killed near the house of Hywel in Bangor by a band of men led by Tudur. The result was panic among the English burgesses in north Wales, the more so since many leading Welshmen appear to have been implicated, and it was suggested that Shalford had died because 'he had more knowledge than any other man of those who have disinherited my lord' (J. G. Edwards, ed., 'Calendar of Ancient Correspondence Concerning Wales', 1935, 233). Hywel was imprisoned for a time at Launceston in Cornwall, and Tudur in Chester, but they do not seem to have suffered any further punishment; in 1352 they were both in possession of their ancestral lands in Anglesey. 
Hywel probably died in 1366 and Tudur probably in 1367. Tudur's wife and Owain Glyn Dwr's mother were sisters; this relationship was to prove significant during the revolt. Tudur had five sons, Goronwy, Ednyfed, Gwilym, Rhys, and Maredudd. Goronwy ap Tudur (d. 1382), soldier and administrator, lived at Penmynydd, the traditional seat of the Tudors, as they can now be called; he served in France with Edward, the Black Prince, and in 1368-9 he was at Northampton in the prince's retinue. He was forester of Snowdon and steward of the bishop of Bangor's Anglesey lands and in 1382 he was appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, one of the very few occasions on which a Welshman was appointed to such an office; four days later he died, apparently by drowning, in Kent. His death was mourned by several poets and he was buried in the Franciscan friary at Llan-faes in Anglesey; his impressive alabaster tomb was moved to Penmynydd church at the dissolution of that house. His wife was Myfanwy, the daughter of Iorwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near Llangollen. His son Tudur was dead by 1400; his daughter Morfudd married Gwilym ap Gruffudd and his lands therefore passed to the Penrhyn family, although they were eventually to be recovered by Morfudd's descendants, the Owen Tudors of Penmynydd. 
Ednyfed ap Tudur died around the same time as Goronwy; Gwilym ap Tudur (d. after 1401) and Rhys ap Tudur (d. 1411), administrators, were both in the service of Richard II; the latter held the offices of sheriff and escheator of Anglesey and forester of Snowdon. Both brothers were involved in the revolt of their cousin Owain Glyn Dwr, possibly from the beginning; their exclusion from the pardon granted at the end of the first phase of the revolt may have led to their capture of Conwy Castle on Good Friday 1401, when the garrison was in church. They withdrew after negotiations and were pardoned, but they seem to have continued in rebellion until the end and Rhys was eventually captured and executed in Chester in 1411. Their lands passed to their kinsman Gwilym ap Gruffudd. 

Maredudd ap Tudur (fl. 1388-1404), administrator, was escheator of Anglesey between 1388 and 1391 and was a burgess of the town of Newborough in the same county. He took part in the Glyn Dwr revolt, but nothing is known of his fate. Maredudd, however, was the ancestor of the Tudor dynasty; his son Owen Tudor (c.1400-1461) married Catherine of Valois (d. 1437), the widow of Henry V, and was the grandfather of Henry VII. 
The descendants of Ednyfed Fychan were, without a doubt, the most powerful family in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Wales. They were the leading servants of the princes of Gwynedd and played a key part in the attempt of those princes to create a single Welsh principality. Some were prescient enough to transfer their allegiance to Edward I before 1282; the rest made their peace very soon after and continued to enjoy a significant role in all the royal lands in Wales; at the local level they were often the ones who exercised effective power in the name of the king of England. But there remained an awareness of their Welshness, with its concomitant loyalties, which surfaced from time to time in the fourteenth century and which led them to the side of Owain Glyn Dwr and to the end of that predominance which had lasted since the early thirteenth century. And it was a descendant of one of those rebels against the English crown who won that crown in 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 60241


Bateman, Hezekiah Linthicum (1812-1875), actor and theatre manager, was born in Baltimore, Maryland, USA, on 6 December 1812, the fourth child and second son of Amzi Bateman ('c'.1777-1816) and his wife, Catherine Schaeffer Evans Bateman ('c'.1784-1870). Amzi Bateman, a fisherman by trade, was a member of the 6th regiment of the Maryland militia and actively participated in the defence of Baltimore against the invasion of British troops during the Anglo-American War. Following Amzi's death his widow, Catherine, tutored students to support her young family. 
Hezekiah, unwillingly apprenticed as a young man to a firm of Baltimore engineers, left that position in the winter of 1832-3 with the intention of becoming an actor. He played juvenile roles with a neighbour, Junius Brutus Booth the elder, and with Ellen Tree (later Mrs Charles Kean). In 1839 he was employed by the theatrical management team of Noah M. Ludlow and Sol S. Smith for their stock company, and made his debut at their St Louis Theatre on 8 April 1839. Smith thought Bateman 'a good actor for the experience he then had' (Smith, 140). 
At the time Bateman was employed, Ludlow and Smith also took on the comedian Joseph Leathley (Joe) Cowell and his daughter Sidney Frances Cowell (1823-1881) ['see 'Bateman, Sidney Frances]. Bateman and the sixteen-year-old Sidney were married in St Louis on 10 November 1839. Of their eight children, four would be remembered for careers on the stage: Kate Josephine Bateman (1842-1917), Ellen Douglass Bateman (1844-1936), Virginia Frances Bateman (1853-1940), the mother of Fay Compton (1894-1978) and Edward Montague Compton Mackenzie (1883-1972), and Isabel Emilie Bateman (1854-1934). 
When the Ludlow and Smith company experienced financial difficulties at the end of the 1840 summer season in St Louis, the Batemans returned to Baltimore, where Hezekiah entered into a grocery business. This commercial enterprise was short-lived, however, and after several appearances at local Baltimore theatres the family sailed for England. Hezekiah made his debut on a British stage at Osbaldiston's Victoria Theatre, Surrey, on 16 September 1846. Badly received, he was hissed off the stage and returned to America, penniless and in steerage. 
Hezekiah and Sidney next joined James Bates's theatrical company at the Louisville Theatre in Louisville, Kentucky, in October 1847. On 17 December 1847 'Children of the Wood' was announced, but, it was said, the two children scheduled to play were suddenly taken ill, and in their place the two Bateman daughters -- Kate, aged five, and Ellen, aged three -- were quickly taught the roles and went on. The local newspaper reported that they 'performed their parts most sweetly' ('Louisville Daily Journal', 18 Dec 1847). The two little girls earned laurels in subsequent performances in Cincinnati, followed by another season in Louisville. In May 1848 the elder Batemans left the Bates company and became managers of their small daughters. 
Between August and October of 1851 the 'Bateman Children' played London's St James's Theatre during the Great Exhibition, and then toured the British Isles; they returned to America in August 1852. For the next three years Hezekiah Bateman toured with the children throughout the United States, until November 1855, when he briefly assumed management of the St Louis Theatre. Between 1856 and 1859 he managed, toured with, and occasionally acted in Sidney's two plays 'Self' and 'Geraldine'. 
In 1859 the Bateman family settled in Brooklyn, New York. In 1860 Ellen, with no further interest in the theatre, married a French-born silk manufacturer, Claude Greppo, and settled in Paterson, New Jersey. Kate, in the meantime, embarked on a stage career as an adult star. She made her New York debut in her mother's adaptation of 'Evangeline' at New York's Winter Garden. 
Hezekiah Bateman managed Kate's successful tour following her New York appearance, culminating in May 1863 at New York's Niblo's Garden with the wildly popular 'Leah, the Forsaken', an adaptation by Augustin Daly of Mosenthal's 'Deborah'. During the summer of 1863, now with some financial means owing to the success of 'Leah', the family could afford to enjoy a European vacation. Before returning to America, however, Bateman secured an engagement for Kate at London's Adelphi Theatre. 'Leah, the Forsaken', now in an adaptation by John Oxenford, ran for a West End record-breaking 211 nights. 
With America in the throes of civil war, theatrical prospects in the British Isles were more promising than those in the United States. In January 1864 Bateman took Sidney and the two younger girls, Virginia and Isabel, to England, where they settled permanently. Following Kate's Adelphi engagement, Bateman managed her tour of the British Isles and, in 1866, returned with her to America for a tour of the USA. Simultaneously he managed a tour of concert artists, including Mme Parepa and Carl Rosa. Kate's marriage to George Crowe on 13 October 1866 permitted Bateman to turn management duties over to Crowe, and he was free, between 1867 and 1869, to manage the tour of a troupe of French artistes who were introducing the operettas of Jacques Offenbach to America. In January 1869 he sold his interest in the troupe to the American railroad financier Jim Fisk. 
Bateman then returned to England and, on 22 February 1871, assumed management of London's Lyceum Theatre. His plan, initially, was to use the theatre as a showcase for Kate and the younger daughters, Virginia and Isabel, who were then embarking on their own theatrical careers. In April 1871 he saw a young actor named Henry Irving in 'The Dream of Eugene Aram'. Upon his return he announced to his family: 'I have found the greatest actor of the century' ('Black and White', 25 April 1896, 523). 

'Fanchette' and 'Pickwick', the first two Lyceum productions under Bateman's management, fell far short of financial success. On 25 November 1871, however, the future prospects for Bateman's finances improved radically with the presentation of 'The Bells', an English translation and adaptation by Leopold Lewis of the Erckmann-Chatrain tale 'Le Juif polonais'. Irving's weird and wonderful power in the leading role made an indelible mark on the history of British theatre and solidified both Irving's reputation and the financial position of Bateman's Lyceum. 
Bateman and Irving followed the 151 night run of 'The Bells' with 'Charles I', 'The Dream of Eugene Aram', 'Richelieu', 'Philip', and then 'Hamlet'. 'Hamlet', which opened on 31 October 1874, was, from the first night, an unqualified success and a triumph for both the manager and the actor. Five months later, with 'Hamlet' still on the boards, Irving organized a dinner party at a Pall Mall restaurant for Bateman, after which the group repaired to the Westminster Club for further socializing. There may have been sharp words exchanged between Bateman and the management when he was asked to leave the club at the required closing time. Upon rising the following morning, 22 March 1875, Bateman was suddenly seized by sharp chest pains, and he died within hours at his home, Rutland Lodge, Rutland Gardens, Knightsbridge, London. 'The Times', in eulogizing him, stated that 'he stood gallantly forward as the promoter of an intellectual and morally irreproachable drama at a day when the theatrical world was threatened with a deluge of vice and frivolity' ('The Times', 24 March 1875, 8). He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 27 March. 
Following his demise his widow and three of his daughters, Kate, Virginia, and Isabel, attempted to keep the Lyceum going, but conflicts between Irving and Sidney Bateman finally made a parting of the ways inevitable. Irving took over the Lyceum in 1878, while the Batemans took possession of Sadler's Wells. Debts mounted at the Wells, and when Sidney died in 1881 the daughters were left to deal with the debt. 
Kate continued to tour the British provinces before retiring in 1892, and thereafter ran a stage school in London. Virginia married the actor Edward Compton (1854-1918) on 12 June 1882, and afterwards acted in and co-managed the Compton Comedy Company. Isabel, after paying off the last penny of the debt, left the theatre in 1898 and entered the Anglican sisterhood of St Mary the Virgin in Wantage, Berkshire, in time becoming mother superior of the order. 


@@@@@


doc= 60242


Wilton, Frederick Charles (1802-1889), actor and stage manager, was born on 3 December 1802 in Bristol, the son of a saddler. Little is known about his parents, although he recounts that his father died at sea and that he had a brother, James George Wilton, also an actor, who died in Bristol on 20 October 1830. About 1823 he married Amelia Sherrill (died 1873), a dancing-teacher and actress and a native of Devonport, Plymouth. They had six surviving sons and daughters: Edward George ('b'. 1823/4); George ('b'. 1826/7); Tom ('b'. 1834/5); Elizabeth (Lizzie) Theresa ('b'. 1832/3), who married John Byron; Amelia Harriet ('b'. 1840/41), who married Fred Rountree; and Jessie ('b'. 1845/6), who married an actor named Drury in 1878. A further seven sons died in infancy. Edward, George, Tom, and Lizzie eventually emigrated to Australia. 
Wilton made his debut as an actor with James Dawson and David Obaldiston's company in south-west England in 1821. He acted in Edinburgh and Perth in 1826-7 and appeared in James Brunton's company in Birmingham, Plymouth, Bristol, and Swansea from 1828 until mid-1831. His association with Plymouth continued until 1837; he became stage manager of the Devonport theatre in 1836 and managed the Victoria Theatre, Plymouth, for a short summer season in 1837. From 1836 he had also been playing for Hay's Exeter company (he was acting there with Samuel Phelps when the latter received an invitation to appear with Macready in London) and in 1839 appeared with other actors on a profit-sharing basis in Honiton and Yeovil. In 1840 he moved to London, and he appeared at the City of London Theatre until 1841; his movements in 1842 are unaccounted for, but during 1843 he became stage manager of the Theatre Royal, Gravesend. In December of that year he was appointed stage manager of the Britannia Saloon (later Theatre) in Hoxton, but he left six months later after a disagreement with its manager, Samuel Lane. He returned to Gravesend, then from 1844 to 1846 was a member of the Royal Victoria Theatre's company in south London, at that time managed by his former colleague Obaldiston. 
In January 1846 Wilton returned to the Britannia as stage manager, and he remained there until his retirement on 31 July 1875. The Britannia Theatre, one of London's major East End theatres during the nineteenth century, certainly owed a lot of its success to Wilton's efficient stage management during some of its most formative years: the actor J. B. Howe described him as 'one of the best practical stage managers' he had ever seen (Howe, 99); elsewhere he was described as 'the most scholarly, clever, gentlemanly and patient of stage managers' (Britannia clippings, Theatre Museum). Wilton's responsibilities included the preparation, rehearsing, and staging of plays and the annual pantomime; recruiting extras and novelty acts; representing management if problems arose with the authorities; organizing benefit performances; preparing playbills and newspaper puffs; and dealing with absenteeism. When the 'Pepper's ghost' effect was first integrated into a theatrical production in 1863, it was Wilton's responsibility to co-ordinate it. Additionally, he acted in many of the Britannia plays. Until 1863 he and his wife also ran a grocer's shop in Houndsditch: in the 1861 census he is described as 'comedian and grocer'. 
As early subscribers to the Royal General Theatrical Fund, both Wilton and his wife were able to draw pensions on their respective retirements. In his spare time he was not only a keen angler, gardener, chess player, and reader, but his diaries also reveal a strong interest in current affairs. Just over a year after his retirement he emigrated to Australia, departing on 14 November 1876. He initially resided in Sydney, soon moved to Melbourne with John and Lizzie Byron, though he returned to Sydney in 1880. Even in retirement he records meetings with actors such as Howe, and attempts to track illicit performances of Britannia plays in Australia. His diaries, which are the source for much of this information, cover not only his retirement years but also the last twelve and a half years he spent at the Britannia, providing a unique resource for the reconstruction of day-to-day life in a major nineteenth-century London playhouse. Few English stage managers of the period, apart from James Winston, have left such accounts; interestingly, Wilton's diaries, while chronicling Britannia minutiae, also reveal him as a highly literate, erudite, sociable, and witty individual. He died at his home, 130 Darlington Road, Sydney, on 8 September 1889, and was buried the following day in the city's Waverley cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60243


Kinross, John (1855-1931), architect, was born on 3 July 1855 at Shore Road, Stirling, the second of four sons of William Kinross (1810-1874), carriage builder, and his second wife, Ann (1821-1899), 'nee' Marshall. Kinross attended Stirling high school from 1865 to 1870. He took an architectural apprenticeship with John Hutchison IA (1841-1908) in Glasgow from 1870 to about 1875, and then moved to the Edinburgh office of Wardrop and Reid, architects. In 1880-81 he toured Italy studying, publishing 'Details from Italian Buildings Chiefly Renaissance' (1882) on his return. In this year he joined Henry Seymour (1857-1912) in partnership in Edinburgh, undertaking predominantly ecclesiastical work. On 13 August 1889 Kinross married (Mary Louisa) Margaret (1863-1935), teacher, daughter of George Blythe Hall, a banker in York: they had four children, Eveleen Mary (1894-1969) and John Blythe (1904-1989), and two daughters who died in infancy. After leaving Seymour, Kinross began independent practice in 1890, enjoying major restoration projects such as the Carmelite friary church, South Queensferry, Midlothian (1889-90), and the Augustinian priory, St Andrews, Fife (1893-8), and the patronage of the third marquess of Bute. He was active in the Edinburgh Architectural Association, serving as president in 1898-9, and was committed to the Royal Scottish Academy, becoming associate in 1893 and full academician in 1905. 
Work for Kinross's other leading patron, Sir James Percy Miller, bt, of Manderston, Berwickshire, began in 1890, including extensive work across the estate and to the mansion. By 1897 the large volume of work in which he was engaged led to partnership with Harold Ogle Tarbolton (1869-1947), though Kinross reverted to independent practice in 1905. During the following years he took an active role in the development of the architectural education in Scotland through continued involvement with academic bodies. He pursued his earlier search for a school of design, creating a new college of art in Edinburgh on whose board of management he sat (1908-11 and 1919-21), constantly insisting upon the study of historic fabric and the link with craftsmanship in design education. Kinross joined J. Inch Morrison (died 1944) in practice in 1920. His other major works include the restorations of Falkland Palace, Fife (1890-98), Greyfriars convent (1896-1900), and the Michaelkirk, Moray (1900-01), new work at St Mary's, Chapeltown, Moray (1896-7), stables at Altyre, Moray (1902), and Ingliston, near Edinburgh ('c'.1900-02), houses at Carlekemp, Haddington (1898-1900), and The Peel, Selkirk (1904-6). He worked particularly with Gothic, Renaissance, and Scottish seventeenth-century styles. Kinross was regarded highly by his colleagues in the profession. He died on 7 January 1931 at his home, 2 Abercromby Place, Edinburgh; after a funeral at St Paul's episcopal church he was buried at Grange cemetery, Grange Road, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 60245


Sonntag, Jacob (1905-1984), journal editor and translator, was born on 15 April 1905 at Vijnita (Wiznitz), northern Bukovina, then a part of the Austro-Hungarian empire (and now in Ukraine), the eldest child (there were three younger brothers and one younger sister) of Ben-Zion Singer-Sonntag, a bookbinder, and his wife, Edel David. (As a young writer, Jacob Sonntag sometimes called himself Jacob Singer, after his grandfather.) Born to poverty, his family moved to Kosov, in eastern Galicia, where he attended the local elementary schools, and then, during the early stages of the First World War, moved to Innsbruck and then to Vienna, where he attended a local 'Gymnasium' to the age of about sixteen. He had also received a traditional Jewish religious education in Orthodox 'cheders', but abandoned this outlook for secular pursuits in literature and philosophy. He also became a convinced Zionist, attending a 'hachshara' (training in agriculture for intending migrants to Palestine). Here he met Berta (Batyah), daughter of Israel and Chaja Weinraub of Czernowitz, then in Romania, whom he married in Vienna in January 1927. During the 1920s he contributed prose and verse to German-language Jewish newspapers in Vienna and, in 1930, moved briefly to Palestine but returned to Vienna after six months. For the next five years he worked as a freelance journalist in Vienna, contributing mainly to Jewish newspapers and periodicals and also working as a foreign correspondent for Jewish newspapers in France and the United States. After the fascist coup in Austria in 1934, he moved to Czechoslovakia, where he worked as a freelance journalist for three years, first in Brno and then in Prague. 
With the invasion of Czechoslovakia by the Nazi regime, Sonntag was fortunate to escape to Britain (Berta's parents perished in the holocaust). He arrived in England in November 1938 among the first group of refugees who emigrated with the help of the Czech Trust Fund and the National Union of Journalists. After internment on the Isle of Man and spells of unemployment and menial work, he resumed work as a freelance writer and translator, chiefly for Jewish publications in Britain. He also edited 'Zeitspiegel', a small publication of the Austrian Centre, consisting of translations from the English press. As a survivor of the decimated Jewish communities of eastern Europe, Sonntag was acutely aware that Jewish literary culture and commentary could only be carried on if the seeds of the vanished Jewish civilization of Europe were somehow replanted, and flourished, in Britain. Berta Sonntag was active in the field of children's education and in 1941-2 was honorary secretary of the refugee teachers association of the National Union of Teachers. After the Second World War, Britain contained one of the largest remaining Jewish communities in Europe, in a democratic society with a literate culture. Yet the Anglo-Jewish community was lamentably lacking in a continuing tradition of Jewish literature and commentary, containing few organs in which Jewish writers could feel at home or speak freely. Nor had Anglo-Jewry many close ties with any of the vigorous intellectual and political traditions of Jewry on the continent. It was this situation that Sonntag spent the rest of his life attempting to ameliorate. In 1947 he launched an illustrated monthly, 'New Life', intended to provide a platform for Jewish writers and artists who had survived the holocaust. This lasted for less than two years before it was unfortunately discontinued because of paper restrictions. He also edited two other short-lived publications, the 'Jewish Literary Supplement' and the 'Jewish Literary Quarterly'. 
In spring 1953 Sonntag founded the 'Jewish Quarterly', the periodical with which his name is associated. It provided a distinguished forum for Anglo-Jewish writers and intellectuals who wished to emphasize the Jewish component of their outlook, or to comment on Jewish affairs. Many of the most notable Anglo-Jewish writers of the post-war decades published in the 'Jewish Quarterly', particularly younger authors who were increasingly concerned with their Jewish roots, among them such notables as Danny Abse, Brian Glanville, Wolf Mankowitz, Alexander Baron, Frederic Raphael, Jon Silkin, and Arnold Wesker (whose first published works appeared there). The 'Jewish Quarterly' also featured vigorous commentary on key Jewish issues such as secular Jewish identity in Britain, the central role of Israel in contemporary Jewish affairs, and the persecution of Jews in the Soviet Union. Although ever aware of Jewish history and tradition, Sonntag was a liberal intellectual who was uncomfortable with the growth of Jewish religious fundamentalism and right-wing Israeli nationalism since the 1960s. Two anthologies of notable works from the 'Quarterly' were published in his lifetime; these were 'Caravan: A Jewish Quarterly Omnibus' and 'Jewish Perspectives: 25 Years of Modern Jewish Writing' (1980). Sonntag edited the 'Quarterly' almost single-handedly, always on a shoestring budget, and operating from his own home in north London. It was widely noted that for its range and quality the 'Quarterly' was without equal in the English-speaking world. The Jewish Literary Trust Ltd was established in 1976 to fund the periodical, allowing it to be published without desperate financial worries. The 'Quarterly' continued to be published after Sonntag's death. 
Sonntag also published a number of translations from the Yiddish, in particular a narrative poem by Abraham Sutzkever, 'Siberia' (1953), which appeared with original illustrations by Marc Chagall. He edited two anthologies of Jewish writing, much of which had not appeared in the 'Quarterly', namely 'Jewish Writing Today' (1974) and 'New Writing from Israel' (1980). He contributed several surveys of Yiddish literature to encyclopaedias of world literature, and organized many symposia on topics of Jewish interest. He was renowned for his absolute integrity and editorial independence, and was sometimes compared to the 'maskilim' of nineteenth-century Europe who sparked the so-called Jewish enlightenment. Britain has not known another figure like Sonntag either before him or since his death. Jacob Sonntag died at 68 Worcester Crescent in north London on 27 June 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 60246


Simpson, Evelyn Mary (1885-1963), literary scholar, was born on 2 September 1885 at 2 Park Terrace, Cambridge, the daughter of James Spearing, solicitor, and his wife, Fanny Elizabeth, 'nee' Clayton. She was educated at the Perse School, Cambridge, where she was remembered as one 'whose learning already created awe in those around her' ('Newnham College Roll Letter', 1964), and at Newnham College, Cambridge (1905-9), gaining a first in medieval and modern languages in 1908. After teaching at Bedford College, London University (1909-11), in 1911 she became a fellow of Newnham, the title 'fellow' being associated at Newnham at that time specifically with research. 
In 1912 Spearing published 'The Elizabethan Translations of Seneca's Tragedies' and her work on 'Studley's Translations of Seneca's Agamemnon and Medea' appeared in Louvain in 1913. She interrupted her research on Elizabethan drama -- the second volume of her endeavours was lost when the Louvain University Press was destroyed -- to work as a nurse, first during 1914-15 at a Red Cross hospital in Cambridge for wounded Belgian soldiers and subsequently, from the autumn of 1915, at military hospitals in France. In 1917-18 she worked as a general service superintendent at Eaton Hall Military Hospital, Chester. 
It was an act of considerable courage for a pioneering woman university teacher and scholar to interrupt an academic career in Cambridge to work as a Voluntary Aid Detachment (VAD) nurse in the difficult conditions prevailing in France in 1915. In her account of her experiences, 'From Cambridge to Camiers under the Red Cross', published in 1917, Evelyn Spearing shows a profound and tender compassion for the ordinary wounded combatants in her care. In 1918 she was mentioned in dispatches. 
Spearing was appointed tutor in English literature at St Hugh's College, Oxford, in 1919. On 16 August 1921 she married the English scholar Percy Simpson (1865-1962), fellow of Oriel College from 1921 to 1936 and latterly Goldsmiths' reader in English at Oxford University. The following year she became the first woman to be awarded the DPhil degree at Oxford and in 1924 she published a study of the prose works of John Donne based on her doctoral thesis. Her marriage, however, marked the end of her tutorship at St Hugh's but the beginning of a long-standing editorial collaboration, described as 'one of the most remarkable partnerships in the history of scholarship' ('The Times', 12 Sept 1963). Percy Simpson was some twenty years older than his wife and for many years had been engaged, with C. H. Herford (1853-1931), on the Oxford edition of Jonson's works, the first two volumes of which were to appear in 1925. Following Herford's death Evelyn Simpson worked with her husband on the remaining volumes of text and accompanying commentary, the whole edition of eleven volumes being completed in 1952. The Jonson edition stands as a lasting monument to the Simpsons' meticulous research and editorial skills; it 'remains one of the great editions of its age. Its commentary is a masterpiece of wide, profound, and exact scholarship' ('DNB'). 
While the great work on Jonson was nearing completion, Evelyn Simpson's work on Donne's sermons, commissioned by the University of California at Berkeley, though it had been interrupted by research for the Jonson edition, was also taking shape, the first volume appearing in 1953. She too suffered the loss of a co-editor with the death of George Reuben Potter (1895-1954) and continued as sole editor, completing the ten-volume work in some nine years. 
Evelyn and Percy Simpson had two children: a son, Edward Spearing Simpson ('b'. 1923), who died in an accident on Mont Blanc in 1953, and a daughter, Mary, born in 1924. Percy Simpson died at the age of ninety-seven in 1962, and Evelyn's death followed less than a year later; she died, of heart failure following pneumonia, at Sun Court Nursing Home, Sheringham, Norfolk, on 7 September 1963, aged seventy-eight, and was buried at Old Headington cemetery, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 60250


Leftwich, Joseph (1892-1983), writer, editor, and translator, was born Joseph Lewkowitz on 20 September 1892 in Zutphen, the Netherlands, the son of Leopold Lewkowitz, a Polish Jewish cobbler, and his wife, Johanna Bachara. According to the 'Autobiographical Note' included in his eighty-fifth birthday tribute, he was fortunate to survive a difficult circumcision. The family moved to London in 1897, when he was five. Speaking English at home, he grew up in Whitechapel, referring to himself as a 'Whitechapel boy'. He 'became an English schoolboy in a Whitechapel board school' ('Autobiographical note', 4) and remembered his father taking him to the processions for Queen Victoria's funeral and Edward VII's coronation. He attended his school 'a few years late [and] never caught up to the scholarship class, so that [his] schooling ended at 14' (ibid.). He was known as 'Lefty', and early friendships included Jack Isaacs, the poet Isaac Rosenberg, John Rodker, and Stephen Winsten. Leftwich's reminiscences and his 1911 diary, the only one he kept, subsequently became an important source of information for biographers of his contemporaries. His essays on Yiddish and Jewish literature, and especially his essay ''Jewish' London Fifty Years Ago', in '1915-1965: Fifty Years' Achievements in the Arts' (ed. J. Sonntag, 1966) are the source for the expression 'Whitechapel boys' to describe Leftwich, Rodker, Winsten, Rosenberg, Jacob Epstein, and others. 
On leaving school in 1906 Leftwich worked briefly as a junior librarian at the Jewish Institute in Mulberry Street, Whitechapel. This was followed by a variety of jobs including as an errand boy and working in a bakery, a tailors' workshop, a Jewish tailors' trade union, a furrier's workshop, and a Smithfield egg merchants. He spent his 'days in the libraries, or walking and talking with friends' ('Autobiographical note', 7). Graced with a gregarious disposition, and a charming demeanour, he was appointed president of the local Jewish Literary and Social Society. During the First World War many of his friends became conscientious objectors or, as in the case of Rosenberg, were killed, but Leftwich, owing to his Dutch birth, avoided conscription or imprisonment. Initially his 'aspirations [were] more towards poetry than Yiddish' (ibid., 9). He frequented Harold Munro's Poetry Bookshop, and became a regular at the Cafe Royal, where he met Holbrook Jackson and Jacob Epstein among others. His poems were published in outlets such as 'Colour' and 'The Nation'. A meeting with Joseph Cowen, a leading Zionist, resulted in an invitation to meet Meir Grossman, who was starting a Jewish news agency. In 1921 Leftwich joined the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, where he worked until 1936 as London editor and bureau chief. On 20 May 1927, at the Dalston Synagogue, Islington, he married the 25-year-old Sala Bochenek, a shorthand typist, and daughter of Solomon Bochenek, merchant. They had one daughter, Joan, who married the New York-based writer Joseph McElroy. 
Increasingly interested in Yiddish, from 1920 Leftwich, together with Leo Koenig, the Yiddish writer, edited 'Renaissance', a Yiddish magazine which included Yiddish translations of Israel and Louis Zangwill and Louis Golding among others. It also contained art reproductions of, to name a few, Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani, Jacob Epstein, David Bomberg, and Jacob Kramer. Jewish Telegraphic Agency contacts, combined with Leftwich's political inclinations, led to connections with Poale Zion, the Jewish Social Democratic Labour Party organization. During the early years of the Second World War he became secretary to David Ben-Gurion and Moshe Sharett, future Israeli prime ministers. In 1941-2 the Yiddish P. E. N. Center in New York appointed him its 'Permanent Delegate to the International P. E. N. Executive', in which capacity he served for over thirty-six years. 
For more than fifty years Leftwich worked as a journalist, most notably with the 'Jewish Chronicle'. From 1945 he directed the British Federation of Jewish Relief Organizations. Immanuel Jakobovitz, then chief rabbi, in his contribution to Leftwich's eighty-fifth birthday tribute, commented that Leftwich 'is the spokesman of the world in which he has never lived, and the living exponent of a culture which is now all but dead following its martyrdom in the Holocaust' ('Joseph Leftwich at Eighty-Five', 12). Leftwich's 'Yisroel Omnibus of Short Stories by Jewish Authors' (1933; rev. edn, 1963) was instrumental in making people aware of the achievements of Jewish writers and especially those writing in Yiddish. Other Leftwich publications serving to enhance the cause of Yiddish literature included 'The Golden Peacock Anthology of Yiddish Poetry in English Translation' (1939; rev. edn, 1969), ''The Book of Fire': Stories from Peretz' (1960), 'The Way We Think: Anthology of Yiddish Essays' (2 vols., 1969), 'P. E. N. Anthology of Modern Yiddish Literature' (1974), translations from the Yiddish of his great friend Abraham Sutzkever (1971), and 'Poems by Zalman Shazar' (1974), who from 1963 to 1973 was Israeli president. Leftwich was noted too for 'Israel Zangwill: a Biography' (1957), and co-authored with Joseph Frankel 'Herzl: Man and Legend' (1943). In addition to innumerable essays and translations, other books included, with the far-right politician Arthur K. Chesterton, an account of 'The Tragedy of Anti-Semitism' (1948). 
Known for his quiet humour, diplomacy, extensive connections, and his and his wife's hospitality at their home at 2 Winchester Place, Highgate, London, Leftwich was respected for 'his ability, his dedication and his character' ('Joseph Leftwich at Eighty-Five', 19), and for 'the cardinal virtues of tsedaka (charity) and rachmanut (pity, kindness and consideration)' ('Jewish Chronicle', 4 March 1983). Bespectacled, stocky, of medium height, he was noted, according to Alexander Baron, for 'an occasional fierce flash in the eyes, that made them handsome and betrayed genius [with] 'hair like shocks of wheat wind tumbled'' ('Joseph Leftwich at Eighty-Five', 22), a distinguished mien that lasted well into old age. According to his daughter his most impressive trait was his 'tenacity. Coming from such a poor beginning and with no encouragement from home (in fact discouragement), to have reached his position in Jewish life and letters is indeed a most impressive achievement' (ibid., 32). He died on 28 February 1983 at the Whittington Hospital, Islington, of bronchopneumonia and was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 60254


Yeldham, Florence Annie (1877-1945), schoolteacher and historian of arithmetic, was born at School House, Brightling, Battle, Sussex, on 30 October 1877, the second daughter and second of at least seven children of Thomas Yeldham ('b'. 'c'.1853) of Bromley, Kent, a schoolteacher who later became a school inspector, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann Chesterfield ('b'. 1854) of Leicestershire. With the family's move to London, Yeldham and three sisters had the opportunity to attend a school run by a charitable foundation, James Allen's Girls' School, Dulwich; the school awarded her an exhibition to Bedford College, University of London, where she matriculated in 1895. Meanwhile two of her brothers attended Alleyn's School, part of the same foundation, but none of the rest of her family had an extended education: one sister left school at the age of sixteen, and the other siblings even earlier. Yeldham graduated with a BSc (division two) in 1900, having chosen papers in pure mathematics, experimental physics, and zoology. She is listed as having gained honours, which one would have expected, but no details can be found. 
Yeldham was appointed to her first post as a teacher by the London county council at Peckham county secondary school, London, in 1901. While there in 1913 she produced her first printed work: 'Percentage Tables' (Pitman). The British Library copy comprises just one sheet (double folio size) containing the table itself, with instructions for how it should be used -- not what it was for. It is clearly a very specialized type of ready reckoner, and probably provided a practical solution to some problem which had cropped up in the classroom, but its purpose today is no longer obvious. 
Yeldham moved in April 1914 to the girls' county secondary school in Streatham, London, and remained there for some years, though her teaching career after 1918 is undocumented. In 1922, however, she provided evidence of the progressive educational outlook of that school, describing how it had recently introduced the Dalton plan (a scheme of work giving pupils more responsibility for their own learning, which later became quite widely adopted): she wrote an article in the 'Mathematical Gazette' (reprinted in a centenary edition of 1971) describing, with some enthusiasm, its impact on her teaching in both pure and applied mathematics and physics. Everything indicates that she was a dedicated teacher. 
It can be inferred from her 1922 article that Yeldham was an early advocate of the history of mathematics as a stimulus in teaching mathematics. Despite her somewhat unremarkable classroom career, she possessed a most unusual characteristic: having deplored the lack of suitable books for her pupils (and their teachers) -- as background reading or for the library -- she acted positively to become an expert in order to write them herself. In 1923, at the age of forty-five, she enrolled as a PhD student of Dr Charles Singer in the history of science department of University College, London, becoming one of its earliest formal students. Her first book, 'The Story of Reckoning in the Middle Ages' (1926), was submitted as part of her dissertation -- which dealt with arithmetical methods up to the thirteenth century -- as were four other (unpublished) papers, dealing with minor topics that had evidently intrigued her. In that book she describes Singer as 'my friend and tutor'. 
Yeldham's second book, which appeared in 1936, was 'The Teaching of Arithmetic through Four Hundred Years (1535-1935)'. In the early twenty-first century both books were still well regarded and quite frequently cited, since she included material that was not readily available, while her critical comments, particularly on the later period, give a good sense of the unsuspected difficulties that slowed the development of arithmetic. Her treatment of the subject is generally episodic, being more factual than interpretative, but the books must certainly have met the needs of her intended readership. 
In retirement Yeldham lived in Banstead, Surrey. Her last years must have been passed in some discomfort owing to chronic arthritis, probably compounded by the deprivations of wartime. She spent at least the final six months of her life in the Metropolitan Convalescent Home, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, and died there on 10 January 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 60255


Barrington, Emilie Isabel (1841-1933), biographer and novelist, was born on 18 October 1841 at 15 Hertford Street, Mayfair, Westminster, the youngest of the six daughters of James Wilson (1805-1860) and Elizabeth Preston (died 1886). Her father was a merchant, an important figure in the Anti-Corn Law League, and the founder of 'The Economist'. Although her early years were spent on the continent, in 1846 her father bought Fountainville near Westbury, of which town he soon afterwards became the MP. Like her sisters, Emilie Wilson received the normal education of an early Victorian upper middle-class girl, learning a range of languages and accomplishments from governesses. From 1855 to 1856, she attended a school in Cologne with her sister Zoe; in 1858 she went to a finishing school in Paris with Sophie Parnell, sister of the Irish politician C. S. Parnell. 
In 1859 James Wilson was appointed financial member of the supreme council of India. Emilie and Julia Wilson remained with their recently married sister, Eliza, and her husband, Walter Bagehot, while their father, mother, and other sisters travelled to India. Following James Wilson's death in August 1860, the Wilson women returned to England and made their home with the Bagehots. In the early 1860s Emilie Wilson formed a close friendship with Emily Faithfull, a Langham Place member and the manager of the Victoria Press: both women were interested in expanding opportunities for women's employment. Still more, Wilson was committed to the improvement of the lower classes through art. She was an amateur artist herself, taking drawing lessons from Arthur Hughes, and an inveterate visitor to art exhibitions and artists' studios. 
During a continental tour in 1867 Wilson became engaged to Russell Barrington (died 1916), the eldest son of the Revd Lowther and Lady Catherine Barrington; they were married on 1 July 1868 at St Peter's, Eaton Square. A quiet, dull man, he tolerated her highly strung and dominant personality, and admired her artistic pretensions. Their first child, Guy, born in 1869, was mentally unstable; their second, Ivo, died in 1871, at the age of four months. In the same bitter year Barrington's submissions to the Royal Academy were rejected. 
As a married woman Emilie Barrington aimed to become the hostess for a well-born and artistic London set: in this rather forlorn hope she became, as Wilfrid Blunt cruelly puts it, 'an indefatigable pursuer of artistic big game' (Blunt, 159). About the time of her marriage she met G. F. Watts at Rossetti's studio, and she became an intimate of the Little Holland House circle and a self-designated muse to the artist. After Walter Bagehot's death in 1877 she persuaded her husband and widowed sister to purchase a house on Melbury Road, next to Watts's studio, and she visited him daily, reading to him and playing music for him. Russell Barrington acted as a go-between for Watts and his buyers. This practice ended only after the artist's marriage in 1886: Emilie Barrington's failure to appreciate that she was no longer Watts's hostess and Mary Watts's jealousy led to such acrimony between the two women that the Wattses moved away in 1891. After the artist's death, Mrs Barrington's close friendship with the artist was memorialized in her 'Reminiscences of G. F. Watts' (1905), a work criticized as unreliable by Watts's widow: in her own copy, she substituted 'a poisonous snake' for Mrs Barrington's name, and she published her own memoir in 1912 as a corrective. A later biographer of Watts, Ronald Chapman, disagreed with his widow's verdict, valuing Mrs Barrington's account for the light it shed on the artist's character. 
After Watts's marriage Barrington soon transferred her allegiance to Frederic Leighton, forming a friendship with one of his sisters. Her 'Life, Letters, and Works of Frederic Leighton' appeared in 1906. The first major biography of Leighton and based on family letters and the memories and papers of Leighton's friends, it is a moving and passionate analysis of Leighton's character and mentality. It remains an important source for Leighton's life and career, as the originals of many of the letters quoted in it have since been destroyed. After his death in 1896 Barrington was instrumental in ensuring that Leighton House became a museum, buying and donating several of his works to the museum. She was also a friend and admirer of the arts and crafts artist and designer Walter Crane. Another woman writer on art, Vernon Lee, was less impressed with Mrs Barrington herself: she described her as 'a rumpled, scrumpled little brown paper woman, of uncertain artistic pretensions, a sort of King Charles dog of the neighbouring studios' (Gunn, 87). 
In 1881 Barrington played a role in the establishment of the Kyrle Society, the aim of which was to 'bring beauty home to the poor'; she painted a portrait of Octavia Hill, its leading figure, in 1889. Her increasing preoccupation with philanthropy -- admittedly of a showy variety -- was evidenced in the two novels she wrote in the 1890s, 'Lena's Picture' (1892) and 'Helen's Ordeal' (1894), where both heroines seek solace for their lovelorn states in helping others and triumph spiritually over material woes. Barrington and her sisters clearly held traditional views on women's role in society as providers of spiritual and material bounty, and three of them -- including Emilie -- signed the appeal against female suffrage which appeared in the June 1889 issue of the 'Nineteenth Century'. In the same year she published a rather murky and mystical pamphlet, 'The Reality of the Spiritual Life'. During the 1880s and 1890s she was also a contributor to periodicals and journals, writing for the 'Fortnightly Review' and 'The Spectator'. 
In her later years Barrington lived mainly with her sister Eliza in her London home and at Herd's Hill in Langport, Somerset. A photograph of her, probably dating from the first years of the new century, shows a small and delicate-looking woman with a forceful expression. She edited the complete works of Walter Bagehot in nine volumes, the tenth (1915) being essentially a reissue of her life of Bagehot (1914). After the deaths of Russell Barrington and her much-loved daughter-in-law Ida in 1916, and of Eliza Bagehot in 1921, she embarked on 'The Servant of All' (1927), a life of her father which drips with filial devotion; she also edited 'The Love Letters of Walter Bagehot and Eliza Wilson' (1933). She died on 9 March 1933 at Herd's Hill. An autobiography, 'Memories of a long life', was probably destroyed after her death. Although energetic, passionate, and able, she found no true outlet for her ambitions in the role of an upper middle-class Victorian wife and mother, and her life has been described as 'a record of lost causes and lost confidants' (Westwater, 115). 


@@@@@


doc= 60256


Mattos, Katharine Elizabeth Alan de (1851-1939), author, was born in Scotland, the youngest of four children of Alan Stevenson (1807-1865), lighthouse engineer, and his wife, Margaret Scott Jones (1812-1895). Like her brother Robert Alan Mowbray Stevenson, Katharine Stevenson was one of Robert Louis Stevenson's favourite cousins: together, the three children enjoyed spending their holidays roaming the Scottish hills on their ponies. This friendship was to last until well into adulthood and the early years of R. L. Stevenson's marriage to Fanny van de Grift Osbourne. According to Robert Louis Stevenson's biographer, Frank McLynn, Katharine became a charismatic and very intelligent woman: Stevenson's appreciation is evident in his affectionate dedication to her of 'The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde' (1886). 
Katharine Stevenson shocked her friends and family when she decided to wed the Cambridge atheist and notorious philanderer William Sydney de Mattos ('b'. 1850/51). The union proved to be an incompatible one almost immediately after their marriage on 25 June 1874: Katharine had to beg for financial assistance and, finally, opted for a judicial separation in 1881. The couple had two children who were left in the care of their mother; William de Mattos later emigrated to Canada. 
After the break-up of her marriage Katharine de Mattos settled in London and tried to support herself and her children by writing. Stevenson assisted her by introducing her to some of his friends, including the poet William Ernest Henley. Henley not only adopted her as a member of his circle but, according to Charles Baxter and Stevenson, also nourished a passion for her. She started to write for the 'Magazine of Art', which was edited by Henley, and for other periodicals including the 'Saturday Review', 'Sylvia's Journal', the 'Windsor Magazine', the 'Yellow Book', and 'The Athenaeum'. She became widely known, however, for her part in the breach between W. E. Henley and R. L. Stevenson in 1888. In a now-famous letter to Robert Louis Stevenson, Henley accused Fanny Stevenson of having plagiarized one of Katharine de Mattos's stories. The row was fierce and protracted, leaving many people deeply hurt: Stevenson came to blame Katharine for all that had happened -- 'I regard her as the wicked mainspring of all this distress' ('Letters', 6.200) -- and he considerably reduced her share in his final will in spite of his father's wishes. 
By that time, however, Katharine de Mattos had succeeded in establishing her career as a professional writer, although Stevenson had, at one time, articulated his reservations about her writing talents and had thought of acting as a ghost writer for her. Some of her (admittedly small) living derived from translations and a few short stories published under the pseudonym Theodor Hertz-Garten. One translation, that of Vicomte Henri Delaborde's 'La gravure', was published under her brother's name in 1885. Her main source of income from 1886 up to 1908, however, must have stemmed from her anonymous pieces in 'The Athenaeum', to which she contributed, at the peak of her involvement (mainly in the 1890s), an average of seventy reviews a year. Considering that she was paid $10 a book in 1906, those top years yielded an income of about $350 a year. She usually reviewed a great number of new novels, also the 'novels of the week', some of the short stories, and exceptionally a book in the 'Our library table' column. It is unclear what happened to Katharine de Mattos after 1908, when she ceased to contribute to 'The Athenaeum'. She died of 'senile decay' on 13 April 1939, at Beaufort Mansions, Chelsea. 


@@@@@


doc= 60257


Gough, (Eleanor) Kathleen (1925-1990), social anthropologist and feminist, was born on 16 August 1925 at Hunsingore, near Wetherby, Yorkshire, daughter and youngest child of Albert Gough (1888-1970) and his second wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Umpleby (1892-1965), a devout Methodist who sang and recited in local chapels. Her father became village blacksmith in 1914 and played a major role in introducing combines to west Yorkshire after the Second World War. Her brother, Clifford Arthur ('b'. 1920) subsequently joined the business; she also had an older half-sister, Laura Margery Howe (1915-1998). 
Kathleen Gough attended the church school in Hunsingore (population 100, no piped water, no electricity). She gained scholarships to King James's Grammar School, Knaresborough, and in 1943 to Girton College, Cambridge, where she gained a 2.1 in English (1945) and a first in archaeology and anthropology (1946). She was awarded the Barrington prize, became Girton research scholar for 1946-7, and held two university-awarded social anthropology studentships. On 5 July 1947 she married her fellow student Eric John Miller in St John the Baptist Church, Hunsingore, and they did fieldwork together in Kerala, south India. She was supervised by Professor J. H. Hutton, an old-style anthropologist, and after he retired, by Meyer Fortes. With Evans-Pritchard and Gluckman he introduced her to twentieth-century British social anthropology. Both Eric and Kathleen obtained doctorates, but the strains of fieldwork ended their marriage and they divorced with minimal bitterness in 1950. 
Gough, as she was now again called, had abandoned Christianity and declared herself socialist and anti-imperialist as a student of eighteen, but she later said that she found peace in church services and that her socialism arose from the deep sense of moral justice gained from her mother and school. Having returned alone to India in 1951 to continue her work there, she compared the extreme patriarchy of Tamil Brahmans with the 'more free-wheeling [polyandrous and matrilineal] Nayars'. She sought to make the villagers historically intelligible and meticulously collected information on contemporary social change. Ahead of her time, she backed observation and insights from psychology with modern quantitative methods. She situated the local, political and present within national and international frameworks, in political economy and in the historical past and, unusually, in the desirable future. Her identification with oppressed landless villagers and her perceptions of Congress Party corruption led her to support Indian communists. Her doctoral thesis was long, but she published immediately only two short papers in the 'Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute', one of which was the Curl bequest prize essay in 1953. She spent a year at Harvard (with a Wenner-Gren fellowship), and on Audrey Richards's recommendation David Schneider invited her to help them to produce their massive 'Matrilineal Kinship' (1961), of which she wrote more than half. It remains an indispensable introduction to the subject, even though some reviewers disliked the editors' controversial comparative and historical materialist approach. Gough's Nayar chapter breaks new ground in the understanding of the past and possible future of matriliny and polyandry. She lectured in Gluckman's department at Manchester in 1954-5 and 1960. 
Gough married David Friend Aberle ('b'. 1918), whom she had met at Harvard, at Manchester All Saints registrar's office on 5 September 1955. An esteemed American anthropologist, he shared the rest of her life as comrade-in-arms, companion, and constructive critic. They had one son, Stephen ('b'. 1956). After Manchester there followed a series of short but sometimes prestigious university appointments held by Kathleen or David at Stanford, Berkeley, Wayne State, Michigan, and again at Manchester. While David was working at Wayne State University in Detroit, Kathleen began to work with the group running the newspaper 'Correspondence', including Grace Lee, James Boggs, and C. L. R. James, the Caribbean Marxist historian, revolutionary, and cricket authority. She became both politically sophisticated and a self-styled 'agitator', a term she proudly traced back to Cromwell's army. While back in Manchester in 1960, she quietly informed colleagues on her return from an anti-Polaris demonstration at Holy Loch that she had been arrested, held overnight, and released with a caution. 
In 1961 David and Kathleen planned to settle at Brandeis University in Massachusetts, where they were both appointed to tenured posts. As a result of their involvement in anti-nuclear protest, their support for Cuba, and exaggerated accounts of her criticism of J. F. Kennedy to students, complicated by the fact that David was her head of department, they were both forced to resign in 1963. They moved to the University of Oregon, where they played a major part in organizing protests and sit-ins against the Vietnam war. David's actual (and Kathleen's intended) refusal to grade papers that would have caused students to be drafted into the army forced his resignation four years later. They went next to Vancouver, where David took Canadian citizenship. He remained at the University of British Columbia until his retirement in 1984. Kathleen, who retained her UK nationality, joined Simon Fraser University at Burnaby, British Columbia, where her participation in an attempt to democratize the department and the university led to her being manoeuvred out. This led to a worldwide boycott of the university in 1971. In the same year she published a celebrated article on Engels's 'The Origin of the Family' in the 'Journal of Marriage and the Family'. She obtained grants enabling her to continue her work on India and, additionally, south-east Asia. She published two books on imperialism in south-east Asia and Vietnam (1973, 1978) and, after work in British libraries (1974) and fieldwork in India (1976), two major books on south-east India (1981, 1989). She was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 1988. In her last days she saw the first copies of her 'Political Economy in Vietnam' (1990), with a preface by Ved Prakash Vatuk in which he described her as 'soft as a lotus, firm as a rock' -- a true Indian whose life had combined the activities of all four Hindu castes: seeking and imparting knowledge, struggle, speaking for the voiceless, and service to others. She was still studying Vietnamese to facilitate the long-term studies in Vietnam she was planning. The 'Economic and Political Weekly' in Delhi (a favourite vehicle) published, during her last weeks, her self-critical article on imperialism acknowledging Soviet and Chinese depredations. But she never abandoned socialism or her hopes for a better future for poor villagers. 
After four months' illness with cancer, Kathleen Gough died in Vancouver on 8 September 1990, and was buried on 13 September in Capilano View cemetery, Vancouver, after a service which she has herself devised, including psalms and the Hebrew kaddish. She loved India and enjoyed and admired Canada but she was proud of her roots in Yorkshire and maintained ties with her family and former teachers there, and a devotion to the quiet beauty of its countryside. 


@@@@@


doc= 60258


Ross, Anna Margaret (1860-1939), novelist and poet, was born on 8 December 1860 at Drumaness, co. Down, Ireland, the fourth child of Edward Amlave McKittrick, principal of Drumaness high school, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Black. Both parents came from farming stock, and were married in the parish church at Magheradroll, co. Down, on 1 February 1856. Their daughter was baptized Anna Margaret, although she later claimed that her mother named her Amanda Malvina Fitzalan, after the heroine of 'The Children of the Abbey' (1798), by Regina Maria Roche. Her biographer Jack Loudan suggests, in 'O Rare Amanda' (1954), that she adopted her pen-name, Amanda Ros, because she knew of an ancient co. Down family called de Ros. She had a tendency to aggrandizement. 
Amanda McKittrick was apparently educated at home until the 1880s, when, during her teacher training at Marlborough College, Dublin, she was appointed monitor at Millbrook national school, Larne, where she returned to teach after qualifying. On 30 August 1887, in Carrickfergus, she married Andrew Ross (1849/1850-1917), the Larne stationmaster, 'whose genial manner and exemplary courteousness are widely known' (according to her second novel, 'Delina Delaney', 1898). 
Andrew Ross became stationmaster at Larne Harbour, receiving those visiting celebrities who crossed from Stranraer. His wife extolled his dignity in this elevated role, but his working hours were long. She had ample time for reading Marie Corelli's 'The Sorrows of Satan' (1895), re-reading 'The Children of the Abbey', and writing 'Irene Iddesleigh' (1897). 'Irene Iddesleigh' and 'Delina Delaney' established her ambiguous reputation. She worked sporadically on a third novel, 'Helen Huddleson' (published posthumously in 1969 with a final chapter by Loudan), but between 1898 and 1926, when the Nonesuch Press edition of 'Irene' appeared, she issued only the splenetic 'Poems of Puncture' (1912) and some broadsheet verses. 
Ross became a cult figure after Barry Pain reviewed 'Irene' as 'the Book of the Century': 'it sits alone as the nightingale sings' ('Black and White', Feb 1898). An Amanda Ros club was formed by those who delighted in her 'magnificent incongruities', her apparently uncontrollable use of alliteration, and the ridiculous effects she unwittingly produced. Her unlikely correspondents included Aldous Huxley, R. H. Tawney, E. V. Lucas, Siegfried Sassoon, William Beveridge, and several noble lords and ladies. Her plots were conventional -- orphan heroines and all-conquering love -- but her equivocal fame sprang from the richness of her rhetorical flights and headlong plunges into bathos. 
Amanda Ross thought that words meant what she chose them to mean, however eccentrically juxtaposed: as she said in a letter, 'My works are all my own, pleasingly peculiar'. Aldous Huxley, in 'Euphues redivivus' (1923), described her style as 'the result of the discovery of art by an unsophisticated mind' (Huxley, 137). Although his essay is a model of ironic assessment, other contemporary critics were less diplomatic, and Amanda -- a doughty fighter and extremely litigious -- expended much time after 1926 in reviling them in prose and verse. ''At home' always to the honourable', as her visiting card proclaimed, she was irresistibly impelled to respond vigorously -- often coarsely -- to her antagonists. The butt of masculine ridicule, like Margaret Dumont and Florence Foster Jenkins, she stoutly maintained a sense of her own undoubted powers; and while a reader may delight in her verbal incongruities, the enthusiasm behind them is undeniable. 'Irene' is a tragic tale, betrayed by the innocent ambition of its teller, as both Sassoon and Tawney recognized. 
Unable to resist any challenge, when Andy Ross retired Amanda converted part of their home into two shops to boost their reduced income; for a time she also managed a limekiln, whose bequest to her by the owner resulted in a five-year legal battle with his family. She worked indomitably on the vituperative 'Six months in hell', her uncompleted diatribe against clergymen, lawyers, critics, and other infringers of her own idiosyncratic Presbyterian code. 
Andy Ross died in August 1917, and on 12 June 1922 Amanda Ross married Thomas Rodgers (1857/1858-1933), a prosperous farmer in co. Down who died shortly after her last poems were published ('Fumes of Formation', 1933: 'the ingenious innings of inspiration and Thorny Tincture of Thought'). She died at the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast on 2 February 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 60262


Tollet, George (d. 1719), mathematician and naval administrator, is said to have lived to 'a very advanced age' ('St Margaret's', 74), but his birth date and parentage are not known. He had at least three brothers -- John, Thomas, and Charles. Much evidence suggests that his brother Thomas was the composer Thomas Tollet thought to have died in 1696. George Tollet was also musical, owned a violin made by Nicolo Amati, and may have composed 'Tollet's Ground' and other works sometimes attributed to Thomas. In 1683 Tollet became a founder member of the Dublin Philosophical Society -- a sister organization to the Royal Society -- and would become one of its more active members: his experiments and presentations, as well as his correspondence with other scientists, including Edmond Halley, are often remarked upon in its minute book, which records his election to the position of treasurer on 2 November 1685. Several members of the Dublin society remained important contacts after Tollet moved to England, perhaps most notably William King (later archbishop of Dublin), with whom Tollet maintained an extensive correspondence spanning more than two decades, much of which survives in the library of Trinity College, Dublin (amid TCD, MSS 1995-2008). 
Several of Tollet's contributions to the Dublin society's meetings involved applied mathematics -- he presented papers on gunnery and on longitude, for example -- but particularly striking, in light of his later attention to the education of his daughter Elizabeth, is his presentation of a young Irish prodigy. William Molyneux reported to Edmond Halley in a letter of 6 April 1685: 'several of our meetings have been employed by a young mathematical female in this place, bred up by one Mr Tollet, a teacher of mathematics, and a most excellent learned man in that kind. The child is not yet eleven, and yet she hath given sufficient proofs of her learning in arithmetic, the most abstruse parts, algebra, geometry, trigonometry plane and spherical, the doctrine of the globes, chronology, and on the violin plays anything almost at sight. (Gilbert, 2.177)' She was also deemed proficient in geography and astronomy.In 1688 Tollet moved to England. Luttrell's parliamentary diary reports that Tollet was chosen secretary to the 'commissioners for taking the public accounts' in March 1691; was made 'comptroller of the foreign post office in the room of Mr Brocket' in May 1697; took a post at 'the custome house' in November 1697; and in June 1700 was made 'secretary of the excise, worth $500 per annum' (Luttrell, 2.192; 4.219, 306, 661). Not mentioned in Luttrell's diary, but noted by both Hinchliffe and Speake, is Tollet's appointment as accountant-general of Ireland, granted in December 1691. 
Tollet's marriage to Elizabeth Cook (1659/60-1702) had taken place by at least 1690. There seems to have been considerable strife in the marriage. In a letter to William King of 24 November 1692 Tollet remarks how 'deeply sown' is 'ye seed of contention' (TCD, MSS 1995-2008/246). Elizabeth died at the age of forty-two on 6 February 1702, and was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields, as her epitaph records, 'with two of their nine Children; a third lyeth near this grave' (Le Neve, 46). Apart from their daughter Elizabeth Tollet, the poet ('b'. 11 March 1694), only two other children of the nine survived into adulthood: George ('b'. 17 Dec 1696) and Cook ('b'. 1 April 1698). 
A letter from Tollet to Samuel Pepys the diarist and navy official, dated 8 February 1694, is headed 'Office of Accounts in York Buildings', and it seems likely that Tollet had his residence as well as his office in these 'comfortable mansions' in London ('Private Correspondence', 1.90, 267; 2.2). But by 1702 the family had moved to the Tower of London, and on 11 February 1702 Tollet was appointed an extra commissioner to the navy with a salary of $500 per annum. It was perhaps through his work with the Navy Board that he became acquainted with that other famous diarist and navy official of the period, John Evelyn, at whose funeral in 1706 at Wotton he was a pallbearer. On 3 December 1708 George Tollet was granted a coat of arms. The Tollets' residence in the Tower continued well beyond the father's employment with the navy, which ended on 16 November 1714: the family 'certainly resided there' in 'the early part of the reign of George I, during the imprisonment of the celebrated Robert Harley, Earl of Oxford, who, in gratitude to Mr. Tollet, for his kindness to him when in confinement, presented him with a gilt cup, with the Tower engraved upon it, which has descended as an heir loom.(Hinchliffe, 188-9; will, Staffs. RO, D3272/1/22/10/1)' For the initial part of his imprisonment in 1715 Oxford had in fact stayed at the Tollets' residence. 
Tollet wrote his will on 9 June 1718 in the Tower, and later that year retired to the small market town of Betley in Staffordshire to live in Betley Hall, which, with surrounding properties in Betley and Audley, he had recently purchased from Randle Egerton, esquire. He died within about a year of the move, and was buried on 5 November 1719 in St Margaret's Church, Betley. The Tollets and their descendants remained prominent in Betley and surrounding areas for nearly two centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 60263


Allott, Kenneth Cyril Bruce (1912-1973), literary scholar and poet, was born on 29 August 1912 at Cynon surgery, Llanwynno, Mountain Ash, Glamorgan, the elder son of Hubert Cyril Willoughby Allott, a general practitioner, and his wife, Rose Finlay. The family moved to Nenthead, Cumberland, where Kenneth's brother, (Denys Neville) Guy, was born in November 1914. In about 1916 the family moved to Whitchurch, Shropshire, where Allott and Guy, attended local schools before being sent in 1923 to Beaumont College in Berkshire, a Jesuit-run Roman Catholic public school which later joined with Stonyhurst School. By the age of thirteen Allott was reading Kant, and he informed his younger brother that he had renounced his faith. While Allott was at Beaumont his parents separated and Allott's father went to live with a nurse whom he had met during the war. Allott's mother died a few years later -- Allott believed from a broken heart. From the age of about fourteen Allott and his brother were brought up by his mother's sisters, Sarah and Mary Finlay. Following the wishes of his aunts, the boys attended St Cuthbert's Roman Catholic Grammar School in Newcastle upon Tyne, where Allott was known as Speedy because he spoke so quickly. 
In 1934 Allott graduated with first-class honours from Newcastle's Armstrong College. In 1935 he gained a diploma in education, and in 1936 he became a BLitt student at St Edmund Hall, Oxford. His BLitt dissertation, an edition of the poems of the seventeenth-century Catholic writer William Habington, was published by Liverpool University Press (1948). On 10 July 1936 Allott married Surya Kumari Lall ('b'. 1913/14), the daughter of Kundan Lall, a barrister. They had a daughter and a son. Soon after the awarding of his BLitt degree, in 1938, Allott began teaching at Burgess Hill School in London, and also at this time began reviewing for the 'Morning Post' and working with Geoffrey Grigson on the poetry magazine 'New Verse'. He was, along with many other young writers, an observer for Charles Madge's social survey group, Mass-Observation. 
In 1940 Allott successfully applied as a conscientious objector and in 1942 he and his family moved to Gateshead, where he had been appointed an extramural lecturer. In 1943 he was appointed a staff tutor at Vaughan College, an extramural college in Leicester, and in 1945 an assistant lecturer in the English department at Liverpool University. In 1948 he was promoted to a lectureship at Liverpool. In November 1950 his first marriage was dissolved, and on 1 June 1951 he married Miriam Farris ['see below'], a fellow lecturer in the English department. In 1955 he was appointed to a senior lectureship and, after a period (1962-3) as acting head of department, in 1964 he became the first holder of the university's newly established Andrew Cecil Bradley chair in modern English literature. 
Throughout his academic career Allott was engaged in writing fiction and poetry. In 1937 he had published, in collaboration with Stephen Tait, a comic novel entitled 'The Rhubarb Tree', and also a play, 'A Room with a View', based on E. M. Forster's novel. He published two collections of poetry, 'Poems' (1938) and 'The Ventriloquist's Doll' (1943), and is perhaps best remembered for the widely anthologized 'Lament for a Cricket Eleven'. His poetry was influenced by Auden and Eliot, and is characterized by an elegiac tone, by flashes of surrealism, and by a keen sense of morality. He was regarded by many -- including Francis Scarfe, who devotes an entire chapter on Allott's work in his 'Auden and after: the Liberation of Poetry, 1930-41' (1942) -- as one of the most promising young poets of his day. 
During the 1960s and early 1970s Allott held several visiting professorships -- at the University of Otago, and with the British Council in New Zealand and in India (New Delhi). During this period he was a member of the advisory boards of 'Victorian Poetry' and 'Victorian Studies', and was also general editor of the five-volume anthology 'The Pelican Book of English Prose' (1956), and a general editor of the 'Oxford History of English Literature'. 
Allott was an outstanding scholar and a leading authority on Victorian literature. He edited selections of the work of Winthrop Mackworth Praed and Robert Browning, wrote essays on Keats, Shelley, and Clough, and edited the standard Longmans annotated edition of Matthew Arnold's 'Complete Poems' (1965). His other scholarly works include a biography of Jules Verne (1940) and a book written with Miriam Allott, 'The Art of Graham Greene' (1951). He reviewed regularly for the 'Times Literary Supplement'. Allott was always youthful in appearance, witty, enthusiastic, an extremely popular lecturer, and a great lover of cats. He was also a heavy smoker, believing wrongly that his lungs would be protected because of an earlier illness from tuberculosis ('c'.1949-50). 
Besides his academic work on Victorian literature Allott was a champion of new writing. At Oxford he co-edited the literary magazine 'Programme', and was assistant editor of the influential poetry magazine 'New Verse' from 1936 to 1939. His anthology 'The Penguin Book of Contemporary Verse' (1950; revised and enlarged, 1962) was used widely in schools and colleges. 
Kenneth Allot died at Broadgreen Hospital, Liverpool, on 23 May 1973, of lung cancer. He was cremated at Anfield cemetery, Liverpool. Allott's 'Collected Poems' was published posthumously in 1975. 
Allott's second wife, Miriam Allott (1920-2010), literary scholar, was born on 16 June 1920 at 48 Drive Mansions, Fulham, London, the daughter of Labib Farris, an Egyptian medical student, and his wife, Ada Violet, 'nee' Rennie. Her parents had married in Birkenhead a few months before her birth. She was educated at the English School in Cairo, the Froebel Demonstration School (where she was a contemporary of Iris Murdoch), and the University of Liverpool (where she was a contemporary of Frank Kermode). After graduating during the Second World War with a BA in general studies she taught at Rock Ferry School, in the Wirral, while also studying for her PhD in English literature at Liverpool, where she joined the staff as a lecturer in 1948. She was a gifted teacher and of striking appearance, with black hair and 'chiaroscuro eyes' ('The Times', 11 Sept 2010). Her 'Novelists on the Novel' (1959) was widely read. After her husband's death she completed and saw to publication his Longman edition of Matthew Arnold's poetry, followed by her own selection of Keats's poetry. She was also a noted scholar of E. M. Forster. She succeeded her husband as A. C. Bradley professor of modern literature at Liverpool, finishing her career as a professor at Birkbeck College, London, from 1981 to 1985 before returning to Liverpool. 
Miriam Allott was an active supporter of many organizations, including the Liverpool Association and the Liverpool Playhouse. She was a discerning collector of nineteenth-century English pictures, including several by the watercolourist David Cox and travel illustrations by Edward Lear, and built an extensive library of nineteenth-century editions and subsequent critical studies. In later life she suffered from osteoporosis, arthritis, and latterly breast cancer. She died at her home, 21 Mersey Avenue, Liverpool, on 17 August 2010, of bronchopneumonia. She had no children, and left her house to Liverpool University to fund a lectureship in English, and her books and pictures to the university library and Victoria Gallery and Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 60264


Chaplin, Sidney (1916-1986), writer, was born on 20 September 1916 at 23 Bolckow Street, Shildon, co. Durham, one of the several children of Isaiah (Ike) Chaplin (1895-1969), colliery electrician, and his wife, Elsie Mary, 'nee' Charlton (1896-1979). Chaplin attended several village schools and became, in 1931, an apprentice blacksmith at Dean and Chapter colliery, Ferryhill. Though he had no formal secondary education, he attended Workers' Educational Association classes at the Spennymoor settlement and, in January 1939, took up a scholarship to Fircroft Working Men's College, Selly Oak, Birmingham, which was cut short by the outbreak of war, when he returned to work in the coal mines in co. Durham. From 1938 to 1948 he was a Methodist lay preacher and although thereafter he had no close involvement with any church, he retained a strong interest in spiritual matters. 
It was early in this period that Chaplin began to write, his efforts intensifying on his enforced return to his roots. He married Irene Rutherford ('b'. 1920) on 1 January 1941, and they went on to have a daughter and two sons. His poems and stories in 'Penguin New Writing' attracted attention and, when Phoenix House publishers was founded, Chaplin was invited to submit enough short stories for a volume. They made up his first book, 'The Leaping Lad' (1946), which became a marker for a younger generation of writers from the industrial north of England who were to emerge in the late 1950s, among them John Braine, Alan Sillitoe, David Storey, and Stan Barstow. 
The offer of a job as reporter on the new National Coal Board magazine 'Coal' brought Chaplin freedom from pit-work, while his assignments for the publication would take him underground in every coalfield in England, Scotland, and Wales. For four years (1953-7) he worked from an office in London; then, still employed by the NCB, he returned to the north-east and settled in Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne, where he lived until his death. 
Chaplin was a man of warmth and sincerity, with a lack of pretentiousness which could be misleading, as could his acknowledgement of the oral roots of his story-telling, which gave little hint of the range of his prose technique. The four full-length novels he wrote in the rich creative period following his arrival in Newcastle are impressive for the variety of their narrative tone; the two in which he described young protagonists making their way in a changing working-class environment ('The Day of the Sardine', 1961, and 'The Watchers and the Watched', 1962) being especially enviable for the insight and confidence with which the texture of life in the author's adopted city is rendered. While these books brought him a wider audience, it was ironic that they came at a time when the film-makers had recently had their fill of life in northern factories and back streets, and Chaplin, the forerunner, missed out on the richer pickings some of his younger contemporaries had enjoyed, though added prestige came with the Alan Plater and Alex Glasgow stage musical 'Close the Coalhouse Door' (1968), based on Chaplin's 'The Thin Seam' and other stories. 
Public acknowledgement of Chaplin's achievements began to accumulate: an honorary fellowship of Sunderland Polytechnic in 1977, an honorary MA from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1978. In the new year honours of 1977 he was made an OBE for his work for the arts in the north-east. When people come once again to celebrate the warmth and dignity, the courage and comradeship which were the best qualities of the half-century of industrial life and its decline that Chaplin made his subject, his work will be found to have a true and lasting place in the tapestry of witness. 
After a heart attack in 1973, Chaplin suffered two years of pain and discomfort until a heart bypass operation which nearly killed him gave him a new lease of life. On 10 January 1986 he died suddenly of another heart attack at the Prince of Wales Hotel, Grasmere, while participating in a literary weekend at Wordsworth's Dove Cottage. He was survived by his wife, and was buried in Jesmond old cemetery, Newcastle upon Tyne. The posthumously published 'In Blackberry Time' (1987) is a biographical sequence of some of Chaplin's shorter pieces interspersed with comment by his son Michael. 


@@@@@


doc= 60265


Core, Philip McCammon (1951-1989), artist and writer, was born in Dallas, Texas, on 7 June 1951. He spent his early childhood in Delhi, where his father, an alcoholic journalist, was temporarily vice-consul, before returning to New Orleans, where at the age of six he went to school at the military academy. When he was seven he won first prize in the Vieux Carre artists' open competition. 
Although New Orleans was to remain a profound influence on Core's life with its atmosphere of southern Gothic and dandyism, he escaped his family at the first opportunity, in 1963, by winning a scholarship to Middlesex School in Concord, Massachusetts, one of the pre-eminent east coast preparatory schools. From there he went to Harvard University in 1969. He led a colourful undergraduate life making experimental films and designing for a New York boutique, and spent a year in Paris. Here, under the auspices of Philippe Jullian, whom he helped research for his book 'The Symbolists' (1973), he met surviving members of the Cocteau set. In 1973 Core graduated 'cum laude', with an honours thesis on the Belgian symbolist Fernand Khnopff, and later that year left for Europe to study for a postgraduate course at the Ruskin School of Drawing, at Oxford, where he designed a ceiling painting for the Oxford Union. Hating Oxford, he transferred to the Academia degli Belli Arti in Florence in 1974; he settled in London later that same year. In Oxford, Florence, and London he cultivated friends who were members of the 'demi-monde'. He had a great capacity both for making friends and for falling out with them. 
From the beginning Philip Core's literary and artistic work explored his homosexuality, and appeared in the gay press. His art often featured a 'specific type of male, sometimes as threatening, sometimes as innocent as an animal' (Melly, 'Philip Core', 6). Core's first British exhibition was 'Heroes and Monuments' at the Hammond Lloyd Gallery, London, in 1976; it was followed in 1979 by 'Pieces of Conversation' at the Francis Kyle Gallery, which consisted of fictive conversations between some of his (mainly literary) heroes, including a conversation between Evelyn Waugh and Nancy Mitford, and Warhol playing chess with Marcel Duchamp. 
Core's career as a painter looked as if it might take off, but unfortunately his patience and artistic technique never quite matched the grandeur of his visual ambition. In his third exhibition, 'Novels without Words' (1980), he successfully combined his interests in pop art and baroque fiction, but thereafter his work tended to be large-scale and too slapdash. In order to support himself financially, he sought commissions including 'The Ideal Party' (1980) a commemorative mural, rapidly lost, over the entrance to the Ritz Hotel, London, of seventy-five famous guests spanning the hotel's history; an immense cyclorama commissioned by BBC television's 'Omnibus' (1984); and a group portrait of the cast of the film version of 'Brideshead Revisited'. 
Core, however, had an alternative metier in the 1980s as a broadcaster on radio programmes such as 'Kaleidoscope' for BBC Radio 4, since he was able to talk with encyclopaedic authority about almost any subject. The breadth of his intellectual interests also made him an excellent journalist. When, for example, 'The Independent' was founded in 1986, he was commissioned by James Fergusson to write for the newspaper obituaries of controversial subjects such as the photographer Robert Mapplethorpe and the graffiti artist Jean-Michel Basquiat, thereby contributing to the death of the po-faced official obituary. He also flourished as the paper's photographic critic. In 1984 he published two books, one a dictionary entitled 'Camp: the Lie that Tells the Truth' and the other 'The Original Eye: Arbiters of Twentieth-Century Taste'. Both demonstrated his exceptionally wide knowledge of the byways of twentieth-century culture. 
But it is as much as a person as for his work that Philip Core deserves to be remembered. He lived in a flat which he painted entirely black near the Elephant and Castle, London, from which he would make excursions which were sometimes grand and more often 'louche'. He dyed his hair blonde in the manner of Andy Warhol. Indeed, he might have become, like Warhol, a cult figure in later life, but was one of the first people to be diagnosed as having AIDS, at a time when the disease was scarcely known in Britain. Towards the end of his life he was involved in a case with the board of customs and excise concerning the import of visual material which it regarded as pornographic. Shortly before his death he wrote a characteristically perceptive description of himself in the catalogue of an exhibition held at the Watermans Art Centre in Brentford, Middlesex: 'I am not a great artist, only someone who loves painting, drawing and making things with his hands above all else; someone who has, by some curious gift of heredity, become possessed of articulacy and intransigence in equal degree; someone who knows what they love and feels no shame about it.' Philip Core died on 12 November 1989 at the Westminster Hospital, London, of bronchopneumonia brought on by AIDS, and was cremated at Mortlake cemetery, London. In the 1990s, as a tribute, the composer Patrick Nunn wrote 'Hextych', a work based on Core's paintings. 


@@@@@


doc= 60266


Horovitz, Frances Margaret (1938-1983), poet and broadcaster, was born on 13 February 1938 in Princess Beatrice Hospital, Kensington, London, the elder daughter of Frank Edward Hooker (1904-1975), a management accountant for ASEA Electric, and his wife, Margaret Alice Dorothy Scroggs ('b'. 1907), daughter of Arthur William Scroggs, a valet to Sir Frederick Williams Taylor. In 1941 the family moved from London to Nottingham, where during the war Frank Hooker was manager of a munitions factory. They returned in 1947 to live in Walthamstow, east London, where from 1949 to 1956 Frances attended the Walthamstow High School for Girls. School trips to the Old Vic and a sixth-form visit to Italy introduced her to Shakespeare's plays and Renaissance painting. By the time she entered Bristol University in 1956 to read English and drama, she was determined to become an artist. Graduating from Bristol in 1959, she went on to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London where, between 1959 and 1961, she starred in a number of student productions. In 1960 she met the poet Michael William Horovitz ('b'. 1935), and became one of a group of Blake enthusiasts connected with Horovitz's radical journal 'New Departures'; on 12 June 1964 she married him in London. They went on to live at 29 Colville Terrace, Notting Hill, London. 
As a young actress Frances Horovitz took small parts in West End productions and spent time in repertory, but her beautiful speaking voice soon caught the ear of the poet George MacBeth, who cast her in his anti-nuclear satire 'The Doomsday Show' (1963), later employing her as a principal reader in the poetry programmes he was producing for the BBC. Her unsurpassed performances as a poetry reader for radio, directed first by George MacBeth and after 1976 by Fraser Steel, ceased only with the illness that preceded her death. She came to feel that poetry reading was a different discipline from acting -- purer, more austere, and without egotistical self-projection. In 1975 she acted in the first performance of Ted Hughes's 'Cave Birds' at the Ilkley Festival, soon afterwards beginning the long professional partnership with the literary biographer Robert Gittings that established her as one of finest interpreters of Keats and Hardy. 
Frances Horovitz's performances, live and on the radio, won her thousands of admirers, but as a poet she eschewed self-dramatization and instead drew on an instinctive, entirely uncompromised spirituality. In December 1964 she paid the first of many visits to the Carmelite priory in Aylesford, Kent. The attraction was a circle of young artists brought together by Father Brocard Sewell under the auspices of the 'Aylesford Review'. Henry Williamson, who considerably influenced her, was the guiding spirit of this group which shared a reverence for the natural world and a belief that the disciplines of art had to be commensurate with the disciplines of the spirit. When, after her marriage, she began to write poetry, the 'Aylesford Review' became her first publisher. 'Poems' by Frances Horovitz was printed, in an edition of 526 copies, by St Albert's Press in 1967. 'Poems' was followed by 'The High Tower', published by New Departures in 1970. Ten years then lapsed before Enitharmon Press brought out her third collection, 'Water over Stone', in 1980. It was during this hiatus that her poetry deepened considerably. By the time 'Snow Light, Water Light' (Bloodaxe Books) was put into her hand on her deathbed in 1983, her lyrics 'Rain -- Birdoswald' and 'Flowers' had established her as a lasting poet in the English mystical tradition of Traherne and George Herbert. 
During the 1960s Frances Horovitz augmented her slender income by teaching English and drama part-time in a number of London schools, her favourite being the Carlyle Grammar School for Girls in Fulham. In the summer of 1970 she and her husband managed to buy Mullions, a tiny semi-detached cottage in the Slad valley, near Stroud, Gloucestershire, while still retaining their flat in London. On 27 April 1971 their son Adam was born in St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London. With the establishment of the Arvon writing centres in the 1970s, she became a regular tutor at Lumb Bank in Yorkshire and Totleigh Barton in Devon. Shortly before Christmas 1980, with nine-year-old Adam, she went to live with the poet Roger Garfitt ('b'. 1944) in north-east England, spending much of that winter and the next in a farmhouse near the Roman fort of Birdoswald. Through the Li-Yuan-Chia (LYC) Gallery in Cumberland, she contributed poems to 'Wall' (LYC Press, 1981) on the theme of Hadrian's Wall. Another LYC collaboration with Winifred Nicholson and others resulted in the landscape anthology 'Presences of Nature' (Carlisle Museum and Art Gallery, 1982). 
In July 1982, after a spring trip to Orkney, Frances Horovitz and Roger Garfitt moved to 2 Mount Pleasant, St Weonards, overlooking Orcop in Herefordshire. On the morning of their move, Frances learned that the pain she had been suffering in her ear was due to skin cancer. She went north again for a series of operations, but when these proved unsuccessful she was admitted in May 1983 to the Royal Marsden Hospital in Fulham, London. On 28 July her divorce from Michael Horovitz came through, enabling her to marry Roger Garfitt in her bedroom in St Weonards on 6 September 1983. Shortly afterwards she returned, much weakened, to the Royal Marsden Hospital, where she died on Sunday morning, 2 October 1983. 
Frances Horovitz's death was mourned by thousands. After her funeral and burial in Orcop on Saturday, 8 October, memorial readings were held before huge audiences in Bristol and London. Two commemorative pamphlets were published: 'Tenfold' (Martin Booth, 1983) and 'A Celebration of and for Frances Horovitz' (New Departures, 1984). In 1985 Bloodaxe Books, in association with the Enitharmon Press, brought out her 'Collected Poems'. Remembering Frances in 1996, Roger Garfitt wrote: 'When I look back at Frances, I see that her beauty was all of a piece: her poetry, her voice, her manner, the clothes she wore, the very pots she used in her kitchen. Few of us achieve such unity. Yet it's important to see the fierceness in her poetry, the cutting through to the elemental. I see the last poems not as prophetic of her early death but as the culmination of her art -- the beautiful, quiet acceptance she had been working towards all her life. (private information)' 



@@@@@


doc= 60269


Jebb, Julian Alvery Marius (1934-1984), journalist and television producer, was born on 2 April 1934 at Hawkesyard Priory, Rugeley, Staffordshire, the youngest of the four children of Reginald Douglas (Rex) Jebb (1883-1977) schoolmaster and journalist, and his wife, Eleanor Philippa (1899-1979), daughter of Hilaire Belloc (1870-1953) and his wife, Elodie. He was brought up in the Belloc family home, Kingsland, near Horsham, Sussex, its rooms lined with some ten thousand books, richly redolent of candle-grease and his grandfather's Catholicism. Jebb was educated at Downside School (1947-52) and King's College, Cambridge (1953-6), where he co-edited the magazine 'Granta' with Jonathan Gathorne-Hardy and performed in reviews with the Cambridge Footlights. His childhood and education pointed him towards a career as a novelist, but after spasmodic attempts to write fiction his contribution to English artistic life was channelled into reviews of novels and films, and his own arts documentaries made for BBC television. He was always a devoted enthusiast and promoter of talents. 
After leaving Cambridge Jebb worked for the Catholic weekly 'The Tablet' and the literary agent Stephen Aske. In Germany he produced and acted in English-language plays for Radio Bremen. In the sixties he taught English in Rome. He travelled in Spain and Greece, leading the expatriate life, the typewriter set up by the open window, the Aegean beyond. Such money as he earned tended to be spent rapidly and generously. He was homosexual, but the claims of close friendship suited him better than the uncertain territory of love affairs. 
In 1967 Jebb joined the arts department of BBC television as an assistant producer. He co-produced a series of literary programmes, flourishing in the friendlier climate of those times, with BBC2 only recently started, and a mission to put writers on the screen, spearheaded by the young Melvyn Bragg. By means of a quotation guessing game, called 'Take it or Leave it', which was devised by Brigid Brophy, Jebb, through contacts and friendships, introduced a number of writers to the television studio for the first time. Participants included Anthony Burgess, John Bayley, Iris Murdoch, Cyril Connolly, A. S. Byatt, Philip Toynbee, and Mary McCarthy. He conducted the first studio interview with the painter Francis Bacon and made interview-based documentaries with Christopher Isherwood, John Osborne, Patricia Highsmith, and Anthony Powell. In 1969 he filmed 'Tennyson on the Isle of Wight' with John Betjeman, the best of several collaborations with the poet laureate. His longer documentaries on Virginia Woolf, the Mitford sisters, and Dame Edna Everage (Barry Humphries) drew on a lively affection for his subjects. It was the only way he knew how to work. In those days the BBC was happy to retain on the staff someone who had a wide-ranging knowledge and enjoyment of the arts -- literature, opera, ballet, painting, films of all kinds, the pop culture of television (not rock music, however): Jebb cheerfully crossed the boundaries of critical definitions. He was an excellent radio broadcaster and in some respects had more in common with the old-style producers of Radio 4, but he found himself entranced with the new world of television. Unfortunately the medium did not nurture his abilities, even if the excitement of programme making convinced him that he was fully stretched. The weeks before his death were marked by increasing despair at the callous treatment he felt he had received. He was a literary amateur working in a world increasingly dominated by career-driven professionals. 
Jebb was a brilliant mimic with a wonderful vein of fantasy, but a haunting sense of failure increasingly plagued him. No one could halt the inroads of alcohol and pills, which undermined his health and work. Finally, on 31 October 1984, he killed himself at his flat, 171 Ladbroke Grove, London, with an overdose of heminevrin. He had, as a pained and angry Germaine Greer wrote, been given so much and thrown it all away. Sadly a rare gift for friendship and promoting the talents of others had undermined the will-power needed for his own survival. 
In 1993 a memoir, called 'A Dedicated Fan', was published. It includes interviews with Evelyn Waugh ('Paris Review', 1962, a sparkling performance) and Elizabeth Bowen, unpublished journals, personal memories from friends, family, and a number of writers including V. S. Naipaul, Alison Lurie, Patricia Highsmith, A. S. Byatt, Caroline Blackwood, Paul Theroux, Frances Partridge, Patrick Leigh Fermor, Antonia Fraser, Barry Humphries, Melvyn Bragg, Jonathan Gathorne-Hardy, and Elaine Dundy. 


@@@@@


doc= 60271


Olson, Stanley Bernard (1947-1989), biographer, was born on 8 June 1947 in Akron, Ohio, the youngest of the three children of Sidney Olson, a printer, and his wife, Miriam Klein. Both parents were children of emigre Jewish families: the Kleins were from Hungary, while Sidney's father, Frank Olshanitsky, left Russia to escape conscription, changing his name to Olson and settling in Akron, where he made a living as a printer. His sons Sidney and Irving started a radio repair business which eventually evolved into the vast Olson electronics company. 
Olson was unhappy at school, where his grades were abysmal and his behaviour disruptive; at the age of twelve he was sent to the Culver military academy in Indiana, which he loathed, graduating after five years 149th out of a class of 182. In 1965 he enrolled at Boston University, where he came under the influence of the distinguished Henry James scholar Millicent Bell. It was she who inspired his fascination with Virginia Woolf and Bloomsbury, recommending him as a graduate student at Royal Holloway College, University of London, where he arrived in the autumn of 1968 to write a doctoral thesis on the history of the Hogarth Press, 1917-23. During the course of his research he met Lytton Strachey's biographer Michael Holroyd, as well as surviving members of the Bloomsbury group, and through these contacts he soon established his own circle of friends. Frances Partridge, translator and diarist, the widow of Ralph Partridge, became a particularly close and affectionate mentor. 
In 1971 Olson was commissioned to write the life of the poet Elinor Wylie, published in the United States by the Dial Press in 1979. The reviews were respectable, although the book was never issued in paperback or in a British edition. This was followed by the editing of an abridged version of the 'Letters and Diaries of Harold Nicolson' (Collins, 1980), a project which, largely owing to an uneasy relationship with Nicolson's son Nigel, Olson came to detest. With his next undertaking, however, he was completely in sympathy: a life of the painter John Singer Sargent, with whose flamboyant work, elusive character, and elegant style of living Olson wholeheartedly identified. 'I do so adore every aspect of his life. His painting, rather like his life, is all surface and not depth', he wrote in a letter (Hatfield, 137). The book was published to considerable acclaim in 1986, by Macmillan in London and St Martin's Press in New York. 
Next was to have come a life of Rebecca West -- Olson, who had befriended Dame Rebecca in her old age, was named in her will as one of two biographers -- but on 18 July 1986 he suffered a severe stroke. Although surviving with great courage for another three and a half years, he remained unable to read and almost speechless, and died of a second stroke at his flat, 1E Montagu Mews North, London, on 9 December 1989. His remains were cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 17 December. 
Not least of Stanley Olson's achievements was his re-creation of himself as a Henry James Englishman. Small and thickset, with a large, handsome head and glossy black hair, he transformed himself into a dandy: his beautifully tailored suits were lined in red silk, his shoes in red leather; he wrote on hand-cut, custom-made grey paper. His beloved spaniel, Wuzzo, rode in a carriage-tricycle bought at Harrods, eating off a porcelain bowl manufactured for him in Limoges. 
Olson was a generous and affectionate man with a great talent for friendship, although sexual relationships were for him a closed book. Both gourmet and gourmand, he loved to entertain, treating his friends to rich and elaborate meals, often sent in from Claridges or Le Gavroche. (His extravagance was a constant source of complaint from his long-suffering family.) But although a lover of gossip and social life, Olson was essentially a loner, intensely private, often deeply melancholic, contradictions in his character which he felt were treated more kindly by English reserve than by the invasive manners of his compatriots. 


@@@@@


doc= 60272


Brownell, Sonia Mary (1918-1980), literary editor, writer, and friend of artists and intellectuals, was born Sonia Mary Brownell on 25 August 1918 at Mesra Thaua, Ranchi, Bihar, India, the younger daughter of Charles Neville Brownell (1882-1918), a freight broker in Calcutta, and Beatrice Edith Binning (1890-1959). On 5 January 1920 Beatrice married Edgar Geoffrey Dixon (1880-1953), a successful chartered accountant, whose alcoholism wrecked his career in Calcutta and broke up his marriage after the family returned to England in 1927. Sonia had a sister, Bay, and a younger half-brother, Michael, and from 1931 Beatrice brought up her children unaided. Raised a Roman Catholic, Sonia was educated at the Convent of the Sacred Heart, Roehampton, London, from 1927 to 1935 and perfected her French at Neuchatel, Switzerland, but in the summer of 1936 had to be brought back to London, distraught, the sole survivor of a boating tragedy. 
In 1938 Sonia worked for Professor Eugene Vinaver on his edition of Malory's 'Morte d'Arthur'. By this time she had firmly renounced her Roman Catholicism. Also in 1938 she began sitting for portraits at the Euston Road School of Drawing and Painting, who named her the Euston Road Venus on account of her radiant blond beauty. She was drawn by Rodrigo Moynihan and painted by Claude Rogers and William Coldstream. Coldstream and she were lovers from 1939 to 1941 and through him she met Stephen Spender and Cyril Connolly, co-editors of 'Horizon', and its financial backer, Peter Watson, who were to remain her lifelong friends. After working as John Lehmann's secretary on 'New Writing' in 1941 and doing war work at the Ministry of War Transport, in 1945 she joined 'Horizon' as editorial secretary and became, in effect, Cyril Connolly's working partner when Connolly (then sole editor) and Peter Watson were absent. In late 1945 she had a very brief affair with the recently widowed George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Arthur Blair) and later an unhappy affair with the French philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908-1961). On 13 October 1949 she married Orwell, seriously ill with tuberculosis, who died on 21 January 1950; subsequently she mostly used the surname Orwell. On 12 August 1958 she married Michael Augustus Lane Fox Pitt-Rivers (1917-1999), a wealthy farmer, but the marriage ended in divorce in 1965. 
From 1951 to 1956 Sonia worked as a reader and editor for Weidenfeld and Nicolson and persuaded them to publish Saul Bellow, Nigel Dennis, Elizabeth Hardwick, Dan Jacobson, and Mary McCarthy. She helped to organize the successful Writers' Conference at the 1962 Edinburgh Festival and from 1964 to 1965 in Paris she was a co-editor of the international review 'Art and Literature'. She translated many articles from French and in 1966 translated 'Days in the Trees', by her friend Marguerite Duras, for the Royal Shakespeare Company. 
Sonia took her duties as Orwell's literary executor seriously and was resolute that his work should not be misrepresented or commercialized. She gave all his papers to the Orwell Archive, as a founder trustee, when it was set up in 1961 at University College, London, to create a centre for Orwell studies. She was responsible for the publication in 1968 of the four-volume 'Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell', edited by herself and Ian Angus, which further enhanced Orwell's reputation. When Mary McCarthy disparaged Orwell and alleged bias in the editing of the 'Collected Essays', Sonia wrote a trenchant and witty rebuttal ('Nova', June-July 1969), which makes it a matter for regret that she so undervalued her own literary ability that she wrote less than a score of articles and reviews. Orwell's injunction in his will that no biography of him be written resulted in her upsetting several people and caused her anguish up to her death. She was also tormented while she was dying by an impending lawsuit about the Orwell estate that she had initiated but was forced reluctantly to settle out of court because of her physical condition. 
Sonia could be bossy, high-handed, presumptuous, noisy, and anti-male, which set many against her, particularly when her behaviour, at certain periods, was fuelled by too much drink or accompanied by strong language, but, in Stephen Spender's words, she 'still remained underneath the warm-hearted, generous, spontaneous person she was all her life' (Spender, 435). She had a devoted circle of friends, which included J. R. Ackerley, W. H. Auden, Francis Bacon, Ivy Compton-Burnett, Michel Leiris, and Angus Wilson. Prompted by her passionate love of literature and her admiration of imagination and intelligence, Sonia was enthusiastic in her encouragement of writers she befriended and frequently helped them materially. She was lavish in her hospitality and responded instantly and tirelessly to the emotional, physical, and financial needs of her friends who were in distress, as when, for instance, she financially supported Jean Rhys and in 1975 organized an appeal, after Cyril Connolly died in debt, which raised over $40,000 for his widow and children. Sonia was rewarded by being cared for affectionately by her friends when she was dying of cancer. She died in St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, London, on 11 December 1980, and was buried on 18 December in the Putney Vale cemetery. She left everything she derived from Orwell, which was the bulk of her estate, to his adopted son, Richard Blair. 


@@@@@


doc= 60274


Rogers, Stephen Robert (1955-1988), magazine editor and arts promoter, was born on 7 August 1955 at 28 Bayly Avenue, Portchester, Hampshire, the second son of Robert Leslie Rogers and his wife, Betty Kirk Rogers (formerly Houlton). His father came from Canada and, at the time of Rogers's birth, was a refrigeration engineer. He died soon after his son was born. Nothing more is known of Rogers's family or antecedents. From 1966 to 1972 he attended the Royal Hospital school, a boarding-school in the village of Holbrook, near Ipswich. He was expelled when he was in the sixth form, reportedly either for smoking cannabis or for an unsuitable relationship. He took good A-level grades elsewhere. Between 1973 and 1976 he studied at St Chad's College, Durham University, where he gained a BA degree in combined arts and also became involved in student politics. He obtained a postgraduate MA degree in arts administration at the City University, London, and visited New York on a university secondment. 
Rogers's early jobs were in arts administration, including posts at the Redgrave Theatre, Farnham, and Bubble Theatre, London. In 1979 he became performance director at the Midland Group Arts Centre, Nottingham, and launched the important Performance Art Platform, an annual festival of performance art (later the National Review of Live Art). In 1983 he joined the British-American Arts Association in London and was programme director for 'Britain salutes New York', an exhibition of British art, highly regarded both by public and critics, which the association presented in New York. 
Between 1985 and 1988 Rogers managed the two distinguished performance artists Marty St James and Anne Wilson. He worked on their 'Civic Monument' project, a large-scale performance 'monument', which was erected on the back of an articulated lorry, but used performers instead of statues. Dedicated to the ordinary person, its themes included war, television, work, and love. 
Rogers was a long-time contributor to 'Performance Magazine', and in 1987 was appointed its editor; in these capacities inheres his significance for the arts of his day. He made an influential contribution to the development of performance art (or 'live art') and visual theatre. While always committed to creative work that was 'new, vital and revolutionary', as he wrote in an unpublished notebook, he wanted it to be accessible to everybody and was suspicious of the hidden power of arts programmers (he was, of course, testifying from his own experience in the role). His explorations of the nature of performance were both rigorous and broad: in issue 28, for example, he wittily and perceptively reviewed the Cruft's dog show, and, later, was one of the first to feature the drag artist Lily Savage. He strongly believed in the importance of international cultural exchange. 
Rogers maintained an interest in politics throughout his life. He was an active member of the Labour Party and ran unsuccessfully for office on his local council. During his years in London his income was usually low and variable. From time to time he supplemented it by working as a bicycle courier, and he was once a noise control officer in Hackney. There is some evidence in his papers that he was planning a novel, but no more than part of a draft chapter and a few other fragments survive. 
Rogers was tall and well made, with a pale complexion, closely cut hair, and a relaxed, slightly sleepy manner. He was homosexual at a time when social change had made it easier for men to 'come out' than in the past. He refused to separate his sexuality from the other dimensions of his life, and in his work and his politics presented himself as a gay man. His surviving letters and papers, which describe travel in Europe and his time in New York, reveal a young man delighted to make the most of sexual opportunity. It was almost certainly in the United States that he contracted HIV. As early as 1982 he was reporting illnesses that may have been a consequence of the infection; the pneumonia that killed him certainly was. He died at The Hospital, Scarborough, on 10 December 1988. During his last years he lived happily with his lover, Mark Stevens, an airline steward for Britannia Airlines, who died of an AIDS-related illness a few weeks before Rogers himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 60276


Robinson, (Frances) Mabel (1858-1956), author, was born in Milverton Crescent, Milverton, near Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, on 16 June 1858, the second daughter of George Thomas Robinson (1828-1897), an architect who specialized in designing the decorative fittings of great steamships, and his wife, Frances Sparrow (1831-1916). She was the younger sister of the writer (Agnes) Mary Frances Duclaux (1857-1944). The girls were both greatly influenced by their father, who let them read freely the books in his well-provided library. Between 1872 and 1873 they attended a finishing school in Brussels, subsequently enrolling among the first women students of the University of London (1875-80). Mabel Robinson later became secretary of Bedford College, London University's principal college for women. 
Mabel Robinson and her sister Mary immersed themselves in London's cultural life in the early 1880s, both organizing and attending all sorts of parties. The writer Violet Paget (Vernon Lee) was a frequent house guest at the time, and in her letters to her mother she provided incisive sketches of the celebrities who frequented the Robinsons' house, including John Sargent, Robert Browning, William Morris, and Oscar Wilde. She also depicted both sisters (although with what degree of accuracy is uncertain) in her 'roman-a-clef', 'Miss Brown' (1884). Here Mabel's interests were described as 'school boards, and depauperisation, and (it must be admitted) a mild flirtation with young men of scientific and humanitarian tendencies' (Lee, 30). The relationship between Paget and Mabel Robinson was a tense one: eventually the guest left the house with Mary Robinson and a kind of reconciliation some months later did not produce any real harmony. 
Paget had, however, correctly differentiated Mabel Robinson's more political interests from her sister's poetic ones. The younger sister quickly developed an interest in the heated debates in the House of Commons over the introduction of home rule in Ireland. She was eventually to engage herself politically to the extent of carrying secret messages back and forth between England and Ireland. 
In a short autobiographical sketch of her own literary development, Mabel Robinson observed that the idea of writing books occurred to her only after she had devoted most of her girlhood to painting. As a result, she believed, her work was less methodical than it would have been had she started to write earlier. In the same essay she admitted that her style was not always as she wished it to be, but she held that content was more important: 'human feeling', she wrote, 'is for ever interesting', dismissing style as, to a great extent, a thing of fashion (Bainton, 326-8). 
Robinson published a series of novels in the 1880s and 1890s. In tales such as 'Mr Butler's Ward' (1885), 'Disenchantment' (1886), 'The Plan of Campaign: a Story of the Fortune of War' (1888), 'A Woman of the World: an Everyday Story' (1890), and 'Chimaera' (1895) she seems to follow the naturalistic tradition, presenting grim pictures of Irish characters who are bogged down by their fate. Although generally endorsing the Victorian moral order regarding woman's position within marriage and the family, Robinson succeeded in introducing some subversive comments on women's social position in her novels. In 'A Woman of the World', for instance, her young female protagonist argues that beautiful girls may dress attractively for their own pleasure and not necessarily to seduce potential suitors: 'it's an insult to all womanhood to suppose that when a girl wears a string of beads she -- she -- ' (F. M. Robinson, 'A Woman of the World', 1890, 1.90). She also repudiated the attitude which forbade women to earn their own living. It is one of her unsympathetic male characters who endorsed that reactionary viewpoint: 'That a woman should earn her bread, Will, makes me sick!' (ibid., 1.232). Like her sister, Mabel Robinson contributed many reviews to the weekly 'The Athenaeum' in the late 1880s and 1890s; she concentrated on Irish publications, whether historical, political, or fictional. But she also indulged her interest in art by writing articles on Italian art for 'Atalanta' and the 'Magazine of Art'. 
After the death of George Robinson in 1897, Mrs Frances Robinson went to live in Paris, in the place des Pyramides. Mabel Robinson joined her there, and a few years later moved to an apartment building in which her widowed sister also lived. The two sisters exchanged Paris for Aurillac during the Second World War. Mabel Robinson died in 1956 in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 60277


Romilly, Esmond Marcus David (1918-1941), writer, was born on 10 June 1918 at 15 Pimlico Road, London, the second of the two children of Colonel Bertram Henry Samuel Romilly DSO (1878-1940), a professional army officer of Huguenot descent who served as military governor of Galilee province, Egypt, and his wife, Nellie Margaret, daughter of Lady Henrietta Blanche Hozier and an unknown man -- certainly not her husband, Sir Henry Montague Hozier (1838-1907), but possibly the author Wilfrid Scawen Blunt (1840-1922). Stephen Spender characterized Colonel Romilly as 'a kind of perambulating vacuum' ('The Spectator', 16 Nov 1985, 29), and the possessive, volatile Nellie was a far more influential figure in the lives of Esmond and his elder brother, Giles ['see below']. Something of the family circumstances -- marital incompatibility and the favouring of the elder child -- are represented in Nellie's autobiographical novel 'Misdeal', published in 1932 under the pseudonym Anna Gerstein. 
Both boys, who had quarrelled frequently during childhood, were educated at Wellington College, where they became allies in a rebellion against the militaristic and conservative values of the public-school system. Giles withdrew from the school's 'technically voluntary' (Romilly and Romilly, 123) Officers' Training Corps and declared himself a communist. He later admitted: 'I had no knowledge of anything, only opinions' (ibid., 142), and the same might be said of Esmond, who gradually educated himself politically by corresponding with assorted left-wing groups, and provoked considerable anger in 1933 by inserting pacifist leaflets in the hymnbooks at the school's armistice day service. The headmaster, tipped off by 'a very high official at Scotland Yard' (ibid., 218) who was concerned that the school was being targeted by a 'red group', had already warned him that further agitation would result in expulsion. Uncowed, the brothers had decided to launch a magazine, 'Out of Bounds' ('Against Reaction in Public Schools'). News of this enterprise reached the press in January 1934 and the 'Daily Mail' ran an article under the headline 'Red menace in public schools'. The headmaster insisted that the project should be abandoned, whereupon Esmond ran away from school, thus provoking further headlines, partly because his mother's half-sister was married to Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill. He was frequently referred to as Winston's Red Nephew. 
Esmond Romilly established headquarters at the Parton Bookshop in Bloomsbury, a well-known meeting-place for radicals, and set about producing the first issue (of four) of his magazine, which was published, priced 1's'., on 25 March 1934. It was written entirely by correspondents from various public schools (in several of which it was immediately banned), and was regarded by the press as half-way between a juvenile prank and an alarming confirmation of left-wing influence among the young, already apparent in the work of the Auden group of writers. Among contributors to the magazine were the editors' fellow Wellingtonian Gavin Ewart, and Philip Toynbee, who ran away from Rugby and became one of Romilly's closest friends, as described in his memoir 'Friends Apart' (1954). 
Esmond Romilly resumed his education at the progressive Bedales School, but left after one unsuccessful term. In the early hours of 29 December 1934 he and Toynbee were arrested outside the Romilly family home and charged with being drunk and disorderly. Romilly spent eighteen days in the Ponton Road remand home before being released on one year's probation, the first month of which he spent at the country home of a cousin writing his half of 'Out of Bounds: the Education of Giles Romilly and Esmond Romilly'. This precocious and unexpectedly even-tempered joint autobiography was published in 1935 to largely respectful reviews and rushed through two editions. Romilly used his advance to set up with the poet and editor Roger Roughton a short-lived news agency which gathered disobliging stories about public schools to sell on to newspapers. After this venture failed, Romilly sold silk stockings door-to-door. 
In March 1936, still only seventeen, Esmond Romilly became advertising manager of John Grierson's 'World Film News' magazine. He found the job inimical and once knocked his editor unconscious during an argument. In October he gave notice and ran away (on a bicycle) to join the International Brigades in the Spanish Civil War. He joined the (German) Thaelmann battalion and, after rudimentary training, saw action on the Madrid front, one of only two Englishmen to survive the battle. He contracted dysentery and was invalided back to England, where he met his second cousin Jessica Lucy Freeman-Mitford (1917-1996), daughter of the second Baron Redesdale. A fellow rebel against her class and upbringing, Mitford persuaded Romilly to allow her to accompany him to Spain, where he was returning as a journalist. Within days they had fallen in love and decided to marry. Once again Esmond Romilly was in the news ('Peer's Daughter Elopes to Spain'), and he skilfully manipulated the press, selling his story through a friend. In the face of fierce parental opposition -- Mitford's family enlisted the help of the British navy and the foreign secretary, and eventually made her a ward of court -- they married at the British consulate at Bayonne on 18 May 1937. They subsequently had two daughters, the first of whom died in infancy. 
Romilly worked on his memoir of the war, published as 'Boadilla' in 1937, but had been denied a visa to journey to the battlefront at Bilbao. An attempt to make money by gambling with the advance on his book ended badly and the young couple returned to London, living at 41 Rotherhithe Street, a converted Thames-side warehouse. Romilly worked as an advertising copywriter for Graham and Gillies, but there seemed no future for him in England, and in February 1939 he and his wife departed for New York, where he worked as a freelance journalist before joining the Topping and Lloyd advertising agency. The couple subsequently toured America, contributing a series of articles to the 'Washington Post' under the title 'Baby Bluebloods in Hobohemia', then ran a bar in Miami. In the summer of 1940 and in the wake of German advances in Europe, Romilly trained with the Canadian air force at Regina, but was disqualified from air-crew service because of a radical mastoid. After obtaining a discharge, he retrained as an observer and, having gained a commission as a pilot officer, served in England as a navigator with 58 squadron in Yorkshire. On 30 November 1941, 'en route' for a raid on Hamburg, Romilly's aeroplane disappeared over the North Sea. Short, stocky, and truculent, Romilly had remained boyish in his enthusiasms and untidiness, as well as in his behaviour, which was not always scrupulous but offset by considerable charm. Marriage brought maturity, but he was still capable of childish stunts, as when he visited Eton College and stole the hats of those attending chapel, later selling them to a dealer. 




@@@@@


doc= 60281


Giles Samuel Bertram Romilly (1916-1967), journalist and author, was born on 19 September 1916 at 92 Redcliffe Gardens, Brompton, London. Having abandoned his classical scholarship at Lincoln College, Oxford, he also went to Spain as a member of the International Brigades, in the company of Stephen Spender's secretary-companion T. A. R. Hyndman. This period of his life was appropriated, and much embellished, by his former Wellington teacher T. C. Worsley for the novel 'Fellow Travellers' (1971). His mother persuaded Churchill to use his influence to prevent Giles (whom she rightly considered less robust than his brother) from taking part in fighting, so he deserted in order to receive the customary punishment of being sent to the front. He saw action with the British battalion at Brunete, then returned to England, where he joined the Communist Party and lived for a time in east London at Poplar. Abandoning the party, he became a journalist on the 'Daily Express', working as a correspondent in Stockholm from 1938. In 1940 he became the paper's war correspondent in Norway and was captured at Narvik in April. He was imprisoned in several camps, from one of which he made an unsuccessful bid to escape in drag. In Colditz he was categorized as a 'Prominenter', a prisoner with important personal connections in England. He escaped from a fortress at Tittmoning just as the war in Europe was ending, and with his fellow prisoner of war Michael Alexander wrote a lively account of his experiences in 'The Privileged Nightmare' (1954). He also contributed poems and character-sketches to 'Penguin New Writing'. His other book was a novel of manners, 'Christina Claimed' (1951), described by the 'New Statesman' as 'mysterious and elusive, lingering with an avocado-like distinction' (2 June 1951, 629). A dark, handsome man, with deep-set eyes, he married Mary Ball Dodd ('b'. 1927) on 11 March 1949; they had three children. The marriage was dissolved in 1962 and on 8 May 1967 he married Coral Veronica Greene ('b'. 1936/7), a schoolteacher, shortly afterwards travelling to Berkeley, California, in order to research a book he planned to write on the American novel. Prone to depression, and a heavy drinker, he died in a hotel there on 2 August 1967 after taking an overdose of tranquillizers and barbiturates. 


@@@@@


doc= 60282


Jermy, Louise Jane (1877-1952), domestic servant and autobiographer, was born on 30 January 1877 at Howe Lane, Romsey, Hampshire, on the Broadlands estate where her maternal grandmother, Sarah Medley, was laundress to the 'great house'. Her mother, Selina ('c'.1844-1879), died when Louise was eighteen months old. Her elder sister Amy lived with their paternal grandparents in Romsey, while Louise was brought up by Sarah Medley in Kents almshouse in Romsey. Widowed at twenty-three, their father, St John Withers ('c'.1856- 'c'.1923), a labourer twelve years younger than his first wife, remarried and went with his second wife, Mary, to London, where he worked in a variety of small businesses. 
Louise Withers was taken out of school at eleven to help in her stepmother's home-based laundry business. The heavy labour, as well as severe physical abuse from her stepmother, caused Louise to be partially disabled when she was thirteen. She was sent in 1890 to her stepmother's aunt and uncle in Radwinter, Essex, to recuperate; in January 1891 she was sent back to Broadlands to live with her widowed paternal grandfather in Ashfield. There she knitted socks which were sold by a Romsey shop. She returned to London in September 1891. Not fit enough for laundry work, she opted for dress making. She was also expected to help look after two stepbrothers, and was again beaten by her stepmother. She was hospitalized after regular fainting fits and the onset of severe headaches, and then sent back to her paternal grandfather for four months' recuperation. Though unable to complete her two-year apprenticeship, Louise had become a proficient dress maker by 1893. By then she was attending Sunday school, where she confided in and was supported by the teacher. She also wrote verse, in which she expressed her bitterness about the ill treatment she suffered from her stepmother. At sixteen she confronted her stepmother when the stepmother tried to prevent her from reading the 'Bible'. On her seventeenth birthday her father presented her with her own 'Bible', his first birthday present to her. She was forced from her first dress making job (1893-4) by her stepmother, who thought she was not earning enough. 
Louise decided, despite her disability, to go into service. Though she found more freedom in domestic service, her stepmother again prevailed upon her to leave her first position with a Roman Catholic brother and sister in Kensington because of low wages ($7 a year, with board and lodging). In her second position her health suffered. Her next position (1895) led to a move to Birmingham in 1897. She was encouraged by her employer, a suffragist, to improve her education. Recurring problems with her hip led her to leave that position, and after a series of live-in jobs she returned in 1901 to London, where she found work as a cook with a Jewish family called Klein from 1903. 
She moved with the Klein family about 1910 to Wroxham, Norfolk, and there met her future husband, John Jermy (1862/1863- 'c'.1922), a farm labourer, the son of John Jermy, a gardener. Her father objected that John earned too little (13's'. a week) and had poor health, but her stepmother, with whom she was now reconciled, supported her choice of marriage partner. They married at Wroxham parish church on 25 February 1911, and their first son was born on Christmas eve 1911. A second son was born in 1916. John Jermy died about 1922. Louise then worked on the land, and when that work gave out she worked as her maternal grandmother had done, as a laundry worker for the lady of the manor. Her father died about 1923, leaving everything to his third wife and their son. 
Louise Jermy was unusual for a working-class woman in writing an autobiography, 'The Memories of a Working Woman', published in Norwich in 1934 with a foreword by Ralph Hale Mottram, who commented that it was 'said to be the first autobiography written by a Women's Institute member', though the Women's Institute is not mentioned in the memoir itself. Her branch at Hoveton held an official reception on the book's publication, at which she read a letter of congratulations from the queen, who had purchased a copy. Structured around a conventional working-class chronology (birth, childhood, family, work, illness, death, though precise dates are often lacking), the memoir is descriptive not just of events but of emotions. It is a powerful story of a life of struggle and suffering, from which domestic service offered not only an escape but also opportunities to improve her education (through a reading class and piano lessons). The memoir shows how strong the ties of family were, even for someone removed through work and marriage from the parental home. Louise Jermy died at her home, 23 Hoveton St John, Hoveton, Norfolk, on 28 October 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 60284


Round, Jeremy David (1957-1989), writer on food, was born on 6 April 1957 in Kitwe, Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia), the only child of Bryan David Round ('b'. 1929), secondary schoolteacher and headmaster, and his wife, Joyce Harriet, 'nee' Bottomley ('b'. 1930), schoolteacher and deputy headmistress. When Bryan Round decided not to renew his contract with the government of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in 1962, the couple returned to England with their young son, who received his primary education at Calcot School, near Reading, Berkshire. In 1968 he went on to Palmer's College, Grays, Essex, and in 1975 he entered the University of Hull, reading English literature and philosophy. He broke off studies in 1977 and lived in Istanbul for two years, becoming knowledgeable about Turkish culture and history and fluent in the language. He returned to Hull to complete his degree studies, and graduated in 1980. He settled in Oxford, where he began to write poetry and articles on various aspects of life in Turkey. An article on Turkish food was accepted by 'Harpers and Queen', and in 1982 he won a competition -- to choose and explain the menu for a dinner party -- organized by 'The Guardian' in association with Mouton Cadet. This resulted in his visiting the estate in Bordeaux and taking a course at Pru Leith's School of Food and Wine. After moving to London in 1984, he was employed as a deputy editor on 'The Good Food Guide'. Under the pseudonym Jane Somers (the 'alter ego' of the novelist Doris Lessing), he wrote a regular column on restaurants for the magazine 'Country Homes and Interiors'. He then abandoned his disguise and started to achieve recognition with his own name. 

'The Independent' was launched in September 1986, and for the next three years Round's Saturday column was one of the most popular features of the paper. Among his earliest admirers were Elizabeth David and Jane Grigson, who both befriended him. They appreciated his honesty and irreverent wit, and acknowledged him as a kindred spirit. Most writers on food give the impression that they know little of life beyond the kitchen or restaurant, but Round's journalism was not cast in that refined and limited mould. It was clear from his lively prose that his interests -- in literature, music, history, and the fine arts -- were those of a cultivated human being. Yet his writing was completely without pretension. When Elizabeth David, who abhorred the idea of a biography, told him over lunch that he could be her biographer if he wished, he was surprised and honoured. Her Life was one of many books he anticipated writing (in fact, he predeceased her). 
Round published, in 1988, 'The Independent Cook', which includes recipes for Afghan rice pudding, Syrian Orthodox Easter bread, toasted chickpeas, and a Clapham peasant stew of his own invention. In 1989 he won the overall Glenfiddich food writers' award 'for his special and significant contribution to raising the standard -- and our knowledge of -- what we eat in this country'. In August of the same year he joined other food writers on a trip to Hong Kong organized by the airline Cathay Pacific and the Mandarin hotel chain. He died, of a brain haemorrhage, in the Mandarin Hotel, Macau, on the night of 22-3 August 1989. His body was identified six days later by his partner of ten years, the publisher Jeremy Campbell Trevathan ('b'. 1959). He was buried on 6 September in St Peter and St Paul's churchyard, Wingrave, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 60287


Swynnerton, Annie Louisa (1844-1933), artist, was born on 26 February 1844 at 3 Vine Grove, Hulme, Manchester, one of the seven daughters of Francis Robinson, a lawyer, and his wife, Ann Sanderson. After training at the Manchester School of Art (from 1871), where she won a scholarship for watercolour and a gold medal for oil painting, she went to Paris; here she studied at the Academie Julian and admired the work of the naturalist painter Jules Bastien-Lepage. In 1874 she went to Rome with fellow Mancunian Susan (Isabel) Dacre for further artistic experience. She returned to her home town and in 1879 became co-founder with Dacre of the Manchester Society of Women Painters. This initiative was intended to supply the deficiencies of art training for women in the city. 
With an introduction to Edward Burne-Jones, she made her debut at the Royal Academy in 1879, which was followed by annual appearances there until 1886, and again from 1902 until 1934. Other appearances in exhibitions were at the Society of Women Artists (1887); the Grosvenor Gallery (1882-7) and its successor, the New Gallery (1890-1909); the International Society of Sculptors, Painters and Gravers; and the World's Columbian Exhibition in Chicago (1893). On 6 July 1883 she married the sculptor Joseph William Swynnerton (1848-1910), son of Charles Swynnerton, and they subsequently divided their time between Italy and England; their London studio was in Shepherd's Bush. After her husband died in 1910, her British base was a studio in Chelsea. 
During her lifetime Swynnerton's professional distinctions included associateship of the Manchester Academy (1884), membership of the hanging committee of the autumn exhibition (1895), held at the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool, and associateship of the Royal Academy (1922). In this last case she made history in so far as the RA had (controversially) elected no women to its membership since the founding academicians Angelica Kauffmann and Mary Moser in 1768. 
Swynnerton became something of an 'artist's artist', counting G. F. Watts, George Clausen, and John Singer Sargent among her admirers and patrons. Her painting was noted by both admirers and critics for vigorous brushwork and bold subjects, often using the full-length nude figure ('Mater triumphalis', 1892, Musee d'Orsay, Paris) and abstract or ideal themes ('The Sense of Sight', 1895, Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). An independent stylist, she incorporated aspects of Pre-Raphaelitism, neo-classicism, and impressionism into her work over the years. She also produced much successful portraiture of men, women, and children ('Henry James', 1910; 'Dame Millicent Fawcett', 1930). 
A retrospective of fifty-nine of Swynnerton's works was held at the Manchester City Art Gallery in 1923. She became well represented internationally within her lifetime, with paintings entering the collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne, the Johannesburg Art Gallery in South Africa, and the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa; in addition, the Tate collection has six of her works. Acquiring a reputation in her older years as a 'character' because of her independent style in dress, her forthrightness and indifference to conventions, and her candid enthusiasm for her work, she led a reclusive life for her last few years as her sight began to fail. She continued to paint until a few months before her death on 24 October 1933 at her home, Sicilia, in Beach Road, Hayling Island, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 60288


Lewis, Sarah (fl. 1839-1848) was a writer on the status of women, about whom no biographical information has come to light apart from a comment by T. M. Rearden in the 'Congregational Magazine' of 1840 that she was 'a lady known in Episcopalian circles'. 'Woman's Mission', published anonymously in 1839 and later attributed to Sarah Lewis, is her only work, apart from a short article on governesses 'by the author of 'Woman's Mission'' which appeared in volume 37 of 'Fraser's Magazine' (1848), and in which she argues for government-controlled qualification by examination for governesses in order to improve their status and pay. 
The influential 'Woman's Mission' is loosely based on Louis Aime Martin's 1834 work 'De l'education des meres de famille, ou, La civilisation du genre humain par les femmes'. The author emerges from this work as a firm advocate of 'separate spheres'; the book is aimed at middle-class women within the home, whose role she wishes to elevate but not extend in any public or political way. Indeed, since she views the qualities men bring to public life with distrust, and traces their selfishness and competitive temper to inadequate schooling, nothing would be gained, in her view, by allowing women to develop similar characteristics. Instead, she argues that while girls are trained in self-control, submission, and service to others, boys are given a predominantly intellectual training devoid of moral content, with the result that men become 'selfish husbands and tyrannical fathers'. The remedy for this lies in the moral influence of the Christian mother exerted within the home, which Lewis sees as balancing and ameliorating male power, and she wants boys to remain under the influence of such a mother for as long as possible. She also suggests that female moral influence will have its effect on the wider world, and will ultimately improve social and political attitudes. Her arguments both on influence and education are closely similar to those of Sarah Stickney Ellis, who comments approvingly on 'Woman's Mission' in the last of her four books on conduct, 'The Mothers of England, their Influence and Responsibility' (1843). Both these highly popular writers started from a belief in the moral equality of men and women, but Lewis directly argues against the advocates of 'women's rights', in the belief that women would only antagonize men by claiming the right to vote. Like Ellis, she also argues that women should be allowed to take paid employment without loss of caste, because marriage, as a moral enterprise, should not be entered into simply because a woman cannot afford to keep herself; hence the paradox that arguments elevating the role of the married woman also logically tended to support paid employment for the single. 
The reassuringly moderate ideology of 'Woman's Mission' was well received by reviewers for journals usually on opposite sides of the debates on the question of women, and stimulated considerable discussion, while on a more light-hearted note 'Woman's Mission' pretensions, seen as manipulative self-promotion, were frequently burlesqued in 'Punch' throughout the 1840s. Serious analysis of the weaknesses in Lewis's position began when Anna Jameson, in an article in 'The Athenaeum' in 1843, pointed out the inapplicability of 'Woman's Mission' ideology to the masses of labouring women, and in the same year Marion Reid published 'A Plea for Woman', in which, taking 'Woman's Mission' as a starting point, she argued powerfully for women's right to the franchise. On education she also rejected Lewis's position, arguing that women should primarily be educated for their own benefit. 
The very moderation of Lewis's position with regard to political rights for women seems to have helped the dissemination of her ideas, which stimulated debate, and explained how far the position of women could be improved without a more radical programme such as that advocated by Reid. 


@@@@@


doc= 60290


Mitchell, Charles (1807-1859), advertising agent and publisher of the first British press directory, was born in Norwich and baptized on 22 March 1807 at St Giles's Church, Norwich. He was the son of Robert Mitchell, a fruiterer, and his wife, Letitia, 'nee' Moore. Of his first marriage nothing is known, but on 27 May 1839 he married, as a widower, Eliza Wellsman ('nee' Rogers), an innkeeper's widowed daughter, at the parish church of St Benedict, Norwich. 
Fresh from an apprenticeship under Thomas Sowler, founder in 1825 of the 'Manchester Courier', a conservative paper in opposition to the 'Manchester Guardian', he founded in 1837 C. Mitchell & Co., one of the earliest advertising agencies, there being at the time probably no more than two or three others in the British Isles and none in Europe and America. In the quaint little offices at 12-13 Red Lion Court, Fleet Street (demolished by 1912), he became acquainted with or had business dealings with the great journalists of the day, including Charles Dickens, Mark Lemon, Shirley Brooks of 'Punch', and Stirling Coyne, drama critic of the 'Sunday Times' and a co-signatory of the foundation document of 'Punch'. The exact circumstances of 'Punch's' establishment remain unclear, but according to the 'City Press' of 27 June 1892 Mitchell frequently asserted that the comic journal originated with him, Brooks, Henry Mayhew, and Ebenezer Landells. In his magisterial 'History of 'Punch'' (p. 32) M. H. Spielmann merely notes that the printing was executed by Mitchell. 
As a publisher Mitchell issued the dramatic works of John Westland Marston (1819-1890), notably his heroic blank verse poem 'The Patrician's Daughter' (1842-3), and in 1853 he acted as agent and publisher for a prospectus for the Athenaeum Institute in Sackville Street. 
Mitchell's place in newspaper history stems directly from his chosen role of advertising agent for town and country newspapers. Awareness of a gap in the market prompted his decision in March 1846 to issue the first edition of the 'Newspaper Press Directory'. Preceded by the intermittent 'Advertisers' Guide to the Newspaper Press of the United Kingdom' (1844) and 'S. Deacon's Correct List of All the English, Scotch and Irish Newspapers' (1846), the latter 'distinguishing those of Conservative Principles', Mitchell's directory promised to offer a regular and 'more dignified and permanent record' replacing the more fugitive handbooks which he claimed inadequately promoted the 'interests of the proprietors' and failed to guide advertisers in the choice of media best suited to their needs. Numerically slim as was the newspaper press at the time, the enterprise demanded great ability, tact, and judgement. Published initially in 1846, 1847, 1851, and 1854, and annually after 1856, this, among the eldest of all trade directories, offered generally impartial coverage of the national press. The earlier octavo volumes are primarily geographical indexes covering London, the provinces, the Channel Islands and Isle of Man, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, with alphabetical cross-indexes. While reserving judgement on aims and characteristics, the directory's pen portraits of individual newspapers were generally friendly though naturally governed by self-interested commercialism and the wish for future generous treatment and advertisement allocation. There was surprisingly little early information on rates or circulation figures. Religious 'advocacy' was given as much prominence as political affiliation. Entries varied in length and it is salutary to observe the warm welcome given to the closely coincidental arrival of the 'Daily News', in January 1846. Edited for twenty days by Dickens, with the assistance of John Forster and George Hogarth, the new paper was described in the directory as 'an organ which includes so eminently the men who at once guide and represent the public mind', lauding those leading minds who had not 'received their principles from tradition, but evolved them from a vivid and primary experience of life'. The post-Dickens entry was significantly perfunctory. Due deference was paid in the first issue to 'The Times', whose influence Mitchell felt to be 'co-extensive with civilization'. Uniquely featured in the 1846 issue was the topical theme of 'railway papers' (eighteen titles). A year later the railway mania bubble had evidently burst, the list having completely disappeared. 
Editorship passed in 1859 to Mitchell's adopted stepson Walter Wellsman (1834-1911), then in his mid-twenties but well versed since schooldays in proof-reading and editorial duties and destined to become a most durable editor and a significant press historian. A notable collector also of Dickens memorabilia, Wellsman expanded the directory's scope by adding in 1860 an index of magazines and periodicals and a national newspaper map. Subsequent additions included an index of continental newspapers (1878), an index of American papers (1879), and a colonial supplement in 1885/6. Mitchell was strongly opposed to the abolition of stamp duty in 1855, which he feared would reduce press respectability to the level of American papers. But with the first change of format to 'extra imperial' in 1854 (at the reduced price of a florin), due coverage was accorded to the highly contentious issue of press emancipation. Mitchell's death on 8 February 1859 at his home at 1 Edith Villas, Edith Grove, Chelsea, London, was reportedly as the result of a serious railway accident the previous year. The indispensable reference work he founded continues to this day in three volumes as 'Benn's Media'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60292


Alexander, Peter (1893-1969), literary editor and scholar, was born on 19 September 1893, at 3 Great George Street, Hillhead, Glasgow, the only son of Robert Alexander (1844-1900) of Glasgow, schoolmaster and later head teacher, and Christina Cameron McDonald Munn (1863-1949), schoolmistress. After his father's death in 1900 Alexander attended John Watson's school, Edinburgh, and, from 1907, Whitehill higher grade school in the east of Glasgow. In October 1911 he entered the University of Glasgow, enrolling in Latin and mathematics. In his second year at university, he joined the English and moral philosophy classes. The English literature department consisted of the regius professor, W. Macneile Dixon, Dr John Semple Smart, and two assistants. Alexander always regarded Smart as a determining influence and much later was to edit his posthumous book 'Shakespeare: Truth and Tradition' (1928). 
In 1914 Alexander interrupted his studies to enlist with the Cameron Highlanders and was in July 1916 commissioned as second lieutenant in the Royal Field Artillery. He spent these war years on the western front, ending as a captain and returning to the university in 1919. He took an honours degree in 1920, gaining the most distinguished first of the year, and was awarded the valuable George A. Clark scholarship. This would have enabled him to research into his particular topic of interest, '2' and '3 Henry VI', for a further four years. He used that scholarship as a means of financing travel in Italy and had meant to spend a subsequent period in France. In the event, a vacancy occurred in the department, and Alexander was appointed lecturer in English literature as from October 1921. 
On 15 June 1923 Alexander married Agnes Effie Macdonald, who had been his fellow student in the honours school. She was the daughter of the late Revd Angus Macdonald, minister of the United Free Church of Scotland. There were three sons: Peter, who, as a lieutenant in the Royal Tank regiment, was killed in Normandy in July 1944; Donald, who was reader in medicine at Glasgow University; and Nigel, who became a professor of English in the University of London. 
Alexander's most original work was 'Shakespeare's 'Henry VI' and 'Richard III'' (1929) in which he argued that plays long taken to have been crude sources for Shakespeare, such as 'The Contention betwixt the Two Famous Houses of Yorke and Lancaster' (1594) and 'The True Tragedie of Richard Duke of Yorke' (1595), were in fact inaccurate transcriptions of the already existing '2' and '3 Henry VI'. This gives us a more sophisticated Shakespeare -- as, indeed, the relatively polished early plays 'Titus Andronicus' and 'The Comedy of Errors' might have led us to suspect. 
In his various Shakespeare books, such as 'Shakespeare's Life and Art' (1939) and his replacement for John Masefield's 'Shakespeare' in the 'Home University Library' (1964), Alexander showed little awareness of the principles of interpretation as evinced by his contemporary G. Wilson Knight. Rather than acknowledging the new criticism or anticipating cultural materialism, he built upon his predecessor, A. C. Bradley. His most lasting achievement was an edition of Shakespeare prepared for Collins (1951). This one-volume collection proved convenient for professors speaking at conferences or visiting other universities. It could frequently be seen in the hands of Shakespearians such as L. C. Knights, who might well have found Alexander's ventures into the critical field simplistic. There can be no doubt that it had popular appeal for students and for the literate public at large. 
However, the very accessibility of this edition was somewhat misleading. It conflated the quarto and folio versions of 'Hamlet' and 'Othello', producing centos rather than texts. Alexander omitted such works as 'Edward III' and 'The Two Noble Kinsmen' that have as much of Shakespeare in them as '1 Henry VI', which he included. He promulgated readings which some have found problematic, such as ''a babbl'd of green fields' ('Henry V', II.iii) and 'arm-gaunt steed' ('Antony and Cleopatra', I.iv) without due comment. However, how could he have found room for extensive annotation in a popular edition of Shakespeare's works? Compromise was inherent in the undertaking. 
Upon the retirement of Macneile Dixon in 1935, Alexander assumed the regius professorship, which he held until 1963. This tenure was temporarily interrupted when, at the outbreak of the Second World War, he re-enlisted in the army, being posted to the Middle East in 1940 and returning to Glasgow as a major in 1943. He made few reforms to the syllabus, other than removing the study of history from the English honours school. It was mostly his own graduates that he appointed to lectureships, and even then he revealed a prejudice against appointing women. His solitary lady lecturer, a temporary appointment, found herself rebuked for 'wasting the time of his young men'. Stricture from such a source would have been formidable. An impressive lecturer, with his square jaw and bushy eyebrows, Alexander seemed to regard research as a subsidiary activity. In that whole tenure, only one scholar of note, Ernst Honigmann, emerged from his department. 
In retirement Alexander was invited to lecture at New York University and Trinity College, Dublin, and he returned to New York, where he had proved especially effective, from 1965 to 1967. He had been elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1951, appointed CBE in 1964, and awarded an honorary degree of LLD by the University of Aberdeen in 1966. Alexander died of lung cancer in hospital in Alexandria, Dunbartonshire, on 18 June 1969. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 60296


Walker, Alice (1900-1982), literary scholar, was born on 8 December 1900 at 97 Dover Street, Crumpsall, Manchester, the daughter of George Edward Walker, then of independent means and later a solicitor, and Mary Alice Walker, 'nee' Cort. From 1912 she attended Blackburn High School for Girls and passed the University of London matriculation examination in 1919. She took her BA with first-class honours from Royal Holloway College in 1923, receiving the George Smith studentship for graduate studies, and in May 1926 she was passed as PhD in the faculty of arts with a thesis on the works of Thomas Lodge (1558?-1625). In October she entered Girton College, Cambridge, on a Jex-Blake scholarship, intending to work towards a four-volume edition of Lodge's works, and was awarded a University of London postgraduate scholarship for travel and research during 1927-8. After research at Coimbra, Lisbon, Madrid, and Rome, she received a three-year appointment as assistant lecturer in English at Royal Holloway College (1928-31). Thenceforth, until her return to the college in 1939 as librarian, she lived with friends or with her parents at 49 Denmark Road, Churchtown, Southport Lancashire. 
Walker published her first article in 1932 in the 'Review of English Studies' and this was followed by some forty reviews in this publication, founded and then edited by R. B. McKerrow. Her first book, 'The Life of Thomas Lodge' (1933), also appeared at this time, published by Sidgwick and Jackson, the firm of which McKerrow was a director. Her second book (1934) was an edition of Puttenham's 'Arte of English Poesie', published collaboratively with Gladys Doidge Willock, her long-standing friend, head of the English department and later professor at Royal Holloway College. In the same year she published her first article on Shakespeare and was employed by McKerrow to assist with the 'Oxford Old-Spelling Shakespeare' for the Clarendon Press, which had been delayed by his illness. McKerrow accounted her 'the ideal person to help me with the job' (Oxford University Press Archives, CP/ED/000018, 2/5/36), considering her accurate beyond his own standards. On McKerrow's death in 1940 two volumes of Shakespeare's early plays were close to publication and work on another was advanced. Although the press was disposed to ask Walker to carry on the edition, it appears to have been suspended during the Second World War and abandoned in 1948. 
In 1939, already with 'a wide reputation for bibliographical scholarship' ('College Letter', 1940, 14), Walker was appointed librarian at Royal Holloway College and was quickly involved in the fortunes of Janet R. Bacon (principal from 1935 to 1944) who appointed her principal's secretary and registrar in 1941. When Bacon resigned because of ill health in 1944, Walker also resigned and retired with her friend to Welcombe, near Bideford, Devon; they later lived in Bude, Cornwall, and in Oxford. 
During the war Walker had published only the 'Summary of periodical literature' in the 'Review of English Studies'. After six years' private study intended to complete McKerrow's edition, in 1950 she began to publish a remarkable series of articles on Shakespeare's text, and in 1952 to review 'Arden' and 'New Variorum' editions of Shakespeare's works and Malone Society facsimiles for the 'Review'. Her next book, 'Textual Problems of the First Folio' (1953, in J. Dover Wilson's 'Shakespeare Problems' series), for which she was awarded the 1954 British Academy's Rose Mary Crawshay prize, preceded five successive textual articles in Fredson Bowers's 'Studies in Bibliography'. These works revealed her as the most acute and challenging textual critic of the decade, her work innovatively conspicuous for the attention given to the influence of compositors on the transmission of texts. 
After publishing 'Othello' and 'Troilus and Cressida' in Dover Wilson's new 'Cambridge Shakespeare' (both 1957), Walker was urged to apply for the Oxford readership in textual criticism vacated by Herbert Davis, though she expected that she was 'much too old to be considered unless a stop-gap is wanted' (A. Walker to D. Davin, November 1959). Nevertheless, the appointment would facilitate her work on the 'Oxford Old-Spelling' edition which had been revived in 1952, albeit on a different plan, with the appointment of G. I. Duthie as editor; applying for the readership in December 1959, Walker listed herself as Duthie's co-editor. She was appointed reader for seven years with effect from Michaelmas term 1960, and was elected professorial fellow of St Hilda's College in November 1962. The Clarendon Press announced 'Coriolanus' in 1964 as the first volume of the Oxford edition but only proofs survive. In 1965, when applying for sabbatical leave, she noted that her increasing teaching load had put her own work (the edition) 'shockingly in arrears' (University of Oxford Archives FA 9/2/910; board minutes DL 19.1.65). Following her appointment, other than her British Academy annual Shakespeare lecture (1960), two short reviews, and a quatercentenary article in the 'Times Literary Supplement' (1964), she did not publish until the year of her death. She retired in September 1968, having spent much of Michaelmas term 1967 and Hilary term 1968 in Bude recovering from a broken pelvis. She was created reader emeritus in 1972 and died unmarried, of cancer of the liver, on 14 October 1982 at Plymouth Hospital. Her last article appeared posthumously in the 'Review of English Studies'. 
Described in 1997 as 'the most important female editor in the twentieth century' (Thompson, 85), Walker never managed to publish the editions which her long involvement with Shakespeare promised. Her dominant interest during the last forty years of her life lay in the textual problems which must be resolved before a work can be edited. Her most notable contribution was to identify the effects of compositors -- the neglected agents of textual transmission -- and to indicate how their influence could be studied. She was the senior member of the triumvirate including Fredson Bowers and Charlton Hinman which made compositorial analysis the distinctive editorial tool of the second half of the twentieth century. She was acute in criticism, direct and trenchant in conversation, and, at Oxford, solicitous for the well-being of her students. 


@@@@@


doc= 60297


Hutton, Edward (1875-1969), Italophile and travel writer, was born at Cambridge Villa, Ealing, Middlesex, on 12 April 1875, the eldest child in the family of five sons and one daughter of James Edward Hutton (1838-1890) and his wife, Sarah Abraham, 'nee' Salmon ('b'. 1850). His father was a partner in William Hutton & Sons, silversmiths, platers, and cutlers of London, Sheffield, and Birmingham, originally founded by Edward's great-grandfather William Hutton in the eighteenth century. Robert Salmon Hutton (1876-1970), who became professor of metallurgy at Cambridge University, was one of Edward Hutton's younger brothers. 
After home schooling, and while living at 13 Cannon Place in Heathfield Gardens, Hutton first went to school aged seven at Mrs Coghlan's, Thurloe Road, Rosslyn Hill; then, on moving to Elm Lodge in Hampstead, he attended Highgate School, where he and his brother Robert were 'mercilessly bullied' (autobiography, fol. 18). After the death of his father in December 1890, and with the family's transfer to his mother's native Devon, he attended Blundell's School, Tiverton, settling down to happier days and serious study. He became interested in both Italy and Roman Catholicism, largely through the study of Virgil and the reading of the Italian novels of Marion Crawford and J. H. Shorthouse's Anglo-Catholic novel 'John Inglesant' (1881). 
On leaving Blundell's Hutton took private tuition for Oxford entrance in rooms at Hampstead; however, after a year's idling, this ambition came to an end. Instead he was placed, at a cost of $100 to his family, with a 'publisher', a Mr Rideal of 6 Victoria Street. The job entailed correcting proofs (of mostly communist propaganda) and delivering letters, a job he was all too pleased to give up on being offered a trainee position by John Lane at Bodley Head in Vigo Street. It was while working at Bodley Head, the headquarters of the 'decadent movement' in England, that Hutton learned the writing trade and came into contact with a number of literary stars, notable 'sexual heretics', Catholics, and Catholics-to-be of the day, including Aubrey Beardsley (a 'genius'), Ernest Dowson (a 'miserable creature'), Frederick Rolfe (also known as Baron Corvo, an 'unhappy apparition'), Lionel Johnson, Richard Le Gallienne, George Moore (whom Hutton considered both ignorant and boorish), Arthur Symons, and Oscar Wilde (whose poetry he deemed inferior to that of Wilde's lover, Lord Alfred Douglas). His connection with this group of writers and aesthetes gave Hutton a great deal of satisfaction throughout his life (autobiography, fols. 77-91). 
Having attended a school of languages in London to learn Italian during his writing apprenticeship, Hutton first left for Italy in 1896, apparently 'disgusted' at the sacking of Aubrey Beardsley as art editor at Bodley Head, which had capitulated in the face of the celebrated poet William Watson's ultimatum of 1895 (autobiography, fol. 94). It was then that he began writing a steady stream of articles and reviews on Italian art history subjects: there were, for example, 'appreciations' of Luca della Robbia and Fra Filippo Lippi, published in 'The Idler' (1898), a piece on his hero-in-absolute, Walter Pater, in the 'Monthly Review' (1903), and an article, 'Benedetto Bonfigli ('c'.1420-1496): the father of Perugian painting', in the 'Burlington Magazine' (1905). Well-informed though the pieces were, they owed far more to the intimate knowledge and enthusiasm of the gentleman-amateur than they did to the hard-won training and expertise of the professional academic. 
On 18 June 1898 Hutton married Charlotte (1875/6-1960), the sister of a close friend, Horace Miles, and daughter of George Russel Miles, of Hampstead, tea dealer. They had one son, Peter Hutton (1911-2000), and lived (from 1901) at Casa di Boccaccio (a house once owned by the father of Giovanni Boccaccio, author of 'The Decameron') at Ponte a Mensola, east of Florence. They mixed with the great and the good of the Anglo-Florentine literary set. Bernard and Mary Berenson were close neighbours and cordial acquaintances; many of Bernard Berenson's vatic judgements and attributions found their way into Hutton's published work, for example a popular study of Perugino (1907) and a three-volume reprint of J. A. Crowe and G. B. Cavalcaselle's 'A New History of Painting in Italy from the Second to the Sixteenth Century' (1909), with annotations by Hutton. He also began writing a successful run of travel books, the first being 'The Cities of Umbria' (1905), 'The Cities of Spain' (1906), and 'Florence and Northern Tuscany' (1907). However, his most important work from this period was a very worthy critical biography of Boccaccio (1910), which established his name in the field of Italian studies. 
It was with Norman Douglas (1868-1952), whom he first met in February 1917, that Hutton struck up his warmest -- and most unlikely -- friendship. They were fellow travel writers, and later collaborated on 'A Glimpse of Greece' (1928), although their writing styles and approaches were anything but compatible. With the journalist and author Lina Waterfield, Hutton helped set up the British Institute in Florence in 1917. The permanent under-secretary of state at the Foreign Office, Sir Eyre Crowe, had originally sent Hutton (it would appear, at his own request) to Italy in 1916 on a special mission as a sort of spy and propagandist. Hutton remained for nearly two years, sending a report back to England every month. In 1918 Hutton founded and edited the short-lived 'Anglo-Italian Review' (from May 1918 to May 1921). It was on reading the periodical that the shipping broker Arthur Serena first approached Hutton for advice on how he might further the cause of Italian studies in England. This consultation resulted in the founding of chairs in Italian at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and later at Manchester and Birmingham. 
In the 1920s Hutton combined his Anglo-Italian cultural and professional writing activities with dealing in early Sienese art. He was, on the level of the dilettante, something of a connoisseur of this subject. A number of works by Simone Martini (or his workshop) that passed through his hands can now be found in the National Gallery in Washington, DC, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, and the Barber Institute of Fine Arts, Birmingham. He wrote 'The Sienese School in the National Gallery' (1925), a 'souvenir study' that relied heavily on the work and experience of his friends and associates Robert Langton Douglas and Frederick Mason Perkins. 
Hutton's literary output continued unabated throughout the 1920s and 1930s. He issued 'A Short History of Italian Art' (1926), a translation of Adolfo Venturi, and wrote 'The Franciscans in England, 1224-1538' (1926). This second work points to his ever-growing affinity to the Catholic church; and in 1928, along with his friend Mason Perkins, Hutton was received into the Roman Catholic church at Porziuncola, the birthplace of the Franciscan movement close to Assisi. His most profitable line, however, remained highbrow -- and, it should be said, overripe -- travel books like 'Cities of Spain' and 'Rome' (1909, 1912, 1922, 1926, and 1950), which he was frequently revising for new editions in this period. (His last major travel book would be 'Florence', 1952.) 
A combination of his Catholicism, public spiritedness, and acute artistic sensibility led to one of Hutton's proudest accomplishments: he was the prime mover in the Westminster Cathedral campaign which in 1935 helped to stop the amateurish work of Gilbert Pownall and his workshop of mosaicists, and established a committee of experts, on which Hutton sat himself, that saw through more appropriate designs in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s. He achieved this by assembling staunch public support from, among others, Kenneth Clark, director of the National Gallery, Eric Gill, Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, and Sir William Llewellyn, president of the Royal Institute of British Architects. As a testament to his aesthetic victory two of his own cosmatesque mosaic designs are to be found in St Paul's chapel at Westminster Cathedral; and one of his final books was 'The Cosmati: the Roman Marble Workers of the XIIth and XIIIth Centuries' (1950). 
The Second World War inevitably hit the production of travel books. Hutton, though, continued with his journalism, writing regular reviews of historical and art history books for 'The Guardian' and 'The Tablet'. He offered his services yet again to the British Foreign Office in 1939 and, though too old to be of any use in the field this time, his topographical knowledge of Italy was an invaluable asset, unrivalled by any other English person alive at the time. Therefore, in 1943, the political department of the Foreign Office asked him to write detailed descriptions of the Italian provinces. He produced nineteen volumes, the 'Italian Zone Handbooks' -- complete with a handwritten list of works of art and monuments to be safeguarded -- which were used by the allied intelligence corps. 
Edward Hutton was a fantastically energetic and eclectic worker in the area of Italian studies and Anglo-Italian cultural relations, and achieved much. A prolific, authoritative, erudite, if unmemorable and, for the most part, quintessentially Victorian writer (the academic professionalism of the twentieth century having largely passed him by), he wrote on a remarkable range of subjects. He was made cavaliere of the order of the Crown of Italy in 1917; he was awarded the Serena gold medal for his work in Italian studies by the British Academy in 1924; he received the title of commendatore of the order of Merit of the Italian Republic in 1959, and the gold medal for culture in 1965; and he was made a patron of the British Institute in 1969. His final decades were marred by financial instability and a deep-seated insecurity that his literary and wider cultural contribution had not been publicly acknowledged in his nation of birth. Despite a rather pathetic period of doorstepping (an offer of a word in the right ear came from the historian G. M. Trevelyan), his great wish to be officially honoured by his queen was never to be fulfilled. Resident in his latter years at 114 Clifton Hill, St John's Wood (once W. P. Frith's house), he died on 20 August 1969 at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 60300


Burden, Harold Nelson (1860-1930), Church of England clergyman and health administrator, was born on 20 March 1860 at Hythe, Kent, the eldest of the three children of Thomas Burden (1829-1872), a grocer, and his wife, Sarah Ann (Sally) Munk ('c'.1833-1902). When he was twelve his father died, and he was probably brought up by his grandparents, who were farmers. Unfortunately he was not successful as a grazier and dairyman and was declared bankrupt in 1886. He then worked in the slums of the East End of London, where he met his first wife, Katherine Mary Garton ('c'.1854-1919), the daughter of Henry Garton, a tobacco manufacturer of Hull; she was a niece of the wife of George Huntington, rector of Tenby, and had worked with Octavia Hill, who praised her. They married on 26 September 1888 after Burden was ordained deacon in the Church of England; they then emigrated to Ontario, where they were missionaries for three years. Here their two children were born and died. Burden was ordained priest in 1891. 
The Burdens returned on account of Harold's ill health and spent time in Shoreditch and Cambridge, where he wrote a well-received book on his missionary work, 'Life in Algoma, or, Three Years of a Clergyman's Life and Church Work in that Diocese' (1894). This was followed by 'Manitoulin, or, Five years of church work among Ojibway indians and lumbermen resident upon that island or its vicinity' (1895). In 1896 a novel and a set of sermons for 'busy clerics', 'Duty's Call' and 'Addresses on St Matthew's Gospel', were published. At Cambridge, where he matriculated in Lent 1893 and served as chaplain of St Catharine's College (1893-5), Burden gained his English licence to be a priest. He also became a member of the Barbers' Company and a freeman of the City of London. From 1924 to 1926 he served as master of the Barbers' Company. 
Burden moved to Bristol in 1895 as secretary of the Church of England Temperance Society. With local support, he and his wife created a retreat for female 'habitual drunkards', the Royal Victoria Home, and later the first 'inebriate reformatory', the Brentry extension of the home. In 1902 they formed the National Institutions for Inebriates and two years later its 600 beds constituted two-thirds of the places in English establishments of that type. Because of this, and his good relationships with the Home Office, he was appointed to the royal commission on the care and control of the feeble-minded (1904-8). 
From his experience on the commission, Burden set up Sandwell Hall, Birmingham, in 1906. This was the first industrial school for 'feeble-minded' children, and in 1909 he established another, at Stoke Park, Bristol. Partly on account of the low cost of his 'inebriate reformatories', the Treasury reduced its subsidy for these bodies in 1907, triggering the collapse of such institutions nationally. As a result the Burdens changed their reformatories into 'mental deficiency colonies'. Later they concentrated their efforts at Stoke Park and at Whittington, Chesterfield, operating the National Institutions for Persons Requiring Care and Control (NIPRCC). 
Katherine Burden died in 1919, and on 12 May 1920 Burden married the superintendent of the Stoke Park colony, Rosa Gladys Williams ('c'.1873-1939), the daughter of the Revd John Williams. At the time of Katherine's death the incorporation of the NIPRCC operated more than 2000 of the 7000 beds in licensed institutions for mentally handicapped people in England. Burden's other innovation was the creation, just before his death, of the Burden Mental Research Institute (1929). He died on 15 May 1930 at his home, Clevedon Hall, Clevedon, Somerset, and was buried on 20 May at Clevedon parish church. His second wife in turn founded the Burden Neurological Institute in 1939. After their deaths the NIPRCC became the Burden Trust. 
Harold Burden did well financially from running the institutions he created, leaving an estate of almost $150,000 -- although exactly how he managed to amass this wealth remains obscure. Although he engaged committees of the great and good to help him, Burden appears to have worked poorly with others and was autocratic. However, he undoubtedly benefited from the drive and support of his first wife. He was privately criticized by the Board of Education and fell out with several of the board's commissioners over the running of his establishments. Nevertheless, he created some of the first institutions to deal with alcoholism (as advocated by the temperance movement) and with mental handicaps (as proposed in the 'Mental Deficiency Act' of 1913). 


@@@@@


doc= 60301


Abraham [ii] Mocatta (1730-1800) and Jacob. Mattos joined Abraham [i] in partnership, though they shared neither premises nor a trading name, but on the latter's retirement from the royal exchange in 1749 Mattos did not receive the broker's licence. It went instead to Mattos's son Abraham [ii]. 
Abraham [i] died at Bevis Marks in 1751 and was succeeded as leader by Mattos, who died in 1759. Abraham [ii] succeeded as head of the business and his reputation as London's premier bullion broker came to rival that of his grandfather. By 1763 he styled himself Abraham de Mattos Mocatta; he changed his name to Mocatta in 1791, thereby keeping the surname alive. His marriage in 1759 to Esther (1737-1799), daughter of Isaac Lamego, resulted in a family of six sons and five daughters. 
The role of exclusive broker in precious metals to the bank continued. Notably Abraham [ii] assisted with massive gold purchases required for the recoinage of gold guineas between 1773 and 1777 and was responsible for much of the daily management of the sterling exchange rate. His firm was known as Mocatta and Keyser from about 1777, when Alexander Isaks Keyser (died 1779) was admitted a partner. However, it seems that Keyser took over the royal exchange licence in 1767. 
Shortly after 1779 Asher Goldsmid, son of a London merchant of Dutch origin and son-in-law of Keyser, joined the partnership; his elder brothers, Abraham and Benjamin, were to be major government loan contractors during the French wars. Following his admission the business was restyled Mocatta and Goldsmid about 1782. 
Abraham [ii] Mocatta died in London in January 1800 leaving estate of $150,000; seventeen mourning coaches attended his funeral and he directed that for one year three men should watch over his grave. His sons appear as unremarkable businessmen and Goldsmid succeeded as senior. Three of Abraham's sons, Isaac (1765-1801), Moses (1768-1857), and Jacob (1770-1825), had joined as partners; but Isaac was dismissed in 1793 for unauthorized speculation, and Moses chose to retire in mid-life to devote himself to social and philanthropic works and to study. David Alfred Mocatta (1806-1882), son of Moses, was an architect noted for his work for the London, Brighton, and South Coast railway. Another son, Isaac Lindo (1818-1879), wrote tracts on Jewish moral teachings and social questions. 
For the next forty years the Goldsmids dominated the business, especially Asher (died 1822) and his sons Sir Isaac Lyon and Aron Asher. As though to underline the position, no Mocatta was called upon to give evidence to the 1810 select committee on the high price of bullion. 
From 1840, when the bank ended its exclusive brokerage arrangements with Mocatta and Goldsmid thereby greatly diminishing the firm's significance (although such arrangements continued with the India Office), the firm once more came under the Mocattas' leadership. The senior was now 


@@@@@


doc= 60302


Abraham [i] Mocatta (d. 1751) and Isaac (died 1729, unmarried) came of age. By 1701 Abraham [i] was working as a general merchant, and later he also became a stockbroker; in 1710 he acquired a much coveted broker's medal, which had eluded his father, licensing him as one of twelve 'Jew brokers' to do business on the royal exchange. Soon he emerged as London's premier silver broker. 
Abraham [i] Mocatta's transactions were of enormous extent; between 1713 and 1725 two-thirds of the Bank of England's loans against silver were made to him. Underpinning this was his work as exclusive bullion broker to the bank, the East India Company, and the Royal Mint. In 1717 he co-ordinated a gigantic but somewhat obscure transaction, probably for the bank's account, involving the purchase of 1 million ounces of silver against loans of $300,000, as a step to support silver prices and stem silver exports. His significance within London's merchant community was such that in 1744 he joined the group of merchants pledging loyalty to George II and the support of 'public credit' in the face of Charles Edward Stuart's claim to the throne. His commercial links with North America were important and in 1728 he offered to purchase land for a New York synagogue. 
Abraham [i]'s marriage on 3 October 1712 to Grace (died 1753), daughter of Abraham Levy Ximenes, produced no son but a daughter, Rebecca Sarah (died 1737). Her second husband, whom she married in 1730, was 


@@@@@


doc= 60303


Moses Lumbrozo de Mattos (d. 1759), a London broker since about 1740, and they had a daughter and two sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 60304


George (d. c.303?), patron saint of England, is a figure whose historicity cannot be established with certainty. However, an inscription at Shaqqa in the Hauran, in the south-west of present-day Syria, which commemorates 'the holy and triumphant martyrs, George and the saints who [suffered martyrdom] with him' (Budge, 16), and which can be plausibly dated to the mid-fourth century, bears witness to the existence of a cult by that time, while the fact that the name George, from the Greek word for peasant or farmer, is not known to occur before the fourth century, makes it impossible to date the origins of that cult to the third century or earlier. It therefore seems very likely that there was a martyr George, and that he suffered in the persecution of Christians which began on the orders of Diocletian in 303. But later efforts to identify him with the unnamed man who according to Eusebius was executed after tearing down the decree in which the emperor proscribed Christianity, and to locate his martyrdom at Nicomedia, where this act of defiance took place, rest on pure speculation. The earliest locus for George's cult was Diospolis or Lydda, present-day Lod, in Palestine, where it was flourishing by the early sixth century. 
By the last quarter of the fifth century the story of George, however it had first been told, had been subjected to a fantastical hagiographical elaboration, which itself survives in several forms. Shared elements are George's occupation as an army officer, his defiance of paganism and its representatives, up to and including the emperor 'Dadianus', and his protracted sufferings for his faith, lasting for seven years. During that time he is subjected to an appalling series of torments and is killed and resurrected three times, before being finally executed by beheading. His exemplary courage and devotion prompt thousands of conversions, the empress 'Alexandra' among them. In this highly embellished form the 'passio' of George both reflected and helped to create his standing as one of the great martyr-saints of the eastern Mediterranean. Further west it aroused misgivings through its sheer extravagance, and in the sixth century the Roman church, in decretals later inaccurately attributed to Gelasius I ('r'. 492-6), purged the story of many of its details, attributing them to heretics, and declared that George was one of the saints who were rightly reverenced by men, but whose deeds were known only to God. 
The intervention of Rome had little effect. No modified version of the 'passio' of George is recorded in western Europe, where the saint's cult was already beginning to circulate -- it is recorded at several places in sixth-century Francia. Thus Gregory of Tours professed to know several stories of miracles wrought by St George, and associated two with relics preserved in the Limousin and Maine. But not until the late seventh century did accounts of George reach Britain, beginning with the arrival of the Frankish bishop Arculf on Iona about 683. Arculf had been a pilgrim in the Near East between 679 and 682, and visited Constantinople. Two miracle stories concerning St George which he heard there were recorded by Abbot Adomnan in his 'De locis sanctis', composed shortly after Arculf's visit. Bede, who reports Adomnan's giving a copy of his book to King Aldfrith of Northumbria, was clearly unimpressed by what it says of George, for he makes no mention of the saint in any of his works (George was added by later hands to Bede's 'Martyrology'). But Willibald, a native of Wessex who visited the Holy Land in the 720s, was less critical, and in his 'Hodoeporicon', dictated in his old age as bishop of Eichstatt to the nun Hugeburc, he recorded the impact made upon him by the cult he observed at Diospolis. 
The cult of St George seems ultimately to have spread into England from Francia rather than from Scotland, especially through the links between Benedictine monasteries. Hence the saint's commemoration in the ninth-century Old English martyrology, and in all the surviving pre-conquest kalendars; his feast day is always 23 April. In the late tenth century he appears among the saints whose lives were recorded, primarily for the benefit of monks, by AElfric of Eynsham. AElfric shows himself aware that doubts have been expressed about the cult: '
Heretics have written falsehoods in their books 

About the holy man who is called George. 

Now we will tell you that which is true about him. 
('Aelfric's Lives', 307)' But what he provides is essentially a pared-down version of the 'passio' in its original form, and it was clearly this which circulated in England. George's inclusion among the saints whose lives are narrated by AElfric is only one indication how far his cult had become established in England about the end of the first millennium, in the north as well as in the south. At the beginning of the tenth century he was honoured in the Durham 'rituale'. Towards its end a chapel was dedicated to him at Winchester under Bishop AEthelwold, and by the mid-eleventh century there were relics of him there and at Exeter. A monastery founded at Thetford during the reign of Cnut was dedicated to St George, as was Doncaster church in 1061. The death of AEthelred the Unready, on 23 April 1016, is recorded in every surviving version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' as occurring on St George's day. He was still a very long way from being in any sense a national saint, but by the time of the Norman conquest the martyr George was at least well on the way to becoming a nationally known one. 
The cult of St George has never been confined to England. He is revered in many other countries, and not only in Christian ones. The cult which had established itself in England by the mid-eleventh century originated in the eastern Mediterranean, and it continued to develop there. By the ninth century George had become one of the great Byzantine soldier-saints and, along with other holy warriors, he also came to be reverenced in that guise in western Christendom, where hitherto he had been primarily honoured as a martyr. By about 1000 there existed a German 'ordo' for giving arms to a knight, who is blessed by a bishop in the names of saints Maurice, Sebastian, and George. Following the Norman conquest this enhanced cult crossed the channel. In a set of 'laudes' composed at Canterbury, probably between 1084 and 1095, for the acclamation of either William I or William II, the same three saints are invoked to bring safety and victory to the English army. Orderic Vitalis records that the chaplain of Hugh d'Avranches, earl of Chester for the last thirty years of the eleventh century, in his efforts to reform the manners of the earl's household 'told them vivid stories of the conflicts of Demetrius and George, of Theodore and Sebastian, of the Theban legion and Maurice its leader, and of Eustace, supreme commander of the army and his companions, who won the crown of martyrdom in heaven' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 3.217). 
This militarization of the image of St George began independently of the crusades, but is likely to have been advanced by them. Both William of Malmesbury and Orderic tell how St George was among the 'ancient martyrs who had been knights in their own day' who were seen fighting on behalf of the crusading army at the siege of Antioch in 1098 (William of Malmesbury, 'Gesta regum', 1.639). The impression made by his intervention was given visual form very soon afterwards in the tympanum of Fordington church, Dorset, where George (the patron of the church) is shown as a mounted knight striking down Saracens with his lance, while Christian soldiers kneel in prayer, and subsequently in the wall paintings at Hardham, Sussex, datable to about 1135 and possibly made for the monks of Lewes, which represent both George's martyrdom and his exploits on behalf of the crusade. But there is little sign of a widespread cult in England at this time -- very few monasteries were dedicated to George in the years on either side of 1100, for instance -- suggesting that the impact of the crusade on his cult was ultimately ephemeral. English involvement in the third crusade in 1190-92 did little to promote it. It has been claimed that it was from this time that English soldiers fought under the red cross on a white ground, identified as the banner of St George, but the chronicler Roger of Howden, who participated in the crusade, states unambiguously that it was the French soldiers who wore red crosses, and that the English had white ones. Nor is there any evidence that Richard I had a particular devotion to St George -- his favourite saint was St Edmund. 
The claim that St George's day appears in a list of feasts recommended for nationwide observance drawn up in 1222 similarly rests on insecure foundations -- all that can confidently be said of the list is that it predates 1329. Thomas of Chobham, writing in the early thirteenth century, places St George's day among feasts of purely local celebration, and this is confirmed by the uneven record of its observance. At Osney Priory, whose canons had earlier been granted the college dedicated to St George in Oxford Castle, the saint's day was a major festival by 1238, when a serious riot was apparently sparked off by attempts to celebrate it. But a set of diocesan statutes issued for London between 1245 and 1259 names the day only as one on which it was lawful to work after mass, and in several dioceses its celebration went unremarked. That the cult still had only a limited appeal in England is also suggested by the infrequency with which the name George is recorded there, either of people or of ships. In the early south-English legendary, datable to the third quarter of the thirteenth century, the story of George's martyrdom is recounted without any nationalist 'parti pris', but with Gregory the Great it is another matter: '
Bidde we panne pene holie man: apostle of Engelonde 

pat he bi-fore ihesu crist: ore neode ounder-stonde. 
(Horstmann, 359)' The English should pray to Gregory as their apostle, to intercede for them with Christ. 
The association of St George with the English nation is indissolubly linked with the purposes of the English crown, above all in war. In the civil wars of the 1260s the soldiers in royalist armies led by the future Edward I wore red crosses (those of Simon de Montfort had white ones), and it may have been as a result of that association that in 1277 the same arms, now specifically associated with St George, were made for the pennoncels and bracers (little flags and protective armbands) of the footsoldiers and archers in Edward's armies in Wales. The banners which Edward displayed at the siege of Caerlaverock in 1300 included that of St George, while three such banners were made for his son in 1322. The same cult was taken up by other members of the royal family. Edward II's cousin Thomas, earl of Lancaster, is represented standing alongside St George in the 'Douce Hours' of the 1320s (Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 231), and he owned at least one relic of the saint, a bone which he gave to Thomas Beauchamp, eleventh earl of Warwick, at the latter's baptism. The young Edward III was likewise devoted to St George from the beginning of his reign. An illumination in the 'Milemete treatise' of about 1327 (Christ Church, Oxford, MS 92) shows him receiving his shield from the saint. 
The links he had already established with the warrior saint help explain why, in the context of the early years of the Hundred Years' War, Edward III chose St George as the spiritual focus for his military endeavours, in preference to less warlike figures such as St Edmund, St Gregory the Great, and St Edward the Confessor, who had all hitherto enjoyed the status of English national saints. In 1344 he had planned a chivalric fraternity modelled on King Arthur's Round Table, as a means of uniting his foremost magnates and soldiers in loyalty to himself. But this proposal was abandoned, to be replaced in 1348 by the Order of the Garter, a fraternity of identical purpose whose patron was to be St George. It met for the first time a year later. Its physical locus was Windsor Castle, where, significantly, the chapel of St Edward the Confessor was rededicated to St George and the Virgin. A statue of George in armour, to stand by the high altar, was paid for in February 1351. When fighting against the French at Calais in 1349, Edward is said to have drawn his sword with the words 'Ha Sant Edward, Ha Sant George' ('Historia Anglicana', 1.274), but it was the latter to whom his devotion was increasingly given. When the walls of St Stephen's chapel in Westminster Palace were redecorated about 1350, George was shown kneeling before the altar, alongside Edward and his sons. On 13 August 1351 the saint was acclaimed as 'the blessed George, the most invincible athlete of Christ, whose name and protection the English race invoke as that of their patron, in war especially' ('CPR', '1350-54', 127). 
By the fourteenth century the image of George as a man of war had been reinforced by the increasing circulation of the most famous myth associated with him, that of his slaying a dragon and rescuing a princess. Yet again this had originated in the Byzantine world. The story was known in western Christendom in the late twelfth century, but owed its popularity above all to the 'Golden Legend' of Jacobus de Voragine, completed by 1265. It tells how George, a military tribune of Cappadocian origins and a Christian, comes to 'Silena' in the province of 'Lybia', where a dragon has been terrorizing the populace. Appeased at first by offerings of sheep, it has latterly been fed men and women as well, chosen by lot, which has now fallen on the king's daughter. George arrives in time to defeat the dragon, and tells the princess to lead it into the city, where he promises to kill it if the people become Christians. They do, their former scourge is dispatched, and George departs, to undergo his protracted martyrdom. The addition enriched the symbolism of George's cult by presenting his victory as a clear-cut analogy for the victory of good over evil, the latter being equally easily identified with foes spiritual or earthly. The point was explicitly made in the fourteenth-century English prayer which invokes George as simultaneously a martyr, albeit one pre-eminent in soldiership, and the saviour of 'a royal child in sorrow before the wicked dragon', and begs for deliverance from enemies visible and invisible (BL, Arundel MS 341, fol. 19'r'- 'v'). The memorial brass of Sir Hugh Hastings, an experienced soldier who died in 1347 immediately after being appointed seneschal of Gascony, shows him spearing a humanoid figure with a dragon's head. Loyalty, familiarity, and national feeling all served to promulgate George's cult. By the 1330s ships were coming to be named after the saint in south- and east-coast ports. Froissart several times records how English forces went into battle in France or Spain under the banner of St George and with such war-cries as 'God and St George' and 'St George for Guienne'. Fraternities and guilds were dedicated to the saint. Tellingly, a guild was founded at Chichester in 1368 'to the honour of the holy Trinity and of its glorious martyr George, protector and patron of England' (Dawson, 16-17). 
From the late fourteenth century the observance of the cult of St George in England steadily intensified. This was a development found at every level of society, including the topmost, for St George remained the patron of the monarchy and of the activities associated with it. It was on St George's day 1377 that the elderly Edward III knighted his heir apparent, Richard of Bordeaux. However, Richard II seldom aspired to military glory, and his attitude to the saint who had become so closely linked with English prowess on the battlefield seems to have been ambivalent and unconventional. By 1384 the relic collection at Windsor contained part of an arm of St George, in a silver-plated reliquary which was repaired in October 1388, and in 1394 repairs were carried out on 'a table on which is painted the story of St George' (Bond, 97). But although the king of Aragon had reported a year earlier that a Gascon adventurer had obtained the saint's head at Levadhia in central Greece, and hoped to sell it to King Richard, if he did approach the English king no sale resulted. Richard seems to have been more interested in the red cross of St George, which he saw as a symbol of the nation, and one which could in turn be identified with himself. When he prepared for his only large-scale military venture, an invasion of Scotland in 1385, every soldier was ordered to wear 'un signe des armes de seint George large' (Twiss, 1.456), and ninety-two standards of St George accompanied the army. When Richard faced rebellion at the end of 1387, his troops fought under 'the royal standard and that of St George' (Hector and Harvey, 221-3). Most strikingly of all, in the Wilton diptych of the late 1390s, one of the angels surrounding the Virgin and Child before whom Richard kneels holds the red cross flag, surmounted by a tiny orb on which is painted an island representing Britain. 
Richard II's idiosyncratic linking of national cult with an unusually pacific style of kingship may have aroused discontent, or at any rate raised eyebrows. No sooner had he been deposed than on 6 October 1399 the clergy petitioned Archbishop Thomas Arundel for the nationwide observance of the feast of St George, 'who is the spiritual patron of the whole soldiery of England' (Wilkins, 3.241). Under the Lancastrian kings, and especially under Henry V, there was no danger of the saint's losing his associations with war. At the battle of Agincourt on 25 October 1415 Henry is said to have ordered his men to attack with the cry 'In the name of Almyghti God and Saynt George avaunt banarer! and Saynt George, this day thyn help!' and stories circulated afterwards that the saint had 'halpe hym to fighte, and was seyne aboven in the eyre, that day they faught' (Brie, 2.337-8, 557). On the king's return to London a statue of George formed part of the pageants which greeted him, while on 4 January 1416 Archbishop Chichele ordered that throughout the southern province the feast of St George should be a 'greater double', a day on which no one should work, as that of 'the special patron and protector of the said nation... by whose intervention, we unhesitatingly believe, the army of the English nation is directed against enemy attacks in time of wars' ('Register of Henry Chichele', 3.9). In 1422 the northern province followed suit, with even more fervent praise for the saint as military intercessor. Meanwhile, in 1416 the emperor Sigismund had visited England, bringing with him as a gift for King Henry the heart of St George, which Henry had kept at Windsor, and where it featured prominently in Garter processions. The emperor also gave a portion of the saint's skull. In 1419 it was ordered that all Frenchmen in conquered Normandy must proclaim their submission by wearing the cross of St George. Banners of St George were prominent at Henry's exequies three years later. 
Henry V's brother, John, duke of Bedford, was no less devoted to St George. He owned relics and images of him, and is represented in his book of hours kneeling before the saint, who wears the robes and other insignia of the Order of the Garter. Other Englishmen who fought in fifteenth-century France similarly reverenced George. A book of hours prepared for Sir William Oldhall, who served there almost continuously between 1415 and the mid-1440s, shows him and his wife kneeling on either side of the dragon-slaying saint, while an anonymous poet commemorating Robert, sixth Baron Willoughby of Eresby, who likewise fought long and hard in France, acclaims him, too, as an ardent devotee of St George: '
Now holy St George, myne only avower, 

In whom I trust for my protection; 

O very Chevalier of the stourished Flower 

By whose Hands thy Sword and Shield hast wone. 
(Dugdale, 2.85-6)' By the time Willoughby died, in 1452, the English conquests in France had been almost entirely lost under the unwarlike Henry VI. The latter, despite his military incompetence, also cultivated St George. He spent no less than 2000 marks on 'a tabernacle wt an image of Seynt George of gold garnysshed wt dyvers stonys & perles' (Palgrave, 102), and in 1458 had an image of George on horseback made for St George's Chapel, Windsor. But the fact that Henry was no warrior may have fostered the development of another side of St George's cult, one foreshadowed in the devotions of Richard II. Not only was he a supernatural associate in foreign war, his links with the monarchy also made him a plausible upholder of another of the king's responsibilities, namely the well-being of the nation at home. John Lydgate, writing about 1430, acclaimed George as: '
protectour and patroun, 

pis hooly martir, of knighthood loodsterre, 

To Englisshe men boope in pees and werre. 
('Minor Poems', 145)' An anonymous fifteenth-century Latin hymn, addressing George as the glorious knight who is protector of England, calls on him 'graciously to cause those at variance to be brought back to concord' -- possibly a reference to the Wars of the Roses but more likely, since the hymn also alludes to the 'clamorous populace', to disturbances like that led by Jack Cade (Bodl. Oxf., MS Arch. Selden B.26). As government crumbled, the saint's intercession was coming to be looked for in England rather than in France. 
The Yorkists who deposed Henry VI were no less fervent in their reverence for St George, whose cult was perceived as a valuable prop for monarchic authority. Although the name George was never widely used in medieval England, Edward IV's younger brother bore it, as did one of Edward's own sons. Edward himself was a lavish patron of the Order of the Garter, financing the building of a magnificent new chapel of St George at Windsor, and making provision for his own burial there. Unlike his predecessor, moreover, he seems to have seen George as a saint who might be called upon for victory in battle, so that when fighting to recover the throne in 1471 he could be plausibly described as appealing 'To oure lady and to saynt George, and other seyntes moo' (Wright, 275). When Prince Edward, the future Edward V, visited Coventry in 1476 he was greeted by pageants which included one of St George and the dragon, in which the saint claimed for himself and the Virgin 'proteccion perpetual' of England, 'Hit to defende from enemies ferre & nere' (Bulley, 25-6). St George had remained the protector of England, and he had clearly also recovered all his former militancy. In his translation of the 'Golden Legend', published in 1483, William Caxton describes the saint as 'patrone of this royame of Englonde and the crye of men of warre', and concludes with the injunction: 'Thenne let us praye unto hym that he be specyall protector and defensor of this royame' (Barclay, 118). 
The broadening of the cult of St George, to serve the cause of domestic peace as well as of continental war, was maintained under the Tudors. Henry VII claimed the protection of the saint from the very beginning of his reign (the red-cross banner was one of three under which his victorious army entered London in 1485) and he had visible form given to George's protection for his dynasty, in the panel from an altarpiece which survives in the Royal Collection, showing Henry and his queen kneeling in prayer, flanked by their children, while behind them St George overthrows the dragon. When he visited Hereford in 1486 he was greeted by a pageant of St George, who promised to 'be your Helpe, unto your Lives Fine [end], To withstonde your Enemyes with the Help of that blessed Virgin' (Leland, 4.197). Though the saint was invoked for Henry's invasion of France in 1492 -- 'Sent Iorge protector, be hys good gyd!' (Robbins, 96) -- the enemies referred to in 1486 were essentially domestic ones: dynastic rivals and unreconciled Yorkists. The disguising staged on twelfth night 1494 at Westminster, in which St George defeated 'a Terryble & hughe Rede dragun', which 'spytt ffyre at hys mowth' (Streitberger, 27-9), furnished, like the altarpiece panel, an obvious symbolism for Henry's pursuit of security. 
Henry VII's devotion to St George became well known outside England. In 1504 he was presented with 'a legg of Seynt George inclosid in sylvyr parcellis Gylt' (Thomas and Thornley, 328-9), which Louis XII of France had seized when he captured Milan four years earlier. The precious relic was given to Georges d'Amboise, cardinal-archbishop of Rouen, who in turn gave it to Henry VII, who following its arrival in England had it carried before him in procession through the streets of London. In his will Henry bequeathed it to the altar next to his tomb in the newly built lady chapel in Westminster Abbey, together with a relic of the holy cross, directing that they should be placed on the altar 'upon principal and solempne festes' (Condon, 132). The identification of the saint with the well-being of the monarch could be extended to advance the latter's policy. In 1495 the parliament of Ireland, in an attempt to curtail the violence provoked by that country's magnates, enacted that their retainers should no longer use such expressions as ''Cromabo', 'Butlerabo', or other words like... but to call only on St George, or the name of his Sovereign Lord the King of England' ('Statutes... of Ireland', 1.55). The saint was similarly exploited for pacific purposes in Wales, where in 1507 a magnificent tournament staged at Carew Castle by Sir Rhys ap Thomas, one of King Henry's most influential supporters, culminated with St George embracing St David. Henry VII's aspirations for Anglo-Welsh co-operation could hardly have been more clearly expressed. During the early years of Henry VIII's reign, too, the saint's cult continued to serve royal ends, most notably in 1526, when the reform of the currency led to the issue of a new coin, the George noble, a gold piece which on the reverse showed George mounted and killing the dragon with his lance (another issue represented him with sword in hand). Henry also took a close interest in the Order of the Garter (he reformed its statutes), and it may have been during his reign that the practice developed whereby its members unable to be present at Windsor on 23 April observed the patronal feast in appropriate style wherever they happened to be. In the early decades of the sixteenth century the cult of St George was a significant link binding the ruling classes of England to one another and to the monarch. 
Where kings and nobles led, their subjects soon followed. St George did not, in fact, always appear in sanctified isolation. It is not surprising to find him associated with St Michael, as his fellow dragon-killer, for instance in paintings on the altar screen at Ransworth, Norfolk, and he is also several times referred to as linked with the Virgin, and in particular as 'our lady's knight', in fifteenth-century verses. This may have owed something to chivalric culture -- it would not be remarkable if the saint who saved a princess also came to be seen as devoted to the queen of heaven -- while the fact that the Virgin, too, was perceived as the defender of England, as on the Wilton diptych, may also have reinforced the connection. Nevertheless St George was increasingly seen as the principal patron of the whole nation, and not just of its ruling classes, a development reflected in late medieval illuminations showing the rebellious peasants of 1381 mustered round banners bearing the saint's arms. Such was the reverence in which those arms had come to be held that the Northumbrian chronicler John Hardyng associated them with figures from Britain's legendary past, with King Lucius, who after his conversion in 184 'bare of sylver a crosse of gowles [gules] in fourme of seynt Georges armes' (BL, Lansdowne MS 204, fol. 47'v'), and with Sir Galahad, who bore them on a shield made by Joseph of Arimathaea. 
Meanwhile guilds like that of Chichester had begun to proliferate, particularly in East Anglia: Bury St Edmunds 'c'.1369, Bishop's Lynn in 1376, Great Yarmouth and Lincoln in 1377, Littleport in 1378. The most notable of these fraternities was that of Norwich, probably founded in 1385. The Norwich guild was typical in its purposes of honouring the saint and his feast day, while offering prayers for its dead and living brothers and sisters, but was ultimately uncommon in the closeness of its ties to the government of the city. In the early fifteenth century 23 April was already marked by a long and magnificent procession in which the clergy and members of the guild were joined by an armed man representing the saint and by a representation of the dragon, the latter made as lifelike as possible; in 1429 another man received 2's'. 4died 'for playing in the dragon with gunpowder' (Grace, 17). From 1452, when a dispute which had bitterly divided the citizens was resolved, the fraternity became effectively part of the government of Norwich, the St George's day celebrations a hierarchically organized expression of civic unity, involving the mayor and aldermen as well as the humbler members of the guild. 
Elsewhere processions (often known as 'ridings') and plays featuring St George increasingly provided the means for expressions of communal pride and religious devotion. Although they continued to be concentrated in the south and east of England, by 1437 there were plays at Chester, by 1478 at Salisbury, by 1511 at Newcastle, and by the mid-1520s at Leicester, where one may in fact have been staged sixty years earlier. A St George's day pageant has been claimed for Dublin 'c'.1490, while in Scotland the saint appeared in Corpus Christi pageants at Jedburgh after 1488, and at Aberdeen from 1530. At Jedburgh the pageants must have been largely the work of the canons of the Augustinian abbey, just as an enactment of St George and the dragon was the responsibility of the Augustinian canons at Woodbridge in Suffolk after 'c'.1475. The diffusion of the cult was the work of many agencies, and its consequent spread remained geographically uneven. In London the guild of armourers received a charter in 1453 incorporating them as the guild or fraternity of St George, and in 1521 the midsummer celebrations included 'St George, choking the dragon and delivering St Margaret' (Lancashire, no. 969), but although the saint featured in pageants like that which welcomed Henry V in 1415, his cult seems to have put down few roots in the city, where there was only one church dedicated to him, in Botolph Lane. And although it expanded into the midlands and north, its incidence is only thinly recorded there. Such apparent indifference to St George in some regions may, however, have been partly counteracted by the influence of the nobility, and especially of those who were Garter knights. Thus 'Sainte-George-Tide' was one of the 'Principal Feestes' for the household of the fifth earl of Northumberland, who himself attended a requiem mass on the day after the feast 'for the saullis of all the Knightes of th'Order of the Garter Departede to the Mercy of God...' (Percy, 160, 324), and in the far north-west the Dacres, who had a chantry dedicated to the saint in Lanercost Priory, may likewise have done something to spread awareness of his cult; hence, perhaps, the carving of St George and the dragon in Carlisle Castle, executed about 1500. 
Relics of St George are recorded as far afield as Haltemprice, a small Augustinian priory in the East Riding of Yorkshire, which claimed to have an arm (one of several). But most were found further south. The guild chapel in Norwich Cathedral also claimed to have an arm, and other relics were recorded at Lincoln, Yarmouth, London, and Salisbury, as well as Windsor, where there was a notable collection and where pilgrims could apparently obtain cheap badges representing the saint in combat with the dragon. The pattern of distribution is in keeping with evidence which suggests that on the whole the cult of St George intensified in the south and east of England in the later middle ages -- in the areas, that is, which contributed most to, and were most affected by, Anglo-French conflict -- rather than spreading into areas in which it was previously little known. It may be significant that it was in far-away Manchester that in 1421 Thomas, fifth Baron de la Warr, 'being partly a French man and partly an Englishman', was said to have converted St Mary's Church into a college dedicated 'to S. Dionyse, the patron of France, and S. George, the patron saint of England' (Arnold-Foster, 513). It is hard to imagine so eirenic a dedication closer to the battlelines. 
Plays seem to have played an important part in spreading the cult of St George. In 1490 the chaplain of the guild of St George at New Romney went to Lydd in order to inform himself about the latter town's play of the saint (staged since at least 1456), so that it could be performed at home, while in 1511 no fewer than twenty-eight Cambridgeshire townships united to stage a play of St George at Bassingbourn. Plays and processions continued well into the 1530s, just as images of the saint went on being refurbished or replaced. In 1531 the churchwardens of Morebath in Devon recorded their contract with Thomas Glasse, how 'he schall make us a new iorge & a new horse: to our dragon to hys one proper coste & charge' (Wasson, 208-9). By this time the saint's name had long been given to inns as well as ships, starting no later than 1402, when the Byzantine emperor's ambassadors were entertained at the sign of St George in Lombard Street, London. In 1524 the third earl of Kent died in this same inn. Forty years earlier a hostelry named 'le George' had been recorded in St Albans. The foundation in 1537 of a guild of St George at Chester for the encouragement of shooting suggests that by then the saint's cult had become a secure, and increasingly familiar, element in England's social and religious life. 
By the 1530s, however, the cults of all non-scriptural saints were beginning to come under pressure from humanist disdain and Reformist criticism, either as pre-Christian survivals or as unwarranted additions to the sum of religious practice. Their existence was often challenged, their intercessory role rejected. Erasmus denounced soldiers who called on St George, comparing them with pagan devotees of Hercules, while Martin Luther later regarded the saint as an allegorical rather than a historical figure. It was hardly to be expected that St George would be proscribed while Henry VIII was king -- the posthumous inventory of his possessions records pictures, effigies, and embroideries of the saint, often richly wrought, for instance 'a Table of wall nuttree with the picture of Seyncte George on horsebacke raised with liquid golde and silver' (Starkey, 238). In 1536 St George's day was preserved as a high holy day. Nevertheless there were signs of diminishing reverence, ominous for the future. At Canterbury, for instance, the traditional St George's day procession was prohibited in 1538 for contravening that year's royal injunctions against 'feigned images... abused with pilgrimages or offering of anything made thereunto' ('English Historical Documents, 1485-1558', 812), and order was given for the destruction of the saint's image, albeit in the teeth of protests by the churchwarden. Elsewhere, however, the cult still attracted devotion, as at Norwich, where in 1543 the old celebrations persisted, with agreement 'that the Georg' shalhave xs. & the berer of the dragon ijs. this yeer for ther' ffeez' (Grace, 149). Perhaps at this point it helped St George that he had increasingly come to be perceived as a destroyer of idols, as well as a dragon-slayer. 
But with the death of Henry VIII in 1547, St George was left largely without earthly defenders in England. It was a sign of things soon to come that when the young Edward VI processed through London to his coronation he was met at the Little Conduit in Cheap by the saint on horseback, ready to deliver a speech promising to defend the new king as he had protected his ancestors, 'but for Lacke of Time it could not be done, his Grace made such Speed' (Leland, 4.319). Although it may have been Edward's advisers who on this occasion decided that St George's intercession was not worth having, the king himself soon came to share their views. On 23 April 1550, according to the evangelical Edward Underhill, he asked the Garter knights assembled at Greenwich, 'My Lords, I pray you what saint is S. George that we heere so honour him?' Lord Treasurer Winchester responded with a paraphrase of the 'Golden Legend', telling how George 'out with his sword, and ran the dragon through with his speare', to which the king, barely able to speak for laughter, rejoined ''I pray you, my lord, and what did he with his sword the while?' 'That I cannot tell your Majestie', said he. And so an end of that question of good S. George' (Nichols, 'Narratives', 323-4). 
By this time the traditional cults of saints like George were withering throughout England, as the evangelically inspired governments of the dukes of Somerset and Northumberland successively applied themselves to purging the realm of popish superstitions. In this they were increasingly influenced by the radical theology of Geneva, and to John Calvin St George was not even an allegory, but rather a spectre or even a 'bug'. In August 1547 royal injunctions forbade all processions, and so ended the 'ridings' in which the saint had so often appeared. The 'Chantries Act' at the end of that year abolished the fraternities which had supported his cult. At Leicester the churchwardens of St Martin's sold for 12died the horse on which George had ridden. At Ludlow the image of the saint fetched 18died, the dragon just 7died At York the corporation was incredulous that the government should intend to abolish the guild dedicated to the national saint, and made ineffective representations to Westminster. At Norwich the fraternity of St George was saved from dissolution by a charter of Henry V making it a perpetual community, but its character changed markedly; it became instead the 'company and citizens of St George', a name chosen to distance it from the now proscribed doctrine of purgatory, while its annual festivities were severely curtailed. The reformers were determined that the saints should not receive the reverence due to God and Christ alone, and in 1548, in a treatise on the ten commandments published at Zurich, the radical John Hooper rejoiced accordingly 'that Englishmen hath resigned St George's usurped title to the living God, the God of battle' (Hooper, 314). 
The saints still had defenders, but the latter did not always do much to advance their cause. In May 1547 Stephen Gardiner, the conservative bishop of Winchester, defending images as an aid to the unlettered, observed how 'he that cannot read the scripture written about the King's great seal, yet he can read St George on horseback on the one side, and the King sitting in his majesty on the other side'. Gleefully Somerset pointed out how 'As the image testifieth, the King's image is on both the sides... If it were St George, my lord, where is his spear and dragon?' Gardiner's lame response, that 'I uttered the common language I was brought up in, after the old sort', though it bears witness to popular perceptions of St George, would only have confirmed the protector in his belief that the saint was a superstitious icon best dispensed with (Nichols, 'Literary Remains', 594-5). St George's day still had red-letter status in the kalendar of the 1549 'Book of Common Prayer', but was demoted to black letters in that of 1552, when Bishop Nicholas Ridley also successfully prohibited its observance in London. Even at Windsor, where the Order of the Garter had long held a place at the very centre of the English cult of St George, the latter's position was steadily undermined. His images and relics in the Royal Collection were sold in instalments, like the 'Little plate of golde where in Sainct George's harte', sold in 1548/9, and the 'Ymage of Sainct George' disposed of a year later (Bond, 203, 205). And in 1550/51 the king himself drafted new statutes effectively ending the saint's association with the order. To prevent the honour due to God being given to 'a creature', the order's name was to be formally changed from that of St George to 'th'ordre of the gartier or defence of the trueth', while its emblem was no longer to be a representation of the saint, but 'a horsman graven, holding in one hand a sweard, pearsing a boke, on wich shall be written 'Verbum Dei'' (Nichols, 'Literary Remains', 521-3). Not all the proposed details survived reconsideration, but when revised statutes were finally promulgated on 17 March 1553, the Garter was no longer under the protection of St George. 
Edward VI's new statutes for the Garter, like his reforms in religion generally, were quickly abrogated after the accession of Mary in 1553. The former St George's day ceremonies were revived at such places as Chester, York, and Norwich (though on a different day at the last), images restored in churches in several counties. On 23 April 1554 the queen herself processed with the knights of the Garter, in a ceremony which concluded with the election of her future husband, Philip of Spain, to their number. Twelve months later she 'lokyd out of a cassement' while Philip and the other knights 'went in their robes, on procession, with three crosses', at Hampton Court ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 85). But in 1558 Mary's death once more called the status of St George into question. It was in keeping with Elizabeth I's cautious position on religion that he should have been a red-letter saint in the 1559 reissue of the prayer book, and that his feast should have been named as a holy day in a list promulgated in 1560. But a year later, as the cause of reform prevailed, he was again reduced to black lettering. In the calendar which John Foxe composed for the 1563 edition of his 'Acts and Monuments', however, St George retained a place, albeit now surrounded by Reformist luminaries like Wyclif, Erasmus, and Luther -- he and Mary Magdalene were the only non-apostolic saints from the Catholic calendar to do so. It is hard not to believe that it was his role as national saint that had preserved his standing. 
In the years after Elizabeth's accession, attitudes to St George developed along lines which lasted for centuries. Increasingly under pressure from the 1530s onwards, the late medieval cult effectively broke in two; the trappings of religion continued to support a court cult focused on the monarch and the Order of the Garter, while nationalist feeling and secular narratives inspired the development of an image of George as an essentially lay representative of England. But between the images of St George shaped respectively by royal policy and popular culture there lay a theological battleground, for the Catholic religion which before the Reformation had held these elements together now served instead to keep them apart, as the spokesmen for a new church establishment continued to attack the remains of its predecessor. In the eyes of militant protestants, intent on purging the realm of the relics of popery, George's traditional position as patron of England was irrelevant, while efforts to promote him as a way of enhancing the image of the monarch merely associated the crown with superstition and worse. The connection was to be ultimately disastrous for king and saint together. Attempts to bridge the religious gap, and to give St George a new standing as a specifically protestant saint, usually enjoyed only limited and temporary success. 
For Queen Elizabeth, the Garter and St George, like much else, were primarily aids to her own glorification. Garter feasts were celebrated in lavish style, but ceased to be merely private ceremonies for courtiers and aristocrats; held at Greenwich or Whitehall instead of Windsor, the processions of the knights became magnificent public rituals which drew large crowds, and in the process exalted the image of the ruler who was sovereign of the order -- about 1575 Elizabeth had herself portrayed in that capacity. It remained customary, moreover, for knights of the order who were unable to attend the annual Garter feasts to celebrate St George's day, with all the splendour at their disposal, wherever they happened to be (the earl of Essex did so at Dublin in 1599), thereby further advertising the greatness of the monarch and her association with the saint. Such a development chimed well with the self-conscious revival of chivalry at court, proclaiming Elizabeth to be a ruler of time-honoured qualities, not least in being sustained by religion and by the valour and devotion of her subjects. One of her roles was that of leader of a protestant nation in war, and here she could associate her own image with that of St George the dragon-slayer (perhaps influenced by contemporary Dutch engravings of William the Silent in the same role), quelling an enemy easily identified with militant Catholicism. It was in this context that the writer George Whetstone, who served in the Netherlands against Spain in the mid-1580s, addressed 'The Honorable Reputation of a Souldier' (1585) to 'the right valiant gentlemen & souldiers, that are, or shalbe Armed under the Ensigne of Sainct George', and urged on his countrymen in verses which begin: '
God with S. George, Allon, brave Gentlemen, 

Set Speares in rest, renew your auncient fame. 
(sig. Aiiii)' It was against this background that St George made his first and arguably only appearance in a major work of creative literature. Book 1 of Edmund Spenser's 'The Faerie Queene' (1590, revised edition 1596) is largely devoted to the adventures and misadventures of the Red Cross Knight, specifically identified by Contemplation, in the guise of an aged holy man, with St George: '
thou Saint George shalt called bee, 

Saint George of mery England, the signe of victoree. 
(canto 10.61)' Although he drew on earlier sources, most obviously the 'Golden Legend', Spenser presents George as a native Englishman, stolen at birth by 'a Faerie'. But there the similarities with contemporary romances end, as Spenser develops his learned and many-layered allegory. The Red Cross Knight is indeed St George, but he is many other things too, for the allegory is enriched as well as complicated by its kaleidoscopic quality, making it possible to see the knight, variously or simultaneously, as the type of the true-born Englishman, as Everyman, as Christian knighthood defending the church, as holiness, and even as Christ. Similarly the adventures in which he is assailed by the forces of sin and death represent at one and the same time the resistance of protestant righteousness to Catholic aggression and the tests faced by the Christian soul in pursuit of salvation, for either of which the knight's overthrow of the great dragon on the third day of their fight provides an appropriate conclusion. 
References to Queen Elizabeth, who herself appears in several allegorical guises, and to the Order of the Garter, and sometimes to the two of them together, as when Una describes how, hearing of: '
That noble order hight of Maidenhed, 

Forthwith to court of Gloriane I sped, 

Of Gloriane great Queene of glory bright, 
(canto 7.46)' further associate Spenser's poem with the world of courtly chivalry, of which St George formed an emblematic part. After 1603 he continued in that role. Shortly before James VI became king of England, he compared the unruliness of his Scottish subjects with the security of English government: 'Saint george surelie rydes a towardlie rydding horse, quhaire I ame daylie burstin in daunting a wylde unreulie coalte' (Bruce, 31-2). Once safely mounted alongside St George, James I presided over ever more lavish Garter celebrations, while the saint's association with them became still closer. The subtitle of Tristram White's 'The Martyrdome of Saint George of Cappadocia' (1614) describes the latter as 'Titular patron of England and of the most Noble Order of the Garter'. In public ceremonies away from court, too, George appeared as a friend of monarchy. With other knights and a dragon he took part in May pageants at Wells in 1607, and again six years later in entertainments provided for Queen Anne. At Chester, where there had been plays of St George in the early fifteenth century, he appeared with a lively dragon in a procession staged to greet Prince Henry, and was saluted by 'Rumor', in verses provided by Richard Davies, as the symbol of military valour: '
So Britaines, when they fight with cheere, they say, 

'God and Saint George for England!' to this day. 
(Nichols, 'Progresses', 2.30-31)' After 1625 St George became wellnigh overtly the patron of Charles I. In keeping with the latter's more ceremonious style of kingship, the Garter feasts became less public; moved back to Windsor, they were conducted in an ordered style akin to Laudian church ritual. In the same spirit St George was given a place in the calendar of 'Collections of Private Devotions' (1627), a primer devised by John Cosin for the use of court ladies. The monarch's personal identification with the saint received spectacular visual expression in Sir Peter Paul Rubens's 'Landscape with St George and the Dragon' of 1629/30 (Royal Collection), in which the victorious George, an idealized representation of King Charles, presents his sword to a no less romanticized Queen Henrietta Maria after overthrowing the dragon on the banks of the Thames. So close did the connection between saint and king become that impugning the one was commonly regarded as derogatory by the other. Thus in 1634, according to John Aubrey, the controversialist Daniel Featley was 'brought upon his knees' before Archbishop Laud for having denied the existence of St George (Aubrey, 68-9), and a similar charge was brought against William Prynne. 
The multiplication of such attacks called forth the first English defence of St George, in Peter Heylyn's 'History of that Most Famous Saynt and Souldier of Christ St George of Cappadocia' (1631, enlarged edition 1633); significantly it had two dedications, one to King Charles and the other to the Order of the Garter. In a work of wide-ranging learning, drawing upon classical, patristic, and contemporary sources, Heylyn is principally concerned to establish the historicity of St George, against those who proclaim him a mythical or allegorical figure. This determination sometimes leads him into strange positions; thus he concedes that the story of George and the dragon, as narrated by Jacobus de Voragine, is so close to that of Perseus and Andromeda as told by Ovid, 'that were the names changed, and the occasion altered; we might with good reason affirme it for the same', yet declines to rule out the possibility of a dragon, because 'that in times before us, there have been Dragons, Serpentine creatures of excessive bulke, and no lesse danger, is a thing evident in the best writers' (Heylyn, 14-16, 19). But though he concedes that the legend of the saint 'hath in it many vaine and grosse absurdities' Heylyn argues steadfastly that this is no good reason for declaring that George is himself fictitious (ibid., 56). Many leading English clergymen and theologians would have disagreed. John Boys, dean of Canterbury, and the famous Cambridge theologian William Perkins were among those whom Heylyn assailed, but the most formidable of his antagonists was certainly the radical puritan John Rainolds, whose 'De Romanae ecclesiae idolatria' had appeared in 1596. For Rainolds, following Calvin, George is merely a figure of fantasy, at best an allegory. The arguments for his existence propounded by Cardinal Robert Bellarmine, which largely anticipated those of Heylyn, are dismissed as fallacious. In so far as there had ever been a historical George, he was no orthodox martyr but rather the Arian bishop of Alexandria lynched by his flock in 363. Several later writers followed Rainolds in rejecting the saint, though more often on theological than historical grounds. Thus for the poet George Wither in 1623, 'Jesus Christ is the true Saint George' (Wilson, 116-17). 
Puritan hostility to St George was apt to make itself felt outside the worlds of the court and of theological debate. That the May games staged round London in 1559 featured George and the dragon is a sign that the saint had retained a place in popular culture, albeit one largely shorn of formal religious affiliations. Even before the Reformation George seems to have been celebrated in towns and villages at least as much as a hero of romance, the dragon-killer who rescued a princess, as a Christian martyr. At Bassingbourn, where in 1511 he appeared in both capacities, the existence of playbooks (also attested at Lydd in 1532/3) helps to explain how the legend was transmitted. The 'Satires' of Joseph Hall attest its survival in the late 1590s, with a list of 'forworne tales' including: '
Saint Georges Sorrell, or his crosse of blood, 

Arthurs round Board, or Caledonian wood, 

Or holy battels of bold Charlemaine. 
(Hall, 93-4)' Earlier in that decade Shakespeare had alluded to celebratory bonfires -- 'Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make, To keep our great Saint George's feast withal' ('1 Henry VI', I.i, 153-4) -- and also to inn-signs -- 'Saint George that swinged the dragon, and e'er since Sits on's horseback at mine hostess' door' ('King John', II.i, 288-9). Such signs had so proliferated that 'Saint George on horseback' had become a synonym for immobility, and by inference, uselessness: 'An idle justice of the peace is like the picture of Saint George upon a signe-post with his sword drawne to no purpose' (Tilley, 581). But the saint's patriotic association, already given expression by Whetstone, survived such disrespectful treatment, to be memorably encapsulated in the war-cry 'God for Harry! England and Saint George!' ('Henry V', III.i, 34). 
Internal evidence dates 'Henry V' to 1599. By then there had appeared the book that more than any other recast the legend of St George into the form in which it was thereafter transmitted in popular culture. Despite its title, 'The Famous Historie of the Seaven Champions of Christendome' (1596-7) by Richard Johnson is primarily concerned with the deeds of St George, later assisted by his sons. The evidence suggests that Johnson drew on earlier romances, both of the saint and of other legendary figures like Tristan, but took the shape of his narrative primarily from the early fourteenth-century tale of Bevis of Hampton, a lengthy saga of aristocratic adventure in foreign parts which was first printed in 1500. In Johnson's remarkably unsubtle narrative his George, like Spenser's, is an Englishman, born by caesarean section at Coventry to Albert, lord high steward of England, and his royal wife. Having escaped from the witch who stole him at birth, George sets out on a career of knight-errantry. He soon kills a dragon in Egypt and rescues the Princess Sabra, but declines to marry her before he has fulfilled his chivalric mission, a process entailing several years of mayhem and slaughter over much of central Europe and the Middle East. His victims include a number of giants and wild beasts, but are more often either black men or pagans, sometimes both. But although Johnson several times describes George as the champion of Christendom, the latter's religious zeal is less in evidence than his anxiety to protect virgins from rape, a threat sometimes described in near-pornographic detail. Eventually George returns to England, where he succumbs to the sting of a dragon he has killed on Dunsmore Heath outside Coventry, whereupon the king decrees his commemoration on 23 April, 'naming it S Georges day, upon which day he was most solemnely interred in the Citie where he was borne', and also 'that the Patron of the Land should be named S George, our Christian Champion' (Johnson, sig. Cc 'verso'). 
The saint who was acclaimed at Chester in 1610 as a native Englishman, and as renowned not for his martyrdom but for killing the dragon and quelling the heathen, could have derived from either Johnson or Spenser. Nor is it possible to say whether it was tradition or monarchism which after 1603 led to the gilded figure of the saint making intermittent appearances in civic pageants at Norwich, after he had been excluded from them since 1558, or to the mysterious custom reported from Morpeth in Northumberland for a young man chosen to represent the saint to come to church, suitably attended, on 23 April, and at the creed 'stand up and draw his sword' (Lancashire, no. 1190). But there can be no doubt that, away from the court, it was Johnson's lurid romance, as transmitted through plays and chapbooks, which did most to maintain the position of St George in popular culture. There may have been a play of 'St George for England' by Wentworth Smith as early as 1603; there was certainly a dramatization of Johnson's book by John Kirke no later than 1638. Chapbooks containing massively abridged versions of the 'Seaven Champions', and sometimes a ballad of St George as well, circulated in huge numbers, and were surely the source of the story which John Bunyan later rebuked himself for having enjoyed in his misspent youth: 'give me a Ballad, a News-Book, George on horseback or Bevis of Southampton' (Spufford, 7). In this format Johnson's romance provided the basis for still further popularization of St George, for it has been convincingly argued that chapbooks were the principal source of the later mummers' plays. 
Despite such varied support, St George's standing remained precarious. Among puritans and intellectuals his allegorical treatment by Spenser may well have helped to undermine respect for him as a historical figure, and his identification with crown and court was potentially equally damaging as the Stuart monarchy faced increasing hostility, in both England and Scotland. An engraving of Queen Elizabeth from the 1620s or 1630s, representing her with the accoutrements of St George against the background of the Spanish Armada, shows how the images of the queen and saint together could be manipulated to attack the Stuarts for their unwillingness to assist the protestant cause in Europe. But while the memory of Elizabeth was increasingly cherished, St George was more likely to be attacked. In 1609 he appeared side by side with St Andrew in London in the lord mayor's pageant, but around 1634 a tract entitled 'A Comparison between St Andrew and St George' praised the apostolic patron of Scotland at the expense of his mythical English equivalent. Nor were the crown's critics likely to be any more sympathetic towards George as a figure in popular culture. Without a basis in scripture, he was readily associated with popish or heathen superstitions. Thus in his 'Anatomy of Melancholy' Robert Burton placed 'St George for England' in 'a rable of Romish Deities' (Burton, 3.384). Unsurprisingly, such associations led to his cult being attacked, and where possible suppressed, by parliament and its supporters during and after the civil wars. His images were not spared by puritan iconoclasts. William Dowsing destroyed several of them, recording, for instance, how on 26 January 1643 'We pulled down St George and the Dragon' at St Catharine's College, Cambridge ('Journal', ed. Cooper, 166). Then in 1645 the celebration of his feast day was formally prohibited through the 'Directory for the Publique Worship of God' which brought an end to the annual celebrations at places like Norwich: there, and no doubt elsewhere, there was to be 'no standard with the George thereon' (Hutton, 'Merry England', 208). But though the saint was proscribed his flag survived, if without his name -- in 1649 the council of state ordered that 'Ships at Sea in service of the State shall onely beare the red Crosse in a white flag' (Perrin, 62-3). 
The association of St George with the English monarchy survived the civil wars, and to outward appearances was strengthened by the return of the Stuarts. General George Monck was likened to the saint at the time of the Restoration which he did so much to bring about, and Charles II, James II, and Anne all chose to have themselves crowned on 23 April, making it entirely appropriate for Thomas Lowick to dedicate to Charles his 'History of the Life & Martyrdom of St George, the Titular Patron of England' (1664). But the break with the past had arguably been too great for monarchy and saint to continue to buttress one another as in the past. Only a modest number of parishes marked 23 April with bonfires -- an estimated 13 per cent under Charles, rising to 20 per cent under his brother. The saint's day was celebrated at Chester in 1660, but such festivities continued only until 1678. At Norwich the annual civic processions no longer found room for St George, although the dragon, 'a magnificent reptile, all glittering in green and gold', took part every year until 1835 (R. Chambers, 1.541). Samuel Pepys attended Charles's coronation in 1661, but without noting in his diary that it took place on St George's day, and in subsequent years he usually recorded either saint's day or coronation day only if it coincided with a Garter feast. Among churchmen and scholars doubts about the saint's existence persisted. In 1676 Edward Stillingfleet observed of those who reverenced saints like Christopher and George, that 'the wisest among them cannot to this day tell, whether they were 'Saints' or 'Allegories'' (Wilson, 149). Sir Thomas Browne was no more certain: 'That such a person there was, we shall not contend' (Browne, 1.411). John Aubrey shared their doubts, leavened with a characteristically wry humour: 'I will conclude this paragraph with these following verses, that I remember somewhere': '
To save a Mayd, St George the Dragon slew, 

A pretty tale, if all is told be true: 

Most say, there are no Dragons: and `tis sayd, 

There was no George; pray God there was a Mayd. 
(Aubrey, 68-9)' A new element of flippancy was beginning to colour attitudes to St George, perceptible in the facetiously long-winded poem, 'St George for England: the Second Part', which John Grubb, of Christ Church, Oxford, wrote in 1688 as a continuation of an earlier ballad, to gain admission to a university club which met on St George's day and all of whose members were to be named George. 
In the year that Grubb wrote his poem Anthony Wood recorded that bonfires were lit and bells rung all over Oxford on St George's day. Perhaps this was to be expected in a city traditionally loyal to the Stuarts. But the decades immediately after the deposition of James II saw regard for St George at a low ebb. Attacks on his historicity continued. In 1704 the Revd Thomas Salmon, the musicological rector of Meppershall, published 'A New Historical Account of St George for England, and the Original of the Most Noble Order of the Garter', in which he argued, without the least plausibility, that the original patron of the nation was the eighth-century papal legate George of Ostia, later supplanted by the eastern intruder through the machinations of monks. There are hints that St George, whoever he was conceived to be, retained a traditional respect among soldiers and sailors. In 1704 the chaplain of the 'Ranelagh' recorded that on 23 April the ship was 'dress'd very fine with all the colours and penants' (Taylor, 137-8), while on the same day two years later, according to the New England puritan Samuel Sewall, the governor came to Boston with an escort of troops, and conducted obstreperous celebrations -- 'Because to drinking Healths, now the Keeping of a Day to fictitious St. George, is plainly set on foot' (Holford-Strevens and Blackburn, 169). Later in the eighteenth century a number of leading towns on the American coastline established societies of St George to provide assistance to English immigrants. For many of the English who stayed at home, however, the saint seems to have become primarily associated with drinking and sex. About 1700 there were sixty-three inn-signs in London representing the saint, and 'riding St George', or 'the dragon upon St George', had become the name popularly given to the sexual act when the woman took the upper position. 
As far as attitudes to St George were concerned, the establishment of a new dynasty in 1714 was important at first principally for the names borne by its first four monarchs, making it possible for the loyal, the ambitious, and the sycophantic to acclaim the one by celebrating the other, as was particularly apparent in the years immediately after the accession of George I. Thomas Dawson, who had published his erudite 'Memoirs of St George the English Patron' by the end of 1714, with a dedication to the new king, was unusually quick off the mark. A number of church dedications reflect the same development, for instance that of St George's Church built in London's aptly named Hanover Square between 1721 and 1724. The fact that the Society of Antiquaries of London, founded in 1717, was dedicated to St George may likewise have owed something to a wish to cultivate the Hanoverian monarchy, though it may also been due to the fervent admiration felt for the saint by the eccentric but influential Browne Willis, one of the society's founder members. 
For much of the eighteenth century attitudes to St George seem to have varied among the classes of society. Although Sir Joshua Reynolds painted the youthful fifth duke of Bedford and other children enacting St George and the dragon (exhibited 1777, since destroyed), there is little evidence of aristocratic interest in the saint, for whom it seems likely that the nobility felt much the same condescension that they usually extended to the monarchy. The intelligentsia, outside the established church, tended to remain sceptical, and was prepared to make fun of St George, directly or by implication. The principal target of Henry Cary's burlesque opera 'The Dragon of Wantley' (1737) was the conventions of Italian opera, but the fate of the eponymous dragon, dispatched by Moore of Moore Hall by a kick up the backside, was hardly reverential towards the national saint either. In the mid-1750s John Byrom wrote a facetious poem (published in 1779) suggesting that St George had been confused with Pope Gregory the Great, and when the elder Samuel Pegge responded with a defence of George's historicity in the pages of 'Archaeologia' he was ridiculed by Horace Walpole, who described Pegge's article as 'despicable. All his arguments are equally good for proving the existence of the dragon' (Lewis and Wallace, 2.163-4). A far more telling attack on the saint -- deadlier, indeed, for the Olympian disdain with which it was delivered -- was that of Edward Gibbon, who having described the misdeeds and violent death of Archbishop George of Alexandria, concluded: 'The odious stranger, disguising every circumstance of time and place, assumed the mask of a martyr, a saint, and a Christian hero; and the infamous George of Cappadocia has been transformed into the renowned St. George of England, the patron of arms, of chivalry, and of the Garter. (Gibbon, 1.903)' In a footnote Gibbon acknowledged that 'This transformation is not given as absolutely certain, but as extremely probable.' He was being disingenuous. His sole source was an unsupported assertion among a French scholar's posthumous 'pensees', and he certainly knew of Heylyn's riposte to Rainolds, whose arguments for a confusion of Georges had largely anticipated Gibbon's own, for he cited it in the very next footnote, but in such a context mockery was more effective than scholarship. John Milner's rejoinder of 1792, though learned, was laborious by comparison. 
The figure of St George received more respect at humbler levels of society. The story of the dragon fight was savoured. In 1757 Bishop Richard Pococke, travelling in Wiltshire, was told by 'peasants' that 'Dragon's Hill' near Highworth was the site of George's victory, and that grass would not grow where the dragon's blood had been spilt. But among working people George became prominent above all in mummers' plays. The early history of these entertainments is obscure. The fact that George takes a leading part in most of them supports the argument that they derived principally from chapbooks and ballads for which Johnson's 'Seaven Champions' was a major source, and which continued to circulate in large numbers well into the nineteenth century. But evidence for their early development is meagre. A Dublin manuscript of 'c'.1800 contains an account from about 1685 of: 'the drollest piece of mummery I ever saw in or out of Ireland. There was St George and St Dennis and St Patrick in their buffe coats and the Turk likewise and Oliver Cromwell, and a Doctor and an old woman who made rare sport till Beelzebub came in with a frying pan upon his shoulder and a great flail in his hand. (Helm, 7)' It is not said when in the year the Dublin play was staged, but at Exeter by 1737 it was customarily associated with Christmas, as it has usually been ever since: '
With less Decorum Christmas Mummer struts, 

Than on He bears his goodly Grace of Guts, 

Though that same Mummer England's Heroe plays 

And Dragon with his Whineard's Flourish slays. 
(Bede, 464)' A similar play was recorded in Cheshire in 1788, while in 1811 'a kind of short piece about St George and the Dragon and the Holy Land which ended in a sham fight' was reported at Halifax in Nova Scotia (Helm, 8). Direct references to the dragon are in fact rare in mummers' plays outside the challenge with which George usually opens the play, but it is likely that his principal antagonist, commonly named 'Slasher', is in fact a transmogrification of George's monstrous foe, hence his boast: '
My head is made of iron 

My body is made of steel 

My arms and legs of beaten brass; 

No man can make me feel. 
(E. K. Chambers, 'English Folk-Play', 177-8)' The princess very seldom has any part in the plays, although she, too, is mentioned in George's challenge. Her absence was probably due to the mummers' plays having acquired a shadowy but potent undercurrent of symbolism, one to which they owed a good deal of their staying power but from which the feminine element was largely excluded. An essential component of the substructure of the plays upon which the cast of stock characters traditionally improvises its comic business is the theme of death and resurrection, either of the adversary whom George kills or of George himself. In this respect George is a fertility figure, a role once attributed to him, as 'Green George', across much of eastern Europe, where he was 'a spirit of trees or vegetation in general' (Frazer, 2.343). In England he takes on a similar function in a song from the Padstow hobby-horse procession: '
Where is St George, where is he, O, 

He is out in his longboat all on the salt sea, O, 

And in every land, O, the land that ere we go, 

And for to fetch the summer home, 

The summer and the May, O, 

For summer is acome and winter is ago. 
(Hulst, 113)' It is easy to see how George's association with the generation of crops and livestock, arising from his springtime feast day, could be transferred with equal appropriateness to the season of the turning of the year. The figure of St George as he appeared in mummers' plays was also enriched by a patriotic component which may have developed, at least in part, through an association with the monarchy resulting from a coincidence of names. In the plays George very often proclaims himself to be 'King George' or 'Prince George', or more precisely to be George III or even George IV, though in all cases he then goes on to describe how he slew the dragon and won the king of Egypt's daughter. The connection gave added force to an image of the saint as the champion of England, and as such the embodiment of national superiority, as he claims to be in the sword dance from the Shetland Islands, recorded by Sir Walter Scott and dated by him to about 1788: '
In England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Italy, and Spain, 

Have I been tried with that good sword of steel. 

Yet I deny that ever a man did make me yield; 

For in my body there is strength, 

As by my manhood may be seen; 

And I, with that good sword of length, 

Have oftentimes in peril been, 

And over champions was I king. 
(Scott, 'The Pirate', 501-2)' The late 1780s saw attempts at other levels of society to exploit, or develop, an image of St George as a patriotic icon. Probably these should be seen in the context first of attempts to rebuild national self-confidence after the loss of the American colonies in 1783 and then of war with France from 1792. Between 1787 and 1789 Benjamin West's paintings for the king's audience chamber at Windsor Castle included one of St George and the dragon for the overmantel, and paintings by Matthew Wyatt for the royal apartments, executed about 1805, included episodes from the life of the saint. In 1789 a play called 'St George's Day, or, Britons Rejoice' was staged at Covent Garden. Later on, the wellnigh demonic qualities attributed to Napoleon in England made it appropriate for a cartoon of 1805, entitled 'St George and the Dragon', to show George III as the saint, in the act of dealing its death blow to a dragon with the French emperor's head, and for Walter Scott, in 'The Field of Waterloo' (1815), to exclaim: '
Now, Island Empress, wave thy crest on high, 

And bid the banner of thy patron flow, 

Gallant St George, the flower of Chivalry, 

For thou hast faced, like him, a dragon foe, 

And rescued innocence from overthrow, 

And trampled down, like him, tyrannic might. 
(Girouard, 33)' For Scott himself the image would have been given additional force by his fascination with medieval art and culture, which he did much to promote. In his novel 'Ivanhoe' (1820), set in late twelfth-century England, nearly everyone, from Richard I downwards, swears by St George, sometimes with Merry England thrown in; at the novel's climactic moment, when Ivanhoe challenges the villainous Brian de Bois-Guilbert, he invokes the aid 'of God, of Our Lady, and of Monseigneur Saint George, the good knight' (chap. 43). In 1822 'St George and the Dragon, or, The Seven Champions of Christendom', was performed at the Royal Amphitheatre in London. The cult of chivalry had not yet reached its apogee, however, and the influence of the ancient world remained potent in public culture. In 1816 St George appeared on the English currency for the first time since the reign of Henry VIII, in a handsome engraving for the gold sovereign by Benedetto Pistrucci in which the dragon-slaying saint closely resembles Greek carvings of Perseus. But however it was expressed, a connection with St George was clearly becoming one worth cultivating, as George IV showed when he ordered that his own birthday should be celebrated on 23 April instead of 12 August; whether out of respect for the saint or disrespect for the monarch, however, the royal command was ignored. 
At the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837 St George probably enjoyed a wider appeal in England than at any time since the mid-seventeenth century. He had still to recover from the loss of much of his standing as a specifically religious figure at the Reformation, and arguably never fully did so, but during the nineteenth century he gained strength instead from a growing association with the combined forces of English nationalism and imperial expansion. Like the empire itself, this development was slow. In 1853 George was eulogized in an almost impenetrable rhapsody by the eccentric occultist Hargrave Jennings, telling how: 'his goodly cross of red, which shone a very beacon in the conflicts with the Paynim, hath, of itself, passed, and been eagerly transmitted from land to land, and hath served as the rallying light for a hundred, (but for it), to all Christian and humane tendencies, benighted generations. (Jennings, 3-4)' Churches and missions were an essential part of that process of enlightenment, and cathedrals were at various times dedicated to St George at Madras in India (where Fort St George had been the nucleus of the English settlement since the mid-seventeenth century), at Cape Town and Grahamstown in South Africa, at Kingston in the Windward Islands, and at Georgetown in British Guiana. The Anglican cathedral in Jerusalem, too, was dedicated to him, as were the churches of the English chaplaincies in Leghorn, Lisbon, Paris, Berlin, and the Azores, and one of the English churches in Cannes. In 1897 his flag's association with empire, and the latter's perceived benevolence, were acclaimed together in Edward Elgar's 'ballad' 'The Banner of St George', with words by Shapcott Wensley, in which George, having vanquished the dragon, bids farewell to Princess Sabra and tells how: '
Where the strong the weak oppress, 

Where the suffering succour crave, 

Where the tyrant spreads distress, 

There the cross of George must wave! 
(p. iv)' The last verse of the epilogue (marked 'largamente e grandioso' by Elgar) saluted Queen Victoria. She too celebrated St George, if less bombastically. As a girl she recorded enjoying the spectacular show of 'St George and the Dragon' put on at Drury Lane in the 1830s by Andrew Ducrow, while in 1908 it was reported how: 'Until a few years ago an old ballad called 'St George for England' was sung at Windsor on 23 April by the choirboys of St George's Chapel, and from the time of George I until the reign of the late Queen Victoria, a golden rose decorated the royal dining-table on the same day. (Bulley, 30-31)' In 1896 she became the patron of the Society of St George, founded for patriotic purposes two years earlier (the society acquired its royal prefix under Edward VII). The Church of England once more felt able to reverence St George, on the evidence of a 'supplementary collect' published by the bishop of Salisbury in 1899, invoking him, however, as a martyr and soldier rather than as a dragon-killer -- 'O Lord God of hosts, Who didst give grace to Thy servant George to lay aside the fear of man and to confess thee even unto death' (Wordsworth, 323). Six years earlier, when the Roman Catholic church had proposed that the Virgin and St Peter should become the patrons of England, Cardinal Herbert Vaughan wrote reassuringly to 'The Times', upholding George's traditional role of 'military protector' of England, and declaring that 'Catholics, at all events, are not likely to forget the historic and national cry and prayer, 'St George for England'' (Arnold-Foster, 465). 
The towns and villages of England continued to encounter St George principally through chapbooks, ballads, and mummers' plays, all of which proliferated, or at least are recorded as proliferating, during the nineteenth century. References to mummers' plays become suddenly plentiful, and show that they were performed in industrial towns and cities as well as in the countryside, perhaps more often in the midlands and north than in the southern counties. In Northern Ireland, mummers staged a play in Belfast in the 1890s apparently remarkably similar to that put on in late seventeenth-century Dublin -- St George appeared with St Patrick and Oliver Cromwell as well as with such stock characters as the Turky Champion, Beelzebub, Little Devil Doubt, and a Doctor. The words attributed to St George in such productions show that here, too, he often struck a robustly patriotic note, sometimes British, in the company of Sts Patrick, David, and Andrew, and sometimes for England alone. In a play recorded at Lutterworth at Christmas 1863, for instance, he announces himself as the king of England's only son: '
I am Prince George, a worthy knight; 

I'll spend my blood for England's right. 

England's right I will maintain; 

I'll fight for old England once again. 
(E. K. Chambers, 'Medieval Stage', 2.276-9)' The fact that he continued to be often referred to as Prince or King George can only have accentuated his Englishness. 
St George achieved this apotheosis despite opposition. As before, there were those who doubted his existence. The study of comparative religion, which was beginning to have momentous effects for attitudes to the 'Bible', also had corrosive implications for the national saint; thus for Anna Jameson he was no more than a 'mythic allegory by which was figured the conquest achieved by beneficent power over the tyranny of wickedness... this time-consecrated myth transplanted into Christendom' (Jameson, 2.398), while for Sabine Baring-Gould he was 'a Semitic god Christianized' (Baring-Gould, 291). In 1853 George was attacked by Ralph Waldo Emerson in terms borrowed directly from Gibbon. Some twenty years later John Ruskin replied to Emerson in a defence of George's historicity explicitly derived from Heylyn. But in the 1870s Ruskin was interested in George less as a historical figure than as a moral symbol, at a time when he was increasingly concerned with social reform, and it was for that reason that he invited his followers to join him in what at first he called 'my St George's Company', eventually the guild of St George, which met for the first time in 1879. Ruskin was willing to accept the mythico-allegorical derivation of George's combat with the dragon because he saw the mission of his own guild in allegorical terms, a war waged on behalf of traditional Christian values, represented by the saint, against the disruptive forces of industrial capitalism, embodied in 'the Lord of Decomposition, the old Dragon himself' (Ruskin, 1.332). 
As an institution the guild of St George failed. But the ideas behind it proved influential. Among Ruskin's disciples was Edward Carpenter, an early socialist who in 1908 published 'St George and the Dragon: a Play in Three Acts for Children and Young Folk', dedicated to the Independent Labour Party and Socialist Sunday Schools. Its message is all that Ruskin might have wished, for after an opening lament for a time 'when all was gladness in this land and men and women sang at their work, and rejoiced in their strength and in the goodly stores they won by their labour from the soil', St George kills a dragon explicitly identified as Greed, who 'slays the souls Of men, as well as takes their bodies' toll', after which he and the princess he has saved are chosen by the people to be their rulers, in the place of 'such as consult their own ease and safety first and leave their people to perish' (pp. 4, 12-13, 15). Ruskin might have regretted that a play about St George made no mention whatever of Christianity, or any other religion, but he could not have charged Carpenter with lack of seriousness. There must have been many of his contemporaries, however, for whom the saint remained little more than an inn-sign, like the George and the Dragon noticed in London, with the inscription below, 'Entertainment for man and horse' (Brand, 2.357-8), or the cheerful sign painted in 1876 by the artist John Evan Hodgson and a friend for the George and the Dragon at Wargrave, Berkshire, showing the fight on one side, and the victorious saint reviving himself with beer on the other. 
A similarly light-hearted note is struck by Kenneth Grahame's 'The Reluctant Dragon', first published in 'Dream Days' (1899). In this engaging fable a dragon appears on the downs, where he befriends a small boy, shows an unexpected talent for poetry, and settles down to a quiet life -- 'Meanwhile the dragon, a happy Bohemian, lolled on the turf, enjoyed the sunsets, told antediluvian anecdotes to the Boy, and polished his old verses while meditating on fresh ones' (Grahame, 135). His idyllic existence is disturbed by the arrival of St George, whom he is eventually compelled to fight by the machinations of the locals, who are betting on the outcome. By now George is no more eager for the fray than the dragon, but the unenthusiastic combatants finally agree that George shall enjoy a bloodless triumph in the third round. The day concludes with a banquet, at which the dragon, having 'won popularity and a sure footing in society... proved the life and soul of the evening' (ibid., 149). 
Others continued to take St George with the utmost seriousness. One such was Robert Baden-Powell, founder of the Boy Scouts, for whom the saint was the embodiment of chivalry, and as such 'the patron saint of cavalry and scouts all over Europe', on whose day 'all good scouts wear a rose in his honour and fly their flags' (Baden-Powell, 210). He was treated no less reverently in the children's play 'Where the Rainbow Ends' by Mrs Clifford Mills and Reginald Owen (the latter under the pseudonym John Ramsey), first performed on 21 December 1911 and published as a novel by Mrs Mills in the following year. Here two children, Crispin and Rosamund, desperate to be reunited with their absent parents and possessing a magic carpet which can take them to 'the land where all lost loved ones are found', successfully call on St George to accompany and assist them. They are opposed by their Uncle Joseph, a Hampstead liberal before his time who mocks the union jack and is eventually eaten by hyenas, and by his abettor the Dragon King. The latter reflects on the children's ally: 'This saint, the champion of England, who spoke to the hearts not the greed of his countrymen, who demanded from those who fought his country's battle the sacrifice of self purpose and the clean hand to wield the sword, to what heights had he not led Englishmen in the past, to what greater heights would not his lofty spirit lead them in the future? (Mills, 70)' The story culminates in George's last-minute appearance to save the children from death, and his challenge to the Dragon King: 'Once more we meet, arch-enemy', he cried, 'to fight the everlasting fight of good and evil' (ibid., 154). Good prevails in the apocalyptic struggle, and all ends happily. 
The association of St George with the forces of righteousness, and of both with England, is explicit throughout 'Where the Rainbow Ends', but equally apparent is an undertone of menace, even pessimism. In an analogy Ruskin would have appreciated, the saint represents not only England but also the heroic qualities needed to defeat the forces of materialism and greed which threaten the nation's soul, forces symbolized by the dragon. The outcome of their conflict cannot be taken for granted. When he first appears, wrapped in a cloak, the children do not recognize St George, mistaking him for one of the unemployed, to which he responds with the admission that 'I am... one of England's unemployed ideals... I am no longer wanted here, men do not war with the dragon nowadays, and the maidens prefer to fight their own battles'. But when Rosamund calls on him for aid, the saint is utterly transformed, into 'the St George they knew and honoured -- a noble knight in shining armour. Tall, slender and muscular, yellow-haired, English of the English' (Mills, 41-3). The change was doubtless such as was looked for by those concerned for the moral health of England. George's physical appearance, English or otherwise, was in fact seldom illustrated in the high art of the Victorian age, though his legend inspired paintings by Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Edward Burne-Jones, and the image evoked by Mrs Mills probably derived from children's books and from the illustrations of the numerous studies of the saint published in the years on either side of 1900. Those studies in turn reflect the public position George had increasingly come to occupy as a patriotic as well as a moral symbol. In 1899 it was estimated that there were over 190 churches dedicated to him in England, with at least one in every county except Huntingdonshire, Hertfordshire, and Rutland. By this time his feast day was being widely celebrated. In 1902, for instance, children near Dunstable were given a holiday from school, while in 1914 the townspeople of Kidderminster flew flags and held a church service. Ignorance, indifference, and mockery no doubt continued, but to outward appearances St George was not only English himself, he had become part of the English cultural landscape. 
The beginning of the First World War in 1914 quickly led to a revelation of St George's significance as a patriotic icon, albeit in an oblique fashion. Among the literary responses to the outbreak of war was Arthur Machen's story 'The bowmen', published in London's 'Evening News' on 29 September 1914, telling how during the retreat from Mons an English soldier repeats the inscription calling on St George which he remembers having seen on a plate in a vegetarian restaurant. A line of figures promptly materializes, the pursuing Germans fall under a hail of arrows, and although the saint himself does not appear, 'the man who knew what nuts tasted like when they called themselves steak knew also that St George had brought his Agincourt Bowmen to help the English' (Machen, 66). Machen's patriotic fantasy made a startling impact, and within months the overwrought public imagination had transformed his dimly perceived archers, originally 'a long line of shapes, with a shining about them', so that 'the Bowmen of my story have become 'the Angels of Mons'. In this shape they have been received with respect and credence everywhere, or almost everywhere' (ibid., 18-19). St George is similarly but more explicitly represented in John Hassall's painting of 1915, 'Vision of St George over the Battlefield' (IWM), where his appearance over the trenches, mounted and armed as a medieval crusader, brings terror to the Germans. At Thaxted in Essex, the vicar, Conrad Noel, turned an aisle of the parish church into a wartime shrine, with a picture of St George defeating the dragon surrounded by the flags of Britain's allies, while Jessie Pope explicitly equated the soldiers in the trenches with the English national saint: '
Of gallant St Georges to-day we've a legion, 

As sturdy and game as the knights of Romance; 

They are fighting their fight in that shell-battered region 

That bears the vague pseudonym -- 'Somewhere in France'... 
(Parker, 226)' Whether the troops themselves valued the association is open to question, although it was with the signal 'St George for England' that Admiral Roger Keyes led a daring raid against Zeebrugge on 23 April 1918. 
As the war ended G. F. Raggett concluded a short book which he entitled 'An Essay on the Life of St George the Martyr, Patron Saint of England' (1919). Though eventually dedicated to Keyes, it had been begun before the Zeebrugge raid, 'to be a guide, although very imperfect, to the vast number of English people who know nothing whatever about our Saint' (p. 3). By the time Raggett's book appeared his fellow countrymen (whose ignorance he probably exaggerated) were being widely familiarized with the form of St George through the medium of public war memorials. The saint is nearly always represented as a medieval knight victorious over the dragon, most strikingly in Adrian Jones's powerful cavalry memorial, now in London's Hyde Park; Eric Gill's memorial at Trumpington, near Cambridge, is exceptional in showing George as a soldier of the trenches. Sometimes he was set upon memorials in places where he already had a particular local appeal, as at Newcastle upon Tyne, where he had long featured on the regimental cap-badge of the Northumberland Fusiliers, but the wide distribution of such figures seems more often to have stemmed simply from his constituting an appropriately warlike and patriotic image, albeit one capable of conveying more than one message. In some cases the saint appears as a transcendental image of good overcoming evil, as at Lawrence Sheriff School, Rugby, where the memorial represents George killing his traditional adversary above the inscription: 'There are dragons still. 1914-1918'. And he was also envisaged as embodying the values for which the war had been fought and the qualities by which it had been won. The duke of York (later King George VI), when unveiling the memorial at the Leys School, Cambridge, said of its central image of St George: 'It will stand for all time, a pivot of the school's history and tradition and the inspiration of those ideals of chivalry, self-sacrifice, and patriotism which are essential to the highest conduct and character' (Borg, 100-01). There could be no sectarian monopoly of such ideals, and in London memorial chapels commemorating the victims of the 1914-18 war were dedicated to St George in both the Roman Catholic Westminster Cathedral and the Anglican Westminster Abbey, while a stained-glass window served the same purpose in Wesley's Chapel. 
No doubt it was at least partly due to his commemorative association with the war dead that between 1918 and 1939 St George's day continued to be fairly widely observed. He was promoted by the Royal Society of St George, which had 20,000 members by 1920, and by the Boy Scouts, and 23 April was often marked by church services and the flying of flags, and sometimes by a show or fete, which might include a pageant of the saint and the dragon. It was on St George's day that George V opened the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1924. Although in this context George remained an essentially backward-looking patriotic symbol, he was also capable of being used for progressive purposes. In 'Vision of England, '38', the young radical poet George Barker tells of encountering the saint in a vision set at Brighton, where he emerges from the sea to denounce capitalism in terms Ruskin would have approved -- 'I killed an enormous monster, but the brute Still rules England with its scales of gold' -- and then imagines him rising in the north to free 'The national man and woman, who groan!' (Barker, 68, 75). But when war with Germany broke out again in 1939, George once more became an emblem of valour and resistance, though not always to the same end. Soldiers fighting in the western desert constructed a chapel dedicated to him, making bells from shell cases and altar furnishings from gun parts. And acts of civilian bravery on the home front were marked by the award of the George Medal, under a royal warrant of 24 September 1940 which stipulated that the reverse should show 'St George slaying the dragon on the coast of England' (Henderson, 106). But shortly afterwards the saint's name and military role were invoked for very different purposes by the traitor John Amery, a fanatical anti-communist who defected to the Nazis and tried to persuade British prisoners of war to enlist in what he called the Legion of St George, to fight alongside the Germans against the Russians. The name of the English national saint had no appeal, for only about thirty men enlisted, and when Amery left Berlin at the end of 1943 the tiny force was handed over to the SS, who renamed it the British Free Corps. 
Although Amery's venture can hardly be held responsible, there are signs that even before war ended the appeal of St George as a heroic warrior-saint was beginning to wane in England. The chivalric qualities he could still be seen as embodying in the early decades of the twentieth century had little meaning to people enduring rationing and the blitz, and he was easily identified with retrograde inter-war social attitudes by those who now looked forward to the welfare state, and for whom empire and military glory had lost their appeal. In 1943 23 April fell on Good Friday, and St George's day was therefore celebrated on 3 May instead. The move had the support of the archbishop of Canterbury but was not a success. A year later a BBC producer declared that 'nine out of ten people haven't the least idea who St George was and don't care anyway' (Weight, 56). He may have been over-freely attributing his own views to the nation at large, but there is no doubt that the years following 1945 saw a steady decline in interest in the saint. He again featured in a number of war memorials -- the chapel of remembrance at RAF Biggin Hill was dedicated to St George -- but less often in new statuary (the names of the dead of 1939-45 were usually added to existing memorials) than in stained-glass windows in churches, where they inevitably made less impression on the public at large. The general decline in churchgoing, too, contributed to the growing indifference, as did the coincidence of St George's day with the day of William Shakespeare's death (and possible birth). The national saint lost ground to the national poet, and by 1947 the author and artist Laurence Whistler could comment that 'The celebration of 'the Birthday' is now the main feature of St George's Day' (Whistler, 133). In John Masefield's verse drama 'A Play of St George' (1948), set in the reign of Diocletian, George's links to the land of his future tutelary role are confined to a passing reference to 'A place called Londinium in South Britain' (p. 48). 
During the 1950s and 1960s the Royal Society of St George (which received a royal charter of incorporation in 1963) worked to maintain interest in and knowledge of the English national saint, against a background of widespread apathy which the Roman Catholic church's demotion of George's cult to one of purely local observance in 1969 can have done nothing to dispel. He retained his traditional place in mummers' plays, but also his equally traditional confusion with King George, which can only have obscured his status. Thus in a performance recorded at Antrobus, Cheshire, on 12 November 1974, he announced himself at the outset: '
In come I, King George, the champion bold, 

I won ten thousand pound in gold. 

'Twas I that fought the fiery dragon and brought it to a slaughter, 

And by these deeds won the King of Egypt's daughter. 
(Green, 144-5)' Two years earlier, however, the United Kingdom's entry into the European Economic Community (31 December 1972) had helped to fuel emotions which did much to recast the image of St George, albeit in an overtly militaristic and xenophobic mould which found little space for traditional associations with chivalric gallantry. Here a leading role was taken by the League of St George, founded in 1975, which was overtly hostile to outsiders and foreigners of all kinds, and made much of the threat allegedly posed to Britain's (as much as England's) national identity by immigration. The incongruity of the choice of name, given that George is also widely honoured on the continent (for instance as the patron of Catalonia and of the Greek army) and in the Middle East, by both Eastern Orthodox and Coptic Christians and by Muslims, was overlooked. 
The impact of the League of St George was never more than local and ephemeral, but in the 1990s the saint's cause was taken up again, now with the support of sections of the media -- in 1998 'The Sun' launched a campaign to revive the observance of St George's day. The decade 1984-94 saw a substantial increase in the number of boys given the first name George (from 804 to 3907), and in 1995 it became possible to buy cards marking 23 April -- 50,000 were being sold each year by the end of the century. The principal force behind these developments was less religion, however, than continued anxiety over national identity, now fuelled not only by racism but also by hostility towards the European Union (as the European Economic Community became in 1992) and fears that it aimed to create a European 'superstate', and perhaps, too, by concerns for England's place in the United Kingdom at a time when its long-established primacy seemed to be threatened first by demands for, and then by the enactment of, Welsh and Scottish devolution. Indeed, despite the decision of its general synod in 1996 that St George's day should be one of the Church of England's twenty-eight major festivals, in the 1980s and 1990s the saint himself was less in evidence as a patriotic symbol than his banner, which became all too often associated with the violence of football hooligans and extreme nationalists. To some extent this was in keeping with popular perceptions of St George as above all a soldier and dragon-killer, his initial status as a martyr having been almost entirely forgotten. Yet despite this warlike image, he has also continued to be linked by name to beneficent institutions of all kinds, to hospitals and charities as well as churches, and thus to functions in keeping with those gentler aspects of his legend which tell of his rescuing an imperilled princess and saving heathen souls. That this should be so illustrates the extent to which that legend has over the centuries gathered a rich variety of elements, which in their turn have enabled St George to show himself a protean figure, capable of continuous adaptation. At the beginning of the twenty-first century there is every reason to suppose that this process will continue. 


@@@@@


doc= 60305


Andrew (fl. 1st cent.), apostle and patron saint of Scotland, was a fisherman from Capernaum in Galilee. 
In the synoptic gospels Andrew is merely mentioned as one of the twelve disciples of Jesus, but in the gospel of 'St John' he appears as a follower of John the Baptist, who introduced him to Jesus. Andrew then went to his brother Simon and said, 'We have found the Messiah' ('St John' 1: 35-44). For this reason Andrew acquired the epithet the First-called, which came to be much used, in the East and in Orthodox tradition, to give parity or priority compared with Peter and Rome, and also in Scotland, in the struggle for independence for state and church from England, and from York, the see of Peter. 
A few references in early Christian sources (especially Eusebius, 'Historia ecclesiastica', derived from Origen) give as Andrew's missionary field northern Turkey and 'Scythia' (probably modern Crimea or southern Russia). This tradition led to stories of his personal conversion of Georgia and Ukraine, and of travels even as far as Novgorod, and so to the particular honour in which St Andrew has been held in Russia. 'Scythia' is also the usual imagined setting for adventures in some early 'acta' ('deeds') of the saint, which take him on a mission to rescue a fellow apostle from cannibals. Versions of this story, full of excitement and wonders, are known from many sources in various languages, and that it was known in England is demonstrated by the remarkable Anglo-Saxon poem 'Andreas', written before 950. 
In religious and secular tradition in the West, however, this miraculous story came to be played down, understandably, and the 'acta' as appearing in the apocryphal 'New Testament' are largely devoted to missionary work in Asia Minor and then in Greece, and to martyrdom there, at Patras. In this story the saint's death is preceded by a lengthy debate with the Roman governor Aegeas on the mystery of Christ's sacrificial death, and an impassioned speech addressed to the cross as the instrument of Andrew's welcomed martyrdom. 
This is the uplifting account as it appears in the Catholic liturgy, in the sixth-century work of Gregory of Tours, 'Liber de miraculis beati Andreae apostoli', and in the 'Golden Legend' of about 1293. It forms the substance too of the account of St Andrew in the 'Scottish Legends of the Saints' (this compilation is dated to about 1400, but nothing is said in it of St Andrew's importance to Scotland, or of relics of the saint being there). 
The whole Patras story is very unlikely to have any basis in historical fact, but to have been developed after some martyr's tomb there was mistakenly identified or claimed as that of St Andrew the apostle. It should be noted that in no early or medieval text is there any reference to Andrew's being put to death on a special X-shaped cross. 
The cult of the saint began on a major scale in 357 or thereabouts with the transfer to Constantinople from Patras of bones then believed to be those of Andrew the apostle. Thus the emperor Constantius II ('r'. 337-61) acquired relics for the 'new Rome' to match those of Peter and Paul in 'old Rome'. In the next generation Bishop Ambrose followed by funding his own church of the Holy Apostles in Milan, with relics of St Andrew (among other saints); these he presumably acquired from Constantinople. The cult of St Andrew spread over Italy, being especially strong at Ravenna and Rome, and his festal day was fixed as 30 November by the mid-fifth century, to judge from a calendar of the church at Carthage. It so appears also in the early Roman sacramentaries. 
The cult only developed in Gaul in the sixth century, but then rapidly became popular, there and generally in the West. Pope Gregory the Great ('r'. 590-604) had dedicated the monastery he had founded in Rome to St Andrew, and it was from this house that he sent Augustine in 597 to promote Christianity in England. This probably accounts for the fact that Augustine's church at Rochester, the second episcopal foundation after Canterbury, was dedicated in St Andrew's name. 
Andrew was a favoured saint for Anglo-Saxon church dedications (next to Peter). Another important early devotee was Bishop Wilfrid (died 709/10), among whose religious foundations was the church dedicated to St Andrew at Hexham in Northumbria. It is probable that it was from there that the cult was taken to Scotland, and first to Kinrymont in Fife. 
St Andrew has remained a popular saint in England over the centuries, and there are some 570 pre-Reformation churches to his name. They are particularly numerous in East Anglia and the east midlands, and up to Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, and in the south-west (except in Cornwall); less frequent in the London area, the west midlands, and the north-west. The cathedral at Wells is a St Andrew dedication. 
The saint figures in sculptures in English churches (there are three examples, from different periods, in Worcester Cathedral, for instance). There is a fine modern chapel to him 'and the Scottish saints' in Westminster Cathedral, London. In stained glass and wall painting he mainly appears with other apostles. The one window that gives scenes from his legend is in Greystoke church, near Penrith, Cumbria. 
The earliest religious settlement at Kinrymont (St Andrews) may have been of an Irish monastic type. However, about 710, as Bede relates (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 5.21), the Pictish king Nechtan (died 732) made contact with the 'Roman church' in Northumbria, adopted their doctrinal rules, and also had a stone church built in the name of St Peter (possibly at Restenneth in Angus). It is historically plausible to suppose that this could have been followed by the dedication of a church to St Andrew in Pictland. Nechtan's successor was a King Oengus, and in the St Andrews foundation legend it is a King Oengus who sets up St Andrew's cult at Kinrymont. 
Versions of the legend differ in important details, but in all of them the king is motivated by a promise of help against his enemies given to him by St Andrew in a dream or vision. In one version there is a reference to an appearance in the sky of the sign of the cross of Christ, a detail which perhaps derives from the story of the emperor Constantine's vision in 312. It is important to note that the vision is not described as of a 'cross of St Andrew' in the manuscript sources or in the work of the chroniclers Fordun (died 1363) and Bower (died 1449); however, it is so described by Boece, writing (1527) when the association of the saint with the particular X-shaped cross had become well established. 
Another element in the foundation legend (which raises insurmountable chronological difficulties) is the story of a monk Regulus bringing some bones of St Andrew from the East in the fourth or fifth century, for housing in the new church of the saint established by Oengus. There certainly were relics of some kind later at St Andrews, and this story was presumably developed to account for their presence, and in a way possibly designed to cover up an 'English' provenance. By 900 the bishop at St Andrews seems to have come to be recognized as the chief bishop of Scotland, and the shrine of the saint was a place of pilgrimage, but its real importance dates from the establishment of the Augustinian priory under David I, with great new ecclesiastical buildings, and the planned development of the burgh under the bishops' patronage. In the following centuries church and town flourished, and the huge cathedral was finally completed and dedicated in 1318. Pilgrims visited in numbers, of their own volition or as part of a penance, though unfortunately there are few personal notices, and no collection of miracle stories survives. St Andrews' status was marked by the establishment of the first Scottish university there in 1412. 
St Andrew was not the overwhelmingly favoured dedicatee for pre-Reformation churches in Scotland (twenty-four, compared with at least twenty for St John the Evangelist and nearly forty for St Peter). Nevertheless, under the Malcolm dynasty of kings St Andrews Cathedral was the seat of Scotland's chief bishop, and his shrine probably the main goal of pilgrimage in the country. It is appropriate to recognize him as pre-eminent patron in a religious sense, and the St Andrews foundation legend makes him such. It is probably anachronistic, however, to give this political significance and to call him patron saint of the Scottish nation before the end of the thirteenth century. 
The decisive moment came in 1286 when, on the death of Alexander III, guardians were appointed to rule the kingdom, and they authorized production of a great seal, with, in place of the king, the figure of St Andrew (on his X cross). The legend 'Andreas dux esto Scotis compatriotis' ('Andrew be leader of your Scottish compatriots'), shows how the saint was to be the unifying symbol and champion, not just of the church, or of a royal house, but of the whole people. Even so, this was probably an establishment rather than a popular choice. Chroniclers of early wars had made St Columba Scotland's champion in battle, and Robert I before Bannockburn (1314) is said to have prayed to the 'Scottish saints' as well as to St Andrew (and to St Thomas of Canterbury). It was relics of St Columba, not bones of St Andrew, that were taken to that battlefield, though the dedication of St Andrews Cathedral in 1318 was made into a thank-offering for the victory, which, in this context, was ascribed to St Andrew. 
The wars of independence with England certainly consolidated St Andrew's 'official' position. During the struggle use was made in propaganda of the saint, particularly in correspondence involving the popes, when the Scots wished them to back their claims for independence against the English kings. This is particularly evident in a bull of Boniface VIII (Stones, 81-7). Such propaganda sometimes went so far as to say that God had especially favoured the Scots by procuring their conversion through the bones of St Andrew, and at a date, allegedly, long before the conversion of the English. The declaration of Arbroath (1320) makes a similar point about divine favour, implying in fact that Andrew had converted the Scots in person. 
St Andrew was thus firmly established as patron saint of the Scottish people. In the fourteenth century his cross came to be used as a convenient national symbol, especially in opposition to the cross of St George. It is so prescribed in an act of the Scottish parliament of 1385. St Andrew also figures on Scottish coins from this period. He is portrayed on the mace of the faculty of arts of St Andrews University, which dates from 1418, and on the sceptre of 1494 that forms part of the Scottish regalia. 
St Andrew's position over all 'Scottish' saints is marked in the Aberdeen breviary of Bishop Elphinstone, which appeared in 1510. Andrew is indisputably and explicitly the patron of church and state, referred to as 'Scotorum sanctissimus patronus', and, like the Virgin Mary, he is to be honoured in all churches in Scotland with a regular weekly 'commemoratio'. In this he is addressed as 'pie, sanctorum mitissime' ('most gentle of the saints'), an epithet often used for him. 
The triumph of Presbyterianism brought an end to the open cult of saints and to pilgrimage. However, St Andrew and his cross remained plainly significant in the secular world. He appears on coinage of the Stewarts, and was made patron of the Order of the Thistle when this was established in 1687. In following centuries St Andrew's day (30 November) and his flag have played an important role in marking and celebrating Scottishness, both overseas and at home; expatriate Scots often found a St Andrew's Society. Nevertheless there is little evidence for St Andrew himself as a popular saint with real personality for Scottish people, either before or since the Reformation. He was not a figure in story, or in mystery or folk plays, as St George was in England, and his historical and legendary background has not been much exploited in literature or art. He is not mentioned once, for example, by the poets Barbour (died 1395), Henryson (died 1490), or Dunbar (died 1530). Representations in sculpture and painting are mostly recent, and not worthy of particular comment. 
Andrew as a personal name is attested in Scotland from the twelfth century, but to judge from evidence such as charters it was not especially favoured in the middle ages. However, surnames such as Andrewes, Anderson, MacAndrew, as well as Gillanders ('servant of Andrew'), are widely found in Scotland, appearing from the thirteenth century. 
There are very few place names in Scotland that explicitly recall the saint (St Andrews in Fife and Kirkanders in Kirkcudbright are the only notable ones), though in most urban developments there will be a St Andrew's Street or St Andrew's Square, and the centre of Scottish administration in Edinburgh is St Andrew's House. 
The main shrine of St Andrew is at Amalfi in Italy; supposed bones of the saint were taken there from Constantinople after its capture by crusaders in 1204. A head bone was held from the fifteenth century in Rome, but has now been given to the cathedral in Patras. Any relics of the saint in the cathedral in St Andrews were lost in the Reformation. Small fragments from Amalfi have been donated by recent popes to St Mary's Cathedral in Edinburgh and to the Catholic church of St James in St Andrews. 
In iconography St Andrew is portrayed as a fisherman, or shown on, or with, his cross of martyrdom. This has come to be represented as an X-shaped, or decussate, cross; it often appears in a flimsy, squashed, or scaled-down, that is, in a symbolic, form. In early representations of the saint, however, in manuscripts, sculpture, painting, and stained glass, Andrew is shown as dying on a tree, on a cross planted horizontally, or, most commonly, on an upright, Latin, cross. Such portrayal, on the continent, continued even after the appearance, about 1300, of the decussate cross. This latter form did come to prevail, aided, no doubt, by the adoption by the Burgundian ducal house of St Andrew as their patron saint, and as patron of their order of the Golden Fleece (created in 1429), with the X cross as his emblem. 
A depiction in the Autun troper (Paris, Bibliotheque de l'Arsenal, MS 1169) of 'c'.1000 has been wrongly taken by iconographers to represent St Andrew, exceptionally early, on a decussate cross. In fact it shows St Vincent on the Roman instrument of torture, the 'eculeus'. Rather, the decussate cross seems to be found first in British, not continental, portrayals. A font at Langtoft in Yorkshire shows Andrew on such a cross, and has been given an eleventh-century date. Otherwise the earliest examples seem to be seals of St Andrews Priory, from before 1200. There are representations on other seals (Rochester, Ouston) and in a wall-painting (Winchester) by 1250, and the decussate cross becomes standard in church embroidery, sculpture, painting, and window glass in England and Scotland. 
The reason for the emergence of this tradition (and apparently in Britain) is to be sought. It may derive from a mistaken interpretation of a portrayal of St Andrew, holding or with an equal-armed cross of Christ, shown in X rather than upright form, or perhaps even a misunderstanding of a chi-rho figure. This might have led to the belief that it was on a cross of special shape that Andrew died. It is noteworthy that in 1593 the scholar Justus Lipsius, in his 'De cruce', refers to the 'crux decussata' as the one 'on which a sufficiently old tradition tells us St Andrew died' (Lipsius, 1.7). He plainly had no text to quote, and nor do modern scholars. 
By the fourteenth century the decussate cross was accepted as a symbol of St Andrew, and, because he was patron saint, as a symbol of Scotland, but its background colour did not settle down as blue until the sixteenth century. The blue and white saltire does appear in Lindsay's armorial of 1541, and it was in this guise that it was incorporated in early designs for the flag of the Union from 1606, and in its final form of 1801. 
The saltire may thus be seen as the chief legacy of St Andrew to the Scottish people. 


@@@@@


doc= 60306


Constantine, earl of Fife (d. in or after 1128), who is more usually considered to have been the first earl. The date of Constantine's promotion is uncertain. He witnessed a charter of Edgar in 1095, but only by means of the attestation 'Signum filii Magdufe Constantini' (Lawrie, no. 15) -- he is not styled earl; but he is earl in the confirmation of AEthelred's gift by Alexander and David, datable to before 1107. He last appears as a witness in a charter of 'c'.1128, along with his successor Gille Micheil Macduff, who can plausibly be described as earl-in-waiting. 
Even if AEthelred is excluded from their number, it nevertheless remains likely that the first earls were closely connected to the royal house. This is suggested by the fact that two of the first earls, Constantine and Gille Micheil, are called 'Macduff' -- a Scoticized form of two Gaelic words, 'mac' and 'Dubh', meaning 'son of Dubh'. In Scotland the only person of note to bear the name Dubh was Dubh, king of Scots from 962 to 966, making it virtually certain that the Macduffs were descended from him. The surname Macduff for his descendants may have come into use as early as 1128. According to the later chroniclers John Fordun (died 1384) and Andrew Wyntoun (died 'c'.1422) the prominence of the Macduffs stemmed from their support for Malcolm III against Macbeth. Wyntoun records Macduff of Fife ['see under 'Dubh] as requesting from Malcolm the privilege for himself and his successors of enthroning the kings of Scots, while Fordun makes Malcolm promise that Macduff will be the first in the kingdom. However, the historicity of these accounts remains highly contentious, and it seems more likely that the Macduffs represent a dynastic segment descended from King Dubh, who abandoned their claims to the kingship within the old kin-based system of succession in return for a privileged position which made them foremost among the Scottish nobles. The hypothesis that the earls of Fife were related to the ruling house is strengthened by the use of shared names such as Duncan, Malcolm, and especially the rare Constantine. 
Constantine, called 'filii Magdufe' in King Edgar's charter of 1095, is the first earl to be firmly recorded as such and also the first to bear what became the established name of the lineage. Most of what is known of him derives from the record of a complaint made by the Culdees of Loch Leven against Robert the Burgundian in 1128. Constantine appears in the document as 'earl of Fife, great 'judex' in Scotia' ('comes de Fyf, magnus judex in Scotia') and is also referred to as 'a man of the greatest discretion' (''viri discretissimi''; Lawrie, no. 80). Constantine and two other 'judices', Mael-Domhnaich, son of Macbethad, and Dubgall, son of Mocche, acted as judges, and judgment was pronounced in favour of the Culdees. It is possible that 'justitia', justice, may have been confused with 'judex' in this account, and that Dubgall was 'judex' of Fife while Constantine held the new office of justice in Scotia. It has also been suggested that Constantine must have attended a native law school to allow him to participate in the proceedings, and it is possible that he presided over the court of the 'judex' in his capacity as justice. Whatever the case may have been, Constantine certainly presents an early example of the transition between old and new in Scottish society. Moreover, the reference in this document to the multitude of men, mostly from Fife, and the provincial army or armies, is a reminder of the ancient responsibility of the mormaer for leading the common host of his province. 
Constantine's successor was Gille Micheil, who appears to have held the earldom only from about 1128 to about 1136. His identity remains something of a mystery, as does his relationship to his predecessor, but in a confirmation of King David to Dunfermline Priory of 'c'.1128 he appears as 'Gillemichel mac duf'. Gille Micheil was clearly one of the most important men in the kingdom. In the 1128 charter to Dunfermline he was the first of the non-comital witnesses, and in another charter of David I to Dunfermline, 'c'.1130, he was the first comital witness, appearing before even the important newcomer, Hugh de Morville (died 1162). He was dead by 1136, when his successor appears on the record. 



@@@@@


doc= 60308


Forster, (Johann) Georg Adam (1754-1794), traveller and naturalist, was born on 27 November 1754 in Nassenhuben near Danzig in Polish Prussia, the eldest of the six children of Justina Elisabeth, 'nee' Nicolai, and (Johann) Reinhold Forster (1729-1798), the local Lutheran pastor. Forster's family appears to have been of British origin, though long settled on the Baltic coast. Forster's father, a somewhat reluctant cleric, sought opportunities to prove his abilities as a man of science to a wider world. In 1765 he travelled to St Petersburg in search of suitable employment, accompanied by Georg, then aged only eleven, who learned Russian and later attended school there. Reinhold Forster was commissioned to undertake an extensive tour of southern Russia during which his son assisted him in scientific observations for the Imperial Academy of Sciences and in the preparation of maps. In the following year the pair travelled to London in a further search for an appropriate position. On their arrival, the elder Forster established contact with other German-speaking clergy and intellectuals in London, and especially with Carl Gottfried Woide, the Lutheran preacher and man of letters, who helped them find lodgings in Denmark Street. (The rest of the family rejoined them only later.) Georg quickly mastered English to add to his knowledge of Russian; his translation work, though mostly attributed to his father alone, was probably the family's principal source of income while Reinhold Forster sought regular employment, built his reputation, and established contacts within the British scientific and scholarly communities. The latter was engaged from 1768 as a tutor at the nonconformist Warrington Academy, which Georg also attended briefly as a student, but returned to London in 1770 in pursuit of a more challenging post. In 1772 he was engaged as naturalist on James Cook's second circumnavigation of the globe in the 'Resolution', again taking his son along as his assistant. 
The voyage took the Forsters round the Cape of Good Hope to New Zealand, Tahiti, Tonga, and south beyond the Antarctic circle. Georg Forster's later reputation was based largely on the descriptions of the voyage he published after their return in 1775. The first of these was a botanical work, 'Characteres generum plantarum, quas in itinere ad insulas maris Australis, collegerunt, descripserunt, delinearunt, annis MDCCLXXII-MDCCLXXV', published together with his father, which earned him election to the fellowship of the Royal Society. 'A Voyage Round the World, in His Britannic Majesty's Sloop, Resolution' (1777), which Forster published after his father had been denied the opportunity to write the official account of the voyage, had much greater impact. In particular Forster's German translation ('Reise um die Welt', Berlin, 1778) not only introduced the newly discovered, almost utopian cultures of the south Pacific to the German reading public but was acclaimed for a prose style of great freshness and clarity. In his preface to the German edition, Forster emphasized the subjective nature of description and evaluation in travel writing. The work was praised by many of the leading German literary figures of the day and was held by Alexander von Humboldt, for example, to be the first truly modern account of scientific exploration. Following the publication of the London edition, the Forsters were embroiled in much controversy about the expedition and the role of its members, which gave rise to a minor pamphlet war. Georg's 'Reply to Mr. Wales's Remarks' is an elegant riposte to a pamphlet attack by William Wales, the astronomer to Cook's expedition. 'A letter to the right honourable the earl of Sandwich, first commissioner of the Board of Admiralty' (1778) sets out his father's case. From 1775 to 1778 the family lived in Percy Street near Tottenham Court Road. In 1780 Reinhold was invited to Halle as professor of natural history and inspector of the botanic garden, and as this post was connected with the faculty of medicine he was made MD. The early death of his son Georg affected him deeply and early in 1798 he described himself as a dying man. He died at Halle on 9 December 1798. 
In October 1778 Georg Forster moved to Germany, presumably seeking advantage from his literary celebrity there. In the following year he was appointed professor of natural science at the Collegium Carolinum in Kassel. He married Therese (1764-1804), the daughter of Christian Gottlob Heyne, professor of rhetoric and university librarian at Gottingen, on 3 September 1785. Forster took up a post at the University of Vilna, then in Poland, in 1784, but after several unhappy years accepted an appointment by the elector of Mainz as university librarian in 1788. From April to June 1790 he undertook a further journey, accompanied by Alexander von Humboldt, this time along the Rhine, through the Low Countries, and on to London, returning through revolutionary France. Forster's account of the journey ('Ansichten vom Niederrhein, von Brabant, Flandern, Holland, England und Frankreich', Berlin, 1791) was held in almost as much esteem by contemporaries as 'Reise um die Welt' itself. 
Forster remained in Mainz after the occupation of the city by French revolutionary forces in 1792, becoming active in Jacobin circles. A supporter of the incorporation of the west bank of the Rhine into the French republic, in early 1793 Forster was elected deputy for Mainz to the national convention in Paris. His writings about the revolution were significant, if highly contentious, contributions to its reception in the German-speaking world. He died suddenly in Paris on 10 January 1794; the failure of his marriage had caused him much personal unhappiness towards the end of his life, adding to the strain of continual financial difficulties. 
Although he was of somewhat unpersonable appearance, contemporaries nevertheless testified to Forster's attractive and open personality and considerable moral courage. Despite his birth in Polish Prussia and upbringing in Russia and England, he clearly felt a close affinity with the German language and culture. Nevertheless he maintained quite close ties with England after his move to Germany in 1778. He was invariably referred to in contemporary English sources as George Forster, a style which has occasionally led to his being confused with the contemporary traveller-writer of the same name, an East India Company servant. His regular correspondents included Sir Joseph Banks and, in the 1790s, Charles Heydinger (presumably Charles William Heydinger ('b'. 1769), the son of the London-based German bookseller Carl Heydinger). Heydinger supplied Forster with English books and maps, apparently sent via Heyne, his father-in-law at Gottingen, with the diplomatic mails of the Hanoverian legation in London. Neither his familiarity with the country nor mastery of the language appear to have made Forster particularly well disposed towards the English themselves. In a letter to Heyne written during his last visit to London and dated 24 May 1790, he wrote: 'The English are, however, too guarded, too mistrustful, too indifferent towards anything from abroad, or indeed any foreign undertaking, for me to have achieved anything during my short sojourn that might further my literary undertakings'. Despite these reservations, Forster should be regarded as a key figure in the reception of English culture and sensibility in eighteenth-century Germany, especially through the English influence on his prose style and approach to scientific writing. The lack of a significant modern biography of Forster in English is unaccountable. 


@@@@@


doc= 60309


Taylor, John (1805-1842), surgeon and Chartist, was born on 16 September 1805 at Newark Castle, Ayrshire, the eldest son of Captain John Taylor of Blackhouse, Ayrshire, who had served in India and married an Indian lady. His family was connected with the Ayr Coal Company and owned considerable property in Ayrshire. Taylor was, in his own words, 'born to immense affluence' and 'educated in the most splendid fashion' ('True Scotsman', 27 April 1839), with poetry, Byron, and political reform as his chief interests from youth. He was trained in medicine, probably at Edinburgh University, and was for a time a naval surgeon. 
Taylor spent a substantial part of a $30,000 legacy fitting out a ship which he took to the aid of the Greeks in their war of independence. Much of the remainder disappeared in legal costs defending his libel of Thomas Kennedy, who had defeated him in the 1832 parliamentary election for Ayr burghs. That cost him control of the 'Ayrshire and Kilmarnock Gazette'. His next two years were spent trying to make a commercial success of the Ayr Chemical Company. Then he used the remaining funds to purchase the Glasgow trade-union-supported newspaper 'The Liberator', which survived until May 1838. His obsession with Byronic heroics led him into several jousts with the law, especially in the first year of the Chartist movement, but initially in France in 1826 for plotting sedition with French republicans, and again in September 1833 for challenging Kennedy -- now a lord of the Treasury -- to a duel ('Case of Duel and Statement of Conduct of T. F. Kennedy M.P., 1833'). 
By the end of 1836 Taylor had contested two parliamentary elections, become a leader of the Anti-Corn Law Association and chairman of the West of Scotland Radical Association. His handsome appearance, with dark flashing eyes and flowing locks of curled hair -- 'he carried ladies' hearts by storm', Harney later commented ('Newcastle Weekly Chronicle', 5 Jan 1889) -- together with his impassioned eloquence helped to establish his widening reputation as a radical reformer. He became popular in the north of England in the winter of 1837-8 with his campaign to support the Glasgow cotton spinners against their sentence of transportation. His main claim to fame and notoriety came with the blossoming of the Chartist movement, in which Taylor quickly became identified as one of the 'physical force' wing, tempted to move beyond the mere threat and demonstration of popular strength. 
Taylor's initially moderate behaviour in the general convention earned him the sobriquet of Mirabeau of the Chartists, but this was displaced after May 1839 by periodic declarations promising liberty or death. After his arrest and brief imprisonment, following the Bull Ring riots, he denounced most of the convention as spies, cowards, and traitors, and engaged himself in plotting insurrection in Cumberland and Northumberland. This was intended to be part of what proved to be a badly co-ordinated plot for synchronized uprisings in Yorkshire and south Wales, along with Taylor's 'men of the north', which resulted in partial outbreaks at Newport in November, and later at Sheffield, Dewsbury, and Bradford. By that time Taylor had been arrested in Newcastle, bailed for $400 sureties in Carlisle, and plagued by chronic illness, lack of money, and shattered dreams of heroic rescues. By February 1840 even the authorities decided they need no longer take him seriously and the charges of sedition were dropped. In March he left Hull for Germany, before returning to Larne, Northern Ireland, where he spent the rest of his life at the manse of his brother-in-law the rector of Island Magee. There he devoted himself to writing religious verse and to religious study with a view to entering the church. Taylor, who never married, died of consumption at the rectory on Island Magee on 4 December 1842, and was buried two or three days later in Island Magee churchyard, where a statue was erected over his grave. Commemoration dinners were held by the Chartists of Ayr, Prestwick, and Greenock. A statue in 'Taylor's cemetery' at Wallacetown, Ayr, was erected by public subscription in Ayr and Kilmarnock in 1858. Apart from his editorial writings of the 1833-8 period, Taylor's publications include 'Letters on the Ballot' (1838), 'The Coming Revolution' (1840), 'Christian Lyrics' (1851), and other verses in 'Modern Scottish Poets' (vol. 15, 1893). 


@@@@@


doc= 60310


Franchi, Gregorio (1769/70-1828), art collector, was born in Portugal to Loreto Franchi, an Italian singer employed at court. William Beckford met him during his stay in Portugal in 1787, when he was invited to hear the seventeen-year-old play Haydn in the Patriarchal College, and gained his father's consent (as a letter testifies) to take him back to England and to provide for the young man's future well-being. The talented and artistic youth gradually grew to be indispensable within Beckford's entourage at Fonthill, and took a leading part in furnishing the new abbey buildings, the grandest of the eighteenth-century 'Gothic' style mansions, with paintings, tapestries, furniture, silver, and 'objets d'art'. He married in Portugal in 1795, but after the birth of a daughter he left his family in Lisbon and returned to England. 
As Beckford became a leading collector in Europe, Franchi acted as his agent, visiting auctions and salerooms in England and abroad, buying and selling on his behalf, negotiating wartime blockades, commissioning new works; he also became his artistic collaborator, designing new 'objets d'art' to suit the fantasy of the 'Romantic interior'. Franchi and Beckford corresponded daily, even while living in the same house, Beckford writing over a thousand extant letters in Italian in a racy, intimate, at times salacious style, Franchi replying in Portuguese; a selection of the letters, in translation, was published by Boyd Alexander under the title 'Life at Fonthill, 1807-1822'. Recent work by curators of the Victoria and Albert Museum, which bought a number of items belonging to Beckford at the Fonthill and Hamilton Palace sales in the nineteenth century, has identified a number of drawings by Beckford, or by Franchi, initialled by Beckford, that served as patterns for leading silversmiths commissioned to carry them out, as well as supporting documents. A number of examples are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, and still more in Brodick Castle in Scotland, a charming small castle on Arran Island that houses some silver and other items Beckford's daughter Susan brought with her when she married the tenth duke of Hamilton in 1811 or later inherited on Beckford's death in 1844; some other items are in the National Museum of Scotland. Some of the most exquisite are small spoons with 'oriental' or 'Renaissance' motifs. Franchi appears to have been on good terms with Beckford's daughters, not only Susan, but also Maria Margaret, whom Beckford had turned out for making a runaway love match with Major James Orde, and he continued to work for the tenth duke, who built up his own collections. In 1797 Beckford made his last journey to Portugal, where he had arranged for the order of Christ to be bestowed on Franchi, giving him the title of chevalier. Franchi's way of bringing the best out of the craftsmen is illustrated by a comment by William Gibbs Rogers, a woodcarver: 'Mons Franchi, a man of taste. He would come into the carvers workshop with a volume of Holbein or Aldegreve, select a spoon or handle and have them executed in ivory or ebony as high as he could get talent to bring them, would watch the progress of work day by day and the question would often be 'if you spent another day on it could it get finer'.' As Franchi's Portuguese letters relating to the detail of the works in hand have only just been translated, we can expect to know a good deal more about his role in the joint labours of commissioning, designing, procuring, and execution. 
At about the time of the sale of Fonthill in 1822, however, Franchi and Beckford fell out; the exact circumstances are not known, but Beckford was unforgiving. Franchi had built up his own small collection while working for Beckford, and when it was sold at the time of his death the excellent taste of the items was noted. His will, made in Rome in 1825, showed his care in recording 'objects of curiosity' he had stored in various locations and settling any small debts. He left an annuity to his wife, and to his daughter Isabella he left that portion of his property in Portugal that belonged to him, to come to her only after the death of his wife and her mother. He also left a remembrance to Miss Catherine Hillman and Miss Randall, both of 74 Upper Berkeley Street and Portman Square, with whom he had lodged. He instructed that Beckford's letters to him be returned, and the rest destroyed. He died in early August 1828 and was buried in the cemetery of St Marylebone on 9 August, with a headstone provided by Susan, duchess of Hamilton. 


@@@@@


doc= 60311


Livesey, Roger (1906-1976), actor, was born on 25 June 1906 at 138 Holton Road, Barry, south Wales, the son of Joseph Livesey and his wife, Mary Catherine Edwards. His father, known as Sam, was an actor, and the young Roger Livesey was to make his first stage appearance at the age of seven, alongside his father, as an office boy in 'Loyalty' at the St James's Theatre. Educated in London, he attended the Westminster City School and the Italia Conti School, which prepared its pupils for a career in the theatre, and between 1920 and 1926 he was playing juvenile roles in the West End theatre, including an appearance at the Aldwych Theatre in a farce by Ben Travers. This was followed by a period of touring in the West Indies and South Africa, where he played two seasons. On his return he appeared in a cast which included John Gielgud in the try-out of Ronald MacKenzie's 'Musical Chairs', subsequently taking over a role in the play from his brother Jack in 1932. Further association with Gielgud, in the try-out of 'Richard of Bordeaux' by Gordon Daviot, brought him to the attention of Harcourt Williams, who engaged him for a season at the Old Vic Theatre; from September 1932 to May 1934 he stayed a member of the Old Vic Company, where the most eminent actors of the day appeared in Shakespearian and other roles. Under the direction of Tyrone Guthrie he played the Duke in 'Measure for Measure' (with Flora Robson as Isabella), and Caliban (with Charles Laughton as Prospero) in 'The Tempest'. William Congreve's 'Love for Love' saw him appearing in a cast which included his brother as well as his father. 
By now established as a promising young actor whose rugged good looks seemed to conceal a shrewd, humorous intelligence, Livesey was rarely out of work, and he tackled demanding roles both on stage and, a little later, in film. He continued to make appearances on the Old Vic and West End stages during the early years of the war, before making a tour of the Middle and Far East for ENSA (the Entertainments National Service Association, the wartime agency which brought performances to serving troops). He starred in a number of films by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, giving a sympathetic portrayal of the seemingly blinkered military mind in 'The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp' (1943), as well as playing major roles in 'I know where I'm going' (1945) and 'A Matter of Life and Death' (1946), the film selected for the first royal command film performance in 1946. During and after the war he appeared in a number of plays with his wife, Ursula Jeans (who predeceased him in 1973), and when the Old Vic reopened in 1953 they were both members of the company. They appeared together in 'Twelfth Night', 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', and George Bernard Shaw's 'Captain Brassbound's Conversion', and they toured Australia and New Zealand together between 1956 and 1958 in West End successes including William Douglas Home's 'The Reluctant Debutante'. 
On television Livesey appeared in Terence Rattigan's 'The Winslow Boy', Jean Giraudoux's 'Amphitryon 38', Ibsen's 'The Master Builder', and Durrenmatt's 'The Physicists'; he also played Archie Rice's father in John Osborne's 'The Entertainer' (in the film version of which he played the same part) and the Duke of St Bungay in the BBC serialization of Trollope's novels presented under the title 'The Pallisers'. By the 1960s his appearance and husky voice were used to advantage in a number of elderly roles, including Captain Shotover in Shaw's 'Heartbreak House' (which transferred from the Oxford Playhouse to Wyndham's Theatre in 1961), Chebutykin in Chekhov's 'The Three Sisters' (Oxford Playhouse, 1964), and the earl of Caversham in Oscar Wilde's 'An Ideal Husband' (1965). In 1969 he doubled as the First Player and the Gravedigger in a production of 'Hamlet' which opened at the Round House in London in 1969 and was presented at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, New York, later in the same year. He toured South Africa in 1970. He died in the General Hospital, Watford, on 4 February 1976. 


@@@@@


doc= 60314


Macvicar, John (c.1795-1858/9), textile merchant and civic leader, is a figure about whom nothing is known before his marriage to Isabella Burn ('b'. 1799), in January 1821 at South Leith, Midlothian. He remains strangely elusive to the historian, though an important figure in Britain's early nineteenth-century trade with China. For more than anyone, Macvicar promoted and inspired the export of cotton products to exploit the demise of the East India Company's monopoly of the China trade in 1833. He constituted a vital nexus in the trade's supporting infrastructure, providing a personal link and a measure of co-ordination between the disparate worlds of the Canton (Guangzhou) merchant, the Lancashire manufacturer, and the political lobby. 
At first dependent on the agency services provided by the older houses in the Far East, Macvicar gradually took all stages of the trade into his own hands. Between 1823 and 1829 John Macvicar & Co., 'agents general and commercial', were located at 4 Barges Yard, Bucklersbury, London, with interests as far afield as Havana. An exploratory visit to the East about 1830 revealed a potential demand for British cotton piece-goods in spite of increasing American competition from the looms of Lowell, Massachusetts. In addition to a partnership with his brother-in-law, David Burn, in Bombay, agency agreements were sealed with Purvis & Co. in Singapore, Anderson and Wardrop in Penang, and Jardines in Canton. 
Frustration with Jardines and their apparent sluggishness caused ill-feeling on both sides in the mid-1830s. Hardly their pawn, as once suggested, Macvicar had his own objectives to secure and by 1838 Macvicar & Co. itself was established in Canton, acting as agent for the Bombay Commercial Insurance Society. Surviving the First Opium War (1839-42) Macvicars was still in business at the 'new English factory' in Canton in 1848, having participated in the foundation of Hong Kong by purchasing lots in the first land sale of 1841. 
Macvicar's interests lay decidedly with the home manufacturer, and from the early 1830s he was resident in Manchester at 48 Mosley Street. As a partner in the Manchester calico-printing firm of Butterworth and Brooks, and with his links through John Brooks to the Blackburn bankers Cunliffe Brooks & Co., he was well-connected in Lancastrian industrial circles; this attribute was invaluable in Macvicar's successful promotion of the Union Bank of Manchester, of which he had been a founder director in 1836. Cotton was Manchester's lifeblood, and, as continental European and American manufacturing gathered pace, British producers anxiously eyed new outlets to replace those disappearing. However, Macvicar and his associate Samuel Gregson probably over-promoted the potential of China and fostered exaggerated expectations among manufacturers who included Horrocks of Preston, producers of a celebrated cambric much in vogue in Canton. 
Macvicar's position as a director and vice-president of the Manchester chamber of commerce, together with his business link with Gregson, later a chairman of the East India and China Association, established him as the leading advocate of the local China interest. As the prime mover behind the chamber of commerce's memorial of February 1836 on the 'unprotected state of trade with China', he can be credited with being the first to throw the weight of British manufacturing behind the lobby to encourage the British government to adopt a coercive or 'forward policy' towards China. Macvicar's credibility as a spokesman was accepted at the highest levels and in October 1839, accompanied by a Mr Garnett of Clitheroe, he briefed Palmerston on the concerns of the manufacturers as war with China loomed. 
As both Jardines and Gregson discovered to their cost, Macvicar was a difficult man to handle. Yet he was not totally self-interested. He took his civic responsibilities seriously at a time when the town of Manchester was witnessing both administrative change and social stress. His record as borough reeve (or chief officer) in 1835-6 was sufficiently impressive to warrant further service, following the introduction of a borough council, as alderman for the Oxford ward between 1838 and 1841 (when he was an exact contemporary of Richard Cobden), and as a justice of the borough up to 1852. Together with his support of the Royal Manchester Institution as an annual governor, this at least provides a glimmer of altruism. It is not known whether Macvicar had children. His death is recorded in the minutes of the annual general meeting of 27 July 1859 of the Union Bank of Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 60315


Dawson, Montague (1890-1973), marine artist, was born at Burlington House, Chiswick, on 19 September 1890, the son of Charles Ernest Dawson ('b'. 1860/61), typographer, etcher, and engineer, and Florence Hope, 'nee' Bithrey. He had five siblings, Elizabeth, Harold, Horace, Ada, and Eva. His grandfather was the landscape artist Henry Dawson (1811-1878). Dawson moved with his family to the Smugglers House, Hythe, on Southampton Water, and he passed his childhood drawing and 'messing about in boats'. Educated by tutors at home and never apprenticed to a studio, he learned about painting by studying the work of Dutch and English sea painters. Before the First World War he worked as a commercial artist in Holborn, then enlisted in the Royal Navy, serving as lieutenant on trawlers and minesweepers. He worked with the marine artist Norman Wilkinson (1878-1971) on the development of dazzle painting on warships. In Falmouth, Dawson met Charles Napier Hemy RA (1841-1917), the only contemporary artist to influence his work. He regularly submitted to 'The Sphere' illustrations of the war at sea, and there recorded the surrender of the German Grand Fleet. 
After the war Dawson sailed to the West Indies on a square-rigger and used his sketches years later for such subjects as 'Pirates Cove, Cocos Island, Wafer Bay' (1969; priv. coll.). He lived briefly at 8 Percy Street, London, in 1920, then at 19 Stratford Place, off Oxford Street, and at 2A St Charles Square, Kensington from about 1925. On 28 April 1921 he married Doris Mary Lyle (1898/9-1972) at Holy Trinity Church, Paddington; their only daughter, Nyria, was born in 1928. In 1934 the family moved to the New Forest and two years later he bought Hurst, a 1930s property overlooking the Solent. 
Dawson's success owed much to his dealer -- he sold through Frost and Reed, London, whose astute, energetic managing director, Stanley Wade, created a worldwide market for his paintings and further publicized Dawson's name by selling reproductions of his art. But from early days his work sold easily. He began exhibiting at the Royal Academy in 1917, was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1936, and became a founder member of the Royal Society of Marine Artists in 1939, exhibiting there regularly between 1946 and 1970. By the 1960s Dawson was reputed to be the highest paid living artist after Picasso. His work was certainly the highest priced of any living marine artist of the twentieth century and he was the century's leading exponent of painting clipper ships at sea. His wife and daughter helped cope with his constant stream of fan mail. His work was imitated by many and fakes began to appear even in his lifetime. He enjoyed success, particularly as it brought him the admiration of several members of the royal family and examples of his work entered the Royal Collection. 
Dawson's best early works are watercolours, usually yacht races, fishing boats, or clipper ships, but by 1930 Dawson mostly painted in oils. In 1939-45 he again produced monochrome illustrations of the naval war for 'The Sphere' and some full-size canvases (several versions) of warships, notably the 'Sinking of HMS Kelly'. From the 1930s onwards he depicted named vessels many times over; paintings include 'Cutty Sark' and 'Lightning' (the famous wool clippers), 'Ariel and Taeping' and 'Thermopylae' (tea clippers), and 'Chesapeake and Shannon' and the 'USS Constitution' (battleships). In 1970 he finished a large canvas, 'Battle of Trafalgar' (priv. coll.), having uncovered during his research new evidence about Nelson's instructions to the rest of the fleet. He depicted the J-class yachts 'Rainbow' and 'Endeavour' and pioneering ships such as the 'Golden Hind' and 'Mayflower', but few steamships. The heavy brushwork of his early pictures became more refined over the decades, bringing the ability to unite in motion the vessel, waves, and sky in a lifelike though poetic style. He researched his subjects at length and achieved veracity in every detail, the sails and rigging always correctly set for the amount of wind and the tilt of the vessel. 
Dawson died at Western Hospital, Southampton, on 21 May 1973 and was buried at Boldre church, Lymington, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 60317


Constanduros, Mabel (1880-1957), comedienne and writer, was born on 29 March 1880 at Devonshire House, Peckham Road, Camberwell, London, one of the seven children of Richard Stephen Tilling, managing director of the Thomas Tilling & Son bus company, and his wife, Sophie Thorn. She was educated at various establishments, including the Mary Datchelor School in Camberwell and a boarding-school on the south coast, and then worked as her father's private secretary. She was married during the 1900s to Athanasius Constanduros, an insurance broker, who died in 1937. They had three children, of whom only a son, Michael, survived into adulthood. The marriage clearly failed long before 1937; Mabel's autobiography mentions her husband hardly at all and never favourably or by name. She moved in the late 1920s or early 1930s to the village of Bury in Sussex, where she took responsibility for bringing up her son. Her active membership of an amateur dramatic society from about 1910 to 1920 led to a period of training at the Central School of Speech Training. Here she discovered a facility for writing short stories and 'cockney sketches', and was encouraged to approach the BBC for employment. She joined the Radio Repertory Company in February 1925 and made her first broadcast on 23 March that year. 
Mabel Constanduros is remembered above all for her creation of the Buggins family, the first radio family, which made its initial appearance on 1 September 1925 in the sketch 'The Buggins Family out for a Day', with regular broadcasts beginning in 1928. Between 1928 and 1948, when the family made its final broadcasts during BBC's 'Children's Hour', Constanduros wrote and performed in over 250 Buggins radio scripts. Initially she played all six speaking parts: Grandma Buggins, Mrs Buggins, her three children (Emma, Alfie, and Baby Buggins), and Aunt Maria. For some years the father of the Buggins household was an unspeaking presence, but in the early 1930s the part was created by Michael Hogan, with whom Mabel had written a number of radio plays and sketches. He was followed by John Rorke, who co-wrote many of the later scripts. Grandma, a crusty, cantankerous old biddy described by Constanduros as 'one of the tiresomest and cussedest creatures I could imagine' (Gifford, 37-8), lay at the heart of the programme, which became extremely popular with audiences as a result of its skilful characterization and gentle humour combined with sheer appreciation of Constanduros's acting skills. The popularity of the family was such that the Ministry of Food used Mrs Buggins to broadcast recipes during the Second World War. Constanduros made a well-received variety debut at the Coliseum in September 1929, and the family seemed destined for a highly successful live career, but their creator never enjoyed this work and abandoned it quite swiftly. She continued to act, however, appearing successfully as Mrs Bones in A. P. Herbert's operetta 'Derby Day' in 1932 and undertaking a certain amount of film work. Her last live stage performance was at the Palace Theatre, Watford, in 1953. The Buggins family was not the only radio family she created: the English family Robinson, which she created with her nephew Denis Constanduros, first appeared in a radio play in 1939 and continued through 1940 as an occasional feature. 
Given Mabel's remarkable success with the Buggins family, it is interesting that in her autobiography she claimed to 'think of myself first as a writer and secondly as a straight actress' (Constanduros, 64). She was certainly a prolific playwright, credited with having written over 100 plays by herself and many more in collaboration with others (notably Howard Agg and Denis Constanduros). Her most successful -- written with her nephew -- was 'Acacia Avenue', which ran for over 200 performances at the Vaudeville Theatre in 1943. Perhaps her family situation explains why, when reading the correspondence between Constanduros and the BBC, one is struck by the constant arguments about fees. Nevertheless she blended happily into local Sussex life, and Mrs Buggins made one of her last appearances when she opened Aldingbourne church fete in 1956. Constanduros died of a heart attack in the Royal West Sussex Hospital, Chichester, on 8 February 1957. Although today her reputation has faded, she was a popular cultural figure between the wars, helping to establish the style and flavour of British radio comedy. 


@@@@@


doc= 60321


White, Lydia Rogers (bap. 1760, d. 1827), literary hostess, was baptized at St Augustine-the-Less Church, Bristol, on 28 January 1760, the youngest daughter of Stephen White (died 1797), a Bristol merchant, and his wife, Cecil, 'nee' Basset, who inherited substantial property from her brother William Basset of Miskin, Glamorgan. Her surviving siblings were Ann ('bap'. 1756, died 1845), who married Francis Saunderson MP (1754-1827), of Castle Saunderson, co. Cavan, and Mary ('bap'. 1757, died 1848), who married John Bennet Popkin (1756-1804) of Kittle Hill, Glamorgan. Lydia White's father was sheriff of Glamorgan in 1785 and she and her sisters had connections with landed families both in Wales and Ireland. 
She is first heard of in Bath where she was caring for her elderly father. In June 1780 Fanny Burney recorded at length an unsettling interview with a Miss White of Bath -- 'young & pleasing in her appearance, not pretty, but agreeable her Face, & soft, gentle & well bred in her manners' (Rizzo, 4.144) -- who confessed to the author of 'Evelina' that despairing of companionship she had been reading the infidels Hume and Bolingbroke and contemplating suicide. In June 1786, also in Bath, Betsy Sheridan (daughter of the elocutionist, sister of the dramatist) expressed distaste for the affectations of 'Miss White who seems determin'd to Rival Miss [Charlotte] Brooke with my father and to supply her place in my good graces' (Lefanu, 85). 
Stephen White died in Queen's Parade, Bath, in January 1797, leaving the Welsh property to his daughters and so providing Lydia with a competency for life. In November 1798 Samuel Rogers (said to have proposed marriage to Miss White at some later date) wrote to his sister of 'a most charming and elegant woman about thirty-five, who, after having long excited the admiration of the Pump Room by her wit and her talents, shut herself up in her father's sick-room for two long years' (Clayden, 348). She was then living at Wick House, Richmond, on an income of $1200. She is next heard of in Ireland, visiting the poet Mary Tighe at Dominick Street in Dublin and beginning lifelong friendships with Maria Edgeworth, Lady Morgan, and Thomas Moore. 
Moore recalled a performance of 'Comus' of about 1805 in which Lydia White took the part of the Lady and lords George and William Lamb the parts of the two brothers -- Lady Caroline Lamb became a particular friend and was probably the means by which Lydia White made Byron's acquaintance in 1813. She had already made a friend of Walter Scott during a long visit made in 1808; Scott described his guest to Lady Louisa Stuart as 'what Oxonians call a lioness of the first order, with stockings nineteen times nine dyed blue, very lively, very good-humoured, and extremely absurd' (Lockhart, 2.137). Seeing her off to the highlands, Scott professed himself impressed with her energy and physical hardihood. 
By 1815 Lydia White was established in London as a society hostess at 113 Park Street, Grosvenor Square, where, as Scott recalled, she 'contrived to have every evening a very good literary melie and little dinners which were every entertaining' (Scott, 352). She entertained Scott, the Byrons, and Thomas Moore, who on a visit to Samuel Rogers annoyed his host by turning to Richard Brinsley Sheridan and exclaiming, 'Isn't it time to go to Lydia White's?' (Maltby, 70). In contrast to those of rival hostesses -- Lady Holland, Lady Cork, Lady Davy -- the lions of Miss White's 'menagerie' seem to have been strictly literary. While always described as a bluestocking, she did not translate Greek or cultivate the sciences; her intellectual claims were based on reading and travel. 
White was among the many flocking to Paris in 1815; in 1816 she was observed in Florence, in 1818 in Naples, and in 1819 in Venice. The writer Harriet Pigott travelled with her in Switzerland in 1818, finding in her companion 'a fund of amusement' and commenting on her 'terrible bluism' and 'red and white cheeks, a perfect mask, so thickly was the colouring laid on her delicate skin' (Pigott, 148). Pigott recorded that having failed with the archaeologist Sir William Gell, Miss White set her cap at the historian Leonard Sismondi -- who instead wed an Englishwoman (Jessica Allen) guiltless of 'employing a single artifice or manoeuvre'. Miss Pigott observed in Miss White 'some information, much tact, and lady-like feelings' (ibid., 150, 149). 
The good humour noticed by Scott also appears in the compliment paid by Bulwer Lytton in 'Pelham' (1828): ''Miss White', said Lady Roseville, 'has not only the best command of language herself, but she gives language to other people. Dinner parties, usually so stupid, are, at her house, quite delightful. I have actually seen English people look happy, and one or two even almost natural'.' It is also implied in the well-known anecdote related by William Harness: 'On another occasion, at one of her small and most agreeable dinners in Park Street, the company (most of them, except the hostess, being Whigs) were discussing, in rather a querulous strain, the desperate prospects of their party. 'Yes,' said Sydney Smith, 'we are in a deplorable condition; we must do something to help ourselves; I think we had better sacrifice a Tory Virgin.' This was partially addressed to Lydia White, who at once catching and applying the allusion to Iphigenia, answered, 'Well, I believe there is nothing the Whigs would not do 'to raise the wind!'' (L'Estrange, 161)' Lydia White's travelling was terminated by swelling in her legs. But the Park Street entertainments continued as described by Lady Charlotte Bury (in a passage that Anthony Trollope must have remembered when creating his Countess Neroni): 'Immovable from dropsy, with a swollen person and an emaciated face, she is placed on an inclined plane raised high upon a sofa, which put me in mind of the corpse of the late Queen of Spain at Rome, in the church of the Santa Maria Novella. (Bury, 2.200)' She continued thus for several years: 'They may say what they will,' said Samuel Rogers, 'but Miss White and Missolonghi are the most remarkable things going' (Dowden, 3.927). Little notice was taken when she finally died in late January 1827. 'Poor Lydia had asked a party to dine with her on Friday,' wrote Lady Morgan, 'on Wednesday she was dead!' (Dixon, 2.235). When the Friday came, her guests arrived as usual. She was buried in St George's, Hanover Square, on 5 February 1827. No obituary has been located, and none of her contemporaries left a memoir of her. Instead, her memory survived in anecdotes which were collected by William Prideaux Courtney in the first and only memoir of Lydia White to appear, belatedly published in 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 60328


Hill, Caroline Southwood (1809-1902), writer and educationist, was born on 21 March 1809, the eldest daughter of Thomas Southwood Smith (1788-1861), Unitarian theologian, physician, and leading sanitary reformer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Read, the daughter of a Bristol stoneware potter. On his wife's death in 1812, Southwood Smith left Caroline and her sister Emily with his family in Somerset while he pursued his medical studies in Edinburgh, but he later took the unconventional step of taking Caroline to live with him; a lasting emotional intimacy ensued. In 1818 Southwood Smith married Mary Christie (with whom he had one surviving child), and in 1819 or 1820 the family moved to London. Mary left Southwood Smith and emigrated to the continent in the mid-1820s. 
Caroline Southwood Smith remained in Wimbledon in a private teaching post. By the 1830s she had begun to contribute articles to the Unitarian periodical the 'Monthly Repository', often advocating the innovative theories of the Swiss educationist Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi. She became governess to the children of James Hill (died 1871), a former corn merchant and banker, who had requested to meet her after reading her articles. In 1835 Caroline married Hill at St Botolph without Bishopsgate in London, becoming his third wife. At their home in Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, she threw herself into the work of her Owenite husband in initiating various co-operative ventures and seeking to end local corruption. They established a Pestalozzian infant school together, and Caroline Southwood Hill was also instrumental in the running of Hill's highly radical paper, the 'Star in the East' (1836-40). All this was in addition to caring for her six stepchildren and bearing three daughters, Miranda ('b'. 1836), Gertrude ('b'. 1837), and Octavia Hill (1838-1912). Two more daughters, Emily ('b'. 1840) and Florence ('b'. 1843) were born after the family left Wisbech. Southwood Hill's unorthodox child-rearing methods became well known in radical circles: she shunned conventional discipline, seeking to instil in the children an ability to reason and a love of learning. 
Major upheavals were to strike the Hill family: James Hill was declared bankrupt in 1840, and the children of his first marriage were taken in by members of his family. Southwood Hill and her children were greatly assisted by her father and their close friends the radical writer Mary Gillies and her sister Margaret Gillies, with whom Southwood Smith lived. They took in and brought up the young Gertrude (who later married Charles Lewes, son of the literary critic and partner of George Eliot, George Henry Lewes). The rest of the family moved from Essex to Hampstead, then to Gloucestershire, and on to Leeds, where in 1845 James Hill bought the Owenite publication the 'New Moral World'. He suffered a nervous breakdown, and on medical advice decided to live apart from his family; he died alone in 1871. Caroline and her daughters moved to Finchley to be near her father. 
Back in London, Southwood Hill continued to write. With the Gillies sisters, she moved in a radical circle which included such writers and reformers as William and Mary Howitt, William James Linton, and Eliza Cook. They championed progressive ideas on education, democracy, and women's emancipation. During the period from 1846 to 1851 the 'People and Howitt's Journal' published much of her poetic work, and her articles on education were reissued as a book in 1845, 'Memoranda of Observations and Experiments in Education'. In the early 1850s she and her daughters became involved in the Ladies' Guild, a women's craft workshop, of which Southwood Hill became manager. In 1856 she wrote an article for Charles Dickens's 'Household Words' on the guild's work in training disadvantaged children in toy making. While the guild was not in itself economically successful, it became an important symbol for early feminist activists of a strategy for increasing women's employment opportunities. Southwood Hill was dismissed from the guild in 1855 after defending the right of F. D. Maurice, the Christian socialist (whose son later married her daughter Emily), to give 'Bible' classes there. 
Caroline Southwood Hill then moved to Weybridge with her daughter Emily and immersed herself in writing, but was back in London in 1859, sharing a house with Emily and Octavia, and teaching full-time once again. After sharing their house for a short, tense period with the pioneer in female medicine Sophia Jex-Blake, in 1862 Caroline, Emily, and Octavia established a school in Nottingham Place, London, which remained open until 1891, with first Octavia and later Miranda at its head. Southwood Hill acted as matron, although the school followed Octavia's more disciplinarian principals of education. Octavia Hill's burgeoning public career sometimes conflicted with her mother's ideals: for example, Octavia's volunteer cadet corps clashed with Caroline's pacifist philosophy. 
A strong and influential character, Caroline Southwood Hill remained intellectually active throughout her long life. She wrote three children's books, and as late as 1895 was contributing reviews and articles to such publications as the 'Nineteenth Century'. Octavia Hill published some of her mother's educational writings after her death as 'Notes on Education' (1906). Southwood Hill and her family were always exceptionally close, and she continued to live with her daughters until her death at 6 Cambridge Terrace, St Pancras, London, on 31 December 1902. She was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60329


Williams, Owen Tudor (1916-1996), civil engineer, was born on 4 October 1916 at 22 Albert Mansions, Battersea, London, the older child and only son of Sir (Evan) Owen Williams (1890-1969), civil engineer and architect, and his first wife, Gwladys Clarissa, 'nee' Tustian (1888-1947). Following his mother's death on 5 June 1947, his father married Doreen Elizabeth, 'nee' Baker ('b'. 1913/14), and Williams acquired a half-brother and a half-sister. O. T. (as he was always known, to distinguish him from his father) was educated at Shrewsbury School from 1929 until 1933 before going on to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, to read engineering. Immediately on graduation, in 1937, he joined his father's consultancy, which was started in 1919. At once he was involved in all aspects of the wide range of projects passing through the office at the time. These included the Boots 'drys' factory at Nottingham, the 'Daily Express' premises in Manchester and Glasgow, and the J. Sainsbury factory in London's Blackfriars. O. T.'s site experience, enabling him to gain his membership of the Institution of Civil Engineers, was obtained on the 'Daily News' garage in Southwark. 
After the outbreak of the Second World War Williams joined the engineering section of the Admiralty. He first served overseas in Sierra Leone, where he worked on the design of the wartime barracks. In late 1943 he returned to take up a posting in Scotland. There he worked on Admiralty establishments at Cromarty, Invergordon, and Inverness, and Royal Naval air stations at Macrihanish and Campbeltown. On 15 September 1943 he married Rosemary Louisa, 'nee' Mander ('b'. 1920), who worked for the government before her marriage; they had four sons. Williams completed his wartime service at the Admiralty with the equivalent rank of lieutenant-commander. He returned to Sir Owen Williams & Partners with the wealth of experience gained from his service with the Admiralty; at the age of thirty he was appointed a partner. He was deeply involved with one of his father's last major projects, the maintenance hangars at London airport. The hangars, built to service British Overseas Airways Corporation aircraft, were completed in 1955 and were widely acknowledged to be spectacular examples of the use of reinforced concrete; they were a vital part of the early development of London Heathrow. However, in the 1950s the practice was developing its role in highway and motorway engineering and it was in this field that Williams was to forge his reputation. He was actively engaged in the government's plans for the country's strategic road network from the early 1950s until his retirement in 1987. It was thus that he moved from the shadow of his father's massive reputation to establish himself as one of the most distinguished and creative motorway designers of his time. 
In 1951 Sir Owen Williams & Partners had been appointed to carry out feasibility and design studies for a motorway from London to Yorkshire. In 1955 the government took the decision to proceed with its construction by building the first section of what became the M1. Williams and his father were both closely associated with the design and later the supervision of the road's construction. Their work on the project was described in a joint paper presented to the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1961, for which both were awarded the institution's highest award, the Telford gold medal. This was a rare instance of father and son achieving that distinction. Important as the M1 was in the history of the country's motorway development, no less so was Williams's considerable contribution to the extension of the motorway system into south Wales. The Port Talbot bypass and the Newport bypass, both important early sections of the M4 London to south Wales motorway, followed and, after delays due to national economic problems, were opened to traffic in 1967. However, the project for which Williams was best remembered was undoubtedly the lengths of the M5 and M6 motorways around Birmingham which formed the midland links, and which contained the instantly recognizable 'spaghetti junction'. It was a rare achievement to engineer a project that became an instantly and universally recognized part of the nation's vocabulary, and its opening in 1972 was a landmark in Williams's career. His work continued unabated after 1972: there were extensions to the M4 in south Wales, the M54 Telford motorway in the midlands, parts of the M40 and M42, and, in the south, the Ashford to Sellindge section of the M20. Of the first 1000 miles of the British motorway system, the government's declared target, Williams and his firm were responsible for the design and supervision of construction of a fifth of that total. 
In 1966, with his father's health failing, Williams took over the role of managing partner of the consultancy and assumed responsibility for managing the day-to-day activities of the practice. In 1969, shortly before his father's death, Williams was appointed CBE in recognition of his services in the engineering of the nation's motorway network. Motorway and highway work were always at the forefront of his activities, but he took a keen interest in other aspects of engineering. In 1974 he played a key role in establishing a consortium with European contractors to design concrete gravity platforms for use in offshore oil exploration. He was active in overseas ventures and built close links with both Japanese consultants and contractors following his firm's appointment as adviser to the Japanese Highways Corporation. He also undertook toll roads in Portugal, Turkey, and Kuwait. In spite of his involvement in the work of his own practice, Williams was an active member of a number of research committees established by the Transport and Road Research Laboratory. In this way he played a significant role in the development of modern techniques and specifications associated with road design and construction. 
In 1987, having completed fifty years' service with his firm, Williams retired. In the same year, as a further acknowledgement of his work in highway engineering and his standing in the engineering profession, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering. In retirement he never lost his lifelong interest in engineering. Happily, he found time to engage in his two favourite pastimes, woodwork and gardening. He had considerable skill and expertise in both. In 1992 his eldest son, Richard Williams, became the third member of the family to assume management of the consultancy firm. Williams died of a heart attack at his home, 18 Little Gaddesden, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, on 14 July 1996. He was buried at St Peter and St Paul's Church, Little Gaddesden, on 23 July. He was survived by his wife and four sons, each of whom was engaged in some aspect of engineering, which played such a dominant role in his own life. 


@@@@@


doc= 60330


Mee, Margaret Ursula (1909-1988), political activist and botanical artist, was born on 22 May 1909 at The Crest, White Hill, Chesham, Buckinghamshire, one of three daughters of George John Henderson Brown (died 1938), insurance clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth Isabella, formerly Churchman. Her early interest in art was fostered by an aunt who illustrated children's books, that in nature by her father, an amateur naturalist. Educated at Dr Challoner's Grammar School, Amersham, and the School of Art, Science and Commerce in Watford, she taught briefly at Liverpool before deciding to travel. She spent several months in Germany, at a time of active and highly visible persecution of socialists and Jews; in February 1933 she witnessed the Reichstag fire in Berlin and the succeeding Jewish boycott day, events which reinforced her own left-wing views. Margaret married, on 11 January 1936, Reginald Bruce Bartlett ('b'. 1905), son of Herbert William Bartlett, a clerk. Bartlett was a trade union activist, and Margaret herself became an ardent trade unionist. A passionate speaker at meetings she was a delegate for the Union of Sign, Glass and Ticket Writers to the Trades Union Congress of 1937, where she proposed a resolution for raising the school-leaving age. 
The marriage was not successful, and after her father's death Margaret went to France, having to flee the country fifteen days after the outbreak of war. She spent the war years first as a machinist, then as a draughtswoman in the De Havilland aircraft factory at Hatfield, and divorced Bartlett in 1943. When peace returned she enrolled as an evening student at St Martin's School of Art, Westminster, where she met Greville Ronald Bosworth Mee ('b'. 1909), a fellow student who became her lifelong partner. He was the son of Albert Alexander Mee, painter. The portfolio she built up at St Martin's gained her a place, and a post-war grant, at the Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts in south London, 1947-9. Under the tuition of Victor Pasmore she learned the attention to detail and developed the style which was to characterize her later work. 
In 1952, by which time Margaret had changed her name to Mee by deed poll, the Mees went to Sao Paulo, Brazil, where Margaret's sister was living, intending to stay for three or four years. She taught art at St Paul's, the British School, while Greville found work as a commercial artist. Margaret soon became captivated by the luxuriant tropical flora of the forests of the Serra do Mar in south-eastern Brazil; she began seriously to collect and paint, taking detailed notes and working in gouache, and in this wealth of subject material found her true vocation as a botanical artist. Before long she yearned to see the plants of the tropical forests, and, with a friend from the school, she set out in 1956 for Belem and her first experience of the Amazonian flora. It was the first of many expeditions which led her through most of the vast Amazon basin, relying on local guides, surviving the hazards of canoe travel, the local food or lack of it, the often dangerous and always troublesome insect life, and the occasional hostility towards a solitary white woman. 
The Sao Paulo Botanical Institute encouraged Margaret's obsession for accuracy in botanical detail and colour, and sent her to the Mato Grosso, where she collected several plants new to science. She exhibited in Rio in 1958 and in London's Royal Horticultural Society, receiving the Grenfell medal, and henceforth worked as a freelance artist. Other exhibitions followed: Sao Paulo in 1964, and then Washington, which brought her support from the National Geographic Society for an expedition in 1967 to the 3000 metre Pico de Neblina, on the border of Brazil and Venezuela. She was the first woman to make the southern approach to this peak, but the route being badly eroded, the party was obliged to turn back at 1000 metres. 
Unlike Amazon botanical artists before her, Margaret worked entirely from living plants. Her fifteen expeditions into the interior, mostly to Amazonia, involved travelling and living under the most primitive conditions. She would draw at night by torchlight to capture rare nocturnal flowers, and this immediacy gave her paintings an accuracy, depth, and colour unrivalled by her predecessors. Her travels coincided with the beginning of the commercial exploitation of the forest, and she expressed her fury at the damage caused to the land and its peoples. Margaret was back in London in January 1968 for the exhibition and launch of her book, 'Flowers of the Brazilian Forests', a folio edition of thirty-one paintings, for which the duke of Edinburgh was the patron. She returned to Brazil, fired by a fresh ambition to confront the threat to the Amazon Forest caused by the government's road building and mining programme. The Mees moved to Rio de Janeiro, where Margaret was able to paint from the living plants which she had sent back from her explorations. 
A Guggenheim fellowship paid for two further expeditions to the lower Amazon, which yielded more new species. Margaret wrote a report for the Forestry Development Institute, drawing attention to the devastation around Manaus and the damage caused by unregulated trade in forest products. Her work was now internationally acclaimed. Honours accrued: in 1975 honorary citizenship of Rio, on 1 January 1976 the British MBE for services to Brazilian botany, in 1979 the Brazilian order of Cruzeiro do Sul, fellowship of the Linnean Society, 1986. The Brazilian government supported her travels in order to produce another book, 'Flowers of the Amazon', launched in Brazil in 1980, with an exhibition in London's Natural History Museum. During this visit, Margaret and Greville married, on 8 October. 
Margaret's campaign against the environmental damage, with its pollution and loss of species, voiced on Brazilian television, was repeated in the USA when her Amazon Collection of sixty paintings, many of plants new to science, was exhibited at the Missouri Botanical Garden in 1986. This publicity led to an invitation to visit an opencast bauxite mine near Manaus, which she found far more destructive than the mining company had claimed, and an upstream botanical reserve, which yielded new species. Her ambition now was to paint the rare night flowering 'Selenicereus (Strophocactus) witterii', the Amazonian moonflower. The plant does not flower every year, and when it does, the flowers open for a single night. Near Manaus she located a plant with buds, and with a companion, waited through the night until it opened. She then sketched by the light of a fluorescent torch, taking the colours the following day from the now closed flower. 
In November 1988 the Mees came to England for the launch of a book based on Margaret's diaries, 'Margaret Mee in Search of Flowers of the Amazon Forest' (1988), and a major exhibition of her paintings at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Meanwhile she was setting up the Margaret Mee Amazon Trust, based at Kew, to assist Brazilian botanical students to study in the UK. On 30 November the Mees were travelling by car when they were involved in an accident at Seagrave crossroads, Leicestershire; Margaret suffered severe chest injuries and died later that day in Leicester Royal Infirmary. Although she subscribed to no religion beyond a respect for nature, a memorial service was held at Kew on 16 January 1989, with representatives of the duke of Edinburgh, the Brazilian government, and the world of botany attending. She was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 60332


Nolan, Sir Sidney Robert (1917-1992), artist, was born on 22 April 1917 in Carlton, an inner suburb of Melbourne, Australia, the eldest of four children of Sidney Henry Nolan, a fifth-generation Irish-Australian who worked as a tram driver and part-time publican and bookmaker, and his wife, Dora Irene, 'nee' Sutherland. The ethos of the family was typical of the Australian working class of that period, with little emphasis on education but great passion for sport. Nolan devoted much of his energy to physical activity as a swimmer, a daring diver, and a racing cyclist, and until his death maintained a spare, muscular frame. Much of his swimming and diving took place at the beachfront Melbourne suburb of St Kilda, to which the family moved soon after his birth, and which figured largely in his early paintings. 
Nolan attended Brighton Road state school and Brighton Technical School, Melbourne, until 1932, when he went to Prahran Technical College, Melbourne, to study design and crafts. He began there to use some of the diverse media that were to be exploited by him for the rest of his life, including the making of commercial illuminated signs with such materials as tin foil, glass, and transparent enamels. In 1933 he went to work for Fayrefield Hats at Abbotsford, Victoria, where he stayed for over five years. While working on display stands, he became acquainted with spray paints, another medium which was to fascinate him for life and to which he returned in his final years. He designed posters featuring page-boys in the company's hats which, as a handsome young man, he occasionally modelled himself. 
In 1934 Nolan became a not very diligent attender of evening classes at the National Gallery of Victoria Art School, studying intermittently under Charles Wheeler and William Beckwith McInnes. He spent more hours at the nearby public library, read voraciously, and became particularly fascinated by the books of James Joyce, D. H. Lawrence, Marcel Proust, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Marx, and Dostoyevsky. During his heroic cycling activities (200 miles a day was not uncommon) he met a fellow art student who suggested that he should take his studies more seriously. In 1936 he left the family home to move into a ramshackle condemned building where he used as painting surfaces any material that came to hand, including loosened slates from the building's roof. It was in this derelict building that he held his first exhibition. At this time he also began to write poetry. Thereafter he wrote poetry intermittently -- and with considerable skill -- throughout his life. 
During his apprentice years Nolan led the classic life of the impoverished student. He stowed away (abortively) on a Europe-bound ship, worked on a hamburger stand, and spent his wages on eating oysters. In 1938 he showed his portfolio to Sir Keith Murdoch, the press magnate and an influential trustee of the National Gallery of Victoria, who passed him on to the art critic of 'The Herald' (Melbourne), Basil Burdett, who did not much like what he saw but recommended him to an art-obsessed solicitor, John Reed. Nolan's meeting with Reed was one of the two catalytic encounters of his life. In that same year, at Reed's bidding, he joined the new Contemporary Art Society (CAS) in Melbourne. He also married Elizabeth Paterson, granddaughter of the 'Heidelberg school' painter John Ford Paterson. They moved to Ocean Grove, by the sea, and Nolan laboured in asparagus fields as well as, with his wife, taking on a pie shop. 
In 1939 Nolan exhibited at the CAS inaugural exhibition at the National Gallery of Victoria a painting entitled 'Head of Rimbaud' (Rimbaud being a writer he obsessively admired for his entire adult life). The painting was largely abstract and met with some ridicule. A fellow painter, Adrian Lawlor, asked him, 'What exactly is a rimbaud? A French cheese?' In 1940 Serge Lifar commissioned him to do the decor for his ballet 'Icare' in Sydney. Nolan also held his first exhibition at his studio. It was opened by John Reed who, with his wife, Sunday, had taken up Nolan as their major protege. Nolan's daughter, his only child, was born in that year, after he and Elizabeth had already separated, partly because she resented the influence of the Reeds and the amount of time Nolan spent at the Reeds' house, Heide. 
During this period Nolan produced his first important sequence of paintings, brightly coloured pictures of the beach at St Kilda, with vigorous studies, tinged by his early love of abstraction, of divers, swimmers, sun-bathers, and so on. These paintings were much influenced by his early enthusiasm for the work of the Douanier Rousseau, although they were far from being naive. He also produced inventive visions of the permanent St Kilda fun fair, Luna Park. He continued to paint St Kilda pictures until about 1946 but, from 1942 onwards, simultaneously worked on a series of largely landscape paintings of the Wimmera, the partly desolate, partly beautiful, wheat growing area in western Victoria. 
Nolan had been conscripted into the army in 1942 and, after initial basic training, was posted to the Wimmera, spending his time guarding stores against the risks of Japanese invasion. He was promoted to corporal. His military duties were not sufficiently onerous to prevent a prolific output of paintings for which the Reeds provided the essential art supplies. He suffered the loss of two finger joints in an accident but their absence did not affect his capacities as a painter. At this time he embarked on a relationship with Sunday Reed. Nolan and the Reeds, apart from his absence in barracks, maintained a 'menage a trois' which lasted until 1947 and survived the complexities of his desertion from the army in 1944. 
Nolan worked closely with John Reed and the writer Max Harris on an intellectual monthly magazine called 'Angry Penguins', which in 1944 published, illustrated by Nolan, a group of poems by Ern Malley. This constituted Australia's most significant literary scandal, since Ern Malley did not exist, having been invented by two soldier poets, James McAuley and Harold Stewart, to prove that 'modern poetry' was a sham. The hoax was rapidly exposed but, not least because Malley's verse was never less than interesting, Nolan's involvement did him no harm and sparked off several interesting paintings. 
At the end of 1945 Nolan became interested in the life and times of the notorious, but in Australia much worshipped, nineteenth-century bushranger Ned Kelly. Nolan's paternal grandfather had been one of the Victoria policemen who had pursued Kelly. Nolan and Harris toured Kelly's territory, around Ballarat and Glenrowan, and spoke to Kelly's surviving relatives before Nolan settled down at Heide to paint the first Ned Kelly series, on which his lasting public fame was based. 
Nolan once said that 'Kelly is the millstone round my neck' (personal knowledge). By this he meant many things: that Kelly was associated with him often to the overshadowing of and even to the exclusion of other meritorious work; that Kelly was, after the initial exhibition at the Velazquez Gallery in Melbourne in 1948, a kind of incubus he could not shake off; that Kelly images by themselves, or intruding into paintings on totally different subjects, were painted not just for a few years but were a lifetime's work. Through his paintings Nolan immortalized the square black Kelly mask and armour, which in fact owed more to an abstract black rectangle by the Russian artist Kazimir Malevich than the contemporary engravings and penny-dreadful illustrations of Kelly. (Nolan used to say that 'the black square is the most powerful device in twentieth-century painting'; personal knowledge.) Nolan's Kelly became as Australian an icon as Ayer's Rock (Uluru) and the Sydney Opera House and, partly at least because of those unmistakable images, Ned Kelly himself became, alongside Sir Donald Bradman and the racehorse Phar Lap, an archetypal Australian hero. 
In 1947 Nolan left Heide and went to Queensland, spending time in Brisbane and on Fraser Island, the scene of his next major series, about the shipwrecked Mrs Fraser and the convict Bracefell. Nolan, so many of whose paintings were inspired by books, proved in the Mrs Fraser paintings to be the inspirer of Patrick White's novel 'A Fringe of Leaves' (1976). In 1948 he moved to Sydney and married, on 25 March, Cynthia Hansen, 'nee' Reed (died 1976), John Reed's sister. After this the close relationship between Nolan and John and Sunday Reed came to an end. 
The next few years were intensely productive. The year 1948 saw Nolan's first engagement with the paintings of disused mines and his reconstruction of that central episode of Australian history, the gold rush of the 1850s and the battle of the Eureka Stockade -- a subject which formed the basis of one of his major public commissions, the gigantic enamel mural in 1965 for the Reserve Bank of Australia in Melbourne. He had his first critical and commercial success with his paintings of the central Australian desert in 1950. These were followed by his remarkable paintings of the outback and his exploration of the calamitous drought areas in Queensland in 1952. After Kelly and Mrs Fraser, his next major series was devoted to the explorers Burke and Wills, whose epic, tragic, and fatal south to north crossing of the continent to find the Gulf of Carpentaria was one of the several heroic failures of Australian life that so engaged his sympathies. Burke and Wills, like Kelly, remained fixed in Nolan's mind and he continued to paint them for nearly three decades in different styles. Once he got an idea for a series into his head he rarely let it go. 
Early in 1949 the second catalytic encounter of Nolan's artistic life occurred. Sir Kenneth Clark, visiting Sydney, was struck by a Nolan painting in an otherwise humdrum exhibition, and sought him out. A firm friendship and intellectual rapport ensued, so that once Nolan settled in London, Clark was able to open every important door for him, whether socially, artistically, or commercially. Clark's patronage through the 1950s and 1960s was crucial, as was the support of the director of the influential Whitechapel Art Gallery in London, Bryan Robertson, who gave Nolan a major retrospective exhibition there in June 1957. Before that, however, Nolan had gone to England with his wife, Cynthia, and her daughter Jinx (whom Nolan later adopted). They spent 1951 in Cambridge but already his restless need for travel was manifesting itself. His Australian travelling never ceased, but he also moved around extensively in Europe, producing notable work particularly in Italy in 1952. 
In 1955 Nolan, with Cynthia and Jinx, rented a small flat near Paddington Station in London, and had a substantial one-man show at the Redfern Gallery. In 1956 he moved to the Greek island of Hydra, where he and his wife formed a close relationship with the Australian novelist George Johnston and his wife, the writer Charmian Clift. Johnston incorporated Nolan, as Tom Kiernan, into his novel 'Clean Straw for Nothing' (1969). He also introduced him to the work of his fellow Australian Alan Moorehead, notably his book on Gallipoli. Nolan became obsessed with Troy and Gallipoli more or less simultaneously, but first painted the sequence he called 'Leda and the Swan', influenced by the work of Robert Graves and by W. B. Yeats's sonnet. He saw the Leda paintings as a kind of dry run for the Gallipoli series, not least because it was Leda who had given birth to Helen of Troy. He was particularly fascinated by the idea that Troy (with its epic, Homeric deeds) should be the site of the First World War debacle of Gallipoli, which took so many Australian lives and left such a permanent scar on -- and created such an enduring myth in -- the Australian national character. The Gallipoli paintings, the best of which were done on Hydra and in Nolan's riverside studio in Putney, London, to which he moved in 1957, were notable not only for their quality but for their fusion of ancient and contemporary mythology. Nolan later, in 1978, presented hundreds of his Gallipoli paintings and drawings to the Australian War Memorial in Canberra, in memory of his brother Raymond John Nolan, who had died in a drowning accident in 1945. 
In 1958 Nolan was awarded a Commonwealth Fund Harkness fellowship to travel, study, and work in the United States. By 1960 he had established close personal and intellectual friendships with the writers Patrick White and C. P. Snow, and subsequently did most of their book jacket paintings. While never slowing the relentless pace of his studio work, he accepted commissions for magazines, travel paintings, and drawings, and for stage designs which ranged from straight plays to ballet and opera sets for the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden, London, and the Australian Opera in Melbourne. He also formed a close collaboration with the American poet Robert Lowell and illustrated several books for him, including, notably, his very free translation of Baudelaire's 'The Voyage' (1968). He also illustrated books of verse by the Australian writers Randolph Stow and Charles Obsorne. 
In the 1963 new year's honours list Nolan was created CBE. The following year he travelled to the Antarctic with Alan Moorehead (whom he had inspired with his Burke and Wills paintings to write his magisterial account of the explorers' disastrous journey, in 'Cooper's Creek', 1963). The Antarctic journey -- a US Navy expedition to McMurdo Sound -- produced some singularly successful paintings which he soon followed up with a series of illustrations of Shakespeare's sonnets shown in several English venues, including the Aldeburgh Festival. He had already developed a fruitful relationship with the creators of the Aldeburgh Festival, Benjamin Britten and Peter Pears, was a frequent festival visitor and exhibitor, and did some fine paintings inspired by Britten's works, such as his settings of Thomas Hardy's 'Winter Words' and Bertolt Brecht's 'Children's Crusade'. 
In 1965 Nolan took up a creative arts fellowship at the Australian National University in Canberra and in 1966 moved temporarily to New York, where he rented a penthouse and a ground floor studio at the Chelsea Hotel. It was during this period that he collaborated particularly closely with Robert Lowell, doing some powerful paintings based on his translation of 'Prometheus Bound' (1969). He also did several rather undistinguished covers for 'Time' magazine. He then embarked on a series of massive polyptyches such as 'Desert Storm' (Australian landscape), 'Inferno' (based on Dante and Lowell), and 'Riverbend I', 'Riverbend II', and 'Glenrowan', all based on Ned Kelly but emphasizing the landscape rather than the human figures. 
Nolan also travelled widely in Africa, producing some fine animal paintings, particularly of zebras, gorillas, and gazelles. He became much enamoured of China, first gaining entry, via Pakistan, in 1965, and returning in 1972, 1978, and 1983. He produced probably his most significant Chinese painting in 1984, in the form of the fourteen large canvases commissioned for the lobbies of the headquarters buildings of Hong Kong Land in Hong Kong. 
Among the most copious of Nolan's works were a series of small mixed media on paper paintings, each about 30 cm high by about 24 cm wide. He painted literally thousands of these in the late 1960s and early 1970s and enclosed them in a series of glass-framed panels in groups of six or eight or nine, always with a grand design in mind. One sequence, the 'Wildflowers', was presented to the Reid Library of the University of Western Australia in Perth. The remaining three sequences were 'Shark', housed in the lobby of the Studio Theatre at the Sydney Opera House, 'Paradise Garden', comprising over 1000 individual paintings, in the lobby of the State Theatre of Victoria in Melbourne, and 'Snake', the largest of them (some 20 feet high and 150 feet wide), with some 1620 separate paintings displaying the undulating body of a giant snake in a mosaic created out of the individual paintings, which at the time of his death was still held in store. These three were known collectively as 'Oceania', and together they were an extraordinary tribute to the flora and wildlife of Australia and New Guinea. Taken all together they display not only Nolan's astonishing fecundity but also his breathtaking confidence in his architectonic vision. At the other end of the scale, he also experimented with sculpture, producing, in collaboration with the goldsmithing foundry of Jean-Francois Victor Hugo in the south of France, some beautiful gold sculptures only a few inches high but immensely strong in their sculptural impact. 
In 1971 Nolan took part in the Adelaide Festival and travelled in Australia with Benjamin Britten and Peter Pears. In June 1973 he had a major retrospective exhibition at the Royal Dublin Society in Eire, the most important show since the Whitechapel one in 1957 and before the National Gallery of Victoria one in 1987. It cemented his long and deep love of Ireland and its culture. (He long contemplated the acquisition of some land in co. Clare, from which his ancestors had migrated to Australia.) In 1974 he joined in a cultural exchange exhibition in Beijing (Peking) and Nanjing (Nanking) under the aegis of the Australian department of foreign affairs. In 1975 he produced his sequence of Oedipus paintings, involving Oedipus, the Sphinx, and a monstrous chicken. 
On 23 November 1976 Cynthia Nolan committed suicide in London. Nolan was given great support at this time by Mary Elizabeth a Beckett Perceval, painter, daughter of (William) Merric Boyd, potter, sister of Nolan's great friend and rival Arthur Boyd, and former wife of the painter John Perceval. Nolan had known her as a close friend for all their adult lives. They married in London on 20 January 1978. They then lived for the next seven years at The Ruthland in Herefordshire. Nolan's remarriage provoked an intemperate attack from Patrick White in his memoir 'Flaws in the Glass' (1981), thus ending one of Nolan's (and White's) most enduring and intellectually productive friendships. Nolan responded to White's attack by producing a large, scatological painting called 'Nightmare', containing a devastating caricature of White. 
In March 1980 Nolan went to Canberra for the opening of the Nolan Gallery at Lanyon, to which he presented several major works, including some classics from the Kelly and Burke and Wills series. In 1981 he exhibited at Lanyon a magnificent series of large crayon drawings based on Marcus Clarke's great nineteenth-century novel of Australian convict life, 'For the Term of his Natural Life'. He was knighted in the queen's birthday honours list the same year, and received many other honours, including life membership of the National Gallery of Victoria and honorary membership of the American Academy of Arts and Letters. In 1983 the queen appointed him a member of the Order of Merit. He was elected an associate member of the Royal Academy of Arts in 1987, a full Royal Academician in 1991, and a senior academician in 1992. In 1987 the National Gallery of Victoria staged a massive seventieth birthday retrospective exhibition, which travelled on to Sydney, Perth, and Adelaide. 
In 1983, while maintaining a flat in Whitehall Court in London, with a studio with a view over the Thames and the Royal Festival Hall, Nolan and his wife, Mary, bought a beautiful house, The Rodd, Presteigne, Radnorshire, on the border with Herefordshire. It was built mostly in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and there they established both a herd of Welsh black cattle and the Sidney Nolan Trust (to benefit the arts and artists), and staged many successful concerts and exhibitions. It was in his last years at The Rodd that Nolan came full circle with his early years in the hat factory. He returned to the abstract art that had always fascinated him, but which he had never previously fully practised. He developed a highly sophisticated technique of painting with cans of spray paint. He rightly resented the accusation that he was merely imitating American painters of the New York school, such as Frank Stella, pointing out that he had first used this technique in the 1930s and 1940s. One of his last works was a spray-painted, entirely representational self-portrait, with his face encased in a Kelly mask. 
Nolan's standing as one of two dominant figures in Australian art of the second half of the twentieth century, always in amicable contention with his close friend and eventual brother-in-law, Arthur Boyd, is assured. He also enjoyed a considerable reputation in Britain, the United States, and Europe. Even in old age he retained his athletic figure and bearing, and possessed, like other autodidacts before him, a formidably wide reading and knowledge of literature, art, and philosophy. He made friends easily but was cruelly misled by those who looked after his financial affairs. He was, despite this, a notably generous benefactor, giving substantial quantities of valuable paintings to state and national galleries and other public institutions. He was, above all, a cultivated, elegant man, with a dry, occasionally sharp wit, and a brilliant conversationalist, who had considerable charm. 
Nolan died at the Westminster Hospital, London, on 27 November 1992, of heart failure and pneumonia. He was survived by his wife, Mary. A memorial service was held at the National Gallery of Australia in 1993, at which the prime minister of Australia, Paul Keating, was among the speakers. 


@@@@@


doc= 60333


Meade, James Edward (1907-1995), economist, was born on 23 June 1907 at Broome, Swanage, Dorset, the second child and only son of Charles Hippisley Meade ('b'. 1866/7?) and his wife, Kathleen Cotton (Kitty), 'nee' Stapleton ('b'. 1884), daughter of George Cotton Stapleton. He was brought up at 6 Lansdown Crescent, Bath, Somerset, where his father, an Oxford graduate and the descendant of a long line of country parsons, lived the quiet and unostentatious life of a gentleman. Socially, religiously, and politically conservative, he was not an encouraging role model for his son, but, a fine woodworker, he did teach him carpentry. He sent his son at the age of ten to Lambrook School, a preparatory school, and four years later to Malvern College. Meade disliked the emphasis on games at Malvern but two masters, the left-wing classics master and the music master, who took some of his pupils to the Salzburg festival, 'kept [him] sane'. Another element of sanity was provided by his paternal aunt Sybil, an eccentric in a family with more than its fair share of eccentrics, whom he visited often during his holidays from school. He left Malvern in 1926 with a love of music, many prizes, for English verse and Latin prose among others, and a classical scholarship to Oriel College, Oxford. He switched from Greats to the newly established course in philosophy, politics, and economics at the end of his second year. In the summer of 1930 he gained an outstanding first-class degree and was elected to a fellowship in economics at Hertford College. 
Oxford was a welcome liberation from Bath society. Meade joined the Labour Club and became a member of the 'Cole group' of young socialists (gathered around G. D. H. Cole, then a fellow of University College). His switch to economics was motivated by concern with the serious unemployment problem in Britain in the 1920s; in 1928 he also thought it could easily be cured, his aunt Sybil having introduced him to the writings of the monetary crank Clifford (Hugh) Douglas. He soon shed this belief but throughout his career his main concern was with the contribution which economic analysis had to make to the solution of problems of practical economic policy. He was one of several young Oxford economists advising the Labour Party in the 1930s; then and later he described himself as a liberal socialist, who believed in using the market mechanism for egalitarian ends. A convinced internationalist, he was also active in the League of Nations Union. 
Meade spent the academic year 1930-31 in Cambridge. Hertford had allowed him a postgraduate year to learn more economics (and some mathematics); Dennis Robertson, whom he had met in Bath through Robertson's aunts, who were neighbours in Lansdown Crescent, had invited him to Trinity College. Meade was both a pupil of Robertson and a member of the 'Cambridge circus', the group of young economists including Richard Kahn, Piero Sraffa, Austin Robinson, and Joan Robinson, who gathered together to analyse and criticize the recently published 'Treatise on Money' (1930) of John Maynard Keynes. He worked closely with Kahn, whose employment multiplier showed that an exogenous increase in investment would lead to successive increase in aggregate demand and so in incomes; Kahn gave the name 'Mr Meade's relation' to Meade's finding that these increases in income would bring desired savings into equality with the initial exogenous increase in investment. These relations, which implied that adjustments in aggregate demand and income would bring about macroeconomic equilibrium, were essential ingredients of the theoretical system of Keynes's 'General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money' (1936). Meade, having fallen under the spell of the 'magician' Keynes, returned to Oxford already a Keynesian in the modern (post-1936) sense. 
Back in Oxford in the Michaelmas term 1931, Meade set his first students to read Keynes's work. They remembered him as a dry but lucid lecturer and an excellent tutor whose enthusiasm for his subject was contagious. He continued his research in monetary theory, publishing his first book, 'The Rate of Interest in a Progressive State', in 1933. At the same time, in a Fabian pamphlet, 'Public Works in their International Aspect', he used the idea of the multiplier (and his 'relation') to argue for countercyclical government expenditure on public works, accompanied by the appropriate monetary policy, to prevent unemployment in slumps and inflation in booms, and for international monetary co-operation to avert the balance-of-payments problems of domestically orientated macroeconomic policies. Advising Hugh Dalton, a future Labour chancellor of the exchequer, he advocated the removal of barriers to trade, a flexible (but managed) exchange rate for sterling, and the use of exchange controls to regulate the capital account of the balance of payments, in order to permit the adoption of a macroeconomic employment policy by a Labour government. 
In the spring of 1932 Albert Einstein visited Oxford. Gilbert Murray asked the new secretary of the Oxford branch of the League of Nations Union, (Elizabeth) Margaret Wilson ('b'. 1908), daughter of Alexander Cowan Wilson, a civil engineer, to get together a group of young dons to meet him. She invited Meade, whom she had met once before through her younger brother, who had rowed in the same Oriel boat as Meade when an undergraduate. They married on 14 March 1933, setting up house at 11 Holywell Street. In their long and happy life together they were to have a son and three daughters. 
Meade wrote the first modern Keynesian textbook, 'An Introduction to Economic Analysis and Policy', in 1936. He tried 'to expound the whole corpus of Economic Theory without taking any knowledge of technical terms for granted and with full use of the more recent developments' (Preface) and to include every piece of theory with an application to current economic problems, beginning with the problem of unemployment. The book was immediately successful and had gone into a third, American edition and a French translation by 1939. 
By 1937 Meade was looking for the opportunity to devote more time to (policy-orientated) research. When he and Margaret took a holiday on the Riviera they disliked it so much that Margaret suggested they go on to Geneva, which she knew well from her parents living there and her work for the League of Nations Union. In Geneva they met Dennis Robertson, who introduced them to Alexander Loveday, director of the financial section and economic intelligence service of the League of Nations. Loveday invited Meade to join the economic intelligence service to write its 'World Economic Survey', and Meade's college gave him leave of absence for four years from December 1937. Meade wrote two excellent surveys but he did not return to Oxford because of the Second World War. 
In 1940 Meade was offered wartime employment with the British government. He and his wife with their three small children undertook a nightmare journey by car across France in May, arriving exhausted at Nantes only to find themselves stranded on board ship without an escort: all available craft were evacuating the British army from Dunkirk. When they reached England in June they had no home; soon after Meade took up his job in Whitehall, Margaret and the children very reluctantly sailed to America. Fortunately they were able to return in November 1942. 
Meade's first assignment in what was to become the economic section of the war cabinet offices in 1941 was to prepare estimates of national income and expenditure as part of a survey of resources available for the war effort. He drew up a complicated and comprehensive system of balancing tables; a young Cambridge graduate in the Ministry of Economic Warfare, Richard Stone, was sent over to help him with the statistics. Meade's description of what happened next characteristically downplays his own initial contribution: Stone joined Meade in his tiny room with its single desk, established himself on a corner of the desk with a quill pen and a hand calculator, and gradually moved from the corner of the desk to the centre, while Meade turned the handle of the calculator. With the active encouragement of Keynes in the Treasury, their calculations, the first modern double-entry social accounts for any country, were utilized in the 'Keynesian' budget of April 1941 and published with it; they also published, jointly, academic and popular accounts of their methods (notably 'National Income and Expenditure', 1944). 
In February 1941 Meade wrote the first of a long series of memoranda on the subject of post-war reconstruction, identifying four problems: unemployment, the standard of living and the distribution of income, the form of industrial structure, and the re-establishment of international trade and finance. His proposals for post-war employment policy included measures for influencing consumption expenditure countercyclically along the lines of his 'Consumers' Credits and Unemployment' (1938), which he had written before he left Oxford. The Beveridge committee on social insurance and allied services provided him with an opportunity to put forward a detailed scheme for variations in the rate of social security contributions as a means of stabilizing the demand for labour. He tried it out first on Keynes, who had sympathetically reviewed his book in the 'Economic Journal', before submitting it to the committee. Although Meade's scheme did not appear in the Beveridge report, it was included as an appendix to the white paper 'Employment Policy' in May 1944. 
Meade wrote the first draft, in March 1943, of what eventually became the employment white paper. Adverse Treasury reaction meant it had a long and circuitous route to travel. Keynes, less pessimistic than Meade about the possibility of post-war depression, was not entirely sympathetic either, but he endeavoured to educate his Treasury colleagues to the necessity of a macroeconomic employment policy. When a small steering committee, including the permanent secretary of the Treasury, Sir Richard Hopkins, and the director of the economic section, Lionel Robbins, managed at last to produce an agreed report, Keynes commented that it was 'indeed an outstanding State Paper which, if one casts one's mind back ten years or so, represents a revolution in official opinion' ('The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes', 27, 1980, 364). 
Meade was also a founding father of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (later the World Trade Organization). Early in the war, before he left Geneva, he had written a short book, 'The Economic Basis of a Durable Peace' (1940), dedicating it at Christmas 1939 to his children. Believing that a satisfactory peace settlement would require the existence of an international organization, he considered the economic role that such an organization would need to play in the post-war world. He favoured an international bank with the power to issue an international currency against which individual countries would peg their exchange rates but be able to adjust the pegs if the pursuit of high employment policies threatened persistent losses of reserves. The countries adhering to these international arrangements would have to commit themselves to multilateral free trade and payments arrangements. Hence when Keynes produced his 'clearing union' plan for the post-war international currency system, Meade proposed a complementary 'international commercial union' to restore multilateral trade and remove trade restrictions after the war. Dalton, now president of the Board of Trade in the wartime coalition government, took this up enthusiastically, and arranged for Meade to be seconded part-time to his department. The Keynes and the Meade plans formed the basis of the British contributions to the wartime Anglo-American discussions on the post-war international economic order; Meade crossed the Atlantic for the first time to take part in the talks in Washington in September-October 1943. 
Further discussions led to the Anglo-American 'Proposals for Consideration by an International Conference on Trade and Employment', published in December 1945. Meade served as a British representative on the preparatory commission for the conference, which met in London in 1946 and in Geneva in 1947 to produce a draft charter for an International Trade Organization. The ITO Charter adopted at the Havana conference in March 1948 was not ratified, but its main principles were incorporated in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade negotiated in Geneva in 1947. 
In November 1944 Meade had been persuaded to succeed Robbins as director of the economic section at the end of the war; he took over officially in January 1946. When he agreed to serve, he had high hopes of what government economists could achieve on both domestic and international economic policy fronts; he also thought he might be able to pursue his academic ambitions by writing a new edition of his 'Economic Analysis and Policy'. But in the event his position did not give him the chance to influence domestic economic policy in the directions he wished it to go. Dalton, chancellor of the exchequer in the first majority Labour government, decided to pursue a policy of low interest rates much further than Meade thought safe. This was only one of several issues on which they disagreed -- and on which Dalton did not heed Meade's advice. Meade's macroeconomic conception of 'economic planning', which was essentially the use of financial policy to influence aggregate demand, was adopted by Dalton's successor Stafford Cripps, several months after Meade had resigned in frustration and ill health in the spring of 1947. As two of his former colleagues put it, Meade 'was advising the wrong minister at the wrong time.... Moreover, he was uncomfortable in a world of physical controls when his vision was of a world of financial controls.... Meade, more than any man -- more than Keynes -- was the prophet of demand management when the world was not yet ready for demand management. (Cairncross and Watts, 130)' 

Meade returned to academic life, this time to the London School of Economics (LSE), where Lionel Robbins had suggested he take the Cassel professorship of commerce with special reference to international trade. Here, as a direct result of his wartime work on economic policy, he was to make his most lasting contributions to economic 'theory'. His plan was to produce a ''Treatise on Economic Policy' (probably in five or six volumes)' which would cover much the same ground as his pre-war textbook but reflect his experience in government (Meade to Robbins, 3 June 1947, BPLES, Robbins MSS). Since he had been hired to teach international economics, he began on his planned last volume, on international economic policy. 
Meade did not follow the conventional order of writing on trade before finance. He began by constructing a general-equilibrium comparative static model for an economy open to trade and capital flows, synthesizing Keynesian and classical theory and extending it in order to analyse the effects of different policy instruments and other variables on internal and external balance. Since his 'method of work... [was] to make a simple mathematical model of most of the problems before writing about them' in simple prose, the result appeared in a book, 'The Theory of International Economic Policy, Volume 1, The Balance of Payments' (1951), with a separate mathematical supplement containing the model, which also appeared in journal articles. The first systematic exploration of the relationship between domestic and international equilibrium, Meade's model became 'part of the baggage of every economist' (Corden and Atkinson, 529), the most important single influence behind the development of open economy macroeconomics in the next four decades. 

'The Theory of International Economic Policy, Volume 2: Trade and Welfare' (1955) was equally pathbreaking. It made at least three major and lasting contributions to economics: a fundamental reformulation of the theory of economic welfare to make it both operational and more widely applicable; the use of this new theory to analyse controls on factor movements as well as controls on trade; and the extension of the analysis from two-country models to a many-country world, including its application to the theory of customs unions. Meade originally drafted much of the book on the basis of the 'new welfare economics' of the late 1930s but he rewrote it to utilize (and expand on) the method of his former wartime colleague Marcus Fleming's 'On making the best of balance of payments restrictions on imports' (published in the 'Economic Journal', 1951). 'It was a brilliant feat of imagination... to realize... [Fleming's method] was capable of large-scale generalization into a powerful tool for welfare analysis of practical policy problems, and an act of great intellectual honesty and courage for him to scrap his existing draft and rework the whole problem on the new approach. (Johnson, 73)' Meade was awarded the Nobel memorial prize in 1977, jointly with the Swedish international economist Bertil Ohlin, for the work in the two volumes. 
Throughout his LSE years Meade wrote extensively on topical issues of economic policy. To the public debate in England on planning he contributed 'Planning and the Price Mechanism: the Liberal-Socialist Solution' (1948): he argued persuasively for the restoration of the market system and the use of financial policy instruments which work through the price mechanism for the control of inflation and deflation. He also urged the use of taxation, including if necessary and feasible a capital levy, to promote a more egalitarian distribution of income and wealth. In several papers on current international economic arrangements he made clear his then unfashionable preference for flexible exchange rates as the best way to reconcile free trade, domestic full employment, and external balance. 
In 1957 Meade succeeded Dennis Robertson as professor of political economy in Cambridge. He and his family now made their home in a Cambridgeshire village, first Hauxton and then Little Shelford. In his first Cambridge decade, as well as making important contributions to the theory of economic growth and income distribution, he recommenced his ambitious project of a multi-volume treatise on economic policy. He had completed two volumes of his 'Principles of Political Economy' (1965 and 1968) before he decided to resign the chair in 1968. He had not been made welcome by the Cambridge Keynesians, for whom he was too 'neo-classical' -- being prepared, as he told students, to use 'Classical and Keynesian analysis and any old tools which seem to be relevant' to economic problems (personal knowledge). With a research fellowship from his college, Christ's, and the continuing intellectual support of younger Cambridge colleagues, he produced two more volumes of 'Principles' (1972 and 1976) before the temptations of policy-orientated collaborative research made him less single-minded about the theoretical project. What might have formed the fifth volume appeared as a political tract, 'The Intelligent Radical's Guide to Economic Policy' (1975), dedicated like 'Planning and the Price Mechanism' to his wife. 
Meade returned to macroeconomics in 1978 to lead a major research project on 'stagflation' in the department of applied economics at Cambridge. He had long been concerned with the inflation problem in a fully employed economy (his well-known Cambridge inaugural lecture had been on the subject), and had reconsidered the concept of internal balance he had used in 'The Balance of Payments'. He now had three policy targets in mind: the balance of payments, full employment, and price stability. He proposed a 'New Keynesian' assignment of policy instruments to these targets: monetary and fiscal policy to maintaining total money expenditure (nominal GDP [gross domestic product]), reform of wage-fixing arrangements to full employment, and exchange rate policies to the balance of payments. While his younger collaborators worked on the design of the appropriate demand-management policies, he concentrated on the reform of wage-fixing arrangements. 
On the wage-fixing front Meade explored several avenues over two decades. From the outset he rejected the extreme 'solutions' of incomes policies and union bashing. He came eventually to advocate the system he found in Agathotopia. As he explained: 'I recently set sail to visit the island of Utopia... But, alas, I could find the island Nowhere. However on my way home I chanced to visit the island of Agathotopia. The inhabitants made no claim for perfection in their social arrangements, but they did claim the island to be a Good Place to live in. I studied their institutions closely, came to the conclusion that their social arrangements were indeed about as good as one could hope to achieve in this wicked world, and returned home to recommend Agathotopian arrangements for my own country. (Meade, 'Liberty, Equality and Efficiency', 1993, 104)' Agathotopia had a widespread structure of labour-capital partnerships rather than capitalist firms; it also had a government committed to maintaining the desirable rate of growth of money GDP; and an ingenious set of arrangements for encouraging a more equal distribution of income and wealth. As Meade had realized at least thirty years earlier, the use of flexible factor prices to ensure efficient employment of all resources could lead to unacceptably low wages; it was necessary deliberately to separate the problem of employment from the problem of distribution by providing, for instance, a basic income or 'social dividend' to all citizens, as well as a more equal distribution of property. Agathotopia was the closest Meade came to the solution of the problem of the dual function of the price mechanism, which means that the prices of goods and factors of production that promote the most efficient use of resources might well produce an unacceptably unequal distribution of income from those resources. His concern for both efficiency and equality, spelt out most clearly in 'Efficiency, Equality and the Ownership of Property' (1964), was a feature of the two 'Meade reports', 'The Economic and Social Structure of Mauritius' (1961) and 'The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation' (1978). 
Meade was always youthful in appearance as well as in spirit. In old age he looked more youthful than in photographs of his middle age: the abandoning of thick-rimmed glasses meant that the eyes sparkling with intelligence, good humour, and tolerance were more readily seen. He was a man of integrity and optimism, and cynicism was foreign to his nature; in spite of his experiences in Whitehall he never abandoned his belief in the ability of men and women to make for themselves a better society. A modest man -- though justifiably proud of his achievements -- he disliked honours and declined a knighthood on leaving government service; he was made a companion of the Bath in 1947. Elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1951, he served as chairman of section F in 1957, and as president of the Royal Economic Society in 1964-6. Among his many talents were a fine baritone singing voice and his woodworking skills, which he put to good effect in making ingenious mechanical toys for his children and grandchildren. He died at his home, 40 High Street, Little Shelford, Cambridgeshire, on 22 December 1995, of multiple myeloma, and was cremated at Cambridge on 29 December. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 60337


Tipper, Constance Fligg (1894-1995), metallurgist and crystallographer, was born on 16 February 1894 in Station Road, New Barnet, Hertfordshire, the daughter of William Henry Elam, surgeon, and his wife, Lydia, 'nee' Coombes. She was educated at St Felix School, Southwold, followed by Newnham College, Cambridge, from where she gained a third in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1915. After working briefly at the National Physical Laboratory, metallurgical department, in Teddington, she joined the Royal School of Mines, South Kensington, in 1916, and was appointed research assistant to Professor Harold Carpenter in 1917. Later she won two successive fellowships, the Frecheville (1921-3) and the Royal Society Armourers and Brasiers (1924-9). During this time she carried out significant research into the strength of single crystal aluminium. Though still employed by the Royal School of Mines she began working in Cambridge. Her research there, in collaboration with Geoffrey Taylor, led to the modern understanding of crystal plasticity and inspired Taylor's theory of dislocations (1934). In recognition of this and earlier work London University awarded her the DSc degree (1926). 
In 1928 Elam married George Howlett Tipper (died 1947), a Clare College graduate and superintendent of the geological survey in India; there were no children. Officially leaving the Royal School of Mines in 1929 she settled in Cambridge where Newnham College awarded her a research fellowship (1930-31). This association would last over thirty years. The university gave her testing facilities in the engineering department, but no official status, although the Leverhulme Trust awarded her a two-year research fellowship in 1936. Naturally shy, and always happier in research than in teaching, she nevertheless undertook considerable lecturing. In 1947 Newnham elected her an associate fellow for three years; and in 1949 Cambridge University made her a reader in mechanical engineering. Thenceforth until her retirement in 1960 she was a full member of the faculty of engineering. 
Tipper's most significant contributions to metallurgy from 1943 onwards were in relation to the deformation and fracture of iron and steel. When the new Admiralty ship welding committee asked Professor John Fleetwood Baker, head of the engineering department, to investigate fractures in all welded ships, he assigned the metallurgical investigations to Tipper. Brittle fracture in large steel structures had become an urgent naval problem: several Liberty ships built in the accelerated wartime shipbuilding programme to bring vital supplies across the Atlantic had broken up in heavy seas as a crack ran instantaneously right around the ship. One split in half while still in harbour. The ships, built in both Britain and America, brought vital supplies across the Atlantic to Britain during the war years. These ships were the first to be all welded, rather than riveted. Tipper found that the cause lay not in the fabrication and welding, as first thought, but was intrinsic in the material used, which became dangerously brittle under certain circumstances. Her work in this area led to the development of the Tipper test for determining the brittleness of steel. This edge notched tensile test can predict whether steel will behave in a brittle or ductile manner at service temperature. As a result of her research manufacturers began improving both the quality of the steel and annealed welds. The results were published in the scientific literature and in her book 'The Brittle Fracture Story' (1962), which Baker, who had given her so much encouragement and advice over the years, persuaded her to write. 
Colleagues held Tipper in high esteem and found her a pleasure to work with, although independent and outspoken. Her work was always meticulous and remains one of the principal contributions to the development of metallurgical science. There can be no doubt that she was a brilliant metallurgist who should have had a great deal more recognition in her lifetime. Although she officially retired in 1960, she continued working well into her seventies, taking on consultancy work at the Barrow shipyards and on metal bridge construction. As her husband had died earlier, she went to live with her brother at Bank House, Langwathby, Penrith, Cumberland, where she could enjoy the family hobby of fly-fishing. She also enjoyed gardening, watercolour painting, and playing the piano and organ. To mark the occasion of her 100th birthday, in 1994, Newnham College planted a variegated sweet chestnut in the gardens, now known as the Tipper tree. She died at Penrith on 14 December 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60339


Heuston, Robert Francis Vere (1923-1995), jurist and biographer, was born on 17 November 1923 in Dublin, the elder son of Vere Douglas Heuston, managing clerk at Guinness's brewery in that city, and his wife, Dorothy Helen, 'nee' Coulter. He was baptized into the Church of Ireland, of which he was throughout his life a communicant member. He was a collateral descendant (and proud to be so) of Robert Emmett, the Irish protestant patriot, executed in 1803 for leading an unsuccessful rebellion against the British, and famed among his countrymen for his defiant speech from the dock. After schooling at St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, Heuston read law at Trinity College, Dublin (1941-6), gaining first-class honours, and being auditor (president) of the Historical Society (the student debating society) in 1945. Called to the bar by King's Inns, Dublin (1947), but deciding on an academic career he, like many similarly minded Trinity graduates, went as a research student to St John's College, Cambridge. 
Heuston left Cambridge within a year on his election in 1947, at the age of twenty-three, as Pembroke College, Oxford's first law fellow. Then one of the university's smallest, poorest, and least distinguished colleges, little had changed at Pembroke since the nineteenth century -- as John Betjeman observed in 'The Death of Dr. Ramsden' (1947). Old men dominated, while a tiny group of middle-aged and young fellows, led by R. B. McCallum, did the work. This atmosphere (not unlike that of the Trinity he had left) was quite congenial to Heuston who -- shy, reserved, and fastidious, but far from unsocial -- valued formality. He remained at Pembroke for eighteen years, living in college for fifteen of them as a bachelor don responsible for student discipline as well as for teaching law. He was an austere but caring tutor. His pupils included a future lord chief justice of Northern Ireland (Robert Carswell) and a future attorney-general of the Republic of Ireland (J. M. Kelly, whose pioneering study 'The Irish Constitution' (1963) was begun under Heuston's supervision). During these years the college prospered, and he did most of the writing on which his reputation within both the practising and the academic legal communities was based. 
An elegant lecturer, Heuston brought an Irish perspective to constitutional law (his lectures published as 'Essays in Constitutional Law', 1961, remained in print until 1997). He then turned to torts, the law governing entitlement to compensation for injuries to person, property, business interests, or reputation wrongfully caused, or, in some circumstances, not prevented -- an area of law based almost entirely on judicial decisions rather than legislation. This shift of interest resulted from his undertaking (on the recommendation of the influential A. L. Goodhart) the editing (that is, the keeping up to date) of the classic textbook 'Salmond on Torts' (first published in 1907 by Sir John Salmond, a New Zealand judge) when its previous editor (and Oxford's vice-chancellor), W. T. S. Stallybrass, had died in an accident. This book, giving an accurate and clear account of the rules the courts were applying, was much relied on throughout the Commonwealth by practitioners and judges as well as by students. Heuston's eminently judicious editing, grounded in his deep respect for the collective wisdom (or common sense) of the judiciary, extended over eleven editions from 1953 to 1996 (from 1987 with R. A. Buckley). During this period the book was reshaped and largely rewritten, and maintained its authoritative status. Footnotes frequently indicated that a passage had been endorsed by a named court or judge. This was traditional legal scholarship, concerned with what judges said rather than with the consequences and desirability of what they did; while still valued by the practising profession, it came even in Heuston's lifetime to seem somewhat old-fashioned. Although a member both of the English Law Reform Committee (1968-70) and the Irish Law Reform Commission (1975-81), his instincts were not those of the law reformer. 
In 'The Lives of the Lord Chancellors, 1885-1940' (1964), Heuston's interests in political and constitutional history and his fascination with the English judiciary were combined. Designed as a continuation of J. B. Atlay's account of the Victorian holders of this hybrid (part political, part judicial) office, which had in its turn continued Lord Campbell's notorious volumes, it included important reassessments of, among others, lords Halsbury, Sankey, and (in a second, less satisfactory, volume, published in 1987 and covering the years 1940-70) Jowitt. Its publication made him a natural choice as the memoirist of twentieth-century judges, both in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' and elsewhere. 
Widely regarded as the obvious candidate when the All Souls readership in English law became vacant in 1959, Heuston was, perhaps for this very reason, passed over. Three influences help to explain his move to a professorship at Southampton in 1965: this disappointment; a feeling that he should play his part in the great expansion of English universities and their law faculties then taking place; and his marriage. On 2 July 1962 he married Bridget Nancy Ward-Perkins, daughter of Bernard Godfrey Clarke Bolland, Egyptian government official, and widow of his close friend and colleague at Pembroke, the economist Neville Ward-Perkins, thereby assuming a stepfather's responsibilities for four children. 
Heuston returned to Trinity College, Dublin, as regius professor of laws in 1970. This Irish university, by now burgeoning, was very different from the Anglo-Irish protestant college he had left a quarter of a century earlier. Administrative responsibilities, controversies about the reorganization of legal education in Dublin, internal wranglings, and a certain lack of sympathy for his values and standards among younger colleagues (who included two future presidents of Ireland, Mary Robinson and Mary McAleese, and South Africa's first post-apartheid minister of education, Kader Asmal) made his tenure of the chair less happy and fruitful than had been hoped. On reaching sixty he opted for early retirement. 
Heuston was a visiting professor at the University of Melbourne (1956), the University of British Columbia (1960 and 1985), and the Australian National University (1977), Gresham professor in law (1964-70), and Arthur Goodhart professor of legal science at Cambridge (1986-7). He was made an honorary fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford (1982), an honorary bencher of King's Inns, Dublin (1983), and Gray's Inn, London (1988), a corresponding fellow of the British Academy (1993), and a QC 'honoris causa' (1995). He enjoyed the English and the Irish countryside, visits to places with historical and legal associations, race meetings, and dining clubs. He kept his many English friendships in good repair, and his conversation, like his lectures and his writings, was enriched with anecdotes harvested from a wide reading of political memoirs and diaries. He died of cancer at Our Lady's Hospice, Harold's Cross, Dublin, on 21 December 1995, and was buried on 31 December at St Patrick's, Tara, Meath. He was survived by his wife and four stepchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 60342


Fletcher, Charles Montague (1911-1995), epidemiologist and broadcaster, was born in Cambridge on 5 June 1911, the son of Sir Walter Morley Fletcher FRS (1873-1933), of Burrels Field, Cambridge, fellow of Trinity College and first secretary of the Medical Research Council (MRC), and Mary Frances, 'nee' Cropper, from a prominent Cumbrian family. Following early schooling in London and Horsham, Sussex, he entered Eton College in 1924, becoming captain of Conybeare House and a member of the Etonian society, Pop, success as an oarsman and hurdler contributing to his early distinction. His decision to follow in the mould of his father's medical career led him towards the natural sciences, which he read between 1930 and 1934 at Trinity College, Cambridge, where his father had been a physiology don. He completed his second MB and took a first in physiology in 1934, electing to defer clinical studies in order to undertake research in the field of electrophysiology. He described this Cambridge period as the idyllic years, which included the continuation of a prominent family association with the Pitt Club, a rowing blue in 1933, and a growth of interest in amateur dramatics and music. The best and the worst of years he might have described them, with the premature death of his father in 1933 'the blackest of days'. 
Fletcher began clinical studies at London's St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school in 1936, supported by a personal scholarship created in memory of his father, who had studied there. One of the most elegant young men about town, Fletcher combined a remarkably full social calendar and scholastic distinction with apparent ease, being awarded the Henry Brackenbury prize for medicine in his final year. The outbreak of war took him to Emergency Medical Service sector hospitals on the outskirts of London, knitting socks for the troops as part of his own war effort, before joining Professor Leslie Witts's team at Oxford's Radcliffe Infirmary, first as house physician then Nuffield research fellow. During this period he helped Professor Howard Florey with the first clinical tests of a new therapeutic agent known as penicillin. On 17 January 1941 he administered the first injection of 100 mg of penicillin to a human subject. The results, which he described as miraculous, paved the way for its use by the allied forces in the latter years of the Second World War. 
In the calendar of Fletcher's life 1941 was a momentous year, including the onset of diabetes mellitus, which excluded him from the armed forces, and the beginning of a lifelong partnership with Louisa Mary Sylvia ('b'. 1912/13), daughter of John Edward Bernard Seely, first Baron Mottistone (1868-1947), whom he married on 24 October. Soon afterwards he returned to St Bartholomew's (Barts) as registrar, transferring a year later to the British Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith Hospital, diagnostic investigations by gastroscopy forming the subject of his MD dissertation (1945). A strong supporter of the proposed national health service, his aspirations of becoming a staff physician at Barts were challenged by an invitation from the MRC to direct the ground breaking work of understanding the aetiology of pneumoconiosis within the mining valleys of south Wales. Twenty-five per cent of the coalminers were afflicted, with their lung capacity eroded. It was at Llandough Hospital, Cardiff, that Fletcher established, from scratch, a major research unit. Arguably his greatest achievement lay in recruiting an exceptionally able team, including Archie Cochrane, John Gilson, Philip Hugh-Jones, and Martin Wright, to the service of chest pathology and the unit's epidemiological surveys. Under his direction they achieved a new depth of understanding of pulmonary disease and its prevention. The unit also played a major role in drawing attention to the extent to which observer error plagued medical practice. 
Regarding his period in Wales as a form of national service, compensating for lack of military service, Fletcher returned to the Hammersmith in 1952 as clinical lecturer in respiratory diseases. It did not prove the happiest of returns to mainstream medicine, seven years in Cardiff leaving him out of touch with clinical practice. He retreated increasingly into epidemiological surveys; it was a period of difficult adjustment and episodes of deep depression. It was, however, as a clinical epidemiologist that his career rose further, the great London smog of 1952-3 stimulating a wave of research options. He became secretary to the MRC's bronchitis research committee (1954-76), his own research including a major prospective study of bronchitis and emphysema among London's transport and Post Office workers. He also established a dialogue between North American and European physicians, who seriously lacked a consistent terminology. Until then doctors working in this field were not talking of the same diseases. 
A skilled communicator himself, and undeterred by fierce opposition from members of the medical fraternity, Fletcher was already well known to the public through presentation of a range of television programmes on medical matters, notably 'Hurt Minds' (1955) and 'Your Life in their Hands' (1958-65). At the Royal College of Physicians, where he was elected vice-president in 1973, he drafted the first, ground breaking, report on smoking and health (1962) and was instrumental in founding the Council for Action on Smoking and Health (ASH). He continued to campaign for better communication in medicine, the topic of an inspiring Rock Carling lecture (1972) and future publications. In retirement he enjoyed gardening and bee-keeping at his home on the Isle of Wight, remaining actively involved with a number of research charities and in the field of medical ethics, but no longer holding the strong religious beliefs of his youth inspired by his mother's moral crusading within the Oxford Group. Early in his career, following his pneumoconiosis studies in Wales, he was appointed CBE. Some have speculated that his outspoken lobbying against the tobacco industry, or his popular television image, denied him higher honours. Even his personal chair in clinical epidemiology (1973-6) may be regarded as rather delayed in arriving. But in advancing the public understanding of medicine more than any other physician of his generation and playing a leading role in unmasking tobacco, a lifetime feeling that he would never match his father's achievements turned out not to be justified. He died at his London home, 24 West Square, Kennington, on 15 December 1995, survived by his wife and three children. Friends and professional colleagues were among those who attended his memorial service at St Paul's Cathedral on 21 March 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 60343


Cox, Sir (George) Trenchard (1905-1995), museum director, was born on 31 July 1905 at 19 Craven Hill, London, the son of William Pallett Cox, barrister, and his wife, Marion, 'nee' Beverley. He was educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge, where he was a prizeman; in 1926 he took a third in part one of the modern and medieval languages tripos, and in 1928 a first in part two of the modern languages certificate of competent knowledge. Away from his studies Cox developed an interest in the arts. He was encouraged in this by a family friend, Cecil Harcourt-Smith, the director of the Victoria and Albert Museum; and at Cambridge he was inspired by Sydney Cockerell, the director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, to pursue a career in museums. He embarked on this in the then usual way by working, from 1929 to 1932, as a volunteer at the National Gallery and in the department of prints and drawings at the British Museum. During that period he also spent a semester, in 1930, at Berlin University, studying art history under Adolph Goldschmidt. For the rest of his life he would recall Goldschmidt and Charles Holmes, who supervised him at the National Gallery, as his two most important mentors. A brief stay in Paris before returning home led to Cox's 'Jehan Foucquet, Native of Tours' (1931), a study of the French Renaissance painter. 
From the British Museum, Cox joined the staff of the Wallace Collection in 1932 as assistant to the keeper, Sir James Mann. Although Cox did not warm to Mann, he acquired a lasting interest in the decorative arts of eighteenth-century France. He contributed to the catalogue of the exhibition of French art at Burlington House in 1932, and later produced two short works about the Wallace Collection. His marriage, on 14 November 1935, to Mary Desiree (Maisie), the only daughter of Sir Hugh Kerr Anderson, master of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, proved blissfully happy. They had no children, but remained a devoted couple until her death in 1973. In the summer of 1939 Cox had the task of organizing the evacuation of the Wallace Collection's holdings from Hertford House, after which he was seconded for wartime duties at the Home Office, as private secretary to Sir Alexander Maxwell, the permanent under-secretary. 
In 1944, having proved himself a most efficient administrator, Cox was appointed director of the Birmingham City Museum and Art Gallery. The challenge at Birmingham was daunting: the museum's premises, mostly converted for use as council offices during the war, had to be recovered for museum use, and extensive repairs and refurbishment had to be accomplished on a slender budget. But with the help of Dr Mary Woodall, keeper of the department of art, Cox established excellent relations with the Birmingham city corporation and overcame all difficulties to re-establish and increase the museum's high standing. He was exceptionally supportive of the museum's staff, never failing to write a note of congratulation to those responsible for an exhibition or new display. He encouraged everyone under his supervision to fulfil their potential, and established one of the most successful museum friends organizations of the period. In 1947 he paid tribute to Birmingham's most famous painter with the publication of his book 'David Cox'. 
In 1955 the minister of education, David Eccles, offered Cox the post of director and secretary of the Victoria and Albert Museum. The retiring director, Sir Leigh Ashton, had lost his grip, and a new man was urgently needed to restore morale at the museum. Cox accepted the offer and, despite Eccles's explanation that he had been selected to keep the seat warm for John Pope-Hennessy, he stayed until 1966. The first task he undertook set the tone of fairness and kindness that was to characterize his directorship: with the help of his assistant Terence Hodgkinson, he learnt the names of all the museum's staff within three weeks. Thereafter he greeted everybody by name -- and slipped up only once, when confusing the identities of two typists who had temporarily exchanged places. His directorship was also marked by the creation of the museum's education and conservation departments; the reorganization of the National Art Library; such important acquisitions as the jade wine cup of Shah Jahan; and a high standard of exhibitions, notably that devoted to 'Opus Anglicanum' in 1963. On Cox's initiative a female research assistant was promoted to assistant keeper grade, and (another first) a black warder was promoted supervising warder. 
Beyond the Victoria and Albert Museum, Cox took an active interest in the Museums Association, of which he became president in 1963, and in the International Council of Museums. He was also president of the National Association of Decorative and Fine Art Societies; and a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts and of the Society of Antiquaries. He was a staunch supporter of the social welfare activities of St Martin-in-the-Fields, where in retirement he served as people's warden from 1968 to 1979. Tentative and fastidious in manner, he was free of prejudice and self-effacing to a fault. He had very poor eyesight and when talking animatedly would wave his arms about and sway. He always felt at home on the continent, especially in France. Cox was appointed CBE in 1954, knighted in 1961, and appointed a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1967. He died of bronchopneumonia and cancer at his home, 33 Queen's Gate Gardens, London, on 21 December 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60346


Finlay, (William) Ian Robertson (1906-1995), museum director and art historian, was born at Auckland, New Zealand, on 2 December 1906, the son of William Walker Robertson Finlay (1875-1961), stationer and artist, and his wife, Annie Margaret, 'nee' Somerville (1875-1951). Within six weeks of his birth, his parents, who were Scottish, returned to Edinburgh, which became Finlay's home for the rest of his life. From 1915 to 1924 he attended the Edinburgh Academy but he did not take the university entrance examination until 1926. He entered the University of Edinburgh in that year and graduated with honours in history in 1930. In 1928 he was joint winner of the Cousin prize in fine art, his major subject. In 1932 he became an assistant keeper in the department of art and ethnography of the Royal Scottish Museum, then administered by the Scottish education department. He was appointed keeper of the department in 1955 and director of the museum in 1961, retiring in 1971. During the Second World War he was seconded to the Ministry of Information, and from 1942 to 1944 he was the ministry's deputy regional officer for Scotland. He contributed a number of the BBC's wartime 'Sunday Postscripts', and became a frequent broadcaster. 
Gold and silverware were Finlay's chief interest, and he enhanced the museum's collections significantly. A purchase which gave him particular pleasure was the French seventeenth-century Lennoxlove toilet-service, which he regarded as perhaps the finest thing of its kind in existence. His book 'Scottish Gold and Silver Work' (1956), revised by H. Steuart Fotheringham (1991), remains the standard text in this field. He became a freeman of the City of London in 1949 and liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths in 1951. 
In 1960 Finlay visited American museums as a guest of the American state department. On becoming director in the following year, he was able to act on the insights he had gained there, as well as on his own ideas for the future of the museum. He was anxious to provide services to the public and so make the museum a more welcoming place. The refurbishment of the Victorian building by the Property Services Agency gave him the opportunity to plan for public services as well as new presentations by the museum's four curatorial departments. Having inherited a new lecture theatre, he started a programme of public lectures by eminent scholars which made a valuable addition to Edinburgh's cultural life. A tea-room was created. Posts in education, public relations, and design were established, which inaugurated work that later expanded greatly. The Friends of the Royal Scottish Museum, then a new idea in Scotland, was started under his guidance. Throughout his museum career he was responsible for temporary exhibitions of quality and influence which were enhanced by the provision of a new temporary exhibition hall during his directorship. Many were associated with the Edinburgh international festival, and some went on to other venues. Of particular significance was 'Byzantine Art' (1958), arranged by David and Tamara Talbot Rice, which showed objects from behind the Iron Curtain for the first time in the West since the Second World War. 
Finlay's concern for the arts was not confined to the museum. For eight years (1953-61) he was secretary of the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland. He maintained active links with the Arts Council and was vice-chairman of the Scottish Arts Council in 1967. From 1968 to 1971 he served on the Edinburgh festival council, and he was a member of the 'conseil de direction' of the 'Gazette des Beaux Arts'. He was made a CBE in 1965, and in 1971 was elected an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy on his appointment as its tenth professor of antiquities. 
Writing was important to Finlay and, on leaving school, his freelance articles began to appear in the Scottish press. He contributed to journals in this country and abroad, but preferred to communicate through books. His love of Scotland's history, arts, and landscape inspired eighteen lucid and informative books for adults and children. After retiring from the museum he travelled in Europe pursuing his interest in Celtic art, which led to his 'Celtic Art: an Introduction' (1973) and his last work, 'Columba' (1979; new edn 1990). 
Finlay was a well-known figure in the Scottish arts world. Tall, thin, bespectacled, and somewhat reserved, he was a man of charm and distinction. He remained young at heart, his youthful appearance belying his years. He was attractive to younger people because he was a good listener and encouraged the enthusiasms of others. Occasional bursts of anger betrayed his strength of purpose, particularly when his objectives were frustrated by small-mindedness. He had two sons and one daughter with his wife, Mary Scott (1908-1999), daughter of William Henderson Pringle, barrister, of Lincoln's Inn, whom he married on 2 September 1933. The garden of their home at Currie Riggs, Balerno, Midlothian, was a challenge and a joy to him. Not mechanically minded, he enjoyed telling of his motoring adventures. Benighted in an undertaker's store near Glasgow, he was less concerned by his car than intrigued by the macabre transactions going on around him. The power-saw which he requested on his retirement was therefore given with misgivings. He died at Belgrave Lodge, Edinburgh, of heart failure, on 10 December 1995, and was cremated on 16 December at Mortonhall crematorium. He was survived by his wife and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 60347


Watkinson, Harold Arthur, Viscount Watkinson (1910-1995), businessman and politician, was born on 25 January 1910 at Manor Cottage, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, the elder son in the family of two sons and one daughter of Arthur Gill Watkinson, master draper, and later the owner of a light engineering business, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Casey. The family were of staunch Methodist persuasion, and Watkinson later recalled that the local minister 'would go down on his knees, quite naturally, to pray in our sitting room with a simple saintly dignity that touched the heart' (Watkinson, 3). The minister's son Wilberforce Allen was a Liberal member of parliament and gave the young Watkinson his first lessons in politics. Historically, the Methodist tradition has usually led those of a political bent to espouse the Liberal or the Labour Party, but Watkinson from an early stage was drawn to the Conservative Party. He did not, however, become seriously involved in politics until after the Second World War. 
Watkinson was educated at Queen's College, Taunton, and at King's College, London, where he studied engineering. He left without taking a degree and entered the family business at the age of twenty. Outside work, his passion was for climbing. In his autobiography he wrote that at school 'I had been one of the instigators of scrambling at night over the high roofs and battlements (that were strictly out of bounds)' (Watkinson, 4). Later he was encouraged by one of Britain's first professional climbers, Jerry Wright, to take up the activity more seriously. In 1939 he met and became engaged to Vera (Peggy) Langmead, youngest daughter of John Langmead, of Ford, Sussex. When war broke out Watkinson joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve: he had learned to sail on family holidays at Bournemouth and Poole, where he was taught by one of the local fishermen. Before he went on active service he and Peggy decided to get married; they did so on 18 November 1939. They had two daughters, Sarah Margaret ('b'. 1944) and Rosemary Jane ('b'. 1947). Watkinson served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve throughout the Second World War. His engineering experience led him inevitably to the Royal Naval Gunnery School, where he was occupied for the whole of the war in the defence of merchant shipping. He ended the war with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
In 1948 Watkinson became chairman of the Dorking Conservative Association. He was selected to stand for Woking in the February 1950 general election and was duly elected. With the return of a Conservative government in October 1951 he was given the junior, non-ministerial job of parliamentary private secretary to the minister of transport and civil aviation. In May 1952, owing to the personal intervention of Winston Churchill, who wanted to promote young men with a sound background in industry, he was appointed parliamentary under-secretary to the minister of labour and national service, Sir Walter Monckton, a post he held until December 1955, when he was appointed to the more senior post of minister of transport and civil aviation, not then a cabinet post. When in January 1957 Harold Macmillan succeeded Sir Anthony Eden as prime minister, he brought Watkinson into the cabinet (still as minister of transport and civil aviation) and in October 1959 promoted him to be minister of defence, where he succeeded Churchill's son-in-law Duncan Sandys. This appointment later led to his political downfall. 
Initially, Macmillan thought of Watkinson in the same way as Churchill had: a thrusting young industrialist who could bring fresh life to a government of old men. However, it turned out that there were serious differences of policy between the prime minister and his defence minister. Despite the demise of the British empire, Macmillan believed that a worldwide role for the British armed services could be sustained. Watkinson did not. He was determined that Britain's responsibilities should be reduced, and very sharply so. His view was influenced by his reading of the unhappy episode of Britain's intervention in the Suez War of 1956. In July 1962 Macmillan decided to reshuffle his cabinet. This resulted in the sacking of seven cabinet ministers and numerous junior ministers and came to be known as 'the night of the long knives'. In the press it was generally agreed that this was an act of panic in the face of falling Conservative popularity. The dismissal of Watkinson, however, was as much a result of the fundamental difference of opinion between Macmillan and Watkinson, as of the prime minister's desire to bring new blood into his government. In his autobiography Watkinson made it clear that he felt a deep sense of personal hurt at his peremptory -- as he saw it -- dismissal, and did not dwell on the important policy differences between himself and the prime minister. He was, after all, only fifty-two, and could justifiably have anticipated a long career in government. Most of the other ministers dismissed by Macmillan at that time were elderly, and happy to retire -- though one of them, Selwyn Lloyd, made a somewhat spectacular return to politics as speaker of the House of Commons under the prime ministership of Sir Alec Douglas-Home. When in June 1964 Watkinson decided not to stand for re-election to the House of Commons in the general election of October that year, it was Douglas-Home who rewarded him with a viscountcy for his services to government and party. 
Watkinson thereupon threw all his considerable energy into business affairs, concentrating on promoting Britain's economic interests abroad. From 1964 to 1970 he was a member of the British National Export Council and from 1964 to 1967 chairman of the Committee for Exports to the United States. For ten years he was a key figure in the British Institute of Management, serving as its chairman from 1968 to 1970, its vice-president from 1970 to 1973, and its president from 1973 to 1978. It was during this time that he published his 'Blueprint for Industrial Survival' (1976), large parts of which were incorporated into his autobiography, 'Turning Points' (1986). He was group managing director of Schweppes Ltd from 1963 to 1968, chairman of Cadbury's Schweppes Ltd from 1969 to 1974, a director of British Insulated Callender's Cables from 1968 to 1977 and of Midland Bank from 1970 to 1983, and president of the Confederation of British Industry from 1976 to 1977. He was also a member of the National Economic Development Council from 1976 to 1977. In all his business activities Watkinson followed the policies which he had so passionately espoused during his time in government, of building up Britain's economic potential abroad. While he had differed from Macmillan on the military potential of the United Kingdom overseas, he was convinced none the less that economic power was crucial to his country's future, and he made a worthy contribution to that future. He was a member of the Falkland Islands review committee from 1982 to 1983. He died on 19 December 1995 at his home, Tyma House, Bosham, Chichester, Sussex, of cancer of the prostate. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. There was no heir to the viscountcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 60348


Dobson, Sir Denis William (1908-1995), lawyer and civil servant, was born at Shortlands, Graham Park Road, Gosforth, Northumberland, on 17 October 1908, the son of William Gordon Dobson, shipbuilder, and his wife, Laura Janet, 'nee' Muskett. He was educated at Charterhouse School (1922-6) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1926-30), where he took a first class in part one of the law tripos and in the LLB examination. He was admitted a solicitor in 1933 after being articled in Newcastle upon Tyne. He then moved to London and joined a firm in the City, but after what he was later to call 'a mutually disenchanting year' ('The Times', 16 Dec 1995) joined a firm of parliamentary agents, where he laid the foundations of his skill as a draftsman. On 4 December 1934 he married Thelma ('b'. 1906/7), daughter of Charles Curry Swinburne, engineer and brassfounder, of Newcastle upon Tyne. They had a son and a daughter. 
During the Second World War, Dobson served in the Royal Air Force, including three years with the desert air force (1942-5), first with the Eighth Army in north Africa and later in Malta and Italy. His drive and energy were already recognizable and by the end of his service he was senior personnel staff officer. He was appointed OBE in 1945. Following demobilization he had hoped to join the legal branch of the Foreign Office but he was excluded on medical grounds, having contracted tuberculosis. Instead he joined the statutory publications office, which came under the Treasury. His skills there were recognized by Sir Thomas Barnes, the Treasury solicitor, who introduced him to Sir Albert Napier, who wished to strengthen the small legal staff of the Lord Chancellor's Office. Dobson joined the office in 1947. In the same year his first marriage was dissolved and on 29 December 1948 he married Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Captain Joseph Alexander Allen, RAF officer, of Haywards Heath, Sussex; they had two sons and a daughter. 
Dobson was soon recognized as a future contender for the post of permanent secretary of the Lord Chancellor's Office, and was advised to qualify as a barrister. He was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1951. In 1954 Napier was succeeded by Sir George Coldstream as permanent secretary, and Dobson became deputy clerk of the crown in Chancery and assistant permanent secretary to the lord chancellor. Coldstream retired in 1968 and, at the relatively late age of sixty, Dobson succeeded him as clerk of the crown in Chancery and permanent secretary. In the same year he was made a bencher of the Middle Temple. He took silk as a QC in 1971. He was promoted KCB in 1969, having been made CB in 1959. 
On joining the Lord Chancellor's Office, Dobson had at first a keen interest in both law reform and legislation, and became a master of every detail of bills with which the lord chancellor was concerned. His earlier experience with parliamentary agents and the statutory publications office gave him extra confidence to challenge parliamentary counsel and departmental lawyers on aspects of bills for which other ministers were responsible. There were many expert and acrimonious exchanges, and his opening form of address to opponents, 'Now look here, X', became legendary across Whitehall. 
By 1969 Dobson's outlook had become conservative. It was in that year that the royal commission chaired by Lord Beeching on assizes and quarter sessions reported. Both the Labour and the subsequent Conservative government adopted its radical conclusions. These included the establishment of a single crown court with jurisdiction to sit wherever it was needed, and the creation under the lord chancellor of a unified, full-time court service to run the new system. The effect was to transform the small Lord Chancellor's Office, largely concerned with advising the lord chancellor, into a major government department. Dobson had reservations about these reforms, and was generally believed to have held back several lord chancellors from making desirable changes in other areas. 
Dobson retired as permanent secretary of the Lord Chancellor's Office in 1977. He served as a member of the Advisory Council on Public Records from then until 1983. As a civil servant he had been memorable for his forceful vigour, the speed of his intelligence, and his command of the law, but also for his quick temper, and his distrust of change. Policy issues were less attractive to him than the law itself, and there were those who felt that the best outlet for his talents would have been as an outstanding parliamentary draftsman. He died of heart failure on 15 December 1995 at the Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham, London; he was survived by his wife Mary and their three children, and by the two children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 60350


Marshall, David Saul (1908-1995), chief minister of Singapore, was born David Saul Mashal in Selegie Road, Singapore, on 12 March 1908, the eldest son and second of the seven children of Saul Nassim Mashal, a Sephardi Jewish merchant from Baghdad, and his wife, Flora Ezekiel, 'nee' Gahtan. On the advice of a family doctor their family name was Anglicized to Marshall in 1920 following a similar change of name by his uncle and his family in England. At the age of six the young David Mashal had his first taste of wartime internment when he accompanied his mother and brother to Baghdad in 1914 only to find themselves detained by the Turkish authorities for travelling on British passports. After the liberation of Baghdad by British forces in 1917 they returned to Singapore and he was enrolled in the kindergarten of the Convent of the Holy Infant Jesus, before continuing his education at St Joseph's Institution, from which he was expelled after a year for being absent from school on the celebration of Yom Kippur. He fared better at St Andrew's School (1919-21) and the Raffles Institution (1922-4), where his scholastic abilities soon placed him among the top students of his class. As he prepared to sit for a queen's scholarship examination, he worked himself to exhaustion and had to spend some nine months recuperating in a Swiss sanatorium in 1925, where he put the time to good use by learning French, before returning to Singapore in 1926. He took on various jobs -- working as a stockbroker, textile representative, salesman, and shipping assistant -- to finance his ambition to study in England. 
Deterred by the high costs of studying medicine and psychiatry, his first love, Marshall settled for law and arrived in London in 1934 to pursue his legal education, which he completed within eighteen months. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1937. After returning to Singapore in the same year he was called to the Singapore bar in February 1938 and joined the firm Aitken and Ong Siang, and later Allen and Gledhill, only to find his legal career disrupted by the invasion and occupation of Singapore by the Japanese during the Second World War. Having joined the Singapore Volunteer Corps before the war, he was interned and dispatched to Japan in 1943 to work in the coal mines of Hokkaido. 
After the war Marshall was flown to Manila before being repatriated, at his request, to Perth, Australia, where his father and brothers had taken refuge before the outbreak of hostilities, before returning to Singapore in February 1946. Resuming his practice at Allen and Gledhill, and later at Battenberg and Talma, he soon established himself as a leading criminal defence lawyer (he later claimed to have won acquittals in 99 out of the 100 cases he defended on murder charges) but was also increasingly drawn to the affairs of the Jewish Welfare Board, becoming its first elected president in June 1946, and remaining in that post for the next six years. Through his legal circle of contacts he joined the Singapore Association, an organization representing mainly European commercial interests, and became a member of its committee in June 1947. When politically active leaders of the Singapore Association pushed for the formation of the Singapore Progressive Party in August 1947, Marshall also drifted into politics and formally joined the party in November 1949. Elected to its committee in March 1950, he remained active in the party but grew increasingly restless and impatient with its gradualist programme for constitutional change and resigned in December 1952. 
In 1953 the British government convened the Rendel commission to recommend a constitution that would hasten the steps towards self-government for Singapore. Thereafter Marshall began to associate with Lim Yew Hock and Francis Thomas, two former leaders of the Singapore Labour Party, and together they founded the Singapore Socialist Party in April 1954, only to have it merged a few months later with the Singapore Labour Party to become the Labour Front, which Marshall agreed to head. In November 1954 he published an impassioned personal manifesto, 'I Believe', calling for immediate self-government as the party prepared for the run-up to the April 1955 elections. A fiery election campaign left Marshall astonished to find his party winning ten of the twenty-five elected seats and himself installed as Singapore's first chief minister, heading a precarious minority government that was soon assailed by a spate of violent strikes and riots among labour unions and Chinese schools. Marshall's unwillingness to suppress anti-colonial dissent contributed to his stormy relations with the colonial authorities, and particularly the governor, Sir John Nicoll. Within four months he precipitated a constitutional crisis over his right to appoint four assistant ministers. The incident paved the way for the first all-party constitutional talks in London, between April and May 1956, but negotiations faltered over issues of internal security. Failing to deliver on his promise of independence for Singapore, a dejected Marshall returned and resigned as chief minister on 7 June 1956. He gave up his parliamentary seat in April 1957 but came back to win a by-election in Anson in July 1961 as a candidate of the Workers' Party, which he had founded in November 1957. He resigned from the party in January 1963, following an internal dispute. After he lost his seat in the September 1963 general election as an independent candidate his political career petered out, and he played no part in the negotiations that led to Singapore's independence in 1965. He returned to his law practice and became a critic of the government's tough criminal policies (which included abolition of trial by jury), but also lauded its economic achievements. Meanwhile, in April 1961 he had married Jean Mary Gray, a lecturer in social work; they had three daughters, Sarah, Ruth, and Joanna, and a son, Jonathan. 
In 1978, at the age of seventy, Marshall left his law practice to accept an appointment that led to him serving as Singapore's ambassador to France, Spain, Portugal, and Switzerland for the next fifteen years. When failing health and eyesight forced him to retire in 1993, he resumed work as a consultant in a leading Singapore law firm, Drew and Napier. In 1987 the National University of Singapore awarded him an honorary doctorate of law for his contributions to Singapore and the legal profession. He died at his home in Balmoral Road, Singapore, on 12 December 1995 of lung cancer, and was buried in the Jewish section of Choa Chu Kang cemetery. He was survived by his wife, Jean, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 60352


Davies, (William) Robertson (1913-1995), novelist and university teacher, was born on 28 August 1913 in Elizabeth Street, Thamesville, Ontario, the third of the three sons of (William) Rupert Davies (1879-1967), newspaper publisher and broadcaster, and Florence McKay (1870-1948). His father had arrived in Canada from his native Wales, penniless but determined to flourish as a printer, first in the rural village of Thamesville in south-western Ontario. So successful was Rupert Davies that in time he became the owner of several Ontario newspapers, a partner with Roy Thomson (later Lord Thomson of Fleet) in radio and television stations, a Liberal senator, and the owner of a large Victorian pile in south Wales to which he frequently retreated with unfailing enthusiasm. Robertson Davies remained grateful to his affluent father throughout his life, but relations with his mother, nine years older than her husband, were never easy. Florence McKay, a descendant of united empire loyalists who had made their way, with great hardship, to the wilderness of Upper Canada following the American War of Independence, appeared to her three sons as frequently cantankerous, caustic, and distant. It was a troubled relationship that Davies was to explore in his novels. 
Placed in Canada's leading boys' school, Upper Canada College, by his increasingly prosperous father, Davies soon demonstrated a love for the theatre, happily participating in student productions there and later at Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, and at Balliol College, Oxford (where he also joined enthusiastically in college music with Edward Heath). Throughout the 1930s, during his school and university years, Davies sought in drama the fulfilment of his mounting literary ambitions, studying and writing about the English theatre of the eighteenth and especially the nineteenth century and, in Oxford and London, collaborating with his dynamic wife-to-be, the Australian Brenda Mathews ('b'. 1917). During their subsequent two years at the Old Vic, Tyrone Guthrie, who became a lifelong friend, saw in Robertson Davies a valued literary assistant and a likely Shakespearian actor and in Brenda Mathews a highly competent -- and his first female -- stage manager. Brenda Mathews and Robertson Davies married on 2 February 1940, but the war effectively ended their still uncertain theatrical prospects in Britain. Rejected by the Canadian army because of his weak eyesight -- it was not for nothing that he had affected a monocle during his more flamboyant days at Oxford -- Davies sought the safety of Ontario, where a fledgeling career in journalism awaited him. There he wrote regularly for two of his father's provincial newspapers. A tireless reader since schooldays, he soon became the literary editor of the national periodical 'Saturday Night' and, at his father's invitation, editor of the 'Peterborough Examiner'. Wartime Peterborough, 135 kilometres north-east of Toronto, with a population in 1940 of no more than 25,000, was unappreciative of -- if not faintly hostile towards -- the intellectual attainments and literary imagination of both Brenda and Robertson Davies. The small-town Ontario experience did, however, lead to Davies's first books, two collections of his provocative and frequently comic 'Samuel Marchbanks' columns from the 'Examiner'. Such were their quality that they induced Roy Thomson to offer him the editorship of 'The Scotsman'. 
Following the end of the Second World War, Davies continued as literary editor of 'Saturday Night', while writing reviews and articles for the 'Kingston Whig Standard' and the 'Peterborough Examiner'. All the while he continued to help foster with Brenda the modest theatrical life of Ontario. He offered a series of short plays to the annual dominion drama festival, but they challenged Canada's uncertain post-war self-perceptions and were largely unsuccessful despite their easy way with fantasy and humour. Davies's own lack of success as a dramatist did not, however, diminish his commitment to the theatre. He made a major contribution to the launch of the highly successful annual Shakespearian festival in Stratford, Ontario, not far from his birthplace, a festival presided over by his old friend Sir Tyrone Guthrie. 
In 1951, increasingly impatient at the continuing cool reception given his plays in Canada and at the Edinburgh festival in 1949, Davies, then aged thirty-eight, attempted his first novel, 'Tempest-Tost'. Finally free of the frustrating dependence on cast and producers, he adopted his new literary form with enthusiasm, letting his imagination in 'Tempest-Tost' re-create his undergraduate days at Queen's University -- and his tense relations with his difficult mother -- while offering a memorable and highly amusing account of a bungled student production of Shakespeare's late play. Theatre and, eventually, opera were never distant from his novels. His next two, 'Leaven of Malice' (1954) and 'A Mixture of Frailties' (1958), soon completed the Salterton trilogy, the first of several trilogies. (Davies later maintained that he had never intended to write trilogies: he simply had more to say about the varied experience and understanding of his principal characters than he could encompass in a single volume.) Davies always wrote rapidly. Drawing on his experience as editor of the 'Peterborough Examiner', the Salterton trilogy reviewed, in a light-hearted and witty way, the part played by a newspaper in a small Ontario community and the diversity of meaning that subscribers read into newspapers. 'Leaven of Malice' was awarded the Stephen Leacock prize for humour. 'A Mixture of Frailties' reflected the growing interest and conviction of both Brenda and Robertson Davies in the teachings of Carl Jung. Like the major characters in Davies's novels, the Davieses were engaged in a quest for greater self-knowledge and were increasingly captivated by what they read of the Swiss psychoanalyst. He was to them satisfyingly optimistic, flexible, and exploitive of legend in a constructive and illuminating way. They embraced his teachings as 'both safer and more lastingly effective than Freud's', which the Davieses had found restrictive (R. Davies, 'The individual and the mass', 'Saturday Night', 24 May 1958, 26). 'Jung's thought is very expansive, a sort of opening out of life whereas so much psychoanalytical thinking is reductive', Davies said ('New York Times', 4 Dec 1995). His teachings seemed comprehensive, asserting that wholeness in life can be achieved through a process of integration beyond one's own consciousness to embrace that of the traditions and collective consciousness of a whole race. As one who described his writing as having at its centre 'the isolation of the human spirit' (ibid.) in its progress from innocence to experience, Davies came to accept myths as part of the Jungian understanding of archetypes. Myths also contributed to the richness of his juxtaposed comedy and melodrama, realism and illusion. That Davies, by the 1950s, had been heavily influenced by Jung was even more evident in a final play, 'General Confession'. Although a failure in New York City, it is of significance for the close reader of Davies since it reflects in detail his understanding of Jung's 'collective unconscious' and the archetypes that populate it. 
By the age of forty-seven Davies had turned decisively from writing plays to writing novels. He knew that he had already achieved much, being recognized, in Canada at least, as an able and witty journalist, a competent playwright, and increasingly as a committed novelist, but not yet more. In a book of essays about reading, 'A Voice from the Attic' (1960), he extolled 'the values of the humanist -- curiosity, the free mind, belief in good taste, and belief in the human race... an informed, rational and intellectually adventurous individuality must take precedence over all else' (R. Davies, 'A Voice from the Attic', 1960, 39). That understanding was to be the bedrock of Davies's novels and more immediately of the literary columns he wrote for the Toronto 'Star' syndicate. Concurrently, he became a part-time lecturer in drama at Trinity College in the University of Toronto, having completed in 1960 a total of twenty-five years with the 'Peterborough Examiner', first as a columnist, then as editor, and later as publisher. The Davies family moved from Peterborough to Toronto with their three daughters when a yet greater involvement in academe arrived in the form of an invitation from Vincent Massey, the former high commissioner for Canada in Britain and later governor-general, to become the first master of Massey College, at the University of Toronto. The college was modelled on Balliol, the beloved Oxford college of both Massey and Davies. As the first master Davies proved an inspired choice, despite criticisms of the penchant he and Massey shared for the traditional trappings of an Oxbridge college and their desire to transpose these to the markedly different terrain of Ontario. The combined experience of Trinity and Massey enriched Davies's subsequent novels, but it also fuelled his critics' charges that he was pretentious and pedantic and preoccupied with cerebral analysis at the expense of emotional understanding. His presence at the university was visually inescapable: no one else had the theatrical appearance of his great silver mane and beard, hats, and capes, all as easily worn as if he were still at the Old Vic. 
Davies had long known that criticism is integral to university life and was not unduly distracted from his commitment to create in Massey College a vibrant and productive community, but the price was initially a reduction in the pace of his story-telling. In 1971, ten years after his appointment as master, 'Fifth Business' was published. It was, to a degree, an autobiographical novel, but it was also heavily informed by his understanding of Jung's psychoanalysis -- as were also, to a greater or less extent, all his subsequent novels. 'Fifth Business' also triggered another trilogy, the Deptford trilogy, named like the Salterton after a fictional Ontario village. It launched the journeys of self-discovery of individuals, corresponding to Jungian archetypes, who were also to people the subsequent 'The Manticore' (1972), which won the governor-general's award, and 'World of Wonders' (1975). 'Fifth Business', among other matters, deals broadly with the nature of mothers; 'The Manticore' considers fathers. But the Deptford trilogy as a whole, uneven as it is, embraces much more: the eternal question of what is good and what is evil -- or what is God and what is the devil -- with the artist as the purveyor of interpretations, analysis, and wonders. For some, the Deptford trilogy, completed in 1975, remains Davies's best work, rich in characterization, elaborate in plot. Certainly its critical and commercial success in the United States brought him continental instead of merely Canadian accolades -- and was the beginning of the burgeoning international recognition that was to mark the last two decades of his life (with sales rapidly increasing in Britain as well as in the United States and Canada). 
When Davies retired as master of Massey College and ceased teaching at Trinity College in the University of Toronto in 1981, he embarked on what became a third trilogy, completed in 1988, the Cornish trilogy, named after its principal character. 'The Rebel Angels' (1981), centred in a Canadian university and narrated largely by a female graduate student, draws heavily on Davies's years at the two colleges (as well as a backward glance at Queen's and Balliol). 'The Rebel Angels' was received with acclaim by critics across North America as, variously, baroque, esoteric, mystical, and whimsical. In Britain, Anthony Burgess greeted it with the observation that 'Among Canadian WASP novelists who have remained loyal to the culture of the Commonwealth, Robertson Davies, at age 69, stands out as internationally important and undoubted Nobel material' (A. Burgess, 'Maple leaf Rabelais', 'The Observer', 4 April 1982, 33). Despite Davies's loyalty to the culture of the Commonwealth, the Booker prize for Commonwealth authors eluded him, as did the Nobel prize for literature. Yet an honorary doctorate from Oxford and his honorary fellowship at Balliol as well as the award of the order of Canada gave him great pleasure. He was also the first Canadian to be made an honorary member of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters. 
The second and third novels of the Cornish trilogy, 'What's Bred in the Bone' (1985) and 'The Lyre of Orpheus' (1988), continued Davies's explorations of the magical and mystical, reflecting his Jungian understandings but also confirming, as one critic put it, his conviction that 'the modern habit of baring and telling all to be the most abysmal lack of good taste and manners' (C. Ford, 'Calgary Herald', 5 Dec 1995). Curiosity and intelligence are the major traits of his characters in the Cornish fables. The central figures, an artist and an opera singer, both ambiguous in their very natures, travel through Europe and North America in their pursuit of edification and ultimately salvation. At age seventy-four Davies had one or two new novels already in mind, but the third of the Cornish trilogy, 'The Lyre of Orpheus', was an occasion for drawing together the concerns of his highly symbolic novels -- mystical, comic, reflective, and didactic -- as well as a comment on the variety of life. The trilogy also furthered the translation of Davies into a dozen or more languages, reflecting the fact that although mainly Canada-centred, they draw on the full range of shared civilization in a deeper kind of measure. 
Davies's lifelong fascination with the occult culminated in the novel 'Murther and Walking Spirits' (1991) in which the principal character, Connor Gilmartin, is murdered in the first line. While Gilmartin initially sets out, as a ghost, to achieve his revenge, he ends up acquiring self-knowledge as he moves through his ancestral homeland of Wales and through North America, viewing incidents of his family history. Although it was undeniably both entertaining and illuminating, the novel failed to live up to the standards of Davies's trilogies. George Woodcock was especially unappreciative: 'Robertson Davies' theatrical past hangs heavy over his novels, which tend to combine saucily implausible plots with a good deal of creaking stage machinery, a romantic realist manner, and a shameless display of knowledge in some mildly esoteric field' (G. Woodcock, 'Attwood's dark parables, Davies' ballad of bankruptcy', 'Quill and Quire', August 1991, 14). 
Davies's final novel, 'The Cunning Man', was published in 1995. The title character, a Toronto physician whose life from his childhood in northern Ontario is formed in part by mysticism as much as by science, eventually achieves notable diagnostic insights that are unconventional and unparalleled. With some of the same characters as 'Murther and Walking Spirits', 'The Cunning Man' is liberally sprinkled with asides about Anglican ritual, ageing, medieval art, hagiography, Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy', and yet more arcane matter. 
Davies lived long enough to see 'The Cunning Man', which he regarded as the second volume of yet another trilogy, receive the now well-established acclaim of his critics and his ardent enthusiasts. Following a brief illness, Robertson Davies died on 2 December 1995 in Orangeville, near his country house, Windhover, north of Toronto, leaving the third volume of his projected trilogy incomplete. He was cremated and his ashes were scattered over his farm at Windhover. 
Davies left a remarkably rich legacy, including a posthumous volume of speeches, essays, book reviews, and articles in newspapers and periodicals. 'Merry Heart' (1996) embraces the store of wit and wonder that informs all his writing. His love for humankind, with all its remarkable foibles, expressed in his great good humour, patient understanding, and elaborate plots, has given to literature, and not just Canadian literature, a dimension that is both rare and durable. His lifelong rollicking sense of fun found reflection in the wry wit that informs so much of what he wrote and in the richness of his characters. Not surprisingly, Robertson Davies became in his lifetime something of a Canadian literary icon. He did so late in life and within little more than a decade. By the time of his death he had achieved widespread international recognition. The popularity of his novels continues unabated among a large and devoted following, both within Canada and without. 


@@@@@


doc= 60354


Runcorn, (Stanley) Keith (1922-1995), geophysicist, was born at 186 Duke Street, Southport, Lancashire, on 19 November 1922, the only son of William Henry Runcorn, a monumental mason, and his wife, Lily Idena, 'nee' Roberts ('b'. 1895). He was educated first at the King George V Grammar School in Southport, then in 1940 entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in engineering in 1942. In lieu of military service he was posted to the Radar Research and Development Establishment at Malvern. His academic career began in 1946 with his appointment as an assistant lecturer in physics at Manchester University. Although he was initially interested in cosmic ray physics, he was lured into geophysics through the immense enthusiasm of the head of department, Patrick Blackett, whose new geomagnetic theory connected the origin of the field with the rotation of the earth, and thence required the sources of the geomagnetic field to be distributed throughout the whole body of the earth, in contrast with geodynamo theories, then being initiated by W. M. Elsasser, which place the sources deep within the earth's liquid core. 
For his PhD thesis Runcorn, following a remark of E. C. Bullard, calculated the variation of geomagnetic field strength with depth expected for the two types of theory. Then, advised by W. Bullerwell of the geological survey, he went on to measure the field down deep coalmines using standard survey magnetometers. Crucially the results were consistent with 'core' type rather than 'distributed' theories. Meanwhile Blackett had designed and constructed a highly sensitive astatic magnetometer to detect the extremely weak magnetic field that his theory predicted should exist in the vicinity of a rotating gold sphere. This experiment yielded a negative result, so the magnetometer became available for other research. In 1950 Runcorn was appointed an assistant director of research at the department of geodesy and geophysics, University of Cambridge, and several Manchester undergraduates whose appetite for geophysics had been whetted during the mine experiment joined him as research students. 
Impressed by Jan Hospers's investigations in 1950 on the remanent magnetism of the Icelandic basalt lava flows, Runcorn put forward the axial dipole hypothesis to describe the time-averaged character of the geomagnetic field, and importantly he interested Sir Ronald Fisher (they were both fellows of Gonville and Caius College) in developing statistical methods for spherical distributions. He resolved to extend palaeomagnetic research to weakly magnetized sedimentary rocks, making use of Blackett's magnetometer. In 1951 he took on Edward Irving, a Cambridge geology graduate, and they selected the nicely bedded and finely laminated Precambrian Torridonian sandstones as the subject of study. 
Irving's first results yielded a well-defined palaeomagnetic axis strongly oblique to the present axial dipole with normal and reversed directions, and their potential relevance to Alfred Wegener's (then controversial) proposals on polar wander and continental drift was quickly appreciated. So, later in 1951, Runcorn took on Kenneth Creer to build an astatic magnetometer at Cambridge and to begin a palaeomagnetic survey of the geological column. By mid-1954 Irving and Creer had assembled enough data to construct a palaeomagnetic polar wander curve for the UK. 
In 1955 Runcorn was appointed to the chair of physics at King's College, Newcastle (then part of the University of Durham). Several of his former postgraduate students, including Frank Lowes, Raymond Hide, and Kenneth Creer, joined him as university lecturers. He made frequent lecture tours to the USA, disseminating the broad-ranging and highly original geophysical work of his young research team. In particular the department became the global focal point for palaeo/rock magnetism through the 1960s. Runcorn himself was interested mainly in the deep-seated physical processes that occur in the core and mantle rather than the directly observable near-surface geology. A favourite idea of his, which stemmed from Hide's PhD work on thermal convection in rotating fluids, involved the concept of a growing inner core which, he argued, would produce successive and rather sudden incremental changes in the number of lobes in the pattern of mantle convection, and thus explain why long, relatively quiescent geological periods have been interrupted by shorter phases of continental drift. Importantly all this happened chronologically a decade before the development of the sea-floor spreading hypothesis and the conception of plate tectonics. 
Thereafter Runcorn's prime interests moved to lunar and planetary physics. Together with David Collinson he was appointed by NASA to participate in the study of lunar samples from the Apollo programme. Through the late 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s he organized many major international conferences at Newcastle, some under the auspices of NATO as 'institutes of advanced study'. Committee work and administration bored him and he played little part in university politics. Rather, his drive and energy were fuelled by his frequent visits to the USA. At Newcastle he became known (with some affection) as the visiting professor. 
Besides his election as fellow of the Royal Society (1965), Runcorn was honoured by many learned societies around the world and awarded honorary degrees by numerous universities. He held short-term appointments at the Dominion Observatory, Ottawa (1955); the California Institute of Technology (1957); the University of Miami (1966); Pennsylvania State University (1967); and the University of California at Los Angeles (1975). After retirement from Newcastle in 1988 he divided his time between the University of Alaska, as Sydney Chapman professor in physical science, and the Space Studies Group at Imperial College. He was visiting professor at Kiel University (1992) and at the Max Planck Institute, Mainz (1994). Runcorn was a sincere, thoughtful, and kindly person. He was a keen rugby player through his late fifties and remained an enthusiastic squash player into his seventies. He never married. He died on 5 December 1995 as a result of being attacked in his room at the Hotel San Diego in San Diego, California, where he was visiting fellow geophysicists on his way to the autumn meeting of the American Geophysical Union. 


@@@@@


doc= 60357


Clegg, Hugh Armstrong (1920-1995), industrial relations expert, the fourth child and third son of Herbert Hobson Clegg, a Wesleyan minister, and his wife, Mabel Duckering, was born at Parkvedras House in Truro, Cornwall, on 22 May 1920. Educated at Kingswood School, Bath, the renowned Methodist public school, he reacted against his background, becoming an atheist and a member of the Communist Party as a teenager. This independence of mind, and his ability, were demonstrated by his election to the top scholarship (demyship) in classics at Magdalen College, Oxford, while insisting that he be allowed to read philosophy, politics, and economics, in which he took a first class in 1947 after five years of military service. In the army he showed his grasp of practicalities at the shop-floor level in becoming a skilled telephone engineer. On 28 June 1941 he married (Mary) Matilda Shaw ('b'. 1918/19), the elder daughter of George Shaw, a retired bank manager, and Mary Magowan; they had two sons and two daughters, and Clegg was a devoted and conscientious father. 
Demobilized in 1945, Clegg soon found his communist faith undermined, crucially by his philosophy tutor, the redoubtable T. D. Weldon. By 1949, when he was elected a fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, he was essentially a disillusioned empiricist, whose watchword he described, with some exaggeration, as being that 'an ounce of fact is worth a pound of theory' ('The Guardian'). His early books were a mixture of the monographic and wider studies, on nationalization and industrial democracy, which revealed a touch of the surviving theoretician. From 1955 he was in demand as a candid friend of the unions in a series of public inquiries into disputes, and he also presided at Nuffield over convivial gatherings of employers, politicians, and union leaders in a search for the elusive consensus. 
In his heyday Clegg was the most persuasive advocate of collective bargaining in the voluntarist tradition as a better answer than legislative interference to the problem of damaging relations between capital and labour. His greatest success came as a member of the Donovan commission on trade unions and employers' associations (1965-8). He was largely responsible for its massive research and, by threatening a minority report, inveigled his colleagues into abandoning legal restraints in favour of trying to improve collective bargaining. The commission's modest proposals reassured the unions and modified the attitude of many employers; but during a turbulent decade they were not welcomed by most politicians, who became committed increasingly to legislative interference. Clegg's public service ended in 1980 as chairman of the committee on pay comparability. His last recommendations were reluctantly accepted by the Thatcher government and the committee was abolished. 
In 1967 Clegg was appointed founding professor of industrial relations at Warwick University, which offered him novel scope and enhanced backing. He soon displayed his talents as an academic entrepreneur. Having helped to launch the new business school, he presided over the labours of capable assistants as director of the Industrial Relations Research Unit, who produced work which was, as he said too modestly, 'of some use to someone' ('The Guardian'). But the strain of years had begun to tell, and he resigned his chair in 1979. Long into retirement, however, he kept in touch with his creation, the most respected centre of his favourite studies in the country, cycling in from Kenilworth whenever he could. 
Clegg now concentrated on completing a long-delayed project, 'A History of British Trade Unions since 1889'. The first volume, to 1910 (with A. Fox and A. F. Thompson), had been published in 1964; the second (1911-33) followed in 1985, and the third (after 1933) in 1994, when his health was failing. This was a monumental achievement and remains pre-eminent in its detailed coverage of the whole range of trade-union development over a lengthy period. Here and elsewhere, Clegg has sometimes been criticized for failing to deal adequately with the social and political background to his masterly treatment of the institutional, procedural, and legal aspects of the subject. His mastery is also displayed in the other of the most important among his many books, 'The System of Industrial Relations in Great Britain', originally published in 1953 and revised in 1970 and 1979. Regarded for a generation and more as the indispensable textbook, it is voluminous and completely authoritative. 
Clegg had an incisive, retentive mind, apparent in everything he attempted, on paper and in person. Once sure of his views, after weighing the evidence and the opinions of those he respected, he worked quickly, preferably alone, and wrote with a straightforward clarity in a field not noted for stylistic niceties. He could seem dour, even forbidding, but was essentially considerate and warm-hearted -- as became evident when he proved an excellent Oxford tutor and a fine supervisor of graduate students. Immensely loyal himself, he attracted loyalty from others, and was an engaging and often convivial colleague. ('Who's Who' recorded his recreations as 'walking and beer'.) Impressively agile in committee, he was an outstanding manager of seminars but curiously pedestrian as a lecturer. Growing infirmity meant shorter walks and less of his cycling into Warwick. He never learned to drive and his lifestyle was remarkably simple. Mourned by everyone who knew him, he died in Warwick Hospital on 8 December 1995 of a cerebrovascular infarction. 


@@@@@


doc= 60360


Rose, Gillian Rosemary (1947-1995), philosopher, was born on 20 September 1947 at the Avenue Road Clinic, Hampstead, London. She was the eldest child of Leslie David Stone, doctor of medicine, and his wife, Evelyn (Lynn) Preveser. Her parents, who were Jewish, divorced, and at sixteen she took the surname of her stepfather, Irving Rose. She was educated at Ealing grammar school, and was admitted to St Hilda's College, Oxford, to read philosophy, politics, and economics in 1966. After taking an upper second-class honours degree she studied in New York and West Berlin before returning to St Antony's College, Oxford, for a DPhil under the supervision of Professor Leszek Kolakowski. Her thesis on the concept of reification in the thought of Theodor Wiesengrund Adorno was a pioneering study in the philosophical foundations of Western Marxism and was published in 1978 as 'The Melancholy Science'. Her commitment to interdisciplinary study was already evident in this work, which explores the relationship between philosophy, aesthetics, and social theory. 
In 1974 Rose was appointed lecturer in sociology in the school of European studies in the University of Sussex. She valued the opportunity to teach interdisciplinary courses and the presence of senior colleagues at the University of Sussex, many of whom were 'emigres' from National Socialist Germany and eastern Europe. While at Sussex she wrote probably her finest work, 'Hegel contra Sociology', published in 1981. This work revolutionized the study of Hegel, providing a comprehensive account of his speculative philosophy that overcame the distinction between religious ('right Hegelian') and political ('left Hegelian') interpretations that had prevailed since the death of the philosopher in 1832. 
Rose's interpretation of Hegel not only marked the reintroduction of religious themes into the dogmatically secular culture of Western Marxism but also aimed to defend the relevance of Hegelian thought in the face of its dismissal by post-structuralist and post-modernist thought. This was made clear in her next book, 'Dialectic of Nihilism: Post-Structuralism and Law' (1984), in which she developed a sustained critique of recent French thought that was and remains unique in its refusal to confine itself to exegesis and its uncompromising defence of Hegelianism. In the late 1980s Rose gave two important series of lectures for the University of Sussex interdisciplinary course 'Modern European mind' that formed the core of her subsequent two books, the Kierkegaardian 'The Broken Middle: Out of our Ancient Society' (1992) and 'Judaism and Modernity: Philosophical Essays' (1993). In these books Rose deepened her exploration of political theology begun in 'Hegel contra Sociology' and began to relate her work to public debates in religion, ethics, and architecture. 
In 1989 Rose left the University of Sussex for a chair in social and political thought at the University of Warwick. In 1993 she was diagnosed with ovarian cancer and began the battle with her disease that she recounted in her philosophical and autobiographical meditation 'Love's Work' (1995). This work and the posthumously published books 'Mourning Becomes the Law' (1996) and 'Paradiso' (1999) are characterized by their fusion of intensely personal meditation with religious and political reflections on suffering and injustice. 
Rose died of cancer in Walsgrave Hospital, Coventry, on the evening of 9 December 1995, the same day as a conference at the University of Warwick on the theme of God and the city, attended by many of her close colleagues and students; hours before her death she was baptized into the Church of England. After a memorial ceremony at Coventry Cathedral she was buried at Hampstead cemetery on 18 December 1995. She was unmarried. Her work in the tradition of continental philosophy and her defence of Hegelian political theology has continued to provoke debate among philosophers, theologians, and social theorists, while her inspiring teaching is reflected in the number of her research students who went on to hold teaching posts in British and North American universities. Her papers are collected in an archive at the University of Warwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 60362


Evans, Sir (Robert) Charles (1918-1995), surgeon and mountaineer, was born in Liverpool on 19 October 1918, the son of Robert Charles Evans (1882-1918), solicitor, and his wife, Edith Lloyd, 'nee' Williams (1883-1966). His father, a second lieutenant in the 15th Welsh regiment, was shot dead by a German prisoner on 24 August 1918, and Evans was brought up in Dyffryn Clwyd, Denbighshire, principally by his mother. In childhood he spoke Welsh as his first language. He won a scholarship to Shrewsbury School, which he attended from 1931 to 1937, and another to University College, Oxford, at a time when his love of mountains was already well established. He had been introduced to the Welsh hills by Patrick Childs, a master at Shrewsbury, and by 1939 he had already climbed in Wales, Scotland, Ireland, and the Alps. He qualified in medicine in December 1942, and the following year joined the Royal Army Medical Corps before serving in India, Burma, Vietnam, and Borneo. He was mentioned in dispatches in 1945 for his courage as a regimental medical officer crossing the Irrawaddy. He made two brief treks in the Himalayas during this period -- to Kumaon and along the Singalila Ridge, in sight of Kanchenjunga, third highest mountain in the world. Within a decade he was chosen to lead the expedition that first climbed it. 
Evans practised as a surgical and neurosurgical registrar in Liverpool between 1947 and 1957; during this period his mountaineering prowess blossomed. He was to remark that because of this focus of his life he was the oldest middle-grade surgical registrar in the National Health Service. In the Alps in 1949 his season was marred by the tragic fatality of his companion Richard Hull on the Brouillard Ridge of Mont Blanc. Though injured, having broken Hull's fall, Evans descended alone to Courmayeur to summon help. His first Himalayan expedition was to Annapurna II with Bill Tilman in 1950. He visited Kulu (India), attempting Deo Tibba in 1951, and in 1952 he was deputy leader on the expedition to the 8000 metre peak Cho Oyu, under Eric Shipton. Competence, imperturbability, kindness, exceptional organizational ability, and a quiet wit were the qualities for which his colleagues remembered him. Following Cho Oyu he stayed on in Nepal to explore the upper Barun valley. 
In 1953 Evans was appointed deputy leader of the British Everest expedition under John Hunt, who had replaced Eric Shipton. Evans and Tom Bourdillon made the first ascent of the south summit of Mount Everest on 26 May 1953. Faulty oxygen apparatus and lack of time prevented them from reaching the main summit, which was climbed by Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay several days later. How different Evans's life would have been if he had been one of the summit pair. Nevertheless he was soon chosen to lead the 1955 British expedition to Kanchenjunga, a peak harder and demanding more commitment than Everest itself, and scarcely less high. The ascent by two parties, George Band with Joe Brown, and later Norman Hardie with Tony Streather, on 25 and 26 May made this expedition a model of its kind. 1957 was Evans's last expedition, to Annapurna IV. On 14 August the same year he married (Denise) Nea Morin ('b'. 1931), a teacher, and also in her own right a distinguished climber from a mountaineering family. There were three sons of the marriage. 
In the late 1950s symptoms of Evans's neurological illness began. Multiple sclerosis soon disabled him, marking the end of active climbing. He moved laterally from neurosurgery into university administration, and became principal of the University College of North Wales, Bangor, in 1957. This post, which he held until 1984, brought him into conflict with Plaid Cymru, in particular over the appointment of non-Welsh academic staff. Despite these difficulties (which saddened him greatly), and those of his progressive illness, he presided over a flourishing university that tripled in size and established departments of international repute in oceanography, marine biology, electronics, and forestry. 
Evans's four books portrayed his modesty, accuracy, and humour. 'Eye on Everest' (1955) was a gentle book of the sketches he made in 1953, sometimes mocking the neo-imperial aspects of the Everest expedition. 'On Climbing' (1956) was in part an autobiography, understated and dwelling more on climbs he had enjoyed than those for which he was well known. 'Kanchenjunga: the Untrodden Peak' (1956) was the story of this great expedition which he led. His final book, 'A Doctor in the XIVth Army', was published posthumously in 1998; this recorded the campaign by the 'forgotten army' against the Japanese forces. Evans's diaries, on which the book was based, were meticulous, frank, and full of understanding. He described the poor physical condition and privation that Japanese prisoners suffered in British hands, as well as 'vice versa', and recalled how at the trial of a Japanese Lieutenant-Colonel Sumida for war crimes, a British civilian witness named Robert Scott had been summoned to identify his torturers: 'At this the Japanese all rose and gave Scott a formal bow of recognition; a faint smile passed between the two' (Evans, 'A Doctor', 191). 
Evans received a string of academic honours throughout his life and was knighted in 1969. He was a member of the council of the Royal Geographical Society in 1960-61 and president of the Alpine Club from 1967 to 1970. He died of pneumonia at a nursing home in Deganwy, north Wales, on 5 December 1995, and was cremated at Colwyn Bay on 11 December. He was survived by his wife and three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 60363


Burns, Thomas Ferrier (1906-1995), publisher and journalist, was born on 21 April 1906, at Vina del Mar, Chile, the seventh of nine children of David Burns, a Scottish businessman, and his wife, Clara, 'nee' Swinburne, a Chilean of Basque and English descent. The family moved to England when Tom was a child. His mother was a Catholic (his Presbyterian father was later received into that church) and he was brought up in his mother's faith. Thus on their return to England he was educated by the Jesuits, first at Wimbledon College, London, and then at Stonyhurst College in Lancashire. The twin passions that his parents bequeathed to him and dominated his life -- religion and a love of literature -- were never private ones. Burns actively promoted Catholicism in various ways and spent most of his life in publishing. 
Forgoing the opportunity to go to Oxford or Cambridge, Burns opted to attend the University of Paris (though never taking a degree), wanting to know about the French Catholic 'renaissance' and such writers and theologians as Paul Claudel and Jacques Maritain. On returning to London he started work in 1926 with Sheed and Ward, a Catholic publishing house, and in 1936 he joined Longman Green. He moved freely in frequently intertwined literary, artistic, and Catholic circles. For many years he shared his house in Chelsea with the artist David Jones. He became friendly with Graham Greene and commissioned 'The Lawless Roads' (1939), which provided the material for 'The Power and the Glory' (1940). His circle also took in Hilaire Belloc, G. K. Chesterton, Evelyn Waugh (whom he commissioned to write his life of Edmund Campion and later to edit what was to become Thomas Merton's 'Seven Storey Mountain'), the artist Eric Gill, and the influential clerics Martin d'Arcy (who had taught him at Stonyhurst) and Ronald Knox. 
In 1940 Burns joined the British embassy in Madrid, serving under the ambassador, Sir Samuel Hoare, as press attache, a cover that allowed him to straddle the worlds of propaganda, espionage, and diplomacy. Before the war he had supported the fascist rebellion against the Spanish republic (on one occasion he drove an ambulance for the nationalists) and his job at the embassy was both to counter German propaganda and ensure that Franco's neutrality was maintained. Burns's love of Spain, his mother's ancestry, his fluent Spanish, and his religion (not to mention his charm and social skills) equipped him ideally for the task. As well as running spies he hid refugee Jews and escaped prisoners of war. However, his Catholicism and especially his Francoist leanings (he believed that republicanism threatened the church, and that the civil war was not a Hitler-inspired rehearsal for what was to come but a purely Spanish matter) made him enemies within the Foreign Office. Kim Philby, whom he had known in Spain before the war, and Anthony Blunt, both by now well-established Soviet agents, actively sought to undermine him with implications that he was partisan. While in Spain he met and in 1944 married Mabel Maranon, daughter of Gregorio Maranon, a distinguished writer and doctor. It was a long and happy marriage that produced five children (the first of whom died in infancy). 
In 1937 Burns and his friend Douglas Woodruff had combined to buy the ailing Catholic weekly 'The Tablet' from the archbishop of Westminster, returning it to secular ownership after sixty-eight years. The company they formed, the Tablet Publishing Company, was later subsumed within Burns and Oates, the Catholic publishing company founded by a convert collateral ancestor of Burns. Burns had been a director of the company and became its chairman in 1948. When Woodruff was unseated as editor in 1967 Burns took over. Without journalistic experience, he attracted leading writers (like Greene). In 1971 he bought the magazine personally and in 1976 secured a stable financial footing by the creation of the charitable Tablet Trust. He remained editor until his retirement in 1982. 
Burns was politically conservative. He saw that he had come late to recognizing the true nature of Hitler and Mussolini, but he continued to work for international recognition of nationalist Spain. In ecclesiastical affairs, however, he switched the magazine from Woodruff's conservatism to a liberal stance in support of the Second Vatican Council. His deep and personally untroubled attachment to Catholicism never made him slavish toward the church. This was notable when in 1982 'The Tablet' opposed 'Humanae vitae', Pope Paul VI's encyclical on contraception. Burns alienated many readers, and some clergy banned the magazine's sale in churches. He also gave support to the Nigerian government against the secessionist and largely Catholic Biafra and opposed the British government over the Falklands War. 
Burns was appointed OBE in 1983 and in 1993 published an autobiography, 'The Use of Memory'. He died of cancer of the prostate and colon at his home, flat 7, 36 Buckingham Gate, London, on 8 December 1995, and was survived by his wife, daughter, and three sons (who included the writers and journalists Jimmy Burns and Tom Burns Maranon). His requiem mass took place on 11 December 1995 at Westminster Cathedral, and his memorial mass at the church of the Immaculate Conception on 17 January 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 60364


Harrison, Kathleen (1892-1995), actress, was born on 23 February 1892 at 500 Whalley New Road, Little Harwood, Blackburn, Lancashire, the daughter of Arthur Harrison, assistant engineer to Blackburn corporation, and his wife, Alice Maud, 'nee' Parker. From the age of five, when her father became borough engineer for Southwark, she was brought up in London. She was educated at Clapham high school before training at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (1914-15), where she won the Du Maurier bronze medal. While rehearsing her role as Eliza Doolittle for a production of 'Pygmalion' there the play's writer, George Bernard Shaw, visited and gave her advice that would help her in her subsequent career: 'Go out into the Old Kent Road and just listen to the women talking' ('The Independent'). 
Although she appeared in the film 'Our Boys' (1915) on leaving drama school, Harrison married John Henry Back (died 1960), of the Western Telegraph Company, in the following year, and lived with him in Argentina and Madeira for eight years. When he became unemployed they returned to Britain, and Harrison made her stage debut as Mrs Judd in 'The Constant Flirt', at the Pier Theatre, Eastbourne, in 1926. The next year she appeared in the West End as Winnie in 'The Cage', at the Savoy Theatre. This was the start of a fifty-year stage career in which she became notable for playing cockney mothers, maids, and charwomen. Her subsequent West End plays included 'A Damsel in Distress' (1929), 'The Merchant and Venus' (1930), 'Lovers' Meeting' (1931), 'Line Engaged' (1934), 'The Corn is Green' (1938), and 'Flare Path' (1942-4), but it was her role as the comic cook, Mrs Terence, in Emlyn Williams's chiller 'Night must Fall', at the Duchess Theatre in 1935, that established her as a star, and she reprised it in the 1937 film version. She toured north Africa and Italy with Emlyn Williams's Entertainments National Service Association company in 1944. After the war she played, to great acclaim, on stage and screen, the role of Violet, the excitable maid, in Terence Rattigan's 'The Winslow Boy' (Lyric Theatre, 1946, adapted two years later for the cinema) and took over from Peggy Mount the lead part of fearsome mother Emma Hornett in 'Watch it Sailor!' (1960). On stage she also played a blunt former chorus girl in Noel Coward's 'Nude with Violin' (Globe Theatre, 1956) and Mrs Hardcastle in 'She Stoops to Conquer' (Young Vic Theatre, 1972), one of her rare classical roles. 
In the cinema Harrison was usually seen in the same types of role, playing cockney domestics. Her early films included 'The Man from Toronto' (1932, as Jessie Matthews's maid), 'The Ghoul' (1933, alongside Boris Karloff), 'Home from Home' (1939, as comedian Sandy Powell's wife), and Noel Coward's wartime masterpiece 'In which we Serve' (1942). Screen fame came to her in middle age, when she starred as London East End cleaner Ma Huggett in 'Holiday Camp' (1947), featuring the fictional Huggett family enjoying a post-war leisure innovation. With Jack Warner as her screen husband, the film was so popular that Rank capitalized on its success by making the sequels 'Here Come the Huggetts' (1948), 'Vote for Huggett' (1949), and 'The Huggetts Abroad' (1949). These portrayals of the 'common man' -- and woman -- were panned by the critics but such was the public's love for the family that their adventures continued on BBC radio in the serial 'Meet the Huggetts' (1953-62). 
Harrison was recognized as one of the greatest British film character actresses of the 1940s and 1950s, and made notable appearances in 'Oliver Twist' (1948, as Mrs Sowerby), 'Scrooge' (1951, with Alastair Sim), 'The Pickwick Papers' (1952, as Miss Wardle), 'Lilacs in the Spring' (1954, as Anna Neagle's dresser), 'The Big Money' (1956, as Ian Carmichael's mother), and 'Alive and Kicking' (1958, appearing with Sybil Thorndike and Estelle Winwood as three lively old ladies escaping from a home). 
After acting in the films 'On the Fiddle' (1961, as Stanley Holloway's wife) and 'West 11' (1963, as Alfred Lynch's mother), Harrison found new fame on television, as the star of 'Mrs Thursday' (1966-7), a comedy-drama written specially for her by Ted Willis and running to two long series. She played a warm-hearted cockney charwoman, Alice Thursday, who inherits from her late employer $10 million, a mansion, the controlling interest in a property empire, and a Rolls-Royce, while his four wives are left nothing. The programme was the most popular series of 1966 and toppled 'Coronation Street' from the top of the television ratings week after week. Her other small-screen appearances included parts in BBC serializations of 'Our Mutual Friend' and 'Martin Chuzzlewit' (Charles Dickens was her favourite novelist). Her final screen appearance was in the Disney comedy 'The London Connection' (1979). 
Throughout her career Harrison knocked six years off her age, revealing her true age only with the approach of her hundredth birthday, in 1992. She died at her home, 30 Cottenham Park Road, Merton, London, on 7 December 1995. She was survived by a son and daughter, her husband and a son having predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 60365


Matthews, Victor Collin, Baron Matthews (1919-1995), businessman, was born on 5 December 1919 at 14 Cloudesley Square, Islington, London, the son of Abraham Cohen Matthews, a master tailor, and his wife, Jenny, 'nee' Edwards. His father disappeared soon after his birth, and he was brought up by his mother. Educated at Highbury School, he never lost his cockney accent, or his love of Arsenal football team. He left school at fourteen, and his first job was as an office boy for a tobacco company. During the Second World War he served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve and took part in the evacuation from Dunkirk and in the Dieppe raid; he ended the war with the rank of able seaman. On 7 March 1942 he married Joyce Geraldine (1922/3-1995), a typist, daughter of Alfred Ernest Pilbeam, a builder's foreman; they had one son, Ian. 
After demobilization Matthews joined the building firm of Trollope and Colls as a trainee surveyor; he rose to be contracts manager before moving to a small building products firm, Clark and Fenn, as a director. In 1960 he struck out on his own, acquiring the Brixton-based building firm Bridge Walker; within four years he had increased its turnover eightfold, to about $2 million. Among his major clients was Nigel Broackes. When a take-over bid was launched for Bridge Walker in 1964, Broackes, who was keen to diversify, agreed to take a 49 per cent stake in the company, with an option on the remainder. The partnership worked well, and in 1967 Matthews merged the rest of his company with Trafalgar House and joined the board. In 1968 he became group managing director, and in 1973 deputy chairman. 
Under the leadership of Broackes and Matthews, Trafalgar House expanded rapidly into a conglomerate covering construction, leisure, and shipping, with a value at one point estimated to be in excess of $2 billion. Among its major acquisitions were Trollope and Colls in 1966, the Cunard shipping line in 1971, and the Ritz Hotel in 1976. Broackes, shrewd and audacious, provided the brains, while Matthews combined managerial skills with on-site experience. As group managing director (1968-77), deputy chairman (1973-85), and group chief executive (1977-83), Matthews was Broackes's right-hand man, though they were never close socially: in all their years together neither visited the other's home. Matthews, short, dark, and decisive, was a blunt cockney of humble origin. By contrast, the patrician Broackes, educated at Stowe School before national service in the 3rd hussars, was a smooth entrepreneur with a touch of arrogance. 
Matthews became a press lord almost by accident when he and Broackes acquired Beaverbrook Newspapers in 1977, at the knock-down price of $15 million. The controlling family interests sold out to forestall the marauding Rupert Murdoch. The group was heavily in debt after years of decline following the death in 1964 of its founder, Lord Beaverbrook, though the fixed assets were worth over $50 million and the three main titles -- the 'Daily Express', the 'Sunday Express', and the London 'Evening Standard' -- still managed to sell 20 million copies a week. Broackes made no secret of the fact that his main consideration in acquiring Beaverbrook Newspapers was to give Matthews a new role away from Trafalgar House. The two were still partners, but there was mounting tension between them. By 1977 the builder was becoming disenchanted with the demands of big business. At one time he was managing nearly 200 companies. Now he was talking of retiring to pursue his hobby, training racehorses with his son Ian. In his autobiography, 'A Growing Concern' (1979), Broackes described Matthews at this point as 'morbid and morose' (Broackes, 245). Matthews replied with a stinging rebuttal in the 'Evening Standard'. 
In fact, taking on Beaverbrook's mantle perfectly suited Matthews, who felt he still had much to offer at fifty-eight. He was fiercely patriotic and greatly admired the Canadian tycoon's empire crusades. As a young boy delivering newspapers, he had dreamed of becoming a 'Daily Express' reporter. Shy and quiet, with piercing brown eyes, he swept into Fleet Street in his Rolls-Royce determined to succeed in his new role as chairman and chief executive. The 'Daily Express' had been transformed from broadsheet to tabloid -- he pronounced it 'tab-o-loid' -- shortly before his arrival without any discernible improvement in its fortunes. He immediately poached as editor of the 'Express' the managing editor of the 'Daily Mirror', Derek Jameson, another fatherless cockney from north London. The satirical magazine 'Private Eye' immediately dubbed the pair Lord Whelks and Sid Yobbo. 
Matthews renamed the group Express Newspapers and got down to tackling the excessive demands of the notoriously difficult print unions. The engineers were first to knock at his door, demanding a 75 per cent pay increase. For once management stood firm and the confrontation turned nasty. There was a publishing room fire and editorial cars were vandalized. The police were called in and barbed wire was erected around the 'Express''s black glass headquarters, known as the Black Lubyanka. Faced with Matthews's refusal to yield -- he had been outraged by the engineers' demanding twice as much money for half the work they did in the building trade -- the union backed off. Matthews subsequently won court injunctions to prevent the unions usurping what he called the right of management to manage. It was the beginning of a new era in Fleet Street. Ultimately Matthews won the reluctant support of the unions, telling the 'Sunday Times': 'Fleet Street is not overmanned but under-employed.' In 1978 he decided to use some of the group's excess printing capacity, and in the process secured hundreds of jobs, with the launch of the 'Daily Star', Britain's first new national newspaper for 75 years. In 1980 he negotiated a merger between the two loss-making London evening papers, the Express group's 'Evening Standard' and Associated Newspapers' 'Evening News', to form a single, profitable 'Evening Standard'; Associated Newspapers subsequently bought full control of the paper. 
A natural Thatcherite and reputedly the biggest individual donor to the Conservative Party, Matthews was rewarded with a life peerage, as Baron Matthews, in 1980. (Broackes was knighted in 1984.) Apart from taming the print unions, his other great achievement as chairman of Express Newspapers was to unfreeze the treasure trove locked into Reuters, then a co-operative jointly owned by newspapers. Ironically the revenue raised by the news agency's flotation made Trafalgar's publishing interests, from 1982 demerged into Fleet Holdings, with Matthews as chairman, ripe for take-over. In 1985 the group succumbed to a hostile bid by the rival United Newspapers, headed by David Stevens. Under Matthews's skilful management, the group's value had multiplied more than twentyfold, to $317 million. Matthews's personal stake was worth around $8 million. He severed his remaining links with Trafalgar and retired to Jersey. Lonely and all but forgotten in his last decade, he died at his home, Waverley Farm, Mont Arthur, St Brelades, Jersey, on his seventy-sixth birthday, 5 December 1995, two months after Joyce, his wife of fifty-three years. He was survived by his son Ian. 


@@@@@


doc= 60366


Jewel, Jimmy (1909-1995), comedian and actor, was born on 4 December 1909 at 52 Andover Street, Pittsmoor, Sheffield, the younger child of James Arthur Thomas Marsh (1881-1936), music-hall artist (under the name James A. Jewel) and designer and builder of stage scenery, and his wife, Gertrude, 'nee' Driver (1881-1956), also a music-hall performer. Jewel was involved in the theatrical world from childhood, making an albeit brief debut in a Barnsley pantomime -- he injured his shoulder making his first entrance -- aged five. His schooling was largely peripatetic, including two unenjoyable spells at boarding-schools in Derbyshire and in south London, and ineffective. He made his debut in a walk-on role in the family revue 'Explosions' in 1925 and then, under the name Marsh Jewel, he developed a song-and-dance routine that involved impersonations of Maurice Chevalier and Jack Buchanan. As well as touring with the family show in the 1930s he also worked for periods with Willie Lancet's Midget Troupe and as a solo act in cinema variety spots. His career was reshaped by accident in May 1934 when he and his cousin, black-face act Ben Warriss ['see below'], were asked to form an impromptu double act to cover for the non-appearance of another duo. Their performance was successful enough for the two to link permanently from the autumn of that year and, by 1938, they were good enough to make their West End debut at the Holborn Empire under Max Miller. 
For much of the 1940s and 1950s, Jewel and Warriss were Britain's leading comedy double act. They appeared at the highly prestigious Palladium for the first time in 1942 in 'Gangway' and they returned with 'High Time' in 1946, a year that also saw them top the bill in the royal variety performance. Although they were arguably always most effective as stage performers, their BBC radio series 'Up the Pole' -- which ran from 1947 to 1952 -- was extremely successful and it brought them to an even wider audience: they were even the lead strip in the comic 'Radio Fun' for a period. They did only a limited amount of film work, beginning with 'Rhythm Serenade' (1943), starring Vera Lynn, but were more successful in television, becoming the stars of 'Turn it up', the first regular television comedy series, in 1951. They were a major pantomime attraction and they regularly toured the leading provincial variety theatres. Their stage act was essentially a mixture of the fast-paced, increasingly American-influenced, cross-talk acts popular from the 1930s, and a repertory of visual gags that often made use of sophisticated props and scenery: the influence of Jewel's father was clear here. Jewel, with a slightly unconvincing toupee, a remarkably mobile and expressive face, and a broad Sheffield accent, was invariably the gullible victim of the suave Warriss's somewhat malicious humour. When, for example, a character in 'Up the Pole' asked Jimmy, 'Where did you learn to kiss like that?', Warriss replied for him, 'Syphoning petrol!' (Foster and Furst, 100). Warriss regularly received letters asking him to stop bullying his partner. Their comic legacy was fairly limited, as they embodied a skilfully honed version of an old tradition, and by the 1960s their style seemed dated and less appealing to audiences who were increasingly attuned to more subtle and more intimate forms of humour. In 1966, with the variety circuit dead and the disillusioned pair reduced to working the pub and club circuit, Warriss ended the partnership. 
Warriss ran a restaurant near Bath before returning to the stage to chair music-hall revivals at Blackpool, to perform in pantomime, and even to take straight acting roles in productions of Jean-Claude Grumberg's 'Dreyfus' and John Osborne's 'The Entertainer'. He finally retired only when his health broke down a year before his death. He was married three times. His first wife, whom he married on 22 September 1934, was Grace Mary Skinner ('b'. 1910/11), a dancer and teacher of dancing and daughter of Henry Arthur James Skinner, master mariner. This marriage had ended by about 1940 and two years later Warriss married the entertainer Meggie Easton. Little is known of his third marriage, which took place about 1960, other than that his third wife was named Virginia. Warriss was a prominent member of the show-business charity the Grand Order of Water Rats, and he was King Rat for the years 1953, 1961, and 1962. He died at a home run by the Entertainment Artists' Benevolent Fund, Brinsworth House, Staines Road, Twickenham, of lung cancer, on 14 January 1993. 
Jewel was initially deeply upset by the break with Warriss -- Warriss informed him by letter rather than in person -- but he gradually forged a new career as a television and stage character actor that won him greater critical acclaim than his earlier work had ever done. In 1968 the BBC head of comedy, Frank Muir, persuaded him to play the part of a militant shop steward in the television play 'A Spanner in the Works', and this relaunched his career. From 1968 to 1972 he played opposite Hylda Baker in the successful television series, 'Nearest and Dearest', and much more television work appeared, culminating in his final series, 'Funny Man' (1981), which he wrote himself and which was based on his experiences in the family troupe in the 1920s and 1930s. In 1975, aged sixty-one, his serious theatrical career commenced when he starred as the comic Eddie Walters in Trevor Griffiths's 'The Comedians' at the Nottingham Playhouse, and later at the National Theatre, and as Willie Clark in Neil Simon's 'Sunshine Boys' in the West End. He continued to work in television and theatre into the 1980s and he made a film appearance in 'American Friends' as late as 1991. His varied and lengthy career marked him out as one of the most flexible and professional of twentieth-century comic talents. He married the Australian entertainer Isabel (Belle) Bluett (1911/12-1985) on 31 August 1939. She was the daughter of Frederick George Bluett, theatrical artist, and the sister of Kitty Bluett, the comedian. They had a son, Kerry, in 1946 and adopted a daughter, Piper, in 1955. Jewel's autobiography, 'Three Times Lucky' (1982), gave evidence of few hobbies beyond golf and his family. He died at his home, 96 Troy Court, Kensington High Street, London, of respiratory failure, on 3 December 1995. He was survived by his son and adopted daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 60368


Cole, Robert Benjamin Ageh Wellesley (1907-1995), medical practitioner and author, was born in Pownall Street, Kossoh Town, Freetown, Sierra Leone, on 11 March 1907, the eldest child in the family of three sons and two daughters of Wilfred Sydney Wellesley Ageh Cole (1880-1943), a civil engineer, and the first African to be superintendent of the Freetown waterworks, and his wife, Elizabeth Beatrice Okrafor, 'nee' Smart. He was proudly alert to his krio (freed slave) origins. In this he was encouraged by his parents' relatives and the foster children who shared the family's home. He was educated at the Government Model School, Freetown, and the Cambridge Senior School, Freetown (a grammar school run by the Church Missionary Society). Their British curricula provided him with Latin and Greek; he became a chorister, a boy scout, and head boy at the latter school. Studies at Fourah Bay College from 1923 (he took a general arts degree and a London external honours degree in philosophy) led to his departure to England in September 1928, financed by a maternal uncle, Dr Alfred Smart, and his father's millionaire friend Peter J. C. Thomas. He studied medicine at Armstrong College, Newcastle, and was awarded the Tulloch scholarship and other prizes, and graduated MB BS in 1934 with first-class honours. He was refused entry into the college's officer training corps as he was not of European descent. 
Wellesley Cole married his uncle's friend (and his landlady in Newcastle) Anna Isabel Law Brodie (daughter of William Brodie, draper) on 17 April 1932, and after a spell as a house surgeon at the Royal Victoria Infirmary he established his medical practice in Newcastle, the first black doctor in the city. He prospered and in 1936 purchased and modified a house to become his eight-roomed home and surgery in West Road, Denton Burn, which was his base until 1946. He took the degree of MD in 1943 (his thesis was on asthma) and he became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and the first black fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England in 1944. In 1945 he was a committee member touring British west Africa for six months for the Colonial Office; his sister Irene Ighodaro (1916-1995), later president of the Medical Association of Nigerian Women, and the first Sierra Leonean woman to qualify as a doctor, managed the practice during his absence. 
He divorced in 1950 (Anna died in the 1970s), relocated his practice to Nottingham in 1950, and on 1 May that year married a Sierra Leonean nurse, Amy Manto Bondfield Hotobah-During (1930-1996), daughter of Claude Dionysius Hotobah-During, barrister. They had two children in England, Patrice (born in Nottingham in 1952), and Robert (born in Nottingham in 1956). In 1962 Wellesley Cole moved to Nigeria as a consultant surgeon, and in the same role to Sierra Leone in 1964. He had three further children, Olushola Beatrice (born in Nigeria in 1963), Richard Claudius (born in Nigeria in 1964), and Ralph Lloyd Moses. Wellesley Cole's British nationality was forfeited on Sierra Leone's independence in 1961, as he was now classified as a citizen of that country (it was renewed, after a bureaucratic struggle, in 1981), but he lived in London from 1974. 
Wellesley Cole's concern for Africa and African students had led him to participate in Newcastle's East and West Friendship Society and to help found the West African Society, whose journal 'Africana' he edited. He served on a committee of the Fabian Society's colonial bureau (1943-50) and several Colonial Office advisory groups as well as supporting the West African Students' Union and being the final president of the League of Coloured Peoples after the death of its founder, Harold Moody, in 1947. The league had by then run its course, its championship of Britain's black communities having passed on to other organizations, including Africa-centred bodies that involved Wellesley Cole. 
Wellesley Cole's 'Kossoh Town Boy' (1960), dedicated to his mother, became a school textbook in west Africa. Unable to find a publisher for his memoirs of his later years, 'An Innocent in Britain', he paid for them to be printed in 1988. By this time he was living in Sydenham, south-east London, with his third wife, Ajuma Josephine Elizabeth Wyse (whom he had married on 5 August 1980). He wrote two unpublished novels. He retained his strong Christian faith and beliefs that owed a great deal to the Victorian ideals that had survived in Freetown and its education system well into the twentieth century. He was a dignified man with the air of a polymath; in a discussion with an African-American who used 'black 'diaspora'' to refer to the movement of Africans to the New World, Wellesley Cole said he looked on Freetown as a 'black 'epispora'' (a gathering together of Africans). Asked how that word was spelled, Cole wrote it in Greek: a testimony to his education under African teachers seventy years before. He died of bronchopneumonia at Hither Green Hospital, Lewisham, on 31 October 1995. He was survived by his wife, Ajuma, and by four children, his son Robert having died in 1972, while a student at Epsom College. 


@@@@@


doc= 60370


Warrell, Charles Watson (1889-1995), headmaster and writer, was born on 23 April 1889 at Farmborough, near Bath, Somerset, the son of Sidney Watson Warrell, headmaster of Farmborough village school, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Stubbs. Charles Warrell was educated at Newfoundland Road School, Bristol, and from 1907 to 1909 attended his father's old college, Culham College, near Oxford, an Anglican teacher-training foundation. His first teaching appointment was at Frome council school in Somerset in 1909, followed by a post in Shropshire. 
In 1913 Warrell was appointed headmaster to the village school in Higher Wych, Malpas, Cheshire, a rural farming community. He had married a fellow teacher, Elizabeth Gill (died 1952), about 1907; they had one son and two daughters. The Higher Wych school logbook reveals a respected, creative, and innovative head, whose enthusiasm for hands-on activities was already apparent. In 1914 a visiting inspector recorded that his 'work is marked by commendable skill and by unusual enthusiasm and enterprise. I cannot speak too highly of the practical character of his work, which is full of promise for the future'. Warrell joined the army in 1916 and served in Salonika, his wife acting as temporary headteacher in his absence. After the war he continued to teach at Higher Wych until 1923, when he went as headmaster to a school in Bridgnorth, Shropshire. 
From 1926 to 1944 Warrell was headmaster of Pleasley Hill secondary school, Mansfield, Nottinghamshire. During these years he also developed his skills as a writer, producing articles for educational journals, plus textbooks including the 'I'll Teach You' series, a set of self-improvement books for ex-servicemen. He is best known, however, as the originator in the late 1940s of the 'I-Spy' series of children's books. At first called the 'I-Spy Spotterbooks', these were initially rejected by several publishers, so Warrell took the risk of publishing them himself, and sold them via a friendly contact in his local Woolworths. Their instant success enabled Warrell to become a full-time writer from 1948, producing a weekly 'I-spy' column first for the 'Daily Mail' and then for the 'News Chronicle' who 'poached' him in 1950. A long 'I-Spy' series evolved under various publishers, with Warrell's role that of editor-in-chief, or 'Big Chief I-Spy' as he became known to children. The pocket-size sixpenny booklets covered subjects such as birds, trees, insects, farms, history, cars, the seaside, aircraft, and musical instruments. There were items to spot for points and boxes to tick for achieving each challenge. Small prizes were awarded for completed books and a Redskins club, costing 1's'. to join, featured secret codes, badges, passwords and the occasional organized gathering. Warrell obviously enjoyed the ritual and regalia side of his creation and was 'always happy to appear in his giant head-dress on special, I-Spy pow-wows' ('The Independent'). For thousands of children in the 1950s and 1960s, the 'I-Spy' books were an affordable and attractive purchase, and Warrell's coded catchphrase ODHU/NTINGGO (good hunting) in his weekly column epitomized the books' spirit of adventurous enquiry. 
In 1946 Warrell moved to London with his secretary Marian Tucker (died 1994), whom he later married after his first wife died in 1952. Marian was an enthusiastic supporter of I-Spy activities and was herself known as Running Deer. Warrell retired from his 'I-Spy' writing in 1959, though the books continued under another editor and the series remained in print until 1986. Michelin relaunched it in 1991, replacing the line drawings with photographs and updating the items. In retirement Warrell lived for many years in Budleigh Salterton, Devon, enjoying gardening and walking. He continued to write articles, and was an enthusiastic supporter of the Culham College Association magazine, contributing short pieces and reminiscences into his nineties and beyond, and for some years enjoying the distinction of being the oldest surviving Culhamite. A man of small stature, he had a booming voice and abundant white hair. He remained sharp-witted and enthusiastic until the very end of his life, with only his failing eyesight curtailing his activities. The 'Daily Telegraph' erroneously reported his death in 1991, but made amends by sending him a case of champagne which, as a teetotaller, he was unable to appreciate. Charles Warrell died on 26 November 1995 at the advanced age of 106, at the Valley Lodge Nursing Home, Bakewell Road, Matlock, Derbyshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 60373


O'Brien, Leslie Kenneth, Baron O'Brien of Lothbury (1908-1995), banker, was born on 8 February 1908 in Dulwich, London, the son of Charles John Grimes O'Brien (1878-1949) and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Abbott (1879-1969). His father's family came originally from Killaloe in co. Clare, Ireland, but settled in England in the early nineteenth century. O'Brien was educated at Wandsworth School, London, from about 1918 to 1926, and joined the Bank of England as a clerk in 1927. During the next twenty-four years he rose steadily in the bank's hierarchy as his innate abilities were recognized in what was already a hierarchy of merit, at least until the glass ceiling which separated court and the governor from the mundane professionals. Of significance for the future, he served early on as secretary to the governor, Montagu Norman, after the twin crises of the second Labour government's fall in 1931 and the subsequent National Government's abandonment of the gold standard in 1932. While not privy to the highest-level negotiations, O'Brien learned something of crisis atmospheres and the intricacies where high politics and banking interacted to produce harsh burdens for central bankers confronted with politicians playing by very different rules. 
After his marriage to Isabelle Gertrude (1908-1987), daughter of Francis Pickett, on 2 April 1932, O'Brien moved to Worcester Park, Surrey, where their only child, Michael, was born. Promotion followed rapidly, giving O'Brien a senior post in the overseas department and a widening acquaintance with European, dominion, and United States central bank officials. During and after the Second World War it was of great value for him not only to know and understand the intricacies of exchange control, but to see the heavy problems of the sterling area and the outstanding sterling balances (which had financed much of Britain's early war effort), through the eyes of Australian, Canadian, or Indian bank governors and, even more important, those of the American federal reserve. Dedicated to the institution all his life, full of insight and innovation, but undramatic and virtually apolitical, O'Brien (who, with his family, settled comfortably in Wimbledon from 1942) appeared to be one of the Bank of England's leading technicians -- a quality recognized when he was appointed deputy chief cashier in 1951. With Sir Kenneth Peppiatt, his senior, and then as chief cashier himself after 1954, he matured techniques for using bank rate as an instrument of monetary management for the first time since Britain had left the gold standard twenty years earlier. 
From 1954 until 1962 the note issue bore O'Brien's name, and he was fortunate in that the rules which evolved -- or were relearnt -- appeared to work in the barely inflationary 1950s. O'Brien became an executive director in 1962 and then deputy governor in 1964. For a man with a relatively humble background, the glass ceiling still appeared impervious, as it had done for other professionals in the long era of Norman and his patrician successors, lords Cobbold and Cromer. But whereas Cobbold had set out in tandem with government and dominion central bankers to ensure Britain's post-war financial stability, Cromer's outspokenness and independent-mindedness estranged Harold Wilson, prime minister from 1964. Wilson required a man who would not set the bank's view against the government's when it came to defining the national interest -- in this case the uneasy relationship of sterling to the dollar at a time when the Labour government not only had to borrow but was under strong American pressure to support the war in Vietnam in return for any support of sterling. 
No one doubted O'Brien's intellectual ability and experience, but few actually knew much about the man or about the lessons he had unobtrusively drawn from experience over the previous thirty crisis-ridden years. Appointed governor in 1966 in a striking display of the meritocratic flavour of the 1960s Wilson government, O'Brien displayed the ability but none of the docility predicted by Treasury officials. He had seen how Norman had shaped the bank to the state's requirements long before nationalization, in preparation for war in the late 1930s, and as a loyal official O'Brien had fully accepted its subordinate position thereafter. But though he deplored both Cromer's methods and his 'de haut en bas' attitude, he shared his predecessor's mistrust of the way that Keynes's prescriptions were already being misused as a permanent cure-all, with the inevitable risk of inflation. Accepting, as he always did, decisions once they had been made, O'Brien robustly argued the bank's case for a stable monetary policy so long as discussions with the chancellor continued. 
After the July 1966 crisis and through the devaluation debacle in 1967 (against which he struggled hard but without effect) O'Brien addressed four principal policy areas: first how to stabilize sterling, now that it was merely a volatile adjunct to the dollar system; second, how to manage the economy at a time of rapidly rising inflation, created at least partly (in his view) by excessive increases in public spending; third, how to renew the flow of investment to domestic industry; and, finally, how to modernize the City of London's financial institutions before their markets were lost to American banks, and later to Japanese and European contenders. O'Brien was perhaps the first post-war governor with the capacity to answer each of these problems, but the late 1960s were a bad time to argue the virtues of monetary and fiscal prudence. 
The sterling balances were indeed stabilized (in the short term), thanks partly to O'Brien's skilful diplomacy at Basel in 1968. With Harold Lever, Wilson's financial emissary, he also helped to avert a second devaluation in March the same year by negotiating with the American authorities. Soon afterwards, and under a new chancellor, Roy Jenkins, the bank's 'Quarterly Bulletin' was able to take a more explicit line about O'Brien's desire for a permanent but flexible monetary policy, and for a bank rate more influenced by market demand. But the chosen means, 'competition and credit control' (CCC), as evolved by O'Brien and his team, were disputed by the Treasury precisely because of this element of market demand from industry, which would have diminished governmental influence. Revived by Anthony Barber in 1971, CCC emerged in a different form at a uniquely unsuitable time. After the reintroduction of bank rate as minimum lending rate (MLR) in the 1972 crisis, it was suspended on Treasury demand. 
O'Brien had transferred his admiration for Roy Jenkins to Heath (who confirmed his second term of office in 1970) mainly because he believed that EEC entry would induce Britain's long-delayed industrial transformation; but that did not survive Iain McLeod's premature death, which left Anthony Barber, the new chancellor, in thrall to a prime minister who set aims, notably curbing unemployment, above monetary discipline. O'Brien agreed with Heath that industrial managers had failed to take advantage of the new credit regime, but disagreed with him on how to deal with the malignant combination of high wage-inflation and speculative property lending which in 1973 produced a 25.6 per cent increase in money supply accompanied by a real interest rate of 1.2 per cent. Like Cromer, O'Brien had to confront the prime minister and chancellor to ask them to raise MLR in mid-1972. They refused, fearing the effect on the cost of living and subsequent trade-union wage demands. All O'Brien could do, informally and with Treasury officials' assent, was to manipulate the Treasury bill rate sufficiently to push the rate to 9 per cent in June. The governor's special deposits scheme, which he evolved later in 1972, might have helped to check the boom, but that too was denied him. Finally implemented by his successor Gordon Richardson as the so-called 'corset', it may, paradoxically, have intensified the final post-oil-shock collapse. 
O'Brien was no more successful in freeing the retail banks from government controls on lending, in order to compete on a more equal level with the American institutions and the secondary or fringe banks, which enjoyed a laxer supervision by the Board of Trade. His long policy of encouraging industry to seek medium-term loans and consequently to innovate and make structural adjustments rather than to rely on overdraft finance was, like CCC in its latter form, overtaken by the sustained crisis faced by Edward Heath's government in June 1972, when sterling was floated. O'Brien regarded this with extreme distaste, believing that fixed rates were the basis of sound monetary discipline, but he was not called back from holiday to advise, nor was he included in the discussions which preceded Heath's 'Industry Act' of 1972. 
O'Brien's contribution to his fourth policy problem, that of reforming the City's financial institutions, drew strength from work done earlier -- from Anthony Crosland's inquiry into banking profits, and from his establishment of the Mergers and Takeover Panel. Committed to the principle of self-regulation, O'Brien made sure that the bank modernized itself and its services with more transparent presentation of its accounts. Among his reforms, the Institutional Investors' Working Party had some effect on the flows and quality of investment. In the bank's domestic aspect O'Brien's skills as a negotiator and broker of opinion accentuated sound existing trends, but the forces of inertia in the City remained almost as powerful at the time of O'Brien's retirement as they had been in 1966. 
As governor of the Bank of England, O'Brien became a protagonist in a dual struggle between an increasingly global set of financial realities and the domestic British defence of an eroding, post-war, welfare-state economy; and between the bank community, guarding the currency and the nation's long-term financial stability, and the political parties and elected governments whose top priority remained high employment. In so far as 1969-72 saw a determined government defence of the post-war settlement, O'Brien was denied the influence that Richardson later possessed, once the focus of monetary policy changed. His own marker can be found in a definitive speech, delivered in October 1977 to the Belgian Royal Society, in which he clearly linked central bank independence to effective control of money supply and the curbing of inflation. 
Angered by the policies of the Heath government, but too loyal to the state either to protest publicly or resign, O'Brien retired in February 1973 on his sixty-fifth birthday, only half way through his second term of office. He was created Baron O'Brien of Lothbury on his retirement (having been knighted GBE in 1967 and appointed a privy councillor in 1970). In retirement he served as a director of Prudential Assurance, Unilever, the Rank Organization, and various other companies, and he also served on the boards of the National Theatre and the Royal Opera House development appeal. He kept up late in his life an enthusiasm for tennis as well as music and the theatre. His first wife, Isabelle, having died in 1987, he married, on 6 January 1989, Marjorie Violet Taylor, 'nee' Ball ('b'. 1923), with whom he moved to Oxted, Surrey. He died at the East Surrey Hospital, Redhill, on 24 November 1995, following a stroke. A lifelong Anglican, his ashes were buried in the graveyard of St Peter's Church, Tandridge, Surrey, on 1 December. He was survived by his second wife, Marjorie, and the son of his first marriage, Michael. 


@@@@@


doc= 60374


Grant, Peter (1935-1995), rock group manager, was born on 5 April 1935 in Birdhurst Road, Croydon, Surrey, the son of Dorothy Louise Grant, a private secretary, of South Norwood, Surrey. The name of his father is not recorded. He left school at thirteen and his height and weight -- he was 6 feet 5 inches tall and weighed 181/2 stone -- led to his taking work as a bouncer, a stand-in for the actor Robert Morley, and a wrestler (under the name of Count Bruno Alassio of Milan). In the late fifties Grant worked at the Two Is coffee bar in Soho, a popular venue on the London pop circuit, where he met Don Arden, the 'Al Capone of Pop', who offered him a job as a tour manager. Grant's business skills were sharpened by this association; it was when he toured America with the UK rock group the Animals in 1964 that he spotted the potential of the US market, where he later made his fortune. 
By the mid-sixties Grant had taken over the management of the Yardbirds, a UK rock band. He saw it as his duty to do his best for his artists by making sure that they were fully paid. In pursuing this policy, he became known for his often brutal dealings with promoters; he was not shy of using his intimidating physique to ensure payment. 
When the Yardbirds split up in 1968 the band's guitarist Jimmy Page invited Grant to become the manager of his new band, Led Zeppelin. Page saw him as the manager who could ensure that the band kept control of their assets. While Page developed the band musically, Grant's marketing strategies and fearsome management techniques launched it into the stratosphere of the global rock business. He was regarded as the band's fifth member and took a 20 per cent share of the proceeds. 
Grant's reputation as one of rock's shrewdest brains was evident in his negotiations with Atlantic Records when Led Zeppelin became the first rock band to appear on this prestigious rhythm and blues label. They received an astonishing $200,000 advance and the highest royalty rate hitherto negotiated by a group for their first album. The subsequent tremendous success of their albums can be ascribed to the band's musicianship and to Grant's albums-only policy. This strategy meant that the US FM radio stations, which were playing to Led Zeppelin's targeted 'underground rock' audience, would play the whole side of a Zeppelin album, rather than just singles lifted from the record. Eventually Atlantic allowed them to establish their own label, Swansong, which Grant ran until 1983. 
However, Grant's notoriety as one of the toughest operators in rock history (aided and abetted by tour manager Richard Cole) was also made during the band's relentless touring of the US throughout the early to mid-seventies. Along with legendary tales of grotesque indulgence and debauchery, Grant's Svengali-like influence saw Led Zeppelin fill cavernous venues and negotiate with promoters up front a deal ensuring the band an extraordinary 90 per cent of the profits. In 1973 Zeppelin played to 56,800 people at Tampa Stadium, Florida, and grossed $309,000, thereby breaking the previous US box office record, set by a Beatles concert at Shea Stadium. 
In many respects Grant's intimidating physical presence had produced this success. However, his and Coles's tendency to violence (most especially directed against bootleggers and other non-sanctioned merchandisers) eventually caught up with them. On the 1977 tour of the US they were arrested, along with the drummer John Bonham and security chief John Bindon, for assaulting one of promoter Bill Graham's security guards in Oakland, California, after he had manhandled Grant's son Warren. In many respects this disaster was the culmination of the major misfortunes that affected the band in the mid-seventies. Grant himself was divorced from his wife Gloria after fourteen years of marriage in 1976, the singer Robert Plant and his family had suffered an almost fatal car crash, and Plant's son Karac had died. 
These problems stopped Led Zeppelin touring and the band became ridiculed in some quarters as rock dinosaurs. Events took an even more tragic turn just before Zeppelin were to undertake a new American tour in 1980, when the drummer John Bonham died from alcohol abuse. Bonham's death led to Zeppelin's demise and Grant went into a near-terminal decline, locking himself away in his moated Sussex mansion and existing largely on cocaine -- which he referred to as 'Peruvian marching powder' -- and Marks & Spencer sandwiches and trifle. 
When a slimmed-down Grant returned to public view in the late eighties, he had become an avuncular figure. He was by then a grandfather and was living in Eastbourne, enjoying his collections of classic cars, antique lamps, and furniture. He had no desire to return to a changed music business, although he did attend industry seminars where he entertained audiences with his tales from the past. On 21 November 1995 Grant died of a heart attack while returning to his Eastbourne home. At his funeral on 4 December his old associate Alan Callan commented that 'If you were his friend, then to you he would give his all' (Channel 4 television website). Grant's lasting significance was perhaps best summed up by Phil Everly of the Everly Brothers, who paid tribute to him as the first manager 'to make sure the artist came first and that we got paid and paid properly' ('The Guardian', 24 Nov 1995). 


@@@@@


doc= 60375


Collier, John Gordon (1935-1995), chemical engineer, was born on 22 January 1935 at 84 Thrale Road, Streatham, London, the only child of John (Jack) Collier, a professional double bass player, and his wife, Edith Georgina de Ville (died 1948). The Second World War disrupted Collier's education and family life; he moved many times, and the family was reunited only after the war. He gained his O-levels at St Paul's School in 1951 and then joined the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, a part of the UK Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA), as a student apprentice. He achieved his A-levels by part-time study at Oxford Technical College and gained an award to study at University College, London. There he obtained a first-class honours degree in chemical engineering in 1956, before returning to Harwell. This apprenticeship among the 'other ranks' served Collier well and resulted in his easy relationships with people at all levels. On 18 August 1956 he married Ellen Alice Mary (1935-1998), a secretary at Harwell and daughter of David Frank Mitchell, a laboratory assistant. They were a happy couple; Ellen was highly supportive and an able aide. Collier was proud of his family and the achievements of their children, Clare and John Douglas, who both enjoyed successful careers. 
Collier's service with UKAEA was broken by several periods elsewhere, which were formative in his development and gave him a breadth of experience that greatly contributed to his later success. From 1962 to 1964 he worked with Atomic Energy of Canada at Chalk River, and then returned to Britain to join Atomic Power Constructions Ltd in 1966. Back with UKAEA, he became head of its chemical engineering division in 1975, and director of its safety and reliability division (1982-3). After three years as director-general of the Central Electricity Generating Board, he returned to UKAEA as deputy chairman in 1986 and chairman the following year. 
There was a marked transition in Collier's work from the early 1970s, when he collaborated with Walter Marshall, former director at Harwell. Their projects included the two Marshall study group reports on the structural integrity of the light water reactor pressure vessel, which challenged a current view on the safety of pressure vessels and largely contributed to the eventual acceptance of the pressurized water reactor design in the United Kingdom. Collier and Marshall also worked on the International Atomic Energy Agency's international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation programme and on the pressurized water reactor task force, chaired by Marshall, a body that integrated the efforts of a large number of relevant UK organizations to introduce the pressurized water reactor into the UK. Collier became a member, then head, of the atomic energy technical unit, known familiarly as 'Walter's think-tank'. 
Collier was the first chairman of Nuclear Electric plc, set up in 1990 to operate the nuclear power stations in England and Wales. He was at this time chairman of UKAEA and relinquished this post with some reluctance because he felt able to cope with both jobs. The achievement of the key targets he set for the new company caused a turnaround in performance and established the base for the eventual privatization of its nuclear power stations. Success in meeting these targets, and in setting nuclear power in the United Kingdom on its new path, was Collier's great lifetime achievement. 
Collier was a giant of a man, both physically and intellectually. Unpretentious in manner, he was capable of intense concentration and had a memory to match, backed up by a large filing system. He could digest a large amount of information and then reorganize it in simpler but understandable form. He wrote many books and papers and was an excellent reviewer. His 'Convective Boiling and Condensation' (1972) became a standard reference work for engineers. As a natural communicator he was in demand as a speaker and made many presentations to various audiences. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering in 1988, and a fellow of the Royal Society in 1990, was made an honorary DS of Cranfield University in 1988, and an honorary DEng of Bristol University in 1993, the year in which he was also president of the Institution of Chemical Engineers. 
In addition to his great love of cricket -- his exuberant youthful bowling having struck terror into the batsmen who faced him -- Collier was an enthusiastic supporter of most sports, and had a deep appreciation of music and painting. These interests were reflected in the wide range of support given by Nuclear Electric plc to many individuals, organizations, and events in these fields. He was particularly pleased when the derelict Bankside power station, which Nuclear Electric had inherited from the former Central Electricity Generating Board, was taken over by the Tate Gallery. He died at his home, Field House, Longridge, Sheepscombe, Gloucestershire, on 18 November 1995. 


