@@@@@


doc= 60378


Howard, Bernard Marmaduke Fitzalan-, sixteenth duke of Norfolk (1908-1975), courtier, was born at Arundel Castle on 30 May 1908, the only son (there were also three daughters) of Henry Fitzalan-Howard, fifteenth duke of Norfolk (1847-1917), and his second wife, Gwendolen Mary Constable-Maxwell (1877-1945), daughter of Marmaduke Francis, eleventh Lord Herries of Terregles, and heir of that Scottish title. He succeeded to the dukedom in 1917, his half-brother from a previous marriage having died in 1902. He was educated privately and at the Oratory School, Birmingham. 
The young duke, whose hereditary duties as earl marshal were performed until 1929 by his uncle, Viscount FitzAlan of Derwent, was commissioned into the 4th (territorial) battalion of the Royal Sussex regiment early in 1928, but at the end of that year transferred to the Royal Horse Guards, with whom he was not happy. He returned gladly to the Sussex regiment in 1934, rising to the rank of major and serving in France and at Dunkirk in 1940. He succeeded his mother as thirteenth Lord Herries of Terregles in 1945. His interests were emphatically those of a countryman; he loved hunting, shooting, racing, and cricket, and in 1936 became master of the Holderness hunt. He was sworn of the privy council in 1936. He married on 27 January 1937 the Hon. Lavinia Mary Strutt ['see below']; they had four daughters, the eldest of whom succeeded to the Scottish barony of Herries. In 1938 he sold Norfolk House on the corner of St James's Square, London. 
The duke's apprenticeship in official duties came with the funeral of George V (1936), followed by the coronation of George VI, initially planned for Edward VIII. He rapidly demonstrated that he would stand no nonsense from anybody in ensuring the precise and punctual performance of majestic ceremonial. Later in 1937 he was appointed a knight of the Garter, at an unusually early age. His experience was put to good use in 1953 at the coronation of Elizabeth II, which the duke managed with magisterial authority and expertise. On this occasion he coped skilfully with the introduction into Westminster Abbey of television, to which he was initially opposed. His hereditary position also made him responsible for the College of Arms and its officers, in whom he took a consistent interest and with whose aid he regulated two other great state occasions, the (long prepared) funeral of Sir Winston Churchill in 1965 and the investiture of the prince of Wales at Caernarfon in 1969, where the size of the budget and the weather both gave grounds for apprehension. 
Norfolk was a lifelong devotee of the turf and made his mark both as an administrator and as an owner and breeder of horses. He became a member of the Jockey Club in 1933 and served as steward from 1966 to 1968; in addition he was vice-chairman of the Turf Board (1965-8), where he took a traditionalist attitude to the problems of modern racing. Nothing gave him greater pleasure than his position as the queen's representative at Ascot (1945-72); the victory of Ragstone, trained and bred at Arundel, in the Ascot gold cup of 1974 was a fine climax to his career. Another sporting enthusiasm was cricket. Not only did he welcome visiting teams with an opening game in the park at Arundel but he took a team to tour the West Indies in 1956-7, playing occasionally himself; then in 1962-3 he acted as manager of the English team to Australia, bringing his bluff common sense to bear on the problems of the tour. It was an unusual role for the senior duke of England. 
In Sussex, Norfolk played his proper part. He was mayor of Arundel in 1935-6 and lord lieutenant of the county from 1949 to 1974, as well as sitting on the county council. From 1941 to 1945 he served as parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture in the coalition government, putting his robust knowledge of farming to the public good, but his heart was not in politics. In parallel with these official duties went his position as a spokesman for the Roman Catholic laity of England. As a chairman he was terse and efficient; in general his attitude was conservative and he did not welcome the alterations in language and ritual of the Second Vatican Council. In 1970 he participated in the canonization of the forty martyrs, who included his ancestor St Philip Howard (1557-1595), and was received by Pope Paul VI. His local experience also led him to be a powerful and ardent advocate of the Territorial Army; in 1956-9 he was chairman of the Territorial Army council. 
The duke of Norfolk was happier in the countryside than in the metropolis; but his potent sense of duty drove him to undertake a broad variety of tasks, some hereditary, some of obligation, but also many of inclination. His often unmoving face concealed a considerable sense of humour and power of anecdote. In his old-fashioned way he was a grandee by birth, a countryman by inclination, and a good man who did his duty. He was appointed GCVO (1946), GBE (1968), and received the Royal Victorian Chain (1953). He died at Arundel Park House, which he had himself built in the grounds of Arundel Castle, on 31 January 1975. He was succeeded in the dukedom by his cousin, Miles Francis Stapleton Fitzalan-Howard, Baron Beaumont and Howard of Glossop (1915-2002). 
Norfolk's wife, Lavinia Mary Fitzalan-Howard, duchess of Norfolk (1916-1995), racehorse owner and breeder, was born on 22 March 1916 at Kingston Hall, Nottingham, the only daughter of Algernon Henry Strutt, third Baron Belper (1883-1956), and his first wife, Eva Isabel Marian, 'nee' Bruce (1892-1987), the third daughter of Henry Campbell Bruce, second Baron Aberdare. In 1922 her parents divorced, and in 1924 her mother married (Albert Edward) Harry (Meyer Archibald) Primrose, Lord Dalmeny (1882-1974), who in 1929 became sixth earl of Rosebery. He was a keen cricketer, racehorse owner, sometime steward of the Jockey Club, and master of the fashionable Whaddon Chase hunt. His stepdaughter (who was educated at Abbot's Hill, near Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire) rode his horses with the Whaddon Chase and in point-to-point races with her distinctive colours and, until the Disney Corporation intervened claiming copyright, a large Mickey Mouse on her jersey. Following her marriage to the duke of Norfolk she did not convert to Roman Catholicism, but their daughters were brought up as Catholics. She entered fully into the duke's public life and sporting interests, especially horse breeding and racing. At the coronation of 1937 she was one of the four duchesses who held the canopy over the queen at her annointing, and in 1953 she took the part of the queen in rehearsals at Westminster Abbey for the coronation. After her husband's death she continued to live at Arundel Park, and to breed and race horses with notable success: Moon Madness won the St Leger in 1986, and Sheriff's Star won the coronation cup at Epsom in 1989. The duchess was the first woman steward at Goodwood (1975-95). From 1975 to 1990 she was lord lieutenant of West Sussex, the first woman lord lieutenant, and she had numerous local and charitable engagements: she estimated that she was involved with some 150 charities. In 1971 she was made a CBE and in 1990 the first non-royal lady companion of the Garter. According to one obituarist she was 'a formidable character: a true county lady of few words and all of them very much to the point' ('Daily Telegraph', 12 Dec 1995). She died at Arundel Park, Arundel, Sussex, on 10 December 1995, and was survived by her four daughters. 
Michael Maclagan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 60381


Emmison, Frederick George (1907-1995), archivist, was born at 35 Sandhurst Road, Bedford, on 28 May 1907, son of George Emmison, a telegraph clerk with the London, Midland, and Scottish Railway, and his wife, Kate Ann, 'nee' Field (died 1967). A bright boy, inspired by his father with a love of history, he gained a scholarly reputation at Bedford modern school with every expectation of a place at Cambridge University to follow. Unhappily, family circumstances prevented this progression and in 1925 he started work, entering the employ of Bedfordshire county council. Here what must have been disappointment was promptly replaced by opportunity. Appointed the county's first clerk of the records, the young Emmison acquired as his mentor and profited from the experienced guidance of Dr G. H. Fowler, chairman of the county records committee and justifiably acknowledged as the 'father of local archives'. 
Under this tutelage Emmison gained a thorough grounding in archive administration and absorbed the crucial concept of the broad-based county record office. 'It was my singular fortune', he reminisced later in life, 'to be trained in the late 1920s as the first local archivist' (personal knowledge). He soon gained a reputation for his imaginative and energetic approach to his pioneering endeavours. The Bedford years saw many initiatives, not least his wholehearted policies of record survey. That he was from the first a doer as well as a thinker is evidenced in his report of conducting the pursuit of a survey of Bedfordshire parish records by visiting, mainly by bicycle, 'over one hundred churches on forty-five Saturdays as a voluntary scheme' (ibid.). In 1935 he married Margaret, daughter of Dr Hamilton Langwill, with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
The defining event in Derick Emmison's career came in August 1938 with his appointment as the first county archivist of Essex. His opportunities to lead, to influence, to proselytize, became more fully realizable and he set himself to make Essex Record Office pre-eminent in its field and an inspiration to and model for county record offices to come. He remained in post until he retired in 1969, creating in due time the largest English county record office in terms of staffing, size and range of collections, accommodation, and of always steady and at times spectacular increases in user numbers. Meantime his seemingly boundless energy generated a ceaseless flow of often influential initiatives, especially in the related fields of education and publication. He achieved the appointment of the first full-time education officer to an archives service and the lease of part of Ingatestone Hall for major annual exhibitions and facilities for school classes and group visits. Characteristically Derick and Margaret endowed an annual prize for a study based on historical research in original sources by Essex schoolchildren. The Essex Record Office publications programme, begun in 1946, has often been emulated but never yet surpassed, constituting another key legacy in the provision of archive services and the furtherance of local studies. 
Far from content with leading by example, Emmison involved himself in the work of numerous organizations, national and local, pertinent to archives and local studies. He was a founder member in 1932 of the British Records Association and in 1947 of the Society of Local Archivists, and was for many years prominent in the British Records Society, the Historical Association, and the Society of Genealogists, being honoured by office in these and many local bodies. It is, indeed, arguable that his most important contribution to the cause of local archives lay in his talent as a publicist and his instinctive ability to enthuse a wider than specialist audience. No one did more to establish in the public mind an awareness of what the local record office could and should be. The quiet post-war revolution in the availability of and access to the 'nation's memory' would assuredly have been quieter and less profound without him. 
For Emmison, busy as he was with professional concerns, the professional and the scholarly always marched hand in hand. His work as researcher and writer began as early as 1927 and ceased only with his death. His most substantial publications are his 'Guide to the Essex Record Office', parts 1 and 2 (1946-8); 'Catalogue of Maps in the Essex Record Office' and supplements thereto (1947, 1952, 1964, 1968); 'Elizabethan Life' (5 vols., 1970-80) -- all in the 'Essex Record Office Publications' series; 'Wills at Chelmsford, 1620-1720' and '1721-1858' (British Records Society, 79 and 84; 1959, 1969); 'Tudor Secretary: Sir William Petre at Court and at Home' (1961); 'Archives and Local History' (1966); and 'Essex Wills' (from 1558), of which ten of the projected twelve volumes were published by the New England Historical Genealogical Society, Boston, USA, between 1982 and 1995. 
Emmison's achievements were duly honoured. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and of the Royal Historical Society. In 1966 he was made an MBE and in 1970 an honorary doctorate was conferred on him by the University of Essex. He was awarded in 1974 the Julian Bickersteth medal of the Institute of Heraldic and Genealogical Studies, and the Historical Association gave him in 1987 its Medlicott medal 'for outstanding service to history, both in the record office field and as a local historian'. Derick Emmison died from pancreatic cancer in Broomfield Hospital, Chelmsford, on 9 November 1995 and was buried at Chelmsford following cremation. 


@@@@@


doc= 60382


Hull, (James) Alan (1945-1995), popular singer and songwriter, was born on 20 February 1945 at 68 Sutton's Dwellings, Benwell, Newcastle upon Tyne, the home of his father, Anthony Hull, who was unemployed, his mother, Sarah (Sally), 'nee' Broadbent, and his elder sister Moira. He attended Rutherford Grammar School, Newcastle. He was given a guitar at the age of twelve and wrote his first song soon afterwards. As a teenager he became lead guitarist in several amateur rock groups, one of which, the Chosen Few, recorded for Pye Records in 1965. 
At twenty-one Hull began training as a psychiatric nurse at St Nicholas's Hospital, Newcastle, where he met Patricia Sharp 
(known as Pat; 'b'. 1940/41)
. They were married on 22 August 1966, and had three daughters. During this period he wrote several of his most memorable songs, including 'Lady Eleanor' and 'We Can Swing Together', and in 1973 a book of poems based on his experiences there, 'The Mocking Horse', was published by Spice Box Books. He left nursing in 1969 to concentrate on performing his songs and organized a folk club at the Rex Hotel, Whitley Bay. During 1969 he composed more than fifty songs while working as a window cleaner. Among those who appeared at his club was the local folk-rock group Brethren, with whom he teamed up. 
The group signed a recording contract with the London-based Charisma Records, owned by Tony Stratton-Smith, and were renamed Lindisfarne by John Anthony, the producer of their first album, 'Nicely out of Tune' (1970). This contained seven songs composed by Hull, including the psychedelic 'Clear White Light'. Bob Dylan was a primary influence on Hull's songwriting and Dylan's former producer Bob Johnston was brought in from the United States to produce the next album, 'Fog on the Tyne' (1971). The title-song was to become Hull's best-known composition, a singalong number with which Lindisfarne would end each concert. The song's status as a modern Geordie anthem was underlined in 1990, when the group re-recorded it with locally born soccer star Paul Gascoigne. 
During 1971 Lindisfarne had top ten hits with 'Meet me on the Corner', composed by group member Rod Clements, and Hull's 'Lady Eleanor', inspired by Edgar Allan Poe. Hull again wrote most of the songs for the group's third album, 'Dingly Dell' (1972). Among these were 'All Fall Down', 'Bring Down the Government', and 'Poor Old Ireland'. Lindisfarne performed extensively in Europe, North America, and the Far East; the pressure of touring contributed largely to the group's dissolution in 1974. Hull had meanwhile made the solo album 'Pipedream' (1973), which included 'Money Game', a sharp expression of his disillusionment with the music industry. He also composed the music for, and acted in, 'Squire', a 1975 BBC television play by the Newcastle writer Tom Pickard. 
In 1976 the original members of Lindisfarne reunited for what would turn out to be the first of many Christmas concerts at Newcastle City Hall. The group toured occasionally and also recorded many new Alan Hull songs, including 'Run for Home', an international hit in 1978, and 'Dedicated Hound', an attack on music journalists. In 1983 Conservative members of parliament denounced his song 'Malvinas Melody', 'a criticism of war as a solution to disputes', whose title referred to the Falklands conflict of the previous year. Lindisfarne remained a vehicle for Hull's songs throughout the 1980s, and his final album with the group, 'Elvis Lives on the Moon' (1993), included two of his most potent political commentaries, 'Day of the Jackal' and 'Mother Russia'. 
Hull also made solo recordings as well as collaborating with Pickard in 1986 on 'Heads Held High', a musical show commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the Jarrow march. This reflected his lifelong commitment to socialism; for a time he was secretary of his local constituency Labour Party. He performed in Blackpool to coincide with the Labour Party conference in 1990 and played at numerous benefit concerts for striking or redundant miners and shipyard workers. 
Alan Hull died of a heart attack at the General Hospital, North Shields, Northumberland, on 17 November 1995 and his ashes were scattered at the mouth of the River Tyne. His final composition, 'We can Make It', a celebration of northern working-class resilience, appeared on a posthumously released album, 'Statues and Liberties'. This was completed by his musical collaborators, who included his son-in-law Dave Denholm. 


@@@@@


doc= 60384


Davie, Elspeth Mary (1919-1995), short-story writer and novelist, was born in Kilmarnock Infirmary, Ayrshire, on 20 March 1919, the daughter of Oliver Dryer, a Church of Scotland minister, and his Canadian wife, Lilian McFarlane. Her father had a Norwegian grandfather, and Elspeth was always conscious of Norse affinities. Her mother was of old loyalist stock, while her father -- who was something of a womanizer -- was a strong pacifist; before Elspeth's birth he served in London as secretary of the pacifist Fellowship of Reconciliation. When Elspeth was nine he returned to Scotland, to a parochial charge in Bonnyrigg, Midlothian. Elspeth attended the esteemed George Watson's Ladies' College, in Edinburgh, but would say that she learned less there than in her dame-school in London, where she was bowled over by 'Beowulf'. However, she made some mark at Watson's, as a winning high-jumper. Her elder sister, Lois, who married the distinguished theologian Donald McKinnon, was a brilliant philosophy student at Edinburgh University. Elspeth followed her there, and she too did well in philosophy, while also studying English and fine art, but her maths was not good enough for her to complete an MA, so she moved to the city's famous college of art, where she took a diploma. 
Walking in the borders with a friend on 11 July 1938 Elspeth met in a youth hostel 'a dark, heavy sort of fellow... dark brooding eyes behind glasses'. They talked all evening and carried on after breakfast the next day, 'both hungering to talk and discuss real things... I felt we could, in the end, have spoken about anything', as she recorded in her diary ('Chapman 81', 12-13). Her new friend was George Elder Davie (1912-2007), a legend for conversational erudition in Edinburgh student circles, a philosopher just returned from postgraduate study in Germany. His most famous book, 'The Democratic Intellect: Scotland and her Universities in the Nineteenth Century', published in 1961, made an enormous and enduring impact on serious Scottish thinking. He and Elspeth married on 5 October 1944; their daughter, Anne, was born in 1946. 
Elspeth taught art in schools in Aberdeen and the borders. By 1946 she was in Belfast, where George was teaching at Queen's University. There she painted 'en plein air', quickly, in a style that echoed French post-impressionism, and sold her canvasses. (She set little store by them, and did not paint after George returned to Edinburgh University in 1959.) She also befriended a general practitioner, Pat Strang, then intimately involved with Philip Larkin. She met Strang for serious discussion of literature once a week, and Larkin took an interest in Strang's quiet friend. She was cautious in forming relationships, having seen in her own family the consequences of over-free 'giving'. She could impress people as shy and retiring, yet she talked well; once, when George Davie visited his friend Hugh MacDiarmid at his cottage near Biggar, the poet saw him out with 'Next time you come bring Elspeth with you -- she will aerate the conversation.' She kept up with old friends from college days but did not go out much to court new ones. She read voraciously, deep into the night. The significant record of the last four decades of her life is simply that of her writing. 
Elspeth Davie had composed short stories at school. Published excerpts from her diaries of 1938 show that she arrived at an alarmingly mature prose style extremely early. But her gift did not begin to emerge into public view until 'The Observer' launched a short-story competition in 1951. The winner was Muriel Spark, from Edinburgh, who thus began her own impressive career in fiction. Elspeth Davie was runner-up. From then her rise to eminence was gradual. Notable magazines began to take her stories. She attracted the attention of a fellow Scot, John Calder, who had been the prime publisher of Samuel Beckett in English. He introduced in translation other experimental European writers, including the French novelist Robbe-Grillet, theorist of the 'nouveau roman', with whom Elspeth felt an especial affinity. In his world human beings are, up to a point, dominated by objects. Calder and Boyars were therefore the natural publishers for the first novel by this quiet 'avant-gardiste'. 'Providings' appeared in 1965. Three more novels followed: 'Creating a Scene' (1971), about art teaching; 'Climbers on a Stair' (1978); and 'Coming to Light' (1989). 
But it was Davie's short stories that provided the basis for mounting critical esteem, represented by her winning the prestigious Kathleen Mansfield prize in 1978. Calder and Boyars published her first collection, 'The Spark', in 1969. Four more followed, from other publishers: 'The High Tide Talker' (1976), 'The Night of the Funny Hats' (1980), 'A Traveller's Room' (1985), and 'Death of a Doctor' (1992). Three title-stories represent her range and preoccupations. In 'The High Tide Talker' a man who claims to be an actor appears every day on the beach of a popular resort and preaches to holidaymakers up to the point where the high tide drowns his words, so that his ultimate message is not revealed. This highly original fable displays Davie's interest in 'acting', and also her abiding theological concerns. The latter emerge also in 'The Night of the Funny Hats', in which a coachload of travellers and tourists progress through the great southern desert of Australia. 'Death of a Doctor' is confined to at most an hour in one place. As a nurse moves through a crowded waiting room, breaking to each patient in turn news that their doctor has just died, watchers from windows across the street are jealous because they imagine that some kind of social occasion is in progress. Breaking a simple scene into discrete particles, each dwelt on unemphatically in turn, and changing it into a kind of performance, Davie compels the reader to brood with her on what she called 'the secret side of life' (Gordon, 'Beyond the Words', 87). 
Davie believed that meaning could not be abstracted, validly, from a good story; the whole story was its meaning. Her meanings are conveyed by unusual methods. Her stories are copiously populated but remarkably few persons are named. It has been noted, astutely, that 'unlike many excellent woman novelists' she does not 'discriminate in favour of female characters' (Todd, 179); general humankind attends like a Greek chorus the quiet agonies of male principals. She is absorbed with precise visual and aural detailing, but is usually uninterested in smells or sexuality. She offers a vision of humanity transiently and sadly engaged with life under enduring stars, with the arts (music as well as drama and painting) offering the reader, as they did her, purpose. 
Elspeth and George Davie lived for many years at 15 Leven Terrace, Edinburgh -- a flat at the top of a handsome mid-Victorian block. From one side the view was across the meadows, past the Royal Infirmary and the university, to the ominous grandeur of Arthur's Seat. On another side, over Bruntsfield Links, was James Gillespie's School -- the original of Marcia Blane's in Muriel Spark's 'The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie'. The flat was the venue of Davie's novel 'Climbers on a Stair'. By 1982 a hundred stairs were too much for the ageing couple. George had just retired from the university and Elspeth had suffered a mild brain haemorrhage. But when they moved to a modern block in north Edinburgh they chose another top flat (albeit one reached by a lift). They shared a taste for the long view. Elspeth did not discuss her reading with George, and he found her almost aggressively indifferent to his obsession with the history of Scottish education. To a reader though, the overlapping of their philosophical concerns is amply apparent. Their outwardly quiet lives suggested mutual devotion. 
After her first stroke Elspeth, who had never cared for housework, gave it even less attention, but she kept on writing, very well. The second blow fell in 1992. She could still put up a show for visitors, but she was finished. George nursed her as long as he could but at last had to put her in a home. She died at Queensbury House Hospital, Edinburgh, on 13 November 1995, as quietly as she had lived. She had never been a best-seller, but the brilliant younger generations of more flamboyant Scottish fiction writers who had followed in her wake included many who admired her craftsmanship and deep intelligence. Her ongoing and increasing reputation was indicated by the appearance in 2001 of a large selection of her stories, 'The Man who Wanted to Smell Books', published as a 'Canongate Classic'. Introducing it, Giles Gordon evoked her appearance in a certain notable photograph: 'The stern, severe, intelligent face -- intense searchlight eyes; prominent nose; tight but wide lips; compassionate strong chin -- is topped by a sensible fringe and Mrs Davie wears a black, halter-neck jumper. Here is a latter-day Presbyterian visage with a vengeance. (p. vii)' Her Presbyterian vision was certainly not a matter of routine adherence to the kirk, in which her father had reared her. It derived more broadly from the overarching protestant traditions and grey starkness of Edinburgh, and from a rigorous intellectualism tempered by devotion to kindliness and beauty. 


@@@@@


doc= 60385


Williams, Gwyn Alfred (1925-1995), historian, was born on 30 September 1925 at 11 Lower Row, Penywern, Dowlais, Merthyr Tudful, Glamorgan, the eldest of the three children of Thomas John Williams (1892-1971) and his wife, Gwladys Morgan (1896-1983), both of whom were teachers; the family later moved to Pant Road and in 1936 to 8 Morlais Street, Dowlais. Williams was educated at Dowlais central school, where his father was on the staff and later headmaster, and at Cyfarthfa Castle grammar school, the former home of the Crawshays, the ironmasters who had caused Merthyr Tudful to grow rapidly into one of the earliest industrial towns in Wales. The Williams family were Welsh-speaking and staunch members of Gwernllwyn Independent Chapel and the boy was brought up in a household, extended family, and neighbourhood which in many ways embodied the radical tradition of the Welsh working class which was to exercise him as a professional historian. Although his parents were not poor by local standards, the young man was deeply affected by the social deprivation that was a consequence of the mass unemployment which had afflicted south Wales during the inter-war years; in 1939, when he was fourteen, the male unemployment figure for Dowlais was still 73 per cent. In 1943 he won a scholarship to study history at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, but was prevented from taking it up immediately by military service. An admirer of Tito, he also spent a year in Yugoslavia, helping to build a road linking Zagreb and Belgrade, an experience which went to the making of his political views, which were always left-wing and for many years Marxist. Some of the more comical episodes from Williams's boyhood in Merthyr -- particularly at the time of the civil war in Spain, when he and his friends became young communists, and from his active service in France and Germany which took him to the Normandy beaches, the liberation of Paris, and the ruins of Berlin -- were described in his book 'Fishers of Men: Stories towards an Autobiography', published posthumously in 1996. 
On his return to Aberystwyth in 1947, Williams studied history under Professor R. F. Treharne; he took a first-class honours degree in 1950 and, two years later, a master's degree for a study of the social nature of the patriciate in thirteenth-century London. By this time he had married on 9 September 1950 Maria Fernandez ('b'. 1925), whom he had known since childhood; she was the daughter of a Spanish steelworker who had settled in Dowlais; they had one son. Appointed lecturer in Welsh history at his old college in 1954, Williams soon earned a reputation as a highly entertaining speaker and his classes were attended not only by his own students but by many undergraduates from other departments attracted by his invective, his erudition, his irreverence, and his passionate concern for the Welsh working class in the context of a wider world. It was at Aberystwyth, certainly under the influence of David Williams and Richard Cobb, but also through the writings of E. P. Thompson, Raymond Williams, and Richard Hoggart, that he discovered the array of research interests which were to occupy him as a social historian for the rest of his life; these included the French Revolution, political radicalism and dissent (particularly as manifested in the history of south Wales), the Arthurian myth, Jacobinism, the Spain of Francisco Goya, the settlement of North America, and, more specifically, the writings of Antonio Gramsci, which he discovered in 1959. His doctoral study, 'Medieval London: from Commune to Capital', regarded by many as his finest piece of scholarship, appeared in 1963, the year in which he was appointed reader in history at the University of York. The most important of his books written in York, where he was given a chair two years later, was 'Artisans and Sans-Culottes' (1968), a study of popular movements in Britain and France during the 1790s. 
His return to Wales in 1974 as professor of history at the University College of Cardiff was not the triumphant homecoming that Williams's many admirers had expected. The history of Wales did not enjoy much prestige as an academic subject at Cardiff and some of the new professor's staider colleagues were deeply suspicious of his left-wing views and unorthodoxies. He nevertheless set about raising the department's profile -- not by administrative means, which he found irksome, but by throwing himself into research and publication, and by continuing to inspire his students. In 1975 he published a translation of Paolo Spriano's 'L'occupazione delle fabbriche', an account of the strikes and occupation of factories that threw Italy into turmoil in the 1920s, and 'Proletarian Order', a study of Gramsci's contribution to the factory council movement in Turin and the foundation of the Communist Party of Italy, and in the year following there appeared his 'Goya and the Impossible Revolution'. The explicit Marxist message of these, and indeed all his books, was deplored by his more conservative colleagues, but it was his passionate belief that historians had a responsibility to explore the past in ways that could be used for the creation of a better future by people outside the cloisters of university life. He also believed that history should be entertaining as well as scholarly: some of his idiosyncratic footnotes are great fun to read. 
Never one to show deference to the grey eminences of academic life, and revelling in controversy, Williams also held that 'too much of Welsh history has been written with the Welsh left out'. He now turned to a subject of which his own family had direct experience: his book 'The Merthyr Rising' (1978) is still the definitive account of the events of June 1831, when, in the Welsh equivalent of the Peterloo massacre, workers took over the town and were eventually put down by armed force, after which one of their number, Richard Lewis (Dic Penderyn), was hanged for an offence he did not commit -- the wounding of a soldier -- thus becoming 'the first martyr of the Welsh working class'. This book was quickly followed by 'Madoc: the Making of a Myth' (1979), a debunking of the tale of Madog ab Owain Gwynedd, the twelfth-century prince who was reputed to have sailed to America; 'The Search for Beulah Land' (1980), which is about the Welsh in America during the last decades of the eighteenth century; and two collections of essays, 'The Welsh in their History' (1982) and 'When was Wales?' (1985), in both of which his provocative views of Welsh nationality and nationhood were subjected to a rigorous Marxist critique. With these books he earned a reputation as the pre-eminent historian of the Welsh working class -- 'the People's Remembrancer' -- which he was to enjoy for the rest of his life. 
The 1980s were filled with despair and crisis for Gwyn A. Williams. Appalled by the Welsh people's rejection of the Labour government's modest proposals for devolution in March 1979 ('the year of the plague'), and incensed by the subsequent advent of Thatcherism, he began to neglect his professional responsibilities and to fall out with his colleagues and even his erstwhile comrades. His intellectual turmoil was compounded by domestic problems: his wife, Maria, who had sustained him during an often turbulent lifestyle, left him; he began drinking more heavily than usual; and in 1983, falling victim to the effects of Conservative cutbacks, he took early retirement from what he had come to think of as his 'ridiculous job' at University College, Cardiff. From now on, as 'a redundant historian', he would turn his back on scholarly exegesis and speak directly to his own people. 
He chose to do so by a resumption of active politics and as a writer for television. Although he had broken with Soviet communism on account of Stalin's hostility to Tito, Williams was still convinced that the left could be mobilized on Gramscian lines. He was a frequent contributor to 'Marxism Today' and various militant journals in Wales, arguing in favour of a Welsh republic and addressing workshops devoted to the causes of trade unionism, feminism, and world peace. But after the Labour Party was again defeated at the general election of 1983 he joined Plaid Cymru, in whose ranks he soon won new converts to his Marxist point of view; these young people gathered around the magazine 'Radical Wales' and the party's national left, in both of which he played a prominent role. In all his work the call to action was explicit and unequivocal: the capitalist, centralist, British state (and the English hegemony) had to be undone if the national community of Wales was to survive and prosper. He was never persuaded to stand as a parliamentary candidate on behalf of Plaid Cymru (he was an uneasy party member and could not have been happy in the Westminster parliament, anyway) but his oratory -- despite a speech impediment, which he sometimes exploited for theatrical effect -- made him one of the most inspiring speakers in the Welsh national movement. It was not until a trip to Donetsk in 1990, where he was taken down the notoriously dilapidated Gorki mine, that his disillusion with Soviet communism found expression: 'Good God!' he exclaimed in the television programme made about his visit, 'and this is supposed to be a workers' state!' 
The rest of Williams's energies during the early 1980s went into the making of a history of Wales, 'The Dragon has Two Tongues', broadcast by Harlech Television in thirteen episodes in 1985. The series took the form of a free-ranging argument between Gwyn A. Williams and a historian of the old school, Wynford Vaughan-Thomas, in which it was generally thought that the trenchant analysis and impish wit of the wild-eyed, gesticulating, mercurial Marxist had scored more often than the cautious, even-handed, gentlemanly, whiggish approach of his sparring partner. Of small physical stature, with a shock of white hair and the Silurian features that seem so typical of the indigenous people of south-east Wales, Williams developed a quirky but compulsive television presence which had all the pugnacity of his writing, and used the medium unapologetically to put over what he thought the Welsh people needed to know about their own past. In his view the history of Wales, for all its communitarianism and zeal for social justice, was one of discontinuity, schism, rupture, and permanent emergency, and he exhorted his students and viewers to 'enjoy the contradictions'. This exuberant, warm-hearted, complex man was a master of brilliant improvisation, the devastating aside and memorable one-liner, and was not averse to the most outrageous hyperbole. He took risks, both on the printed page and on the television screen, which no academic scholar would have dared contemplate. His inimitable style made Gwyn Alf (as he was commonly known, to distinguish him from several other eminent Welshmen with similar names) a media celebrity, and for the independent television company Teliesyn he went on to write and present many more television programmes, some thirty in all, in both Welsh and English, which were broadcast by BBC2 and Channel 4; in them he examined the careers of such differing writers as Mary Shelley, Aleksandr Pushkin, Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg), and Saunders Lewis, arguing with them as if he were intimately involved in their lives and work. With the last-named, the greatest Welsh writer of the twentieth century and the founder of Plaid Cymru, he had a love-hate relationship: he could admire Lewis's European outlook while deploring the reactionary, right-wing strands in his thinking. More after his own heart were men such as Iolo Morganwg, the 'flinty Jacobin' and 'organic intellectual' who invented the Gorsedd of Bards of the Isle of Britain in 1792, and David Ivon Jones, the Welsh Unitarian who championed the cause of the black trade unions in South Africa, worshipped Lenin, and, at his death in 1924, was buried alongside other communist heroes in the Novodevichye monastery in Moscow. 
Williams was attracted to men and women with enquiring minds whose ambitions were essentially revolutionary or at least subversive of established order and who, like himself, demonstrated in their lives Romain Rolland's motto: 'Pessimism of the intelligence, optimism of the will'. His last book was 'Excalibur: the Search for Arthur' (1994), a clear-eyed account of a subject which has confused so many lesser historians, and his last film, 'Gwyn Alf -- a People's Remembrancer' (1995), a moving autobiography of a man who chose the hard way to an understanding of his people's history. The esteem and affection in which he was held were confirmed at a celebration of his life and work held at Chapter Arts Centre in Cardiff on 6 February 1995, by which time he was seriously ill. 
Williams, a chain-smoker, died of cancer on 16 November 1995 at Ty Dyffryn, in Dre-fach Felindre, Carmarthenshire, the home of (Gillian) Sian Howell Lloyd ('b'. 1938), the woman with whom he had lived since 1985. Six days later he was cremated at Parc Gwyn crematorium, Narberth, after a ceremony in which 'The Internationale' was sung together with a Welsh hymn, and his ashes were later interred in the garden at Ty Dyffryn. 


@@@@@


doc= 60387


Stephens, Sir Robert Graham (1931-1995), actor, was born on 14 July 1931 in Bristol, the first of the three children of Reuben Stephens (1905-1985), a shipyard labourer and costing surveyor, and his wife, Gladys Millicent, 'nee' Deverell (1906-1975), a chocolate-factory worker. Stephens was brought up virtually as an only child as his sister, Jackie, was nine years younger than he and his brother, John, fourteen years younger. He attended Portways Boys' School and, encouraged by an outside elocution teacher, won a free scholarship to the Bradford Civic Theatre School in Yorkshire in 1949. After a spell in provincial theatre, notably at the Library Theatre in Manchester, Stephens joined the newly formed English Stage Company at the Royal Court in London. There he made his name in the title role of John Osborne's second play (co-written with Anthony Creighton), 'An Epitaph for George Dillon' (1958), and he originated the role of Peter the chef in Arnold Wesker's 'The Kitchen' (1961). He also appeared in Osborne's 'The Entertainer' with Laurence Olivier (whom he understudied as Archie Rice) in the West End. When Olivier started the National Theatre adventure, first at the Chichester Festival Theatre in Sussex and then at the Old Vic in London in 1963, Stephens was hired in a crucial phalanx of Royal Court shooting stars: directors William Gaskill and John Dexter, and actors Joan Plowright, Frank Finlay, and Colin Blakely. Margaret Natalie Cross (Maggie) Smith ('b'. 1934) joined this group from the West End, and Stephens promptly fell in love with her. He had first married the actress (Nora) Ann Simmonds in 1951, and their son, Michael, was brought up by his mother's brother when the marriage failed. Soon afterwards Stephens met the actress Tarn Gillian Bassett ('b'. 1928/9). They married on 26 April 1956 and produced one daughter, Lucy, an international lawyer. Stephens's affair with Maggie Smith, which began in 1964 when they played alongside Olivier in a revival of George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer', was one of many romantic escapades. But their professional partnership under Olivier's aegis proved an exciting focus of attention in the National's early days. They married in 1967 and had two sons, Christopher and Toby, both actors. 
These years were gloriously successful for Stephens. His National roles included Atahualpa, the Inca sun god, in Peter Shaffer's 'The Royal Hunt of the Sun' (1964), a performance that was shamelessly influenced by Olivier's Othello. Half-naked and glistening, he emerged in a golden back wall that opened like a sunflower and spoke in a strange argot based on a study of Peruvian bird noises. This mesmerizing performance was followed by a preening Benedick (opposite Maggie Smith's brilliantly flirtatious Beatrice) in Franco Zeffirelli's production of 'Much Ado about Nothing'; a besotted Sandy Tyrell (with Edith Evans, Maggie Smith, and Derek Jacobi) in Noel Coward's 'Hay Fever'; a tortured Loevborg in Ingmar Bergman's radical reworking of Ibsen's 'Hedda Gabler' with Smith in the title role; and a touching Tom Wrench in Pinero's 'Trelawny of the Wells'. This latter performance was as one of the several disappointed writers in whom Stephens seemed to specialize: his George Dillon was presented with a typewriter at the very moment that he knew he would never produce anything worthwhile; Tom Wrench embodied the future of new writing as he sacrificed his unquenchable love for Rose; his Loevborg was a nervous dissolute whose great manuscript was eaten up in the plot and the fire; and his Trigorin in Chekhov's 'The Seagull' at the Greenwich Theatre in 1974, one of his greatest performances, was a philandering short-story specialist who was good but 'not as good as Turgenev'. He had graduated from being an eye-catching juvenile with an easy stage manner, a musical voice, and a heartbreaking gift for pathos, to the stature of a more bestial, classical, and imposing artist. He saw himself in the great romantic tradition of Kean, Macready, and his hero, Olivier. The point was underlined in that same Greenwich season when he also played a sly, smiling Pastor Manders in Ibsen's 'Ghosts' and a fleshy, guilt-racked Claudius in 'Hamlet'. He never went on to play Shakespeare's greatest tragic soldiers, Macbeth and Anthony, roles in which he might have excelled, and he was a disappointing Othello in Regent's Park. 
It was not in Stephens's nature to be cautious, pragmatic, or materialistic; he never owned a house or a car. When his marriage to Maggie Smith began to fail, he launched a last-ditch attempt to save it in a revival by John Gielgud of Noel Coward's 'Private Lives' at the Queen's Theatre in 1972. As Elyot his performance was acclaimed as one of surprising morbidity, but the marriage ended in divorce in 1975. Smith had won an Oscar for her performance in the 1968 film of 'The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie' (in which Stephens had a supporting role as the art teacher), but he could not match that Hollywood success with his own bid for stardom in Billy Wilder's 'The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes' (1969). The rest of his film career was on the whole undistinguished. Trying for the West End money-spinner that always eluded him, he played the lead in 'Murderer' (1975) by Anthony Shaffer, the author of the hit thriller 'Sleuth'. The production was a failure, but not his new friendship with the actress Patricia Quinn. This relationship would prove the most stable of his life, and it lasted until his death. 
Stephens always bounced back. In a second memorable term at the National Theatre in the early 1980s he played Pontius Pilate and Herod in Bill Bryden's production of 'The Mysteries' in Tony Harrison's new version. The production was shown to the critics on an all-day Saturday assignment; they were astonished to find Stephens at the bar well before the official opening time, dispensing large gin and limes to all and sundry, but mainly himself. His subsequent performance was judged superlative. Again, his career went into decline, but he was given one last chance by Adrian Noble, the artistic director of the Royal Shakespeare Company who, as a schoolboy in Chichester, had been propelled towards a stage career by Stephens's performance as Atahualpa. Audiences relished his return to the front rank as a gloriously embittered, unsentimental Falstaff with the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1991. Two years later he played King Lear, again with the Royal Shakespeare Company, as one who knew only too well what it meant to see your life flashing before you. He caught the poignancy, humour, and sheer grandeur of Shakespeare's tragic hero in a way unrivalled in recent times. This completed a comeback on a par with that of Lazarus. 
Stephens's last weeks were spent on a dialysis machine in the Royal Free Hospital, Hampstead, where he had undergone a kidney and liver transplant operation in September 1994. He was knighted in January 1995 and he married Patricia Quinn in the same month. He died in the hospital of liver failure in the early hours of 13 November 1995, just ten days after the publication of his autobiography, 'Knight Errant'. In defiance of doctors' orders, he smoked untipped cigarettes to the last and took comfort in his own belief that it was impossible to be a good actor if you were a dull man. He was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 60390


Gellner, Ernest Andre (1925-1995), social philosopher and anthropologist, was born on 9 December 1925 in Paris, the elder of two children of Jewish parents, Rudolf Gellner (1897-1987), a lawyer, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Fantl (1894-1954), both from Czechoslovakia. The family returned to Prague, where he attended the English grammar school, but in 1939 they fled the German occupation to England, where Gellner attended St Albans county grammar school, winning a scholarship at seventeen to Balliol College, Oxford. After a year at Balliol he served with the Czech armoured brigade in northern France. He returned to Prague in 1945 and spent half a term at Prague University, but, foreseeing the communists' takeover, he returned to England and Oxford as an undergraduate. He read philosophy, politics, and economics, and obtained a first in 1949. After two years lecturing in philosophy at Edinburgh University, he moved to the London School of Economics (LSE) to teach philosophy in the sociology department, but was attracted to the ideas, though not to the cult, of Karl Popper and to anthropology, in the Malinowskian tradition, in which he wrote a doctoral thesis, doing fieldwork among the Berbers in Morocco. In 1954 he married Susan Ryan ('b'. 1926), with whom he had two sons and two daughters. He stayed at the LSE for thirty-three years, becoming professor of philosophy in 1962, moving in 1979 to the philosophy department. In 1984 he became professor of social anthropology at Cambridge but returned to Prague in 1991 as director and resident professor of the Centre for the Study of Nationalism at the Central European University. 
Gellner was brilliant, forceful, irreverent, mischievous, sometimes perverse, with a biting wit and love of irony, while abundantly generous with his time, support, and energy, all the more impressively given a chronic bone disease from which he suffered. He was an intellectual whose impact extended across the world and beyond the various academic disciplines on whose frontiers he flourished. He engaged in vivid academic polemics, in an aphoristic and knockabout satirical style, but always in defence of bold philosophical and substantive positions. These cohered within an overall vision: an anti-relativist defence of Enlightenment ideals and insistence upon the difference between the agrarian religious world and the industrial scientific one, the need to explain the transition from the one to the other, and the cognitive and technological superiority of the second. That vision was most fully set out in his reflections on 'the structure of human history' in his 'Plough, Sword and Book' (1988). 
The first such polemic was 'Words and Things' (1959), Gellner's notorious onslaught on contemporary Oxford linguistic philosophers, much influenced by the later Wittgenstein, forever his particular 'bete noire'. He attacked them for idealism and relativism, for assuming that philosophy must 'dissolve' philosophical problems by endorsing the ordinary language conventions of existing communities. Bertrand Russell wrote the preface, but Gilbert Ryle, the editor of 'Mind', refused to have it reviewed. Subsequent polemical targets included the 'churches' of French structuralism, 'Frankfurter' neo-Marxism and the psychoanalytic movement, the 'anti-Orientalist' analyses of Edward Said, the 'meta-twaddle' of postmodernism, and, within anthropology, the highly influential writings of Clifford Geertz for denying that knowledge beyond culture is possible and thereby influencing his fellow anthropologists towards the very idealism and relativism to escape which he had originally turned to anthropology. 
Gellner's major positive contributions within anthropology began with important contributions to debates about kinship and rationality. Then in 'Saints of the Atlas' (1969) he applied 'segmentary lineage theory' to analyse the role played by charismatic religious specialists in maintaining political order in the absence of state power; he also incorporated a cyclical model of tribal-urban interaction derived from Ibn Khaldun. He developed this analysis into a general model for Islamic polities, in 'Muslim Society' (1981), which, though criticized, was an important stimulus to scholars of Islam. But his best-known and most influential contribution was his theory of nationalism, expounded in 'Thought and Change' (1965) and 'Nations and Nationalism' (1983). This theory focused on the 'requirements' of industrialism which, with its need for labour mobility, entailed a measure of egalitarianism and institutions to promote a homogeneous culture to enable communication. Industrialism's uneven spread meant that the elites of backward areas had an incentive to foster nationalism and separate off to become bigger fish in a smaller pond. This model was also criticized, especially in relation to nationalism outside Europe, yet it remains the best general theory of nationalism yet proposed. 
Gellner also turned his attention to Soviet-style socialism in eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. He had a keen eye for its corrupting mechanisms and inability to fulfil its promises, combining native understanding and linguistic facility with anthropological expertise, spending a year in Moscow in 1989-90. He interpreted Soviet ethnographers' use of Marxist theories for the light they shed on Soviet realities, in 'State and Society in Soviet Thought' (1988). In his last years he put to work the concept of 'civil society' in 'Conditions of Liberty: Civil Society and its Rivals' (1994), contrasting it with traditional segmentary and totalitarian societies, while arguing for guarantees that would protect citizens from the tyranny of the market. A striking study of Wittgenstein and Malinowski, 'Language and Solitude' (1998), appeared posthumously, relating their contrasting viewpoints to conditions of life and thought under the Habsburg empire. 
Gellner was a provocative and exciting but schematic thinker who liked, as he once admitted, 'neat, crisp models'. These should be seen as 'ideal types' for generating theories that have the Popperian virtue of being falsifiable. He offered sketches of the big picture of large-scale social processes, while admiring and encouraging those committed to the detailed understanding of local concepts and ideas but fiercely opposing those who fashionably argued that local knowledge is all the knowledge there is. He was a passionate universalist in both his thought and his life. He built up an extraordinary range of international contacts, but his incessant travels finally caught up with him. On 5 November 1995 he died of a heart attack in Prague after flying back from a meeting in Budapest. He was cremated in Chichester, Sussex. Gellner was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 60391


Birley, Eric Barff (1906-1995), historian and archaeologist, was born on 12 January 1906 at his parents' home, The Poplars, Worsley Road, Swinton, Manchester, Lancashire, the youngest of four sons (there were also two daughters) of Joseph Harold Birley ('b'. 1870), a Manchester businessman, and his wife, Edith Gladys Fernandes Lewis. He was educated at Clifton College and at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he read 'literae humaniores' (Greats). After graduating in 1928 he was appointed to a teaching post at Armstrong College, Newcastle upon Tyne, from which he transferred to a lectureship at Durham University in 1931. He held a readership from 1943 to 1956 (during which period he was also vice-master and master of Hatfield College) and professor of Romano-British history and archaeology in 1956, a chair that he held until his retirement in 1971. Honours included election as FSA in 1931 and FBA in 1969, the appointment as MBE in 1943, honorary doctorates at the universities of Heidelberg, Freiburg im Breisgau, and Leicester, an honorary fellowship of Brasenose College, and presidency of the Dumfriesshire and Galloway Society and of the Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
The early intellectual and academic influences on Birley were his Brasenose tutor in ancient history, Michael Holroyd, and R. G. Collingwood, who leavened his philosophical activities with an interest in the history and particularly the epigraphy of Roman Britain. Birley's academic career was founded on a central preoccupation with matters archaeological. His interest in the area of Hadrian's Wall had been aroused by Collingwood, who was to inaugurate the standard corpus of Romano-British inscriptions. Birley's early work included studies of imported Roman Samian pottery and excavations at Housesteads, Birdoswald, and Vindolanda. It was at the last site that he purchased the house at Chesterholm which had once belonged to the nineteenth-century antiquary Anthony Hedley. These interests remained constant and central throughout his career; his influential views on the date of the Roman withdrawal from Scotland in the early years of the second century AD, before the building of Hadrian's Wall, were founded on his study of the Samian pottery. 
The advent of the war, which took some toll of Birley's health and stamina, brought a position in which he worked in military intelligence, with a particular interest in the structure of the German military command. His experience here was to be influential in steering his interests in a slightly different direction, although in an area in which he had long shared an interest with his friend and distinguished contemporary Ronald Syme, later Camden professor of ancient (Roman) history at Oxford. The two main areas of Birley's contribution to ancient history in the mature years of his career are perhaps best illustrated by two activities of the year 1949. He took a leading role in organizing the first International Congress of Roman Frontier Studies, which took place in Durham and initiated a regular series of such conferences; his formative role was recognized in 1974, when he was elected honorary life president of the Congress of Roman Frontier Studies. In 1949 he also wrote an influential paper on career patterns of the equestrian officers of the Roman army, in which he examined the principles of selection and advancement using, above all, the evidence of inscriptions and prosopographical methods ('Durham University Journal', December 1949, 8-19). This was to be followed in 1954 by a comparable treatment of the careers of senators in the emperor's service, in which he suggested that evidence for posts early in the career indicated some degree of preselection of those destined for important military commands and the consulship ('PBA', 39, 1954, 197-214). 
For more than half a century and well into his retirement years Birley was a leading figure in Romano-British history, archaeology, and epigraphy, though his interests were by no means confined to Roman Britain. He produced academic work of high standards and lasting value, including 'Research on Hadrian's Wall' (1961) and articles which were collected in two major anthologies, 'Roman Britain and the Roman Army' (1953) and 'The Roman Army: Papers, 1929-86' (1988). That he never wrote a single magisterial work of historical synthesis, of which many thought him capable, should not indicate lack of influence or historical vision. These qualities are emphasized by the fact that he was widely thought of, both in Britain and northern Europe, particularly Germany and the Danube lands, where many of his closest academic friends and kindred spirits worked, as the founding figure of a 'school' of pupils engaged at Durham and Newcastle in the study of Romano-British archaeology, military history, and applied epigraphy. Many of these went on to enjoy distinguished academic careers. If he inspired loyalty in his pupils, which he certainly did, he was not the man to shy away from expressing his views forthrightly. His avowedly severe review ('Journal of Roman Studies', 56, 1966) of the first volume of 'Roman Inscriptions of Britain' (1966), published under the joint editorship of R. G. Collingwood and R. P. Wright, took the study to task on a host of details and for failure to exploit and apply the results of epigraphical research by treating inscriptions as historical documents. It indicated, as many of his colleagues well knew, that Birley commanded a mine of detailed information and historical insight, much of which was to remain unpublished. 
Birley married Margaret Isabel (Peggy) Goodlet, daughter of the Revd James Goodlet, minister of Forest Hall Presbyterian Church, Northumberland, on 5 April 1934. They had two sons, both of whom followed their father's professional interests. The elder, Robin, excavated at Vindolanda, as his father had done, and was responsible for the important discovery of the Vindolanda writing tablets; the younger, Anthony, held chairs of ancient history at the universities of Manchester and Dusseldorf and wrote, among other things, biographies of three Roman emperors, Hadrian, Marcus Aurelius, and Septimius Severus. Eric Birley spent his final years living with his wife in close proximity to their elder son, Robin, at Carvoran, where the latter had established a 'museum of the Roman army'. He died at home at Carvoran House, Carvoran, Greenhead, Northumberland, on 20 October 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60393


Allfrey, Phyllis Byam Shand (1908-1986), author and politician, was born in Roseau, Dominica, British West Indies, on 24 October 1908, the second daughter of Francis Byam Shand ('b'. 1879), a lawyer who had come to Dominica from England in the early 1900s, and Elfreda Millicent Crompton Nicholls, whose family had settled in the islands in the mid-seventeenth century. Phyllis Byam Shand was named after her ancestor William Byam, who first settled in Barbados, but eventually moved to Antigua, where he became governor. He was doubtless the Byam whom Aphra Behn describes with vehement negativity in 'Oroonoko' (1688). Phyllis Shand's parents were married in St George's Church in Roseau on 27 March 1905, and had three other daughters: Marion ('b'. 1906), Celia ('b'. 1910), and Rosalind ('b'. 1912). Phyllis Shand and her sisters grew up in Roseau, where they were educated somewhat haphazardly at home, with various tutors educating them in poetry, arithmetic, religious studies, and French. Phyllis also practised drawing and music, and started writing plays at an early age. Her first short story was published in 'Tiger Tim's Weekly' when she was thirteen. 
Having followed her sister Celia to England when Celia married Jack Richmond Allfrey, Phyllis Shand met and married Jack's brother, Robert Edward Allfrey (1906-1986), on 22 May 1930. Shortly after the wedding they went to the United States, where Robert Allfrey had been offered a job as a hydraulic engineer. Their two children were born in Buffalo, New York: Josephine, nicknamed Phina, in February 1931, and Philip in April 1935. The family returned to England in June 1936. In London, Phyllis Allfrey took a job as secretary to the author Naomi Mitchison, a job that brought her into contact with prominent Fabian socialists of the time. She then served as London county council welfare officer to assist those whose homes had been bombed, and she offered her own home as a haven for Dominicans migrating to England. During this period she began to write professionally, winning an international award for her poem 'While the Young Sleep'. In 1940 she published 'In Circles', a collection of thirteen poems she had written from 1936 to 1939. Three of the poems reflect West Indian themes. In 1942 she published 'Uncle Rufus', a short story about her childhood in Dominica, in the London 'Tribune'. 
Throughout the 1940s Phyllis Allfrey wrote numerous short stories, some of which were published in an assortment of magazines including 'The Windmill', 'Pan Africa', and the 'Manchester Guardian'. By 1950 she had collected another set of poems, which she published under the title 'Palm and Oak'. The two trees named in the title represented her own ancestry -- West Indian and European -- which she described as 'tropic' and 'nordic'. Increasing literary success encouraged her to more sustained writing. The Allfreys' two children were in school, and during this peaceful period Phyllis Allfrey wrote 'The Orchid House'. The novel was published quickly, with a British edition from Constable in 1953, to be followed by an American edition from Dutton in the same year. In 1954 Librairie Stock published a French edition, 'La maison des orchidees'. Writing the novel 'drove me towards my home island' (P. Allfrey to E. Campbell, n.d.), and the Allfreys returned to Dominica in 1954. 
In Dominica, Phyllis Allfrey was caught up in the island's social and economic politics. She co-founded the Dominica Labour Party to help the island's underpaid tropical fruit workers, and for the next two decades her political activity overshadowed her creative writing. Her most significant political success occurred in 1958, when she won an all-island election for the cabinet of the newly created federal government of the West Indies. As minister of labour and social affairs, she moved with Robert and her adopted African-Caribbean daughter, Sonia, and Carib son, David, to federation headquarters in Trinidad. There they lived until 1961, when the West Indies Federation collapsed. Upon their return to Dominica, they ran the 'Dominica Herald', and then, in 1965, they founded a weekly newspaper, 'The Star'. 

'The Orchid House' was republished in London in 1982 by Virago Press, followed by an American edition in 1985 by Three Continents Press. During her newspaper years, Phyllis Allfrey continued to write poetry and short stories in addition to political essays and editorials for 'The Star'. Poor health and poverty caused the Allfreys to give up 'The Star' in February 1982, allowing time for Phyllis to work on her novel 'In the Cabinet'. Phyllis Shand Allfrey died of malnutrition and colon cancer in the Princess Margaret Hospital, Roseau, Dominica, on 2 April 1986, 'In the Cabinet' remaining unfinished. Although she died in great poverty, she was accorded a federal minister's funeral in Roseau, where she was buried in the Anglican cemetery. Robert, who died before the end of the year, was cared for in his final months by their adopted Carib son, Robbie. Robert lies in the cemetery in the Carib Reserve not far from the one-room cabin that he and Phyllis had built. 


@@@@@


doc= 60396


Allison, John Drummond (1921-1943), poet, was born in Caterham, Surrey, on 31 July 1921, the youngest of the four sons of Harry Ashby Allison (1870-1946), a chartered accountant, and his wife, of Austrian descent, Gertrude Jane Mabel Wolfsberger (1877-1961). Baptized Drummond because his mother noted that he had the pugnacious chin of Sapper's popular fictional hero Bulldog Drummond, his boyhood was a happy one. The family home was filled with books and visitors including the author T. H. White. One friend remembers the atmosphere as 'utterly Betjeman' (private information). After attending Downside preparatory school, Purley, he won a scholarship in 1934 to Bishop's Stortford College, a liberal, nonconformist public school, where he flourished: acting, debating, and subscribing to the Left Book Club. 
In 1939 Allison won an open exhibition at Queen's College, Oxford, forming productive friendships with Sidney Keyes and John Heath-Stubbs, with whom he founded a salon where other aspiring poets were persuaded to read and discuss their works. Allison contributed to 'Eight Oxford Poets', edited by Keyes and Michael Meyer and published by Routledge in 1941, 'Poetry from Oxford in Wartime, 1942-3' (Basil Blackwell), and 'Z: Oxford and Cambridge Writing' (John Lehmann, 1942). He gained a second class in the shortened honours school in modern history before moving on to Sandhurst and a commission in the East Surrey regiment. He trained in Plymouth and at the battle school in Northern Ireland, spending his leaves in Oxford and London, where he met Tambimuttu and Dylan Thomas in the Swiss Pub in Soho. He had time to correct the final proofs of his single volume of published poems, 'The Yellow Night' (Fortune Press, 1944), before being seconded to the West Surreys and embarking for north Africa in October 1943. In November his regiment joined the Fifth Army in Italy and on the night of 2-3 December he was mortally wounded leading a platoon attack against a German machine-gun post on a mountain ridge overlooking the Garigliano River. He was buried in Italy, first in the divisional cemetery at Roccamonfina then in the war cemetery at Minturno, north of Naples, Italy. 
Compact of stature, determined, energetic, moving and speaking at high speed, Allison had the appearance of a young James Cagney. Impulsive, ebullient, uninhibited, generous, and ingenuous, he gained the affection of a wide circle of friends, male and female. His poetic themes concerned love and longing and the quest for identity, certainty, and purpose in a world of widespread social and political instability and disillusionment. He also wrote about cricket (the subject of two of his most powerful poems 'Verity' and 'The Oval') and of his growing sense of foreboding as the war snatched him from unscathed and enchanted Oxford, forcing him to confront his own mortality. Though his is a raw talent and his poems are often uneven and wilfully obscure, his vocabulary is vibrant and illuminating. His tone is ironic and his language engagingly colloquial, steeped in Arthurian imagery, in political and historical reference, and in his own experience. His mature poems, among them 'Love's Milanese', 'The Brass Horse', 'O Sheriffs', 'A Funeral Oration', 'After Lyonesse', 'Yorktown Gate Guard', and 'The Yellow Night', have found favour in modern anthologies. Allison readily acknowledged his early debt to Swinburne and later to W. H. Auden yet he developed a highly individual and modern style. Echoes of Allison may be found in the early works of Thom Gunn. Though one should not claim too much, there are many who believe that Allison's poetry has stood the test of time better than that of more acclaimed contemporaries. He was, in the words of Ian Hamilton, 'perhaps the most absorbed and striking elegist of Auden's 'low, dishonest decade'' (Hamilton, 74). 


@@@@@


doc= 60398


Hughes, Herbert Delauney (1914-1995), adult educationist and politician, was born on 7 September 1914 at 47 The Mall, Swindon, Wiltshire, the only child of Arthur Percy Hughes, secondary school teacher, and his wife, Maggie Ellen Delauney, former elementary school headteacher. When he was six the family moved to Bakewell, Derbyshire, because of Hughes's ill health. After being taught at home until the age of eleven, he attended Bakewell grammar school and then was a boarder at Manchester Warehousemen's and Clerks' Orphans School at Cheadle Hulme, Cheshire. With a county major and a state scholarship he entered Balliol College, Oxford, in 1933 and graduated with a second-class degree in modern history in 1936. In 1935 he was chair of the Oxford University Labour Club. During this time he was a member of G. D. H. Cole's circle, helped with soup kitchens in Oxford for hunger marchers from south Wales, and later took part in demonstrations in the Rhondda. 
From Oxford, Billy Hughes went to Manchester University to train as a secondary school teacher, but he moved to London after only one term to take up the post of assistant secretary of the New Fabian Research Bureau (NFRB) which had been set up by G. D. H. Cole in 1931 to prepare viable plans for the implementation of Labour Party policies in the form of books and research pamphlets. When the NFRB united with the Fabian Society in 1938 Hughes became organizing secretary, editing the bureau's journal and pamphlets and servicing research committees. 
In London, Hughes worked with John Parker, MP for Dagenham and secretary of the NFRB, and served as a member of Lambeth borough council. He also got to know Parker's sister (Winifred) Beryl (1912/1913-1995), whom he married on 25 September 1937. The marriage lasted until she died in 1995; there were no children. 
From 1942 to 1945 Hughes served with the Royal Artillery, taking part in the invasion of Normandy in 1944. In the following year while his unit was camped on the Dutch-German border he learned that he had been nominated as the Labour candidate for the Wolverhampton West constituency. As the constituency's MP from 1945 to 1950 he served as parliamentary private secretary to Ellen Wilkinson, minister of education. The 'Education Act' of 1944 was being implemented at this time; despite post-war economic difficulties, schools were rebuilt, emergency measures for the supply of teachers were introduced, the school-leaving age was raised to fifteen, and a beginning was made to provide a secondary education for all children. Ellen Wilkinson (whose personal secretary Beryl had been between 1937 and 1941) died in 1947; she was long mourned by both Billy and Beryl Hughes. Billy stayed in the Ministry of Education for another year, after which he became parliamentary private secretary to Michael Stewart, then financial secretary to the War Office. Here his work was largely concerned with parliamentary committees on colonial development and welfare. 
In the general election of 1950 Hughes defended a redistributed constituency against Enoch Powell, the Conservative Party candidate, losing by 600 votes. Later that year the post of principal of Ruskin College, Oxford, became vacant on the sudden resignation of Lionel Elvin to take up a position with UNESCO. Ruskin College was (and is) an independent college, with strong associations with the labour movement and trade unions, which prepared working-class men and women to undertake responsible leadership in their organizations and communities. R. H. Tawney and G. D. H. Cole were academic advisers to the college, and it was Cole who suggested that Hughes apply for the position. The interview panel included Tawney and Cole and he was appointed at a salary of $1000 per annum. 
The years of Hughes's principalship from 1950 to 1979 were successful if difficult. Informality was his style of leadership, and this quality characterized college teaching. He was an accessible principal who continued to teach, in particular taking responsibility for courses on politics, public speaking, and trade union studies. In 1950 Ruskin was in danger of becoming a backwater. Finance was a constant problem for the college and its students, and Hughes worked hard on both fronts. The Ministry of Education grant to the college was increased in 1951, and in the 1960s he persuaded the education department to agree to a 50 per cent grant for the development of new buildings; this in turn led to an increase in student numbers and a broadening of the courses on offer. He worked through the Trades Union Congress to encourage trade unions to provide scholarships for their members to pursue Ruskin courses. For much of the time student grants from local education authorities were discretionary, but in 1974 the Department of Education and Science, following a recommendation of the Russell committee on education (1973), made these grants mandatory for students at Ruskin and similar residential adult colleges. During the 1970s, while the two-year University of Oxford special diploma in social studies remained, students increasingly opted for college-validated diplomas in labour studies, history, literature, and development studies. During the same period the history workshop of socialist and feminist historians was established at the college. In October 1976 the prime minister, James Callaghan, inaugurated a national debate on educational standards while laying the foundation stone of the Steve Biko building at the college's Headington site. 
As student numbers increased Hughes put special effort into obtaining funding for overseas students. By the time of his retirement one-tenth of the 180 students at the college were from overseas, in particular from Africa, to which he had a strong commitment. Tom Mboya was a former Ruskin student and Hughes helped greatly in establishing and developing Kivukoni College in Tanzania. In later years, as chair of the Webb memorial trust (funded from the sale for $1 million of Beatrice Webb House, at Holmbury St Mary, Surrey), he encouraged students from eastern and central Europe to attend Ruskin as Webb fellows. 
During his time at Ruskin and in retirement Hughes was actively involved in educational committees and agencies. These included the Workers' Educational Association (as vice-president and president), the Russell committee on adult education (1969-73), the advisory council for adult and continuing education, the Fabian Society, the National Institute of Adult and Continuing Education, and the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal. His work at the college and his active involvement with bodies related to the education of adults was his life. He regretted the official neglect of adult education, and that England was still educationally two nations and would remain so until schools and further and higher education institutions were integrated to provide for the whole population in a comprehensive system of continuing education. Hughes survived his wife by four months, dying at his home, the Manor House at Merton, Bicester, on 15 November 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60400


Bargate, Verity Eileen (1940-1981), theatre producer and novelist, was born on 6 August 1940 in Exeter, the second child of Ronald Arthur Bargate, electrical shopkeeper and later sales manager in the London Metal Warehouse, and his wife, Eileen Dewes. Her childhood was disrupted by her parents' divorce in 1944, followed by her mother's departure to Australia, leaving Bargate and her elder brother Simon for four years in the care of their father. When her mother returned it was with a new husband, Clarke Taylor, a Royal Air Force doctor, who installed his new family in air force bases at Hornchurch, Essex, and Bicester, Oxfordshire, and dispatched his stepdaughter to a succession of boarding-schools and holiday homes. In later years she described her upbringing as that of a 'middle-class charity child' (private information). 
On leaving school Bargate trained as a nurse at the Westminster Hospital, London, where she qualified as a state registered nurse and supplemented her income with private nursing. Although she was emotionally and physically unsuited to this profession (in which she came to rely on the 'pep pills' that sowed the seeds of her future intermittent spells of ill health), it was five years before she abandoned nursing and took a job with a media analysis firm in Paddington, London, where she remained until her meeting and subsequent marriage on 14 February 1970 to Frederick Proud, with whom she had two sons, Sam Valentine ('b'. 1971) and Thomas Orlando ('b'. 1973). 
Proud was an aspirant director who had studied at the Rose Bruford College, and with Bargate he launched the Soho Theatre at an address in New Compton Street in 1969, as a somewhat late arrival on London's lunchtime theatre scene. With a policy of offering new and little-known work at low prices, it established itself as a home of good acting and arresting texts -- which ranged from modern English and American plays to Sheridan and Cervantes. Reviewers got to know Bargate as the beautiful long-legged girl on the door. She had no theatrical experience but she knew about public relations work, and one reason for the theatre's success was her ability to win over the press with intelligence, good humour, and excellent home-cooked food. Even so, its position was precarious; and in 1971 it was obliged to quit its original premises for a temporary home at the King's Head Theatre in Upper Street, Islington (to which it introduced lunchtime shows), before finding a more secure base in Riding House Street (behind Broadcasting House) in the following year, and changing its name to the Soho Poly. 
Shortly after this move the marriage collapsed, leaving Bargate (from 1975) as the theatre's sole artistic director. She seldom directed shows herself; instead she emerged as a persistent and effective encourager of new talent. Policy for her meant 'putting on what I liked' (private information). This involved extending the lunchtime programme to full-length evening productions; opening the doors to women directors and designers; and concentrating exclusively on living writers with whom she worked as a catalyst and a midwife. Not all of them were full-time playwrights. The actor Bob Hoskins claims that she saved him from insanity by letting him present his one-man piece, 'The Bystander', as a therapeutic exercise. Among those whose careers advanced from the Poly to other stages were Hanif Kureishi, Tony Marchant, Micheline Wandor, Caryl Churchill, and Barrie Colin Keeffe ('b'. 1945), whose studies of alienated working-class youth spoke for a hitherto voiceless generation. 
In Keeffe Bargate found a second partner who also persuaded her to embark on writing of her own; from this point her life underwent a powerful and subsequently fatal acceleration. Until now she had played the public role of a hopeful supporter of others, which had masked her spells of ill health and her private sense of oncoming calamity. She was convinced that, like her mother, she would die at the age of forty, and it was of great significance to her that her birthday fell on the same date as that of the bombing of Hiroshima. The dark side of her nature now found expression in her writing. With grim logic, her birth as a novelist coincided with the onset of cancer, and the remainder of her life became a neck-and-neck race between creativity and disease. 
Of Bargate's three books, 'No Mama No' was published in 1978, and 'Children Crossing' in 1979. At the insistence of her publisher 'Tit for Tat' (1981) was rewritten in its entirety, even though Bargate had one arm in a sling at the time. Her subjects were the lies and cruelties of the sexual contract, and the emotional wounds parents and children inflict on each other. Terrible things happen. A seaside holiday ends with the children dead under a juggernaut: mastectomy becomes an instrument of sexual revenge. But the narrative voice is irresistible, and connects the immediate events to a deep well of early pain. 
Verity Bargate died in Greenwich Hospital, London, on 18 May 1981, two months after her marriage on 14 February to Keeffe and a month after the publication of her final book. Her ashes were scattered on the lake of Lewisham crematorium. Her memorials are her books, her theatre, and the annual Verity Bargate award for short plays. 


@@@@@


doc= 60401


Bottomley, Arthur George, Baron Bottomley (1907-1995), politician, was born on 7 February 1907 at 7 Sutton Road, Tottenham, Middlesex, the eldest of the five children of George Howard Bottomley, a brass finisher and later an engineer with the firm of Houghton Butcher, and his wife, Alice Louisa, 'nee' Humphreys, daughter of the postmaster at Mount Pleasant, central London. He attended Gamuel Road council school and Pretoria Avenue Boys' School in Walthamstow. After leaving school at fourteen, he was briefly an office boy in a City textile firm before taking work as a carriage cleaner at the London, Midland, and Scottish railway workshops in Kentish Town. He grew into a tall, plain-featured man with a direct and friendly manner. An active member of the National Union of Railwaymen, he was involved in the general strike and was politicized by it. 
For some years Bottomley attended night classes at Toynbee Hall, where he heard, among other university extension lecturers, Norman Angell, George Bernard Shaw, and Sidney Webb. Toynbee Hall also brought him into contact with Clement Attlee, who became his mentor, patron, and, 'in an artless, nice way', his hero ('The Independent', 7 Nov 1995). With Attlee's encouragement he stood for election to Walthamstow borough council. His election in 1929 initiated what would become a twenty-year tenure of his council seat, including a term as mayor in 1945-6. In 1935, with Attlee as his referee, he was appointed London organizer of the newly formed National Union of Public Employees, a post he would hold until 1945. In 1936 he married Bessie Ellen ('b'. 1906), daughter of Edward Charles Wiles. A teacher and trade unionist, Bessie Bottomley went on to make her own career in the fields of education and health, work for which she was appointed DBE in 1970. 
Through the war years Bottomley served with energy and distinction on the home front. Having pioneered civil defence in Walthamstow in the late 1930s, he was chairman of the emergency committee and air raid precautions controller for London during the blitz. This service earned him an OBE in 1941. For the rest of the war he was deputy regional commissioner for south-east England. At the 1945 election Bottomley entered parliament as Labour MP for Chatham. In this new role he focused increasingly on overseas policy. Early in 1946 he travelled with a parliamentary delegation to India, a country that had fascinated him since a meeting with Gandhi in 1931; in Delhi he formed lasting friendships with Nehru and Krishna Menon. In May 1946 Attlee brought him into the government as under-secretary for the dominions. He led a government mission to Burma in 1947 and won esteem among the Burmese leaders; long afterwards, in 1981, he was awarded the title of Aung San Tagun, the highest Burmese title available to a foreigner. His next step upwards came in October 1947, when Attlee appointed him secretary for overseas trade, second in command to the Board of Trade's new president, Harold Wilson. A friendly alliance developed between these two, notwithstanding their very different political styles. Wilson was a politician of considerable guile; Bottomley was completely deficient in this quality, invariably believing the best of anyone with whom he had to deal. 
Bottomley was sworn of the privy council in 1951, when Labour lost office. During the opposition years he maintained his Commonwealth interests, travelling to Kenya, Ghana, and Cyprus on parliamentary missions. But he also became an enthusiast for Europe, and served in the consultative assembly of the Council of Europe in 1952-4 as well as producing in 1959 a pamphlet, 'Why Britain should Join the Common Market'. At the 1959 election he lost his seat. He was forced to return to work for the National Union of Public Employees while searching for another constituency. He found time to write two short anti-communist tracts, 'Two Roads to Colonialism' (1960) and 'The Use and Abuse of Trade Unions' (1963). A by-election victory in Middlesbrough East in March 1962 revived his career. Eleven months later he strongly supported Wilson against George Brown for the party leadership. In his capacity as a well-respected trade unionist on the party's right wing, he played an important part in helping to put together Wilson's majority. 
Following Labour's return to power in October 1964, Wilson appointed Bottomley secretary of state for Commonwealth relations, with a seat in cabinet. This was Bottomley's political zenith. But now came his misfortune: Rhodesia. His open and straightforward nature did not serve him well in dealing with the devious Ian Smith. Through 1964-5 Bottomley appeared to believe that he was making headway in dissuading Smith from rebellion. Thus Rhodesia's unilateral declaration of independence in November 1965 made him appear naive. In August 1966 Wilson demoted Bottomley to Overseas Development. He was still in the cabinet but his ministerial career was fading. The end came with Wilson's request for his resignation in August 1967. Bottomley was hurt but, characteristically, not embittered. He involved himself in back-bench assignments, chairing the select committee on race relations and immigration in 1967-70, a committee on Commons services in 1976, and the House of Commons commission in 1980-83. Faithful to Attlee's memory, he chaired the Attlee Foundation from 1978. He served also as treasurer of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and as president of the Britain-India Forum and the Britain-Burma Society. Having switched from Middlesbrough East to Teesside (Middlesbrough) in 1974, he carried on as a constituency MP until his retirement from the Commons in 1983. In the following year he was created a life peer, in which capacity he attended the upper house regularly and spoke occasionally, while never seeming altogether at home there. His unrevealing volume of memoirs, 'Commonwealth, Comrades and Friends', came out in 1986 under the aegis of a publisher in India; British publishers had evinced no interest in his 'scandal-free life' ('The Guardian', 8 Nov 1995). 
Bottomley was one of the last of the old-style Labour politicians. A working man with little formal education, he made his way to Westminster through Toynbee Hall, trade unionism, and local government. He was proud of his achievements, but never lost his engaging simplicity of manner. Always a north-east Londoner at heart, he saw out his days in the house at 19 Lichfield Road, Woodford Green, that he and his wife, by whom he was survived (there were no children), had shared since the early 1950s. He died in London on 3 November 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60403


Taylor, Desmond Christopher Shawe- (1907-1995), music critic, was born at 92 Lower Leeson Street, Dublin, on 29 May 1907, the elder of the two sons of Francis Manley (Frank) Shawe-Taylor (1869-1920), of Castle Lambert, co. Galway, magistrate and high sheriff for co. Galway, and his wife, Agnes Mary Eleanor (1874-1939), eldest of the three daughters of Christopher Ussher, of Eastwell, co. Galway. He was a great-nephew of (Isabella) Augusta, Lady Galway, playwright and literary patron, and a cousin of the art collector Sir Hugh Lane. A happy childhood was violently interrupted by his father's murder at the hands of the IRA, and he was taken to England and sent to Shrewsbury School. He went up to Oriel College, Oxford, where he graduated with a first in English in 1930, and then spent some time in Germany and Austria before beginning in 1933 to contribute musical, literary, and (as Peter Galway) film reviews to various London journals, including the 'New Statesman'. During the war he served in the Royal Artillery, and on demobilization in 1945 he returned to the 'New Statesman' as music critic, with a distinguished group of writers who included his old friend Edward Sackville-West. Together and with another friend, the painter (Edward) Eardley Knollys, they bought a Queen Anne rectory at Long Crichel, near Wimborne in Dorset, where they were later joined by Raymond Mortimer. There Shawe-Taylor wrote a slim but perceptive history, 'Covent Garden' (1948). 
Long Crichel became a house of warmth and delight, dispensing hospitality, music, and enlivening conversation to a stream of visitors chiefly from the literary and musical worlds. It was also the base for 'The Record Guide' (1951, with revisions and supplements), an anthology by Sackville-West and Shawe-Taylor recommending preferred recordings, but valuable long after its immediate purpose for the comments on composers and their works. David Cairns, later his colleague on the 'Sunday Times', was responding to something avian in Shawe-Taylor when he described the book's 'great bird's eye survey which combined the sweeping vision of an eagle with a kingfisher's brilliance and the darting sensibility of a humming-bird' (Cairns, address at memorial service). 
The record collection begun by Shawe-Taylor as a boy was constantly expanded over the years into the CD era, and was a resource for his enduring devotion to the human voice. He became the most perceptive critic of singing among his colleagues, delighting in voices from an age preserved on his oldest records but quick to welcome new artists, and was also a friend to singers including Emma Eames, Lotte Lehmann, and, a Long Crichel guest, Elisabeth Schumann. His quarterly articles for 'The Gramophone', 'The gramophone and the voice' (1951-73), and seventeen occasional articles for 'Opera', 'A gallery of great singers' (1955-88), deeply pondered and carefully constructed, were among those journals' most distinguished contributions. 
In 1958 Shawe-Taylor succeeded Ernest Newman as chief music critic of the 'Sunday Times'. Though he had anxieties about taking over from so distinguished and long-established a predecessor, readers kindled to his enthusiasm, his lightly worn learning, his quick response to music of many kinds, and his truthfulness to his own reactions, all expressed in elegant, engaging prose. He took immense trouble with his articles, worrying away at niceties of style, sparing neither himself nor, by postcard, colleagues who he felt had sinned. Composers he championed included, at early stages of their careers, Britten and Tippett; in the 1950s he was also more responsible than any other critic for winning English recognition of Janacek as a great opera composer. He was appointed CBE in 1965. 
Apart from a year's break writing for the 'New Yorker' in 1973-4, Shawe-Taylor remained at the 'Sunday Times' until semi-retirement in 1983. He continued to write occasional articles, but spent more time at Long Crichel. The original quartet had by now long dispersed or died, but with the added presence of the ophthalmic surgeon Patrick Trevor-Roper the house maintained much of its original character. Domestically, Shawe-Taylor could be as exacting over details of life as he could over a misplaced comma, and sometimes as irritable, but his charm and the evident goodness of his nature set such matters near the surface where they belonged. He was rare in being as excellent a host as he was a guest, always quicker to take pleasure than umbrage. Frances Partridge, a frequent Crichel visitor and at one point nearly a member of the ensemble, wrote of his 'boundless high spirits, optimism, volatility, and interest in everything that comes his way' ('Everything to Lose: Diaries, 1945-1960', 1985, 99). Though an encroaching confusion of his short-term memory from about 1993 constrained his activities, he was still writing and preparing broadcasts at the time of his death, which took place peacefully at Long Crichel House on 1 November 1995 as a result of heart failure, after a country walk near Crichel. He was unmarried. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 26 March 1996, and he was buried at Long Crichel church. 


@@@@@


doc= 60406


Bush, Alan Dudley (1900-1995), composer, was born in Dulwich, London, on 22 December 1900, the son of Alfred Walter Bush (1869-1935), director of W. J. Bush & Co., manufacturing chemists, and his wife, Alice Maud Brinsley (1870-1951). He was educated privately, then at Highgate grammar school (1911-17). He studied composition under Frederick Corder and piano with Tobias Matthay at the Royal Academy of Music (1918-22), gaining a Thalberg scholarship, the Phillimore piano prize (both 1920), and a Carnegie award for his first string quartet (1923). After leaving the Royal Academy of Music, his piano studies continued with Benno Moiseiwitsch, Mabel Lander, and Artur Schnabel. As a pianist he had a heavy touch, although his technique was strong and reliable. He studied composition (1927-32) with John Ireland, a formative influence on his music. Meanwhile he returned to the Royal Academy of Music as professor in 1925, remaining there until 1978. Of his numerous students, most who have made a mark came from his last teaching years, including the composers Edward Gregson and Roger Steptoe, and the pianist Graham Johnson. He studied philosophy and musicology at Berlin University under Johannes Wolf and Friedrich Blume (1929-31); close contact with Bertolt Brecht and Hanns Eisler influenced his political views. On 31 March 1931 he married Nancy Rachel Head ('c'.1905-1991), daughter of Frederick Dewas Head, lawyer and journalist, and sister of the song composer Michael Head. She was a writer and librettist, who collaborated with Bush on all of his operas and operettas, and on many vocal works. They had three daughters, one of whom, Alice, died in a road accident at the age of seven. 
Bush joined the Communist Party in 1935, having dallied briefly with the Independent Labour Party and the Labour Party. Surprisingly, the conservative Royal Academy of Music proved a haven for the staunch Marxist: a few liberally minded admired him, and he was observed by many as something of a novelty. He rarely attended formal occasions such as prize day, or any function where royalty might be present, but uncharacteristically, at a special dinner in London, he was once seen carrying a flaming Christmas pudding from the kitchens, followed by a long stream of tailcoated serving staff. Believing too much patriotism a bad thing, he once said, 'It's high time we had a revolution in this country', unconcerned about the inevitable loss of life, despite having been a private in the Royal Army Medical Corps (1941-5). In a less tolerant country he would certainly have been imprisoned, or worse. But he was merely ignored, both politically, and, which is a pity, as a composer. He nevertheless played an active role: as adviser and conductor of the London Labour Choral Union (1929-40); founder (1936) and president (1941-76) of the Workers' Music Association; founder of the William Morris Musical Society (1941); chairman of the Composers' Guild (1947-8), later vice-president; and examiner for the Associated Board (Ceylon, India, and Australia, 1932-3). On concert tours to eastern and western Europe and the USSR he conducted British music, including his own. 
Bush was tall, handsome, straight-backed, and, when avoiding politics, which was rare, had great charm. Towards both sexes his manners were impeccable. He had a touch of charisma as conductor and speaker, though shyness sometimes made him clumsy. There was no noticeable sense of humour, but when challenged (which he seemed to like) he grinned wryly. The dogmatic Bush never said 'You may be right', but rather 'That's all very well, but...', and there was a plethora of 'buts'. He was dictatorial, convinced that he was right: when examining he believed his own pupils to be best, nominating them for special mention. His four operas were all overtly political; the first, 'Wat Tyler', won an Arts Council award (1951). A notable early work was the energetic 'Dialectic' for string quartet (1929), but the late 1940s were his best period, with the moving 'Lidice' for unaccompanied chorus (1947), the violin concerto (1948), and the remarkable 'Nottingham Symphony' (1949). Other landmarks were 'Voices of the Prophets' (1953), commissioned by Peter Pears, and a choral work, 'Mandela Speaking' (1985). 
Bush's sight failed towards the end of his life. Nancy, his devoted wife, died in 1991; he ceased composing in 1992. He died on 31 October 1995 in Watford General Hospital; he was survived by two daughters, Catherine and Rachel. He was cremated at Golders Green on 7 November after a well-attended service. During his last years he was not informed about changes in the USSR, his family and friends not wishing to upset him. 


@@@@@


doc= 60408


Cooper, Giles Stannus (1918-1966), playwright, was born on 9 August 1918 in Carrickmines, Dublin, the elder child and only son of Guy Cooper (1889-1941), naval officer and colonial civil servant, and his wife, Winifred, 'nee' Warren (1888-1977), a talented painter who had studied at the Beaux-Arts in Paris. Both families belonged to the Anglo-Irish landed gentry, with a tradition of service in the armed forces at home and in the empire, as well as membership of the Westminster and later the Dublin parliament. The Coopers, originally farmers from East Anglia, acquired large tracts of land in Ireland in the seventeenth century, though by the twentieth their estates consisted only of Markree Castle and a 1000 acre farm in co. Sligo. Giles Cooper's father, a younger son, trained as a naval officer, saw action in the First World War, then entered the colonial service and became attorney-general of the Seychelles. This establishment background throws light on Cooper's later devastating critique of post-colonial England and its disintegrating values. 
Cooper's education, at Arnold House, Hampstead, London, Seafield School, Bexhill, Sussex, and Lancing College, conformed to a then-typical pattern for children of fathers serving overseas of boarding-schools and long separations from his parents. Apparently unperturbed by this regime, he enjoyed boxing, shooting, acting, and above all writing, especially for the stage, although a later play, 'Unman, Wittering and Zigo', presents a very dark picture of public-school life. His father, intending him for the diplomatic service, sent him abroad to learn modern languages, but after a post-school year studying French in Grenoble, Cooper decided to follow his own bent. Persuading his father to let him off Cambridge and the Foreign Office, he went instead to drama school, the Webber Douglas School of Singing and Drama, London. However, the Second World War broke out a few weeks after he qualified as an actor, and by 1942 he was an infantry officer on a troopship bound for Singapore. In Cape Town an ailment kept him ashore while his comrades sailed on unawares to years of Japanese captivity which few survived. Cooper himself was re-routed to Burma, where for two years his battalion fought under harrowing conditions in the jungle. He rarely mentioned his experiences there: he struck acquaintances as the typical 'officer and a gentleman' -- courteous, cheerful, and excellent company while basically stoical and reserved. But just as outward convention veiled inner subversion, so beneath the laughter in his work and conversation lay a sombre view of human frailty owing much to what a relative has called his 'very nasty war'. 
Demobilized in 1946 with the rank of captain and a recurrent kidney weakness, Cooper started a modest career as an actor which introduced him to Gwyneth Lewis (1916-1991), an assistant stage manager just out of the WAAF. She was the daughter of Canon Lewis of Llandaff Cathedral. They married on 15 February 1947 and had two sons: Guy ('b'. 1948) and Richard ('b'. 1955). Those were lean times for struggling freelances, but a characteristically jovial trait of Cooper's was to keep a supply of rockets handy for celebrating pleasant surprises. 
One of these, after only moderate success with writing for the theatre, was the immediate enthusiasm Cooper met with as a script writer for radio. His first radio play, 'Fools Rush In', was broadcast in 1949, and thanks to the perspicacity of such BBC directors as Donald McWhinnie, Cooper soon emerged as a supreme exponent of pure radio, producing a seemingly inexhaustible stream of bizarrely original ideas carried out with virtuoso variation of form and technique. 'The Disagreeable Oyster'; 'Under the Loofah Tree'; 'Unman, Wittering and Zigo' -- the very titles amaze. 'Mathry Beacon' (1958), a realistic fantasy about a group of people maintaining a remote anti-aircraft gun-site long after the war is over, won the Prix Italia. In little more than a decade a score of Cooper's plays were broadcast on television or radio. He was made an OBE for 'services to broadcasting'. 
Cooper never gave up on the theatre -- 'Everything in the Garden', a corrosive debunking of suburban respectability, was staged by Peter Hall in London in 1962 and adapted for Broadway by Edward Albee after the author's death -- but Cooper's 'natural' medium was radio. The apparently bourgeois points of departure that may have obscured his originality on the stage, in the 'kitchen-sink' era of attacking the 'status quo' from without, could on radio be suggested and outsoared within seconds, making way for a display of Cooper's distinctive dramatic economy. He exploited the possibilities of the medium to the full, his particular background and temperament adding a sardonic poise and elegance all his own. But on 3 December 1966, at a time when professional success and a family legacy had made financial worry a thing of the past, and he and his family were settled comfortably in rural Sussex, Giles Cooper died, at Kingston Hospital, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, following a fall from a train. He was buried in Heyshott, Sussex. His 'Six Plays for Radio', published in one volume by the BBC in 1964, is a revelation, not sufficiently remembered, of radio writing as literature. Cooper's work has also been already honoured by an annual award named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 60411


Taylor, Harold McCarter (1907-1995), physicist and architectural historian, was born on 13 May 1907 in Dunedin, New Zealand, the younger son of James Taylor (1873-1958), merchant, and his wife, Louisa Urquhart, 'nee' McCarter (1875-1932), daughter of George Alfred McCarter and his wife, Matilda Mary, 'nee' Urquhart. His father's family had migrated to the Scots settled city of Dunedin from Aberdeen, and his mother's from Coleraine, co. Londonderry. 
Taylor was educated at Otago Boys' High School, and the University of Otago, graduating MSc with double first-class honours in 1928. From there he won a scholarship to Clare College, Cambridge, where he took the second part of the mathematical tripos in 1930, achieving senior wrangler with distinction in section B. Subsequently he joined the Cambridge Cavendish Laboratory when Sir Ernest Rutherford and his team of physicists were making spectacular advances in atomic research. He worked with mathematicians and theorists, headed by Ralph W. Fowler and including H. R. Hulme, who formed a productive partnership with the experimental physicists. Initially he conducted his research under Fowler and Nevill Mott, and between 1931 and 1936 he wrote or collaborated in writing important papers treating the anomalous scattering of alpha particles and the internal conversion of gamma rays. In 1933 he gained his PhD, was appointed university lecturer in mathematics, and elected fellow of Clare College. On 8 April the same year he married Joan Sills (1903-1965), biologist and teacher, and daughter of George Reginald Sills, of Lincoln. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Taylor distinguished himself as scientist, teacher, and administrator not only in university service, but also in military service. His training in artillery began with a New Zealand territorials commission in 1925. He transferred to the British territorials, and was adjutant of the Cambridge area Officers' Training Corps from 1936. In 1941 he joined the School of Artillery, Larkhill, rising to senior instructor and lieutenant-colonel. In 1943 John Cockcroft and Nevill Mott invited him to join in atomic research, but he believed that he would contribute more to the war effort by remaining in gunnery. He went to Europe to solve problems of communication and rangefinding between British and American gunners, and in 1946 was awarded the J. H. Lefroy medal of the Royal Artillery for his distinguished work in artillery science. 
In 1945 Taylor decided not to return to mathematics and took the post of Cambridge University treasurer. He moved from financial to academic administration eight years later when he became secretary-general of the faculties. He was appointed principal of the University College of North Staffordshire in 1961 and in the following year, when the college became the University of Keele, Taylor became its founding vice-chancellor. Keele embodied the boldest experiment in university education then being made in Britain. Its approach had been spearheaded by Alexander Lindsay, first Baron Lindsay of Birker, the first principal of the University College of North Staffordshire. Lindsay had advocated broad based education, developed at Keele in a four-year degree programme initiated by a foundation year of studies in both arts and sciences. Taylor, who at Cambridge had advocated joint courses in arts and sciences, espoused Lindsay's philosophy, and also showed his progressive outlook in establishing the first comprehensive university counselling service, covering educational, vocational, and personal needs. Taylor came to Keele when it was poised for expansion, but lack of funding hindered progress. He was highly regarded as vice-chancellor and took a leading role in issues of university funding after the Robbins report. 
Taylor's interest in Anglo-Saxon architecture had evolved soon after his arrival in England, and by 1936 he and his wife, Joan -- who shared his interest -- had shaped plans for a comprehensive survey of surviving pre-conquest fabric in English churches. In thirty years they visited more than 400 churches to record Anglo-Saxon work, either intact, or preserved fragmentarily in later rebuildings. In addition to site work they searched out published discussions, antiquarian accounts, and other records of supposed Anglo-Saxon structures. Volumes 1 and 2 of 'Anglo-Saxon Architecture' (1965) gave new impetus to research, providing a comprehensive, detailed, and accurate catalogue of surviving structures. Joan died suddenly only weeks before their publication. 
This change in personal circumstance prompted Taylor to retire from Keele in order to have time to complete the final volume of 'Anglo-Saxon Architecture' and in 1967 he returned to Cambridge, having, on 21 March 1966, married his former personal assistant Dorothy Judith Samuel ('b'. 1931), daughter of Charles Samuel of Liverpool. She provided further assistance in research. Volume 3 of 'Anglo-Saxon Architecture' (1978) concentrated upon a well-defined group of churches, analysing their features in some detail. Harold and Joan Taylor had originally hoped that typological analysis of architectural features in England and on the continent might make it possible to date them more precisely, but Taylor concluded that to establish a chronology would be premature. 
After 1965 Taylor published more than sixty papers, including some arising from new collaborations with archaeologists. Between 1971 and 1984 he worked with Philip Rahtz and L. A. S. Butler in a detailed investigation of St Mary's Church, Deerhurst, Gloucestershire. Excavations and the stripping of modern plaster from walls uncovered hitherto concealed evidence for the phases of Anglo-Saxon construction. Between 1974 and 1988 he worked with Martin Biddle and Birthe Kjolbye-Biddle at St Wystan's, Repton, revealing new details about the evolution of the church and its crypt mausoleum. 
Taylor was a modest, mannered man of acuteness and precision, with a deep Christian faith. His energy was remarkable. Much of his research was conducted in his spare time, while holding onerous administrative positions. At Keele he and his wife Joan were known to rise before dawn to conduct research before his punctual arrival at the vice-chancellor's office each morning. Other leisure activities included walking and alpine skiing. Ill health ended his research in his last years. He died of pneumonia in St Neots, Cambridgeshire, on 23 October 1995, and was survived by his wife and the four children of his first marriage. He was cremated on 30 October and his ashes were interred at All Souls' cemetery, Cambridge, on 3 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 60412


Barnsley, Alan Gabriel (1916-1986), novelist and poet, was born on 25 March 1916 in Hexham, Northumberland, the fifth of the six children of George Barnsley (1875-1956), a clergyman in the Church of England, and his wife, Katherine Mary Fielding-Smith (1884-1974), who claimed descent from the eighteenth-century novelist and playwright Henry Fielding. Barnsley's father suffered from sleeping sickness, contracted in the First World War; his mother was a playwright and a breeder of whippets. Barnsley described his childhood as 'golden' until at the age of eight he was sent off to the Grange School, Eastbourne, Sussex, where he experienced hostility from masters and fellow pupils. Looking back as an adult on his time at the Grange, he thought that it probably 'was the beginning of the pain out of which I write' (Newquist, 196). He later attended St Edward's School, Oxford, and Llangefni county school, Anglesey, Wales. When his time came for university study, Barnsley enrolled at Trinity College, Dublin. His parents felt that Trinity would lead to a 'sympathetic career' in medicine and convinced Barnsley that his studies would also be a good preparation for writing (Newquist, 197). At Trinity Barnsley won prizes in anatomy, biology, and oratory and was a member of the Philosophical Society; but after earning his University of Dublin BA in May 1940, he was unable to gain admission to a local hospital for medical studies, probably because he was known to have written a satire on Dublin hospitals. Instead, he enrolled in May 1941 at St George's Hospital, London. He qualified MRCS LRCP in 1942. 
In 1943 Barnsley married Edwina Eleanora Cook ('b'. 1923) of Storrington, Sussex, and joined the Royal Army Medical Corps, in which he served until 1946, leaving with the rank of captain. Barnsley entered in 1946 into general medical practice in Maidstone, Kent, a practice that continued until 1966. In time he also assumed the duty of deputy medical officer of Maidstone Prison. He and his wife were received into the Roman Catholic church on 8 September 1954. Barnsley's religious conversion also had literary links, which, along with illness and the stress of work, led him to take up writing in earnest. He had carefully read Graham Greene and Evelyn Waugh, both converts to Catholicism, and was a close friend of Muriel Spark, another convert. Spark dedicated her first novel, 'The Comforters', to the Barnsleys and was godmother to one of their children. Early on, Greene encouraged Barnsley's writing. For additional encouragement there had always been the example of his mother, of whom he wrote, 'it was her ardour and longing -- not for me but for her own work -- that contributed to my determination [to be a storyteller]' (Wakeman, 472). 
Barnsley first tried poetry. 'The Frog Prince and other Poems' came out in 1952. 'Brotherly Love' (1954), his first novel, introduced John Blaydon, the character whose often disheartening experiences are at the centre of five novels. In 'Brotherly Love' John Blaydon is troubled by a domineering mother and a lustful older brother, a misfit of a clergyman. A second volume of poetry, 'XXVIII Poems', appeared in 1955 and reflected the author's developing religious sensibility. In the second Blaydon novel, 'In the Time of Greenbloom' (1956), the girl he loves is raped and murdered, he is treated cruelly at school, and he meets and is saved from despair by a fantastic Jew named Greenbloom, an Oxford student. In the novel 'Eight Days' (1958), Barnsley temporarily departed from the world of the Blaydon family to enter Graham Greene country: a prison doctor, a recent convert to Roman Catholicism, on vacation in north Africa, becomes caught up in spy intrigue. Then with the publication of 'Through Streets Broad and Narrow' (1960) Barnsley completed what at the time he considered a trilogy about John Blaydon, now a medical student in frequent distress in Dublin. 
According to Barnsley, 'The Birthday King' (1962) was an attempt to get away from the subjectivity of the trilogy (Wakeman, 472). The novel is about a family of part-Jewish Catholic industrialists in Nazi Germany. It won the W. H. Smith prize for literature as well as the St Thomas More gold medal in the USA in 1964. 'Gentlemen in their Season' (1966), about a Catholic convert and an atheist working in the religious division of the BBC, followed. 'New Queens for Old' (1972) consisted of a novella and nine short stories. It won the 1972 Governor's literary award in the state of Washington, USA. In 'Pretty Doll Houses' (1979) Barnsley returned to the Blaydons with the usual echoes -- in this case movement of the family from Sussex to Yorkshire to Anglesey -- of Barnsley's own upbringing. Finally in 1986, the year of his death, he published 'The Women of Guinea Lane', in which John Blaydon, now a surgeon at Guinea Lane Hospital in Middlesex during the Second World War, observes the women around him. 
J. K. L. Walker wrote in the 'Times Literary Supplement' of 'The Women of Guinea Lane': 'It is difficult not to admire Fielding's humanity, his sense that life, especially for women, is hard, that happiness is precarious and daily vulnerable to some unexplained assault on body or mind' (Walker). That humanity shows frequently in the novels in Barnsley's characters' search for love. To Barnsley 'it is not at all so lucky to 'be' loved as it is to 'love'' as the character Rachel says to John Blaydon in 'Greenbloom' (p. 254). Barnsley himself told an interviewer that 'The most important part of living is loving' and that 'I have never seen a man make a success of his life without loving his fellow creatures' (Newquist, 203, 206). 
As his writing took up more and more of his time and interest, Barnsley gradually cut back on his medical practice. In addition to his creative writing, he was publishing essays in literary journals, and from 1961 on he was doing occasional broadcasts for the BBC. For his journalism he received a Catholic Press Association award in 1965. Then in 1966 he accepted a one-year appointment as author-in-residence at Washington State University in Pullman, Washington. He never returned to medical practice. After his year as visiting artist ended, he accepted an appointment as professor at Washington State, where he taught until retiring in 1981. Barnsley had been made DLitt by Gonzaga University in Spokane, Washington, in 1967, and after his retirement Washington State named him professor emeritus. 
Barnsley died on 27 November 1986 at 14625 NE 34th Street, apartment G 19, in Bellevue, Washington, having suffered for some months the effects of lung cancer. He was cremated on 2 December 1986 at Sunset crematory in Bellevue, Washington; later his ashes were interred in a churchyard near Aylesford, Kent. Inscribed on his headstone are the words 'Love is always more'. Barnsley was survived by his widow, three sons, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 60415


Grieve, Sir Robert (1910-1995), town planner and public servant, was born on 11 December 1910 at 61 Springbank Street, Glasgow, the son of Peter Paxton Grieve (1886-1960), soldier, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Boyle (1886-1950). His greatest influences were his mother ('a caged tigress') and an uncle who took him on 'enormous walks' beyond Glasgow's tram termini, when he first glimpsed the hills (private information). His father, a regimental sergeant-major in the King's Own Scottish Borderers, and later a woodcutting machinist, played little part in his life. From 1916 he was a pupil at North Kelvinside School, Glasgow, and, encouraged by his mother's determination that he should 'get on', he trained as a civil engineer at the Royal College of Science and Technology, Glasgow (later the University of Strathclyde), passed the final examination of the Town Planning Institute (later the Royal Town Planning Institute) in 1937, and became an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1938. From 1927 to 1944 he was employed by local authorities. On 1 December 1933 he married Mary Lavinia Broughton (May) Blackburn (1911-1984), a great strength and positive influence. There were two sons and two daughters of the marriage. 
In 1944-6 Grieve played a key role in the production of the Clyde valley regional plan, developing the case for the overspill of population from Glasgow to new towns, creating viable communities within new centres for economic development. In 1946 he joined a new planning unit in the Scottish Office, first in charge of the north region and later the west region. In 1960 he was appointed chief planning officer. In 1964 the University of Glasgow appointed him foundation professor of town and regional planning to establish a postgraduate planning course. He had worked closely with Professor Donald Robertson, and bringing together these outstanding planners, one economic, the other physical, was bound to be fruitful both academically and in practical affairs. Grieve followed another great Scottish planner, Patrick Geddes in emphasizing the importance of breadth in education. He recited J. G. Saxe's poem 'The Blind Men and the Elephant', relating how six blind men each explain an elephant by touching it, but differ according to which part of it they touched. The poem ends: '
So oft in ideologic wars 

The disputants I ween 

Rail on in utter ignorance 

Of what each other mean 


'And prate about an elephant'



'Not one of them has seen.'


' Grieve then raised his arms and said 'We have created the University of the Elephant' (personal knowledge). His indebtedness to Geddes was developed in his monograph 'Grieve on Geddes' (1991). 
Grieve's appointment as full-time chairman of the newly established Highlands and Islands Development Board in November 1965 removed him from academia before he could fulfil the expectations which his appointment had aroused. As he put it, he was 'exchanging the unexceptionable sentiment for the terror of action' (private information) -- modestly overlooking the extent to which his earlier work as local government official and top civil servant had involved action. But now he had to add diplomacy to his professional skills. There had been influential opposition in parliament and in the highlands to the establishment of the new board. The board's first report declared that whatever success it might have in the eastern and central highlands it would be judged by its ability to build population in the fragile areas of the islands and the west. Grieve was not a man to seek the soft option. The policies given greatest emphasis were the fuller exploitation of natural resources, the encouragement of new industries, and the development of tourism, with the provision of grants and loans to increase the business birth rate and increase employment. Oil and gas developments in the North Sea stimulated interest in the Moray Firth, which in turn gave rise to both opposition and competition to acquire potentially valuable assets. There were errors of judgement by two board members, who had to resign, with some pressure on Grieve to resign also. He resisted, and soon had the fledgeling development agency back on an even keel. He made the establishment of a university in the highlands and islands a long-term goal, both for social and development reasons. With support from the Scottish Office and the Millennium Commission in the late 1990s his dream moved closer to becoming a reality. The Highlands and Islands Development Board was comprehensive in both its objectives and its powers, giving rise to considerable international interest. The British Council and the board established an annual seminar for students from 'third-world' countries. Grieve planned and chaired these seminars, adding an international dimension to his already powerful influence on planning in the UK. He was knighted in 1969. The Highlands and Islands Development Board commissioned a bust by Benno Schotz on Grieve's retirement, which was placed in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. 
Grieve returned to the University of Glasgow in 1970. Some academic colleagues criticized Highlands and Islands Development Board policies -- its limited powers on land use were not fully understood -- and the recognition of his trials and achievements was uneven. However, as he put it 'the encounter with lively students was to me the greatest of pleasures and rewards' (private information). He retired in 1974, remaining active as chairman of the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland from 1978 to 1983, and of the Highlands and Islands Development Consultative Council from 1978 to 1986. He was awarded the Royal Institute of Town Planning's gold medal in 1974. In time he took on new responsibilities. He chaired the constitutional steering committee which produced 'A Claim of Right for Scotland' (1988), the blueprint for the devolved parliament established in 1999. He chaired an enquiry into housing in Glasgow (1986-9), and received the lord provost's award for outstanding public service. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1980), and was awarded honorary fellowships of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland and the Royal Scottish Geographical Society (1989), and honorary degrees from Heriot-Watt and Strathclyde (1984) and Edinburgh (1985). He was a keen mountaineer, and was president of the Scottish Countryside Rangers' Association, the Stewartry Mountaineering Club, the Scottish Mountaineering Club, and the Scottish Mountaineering Council. His wife, May, died in January 1984, a devastating blow from which he never fully recovered. He was a devoted father to his four children, Ann, Elizabeth, Iain, and William. He died in Edinburgh of prostate cancer on 25 October 1995. Although brought up as a Roman Catholic he was agnostic. His ashes were scattered on the Conic Hill overlooking Loch Lomond on 15 June 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 60416


Reade, Brian Edmund (1913-1989), art historian and critic, was born on 13 January 1913 at Holwood, 42 Trumlands Road, St Marychurch, Torquay, Devon, the second child and only son of Thomas Glover Reade (1870-1952) and Susan Mary (1873-1960), daughter of the Hon. William King of Queensland, Australia. T. G. Reade, a painter, was for many years art master at Torquay grammar school; his teaching was regarded by informed opinion as the best of its kind, and his art classes were used as a model by the Board of Education in its 1924 report on art teaching in England. 
The young Reade was sent to Montpelier, a preparatory school at Paignton, and to Clifton College, where his unconventional manners and his habit of walking about Bristol in carpet slippers did not endear him to dull teachers. During term his great pleasure was to quarter the medieval streets of the city (which were out of bounds to pupils at the school), making himself familiar with the workshops of glass-blowers and wax candle makers; during the holidays he explored the cliffs and beaches of Petitor, Babbacombe, and Anstey's Cove, collecting natural history specimens in a matchbox. Precocious and imaginative, Reade as a boy was already recognizable as the man he became: independent, single-minded, intellectually curious into out-of-the-way knowledge, and intent on conducting original research. 
In 1931 Reade went up to King's College, Cambridge, to read history under Sir John Clapham. He obtained a first class in part two of the history tripos and was awarded a studentship by the college to research the lost and dispersed art collections of Charles I. He travelled widely in Germany, Italy, Austria, Yugoslavia, and Turkey in search first of baroque and then of Byzantine art and architecture, about both of which he was passionately knowledgeable. In 1936 he abandoned his research because the subject was too large for a single scholar to master, and took a post in the department of prints and drawings at the Victoria and Albert Museum. He regarded the accepted English taste of the day, as represented by the Bloomsbury group, as narrow and provincial; his own enthusiasm was for the work of Klee, Picasso, Rouault, Ernst, and the German expressionists. 
When the Second World War broke out, Reade worked at the War Office and was later seconded as a photographic interpreter to an intelligence unit working with the allied forces headquarters in Europe. On 24 April 1941 he married Margaret Tennant (1916-2006), daughter of his godfather Edmund Ware, and herself a talented artist in enamels and lithography who had studied at the Slade School. They had one son, Alban. 
After the war Reade returned to the museum and began to publish the results of his researches. 'Edward Lear's Parrots' (1949), a short, authoritative study of the subject, was followed by 'The Dominance of Spain' (1951), a history of Spanish costume in the sixteenth century, and 'Regency Antiques' (1953), which was notable for its author's rediscovery of George Bullock, a forgotten cabinet-maker whose work he described and made famous. Later his work on the Enthoven collection, core of a national archive of ballet design, was to bear fruit as 'Ballet Designs and Illustrations' (1967). In the meantime he began to make a reputation as an organizer of exhibitions, among them the Edward Lear exhibition for the Arts Council (1958), the art nouveau and Alphonse Mucha show at the Victoria and Albert Museum (1963), and the Beardsley exhibition there (1966), which became legendary: it was the most successful and influential exhibition of its kind ever mounted by the museum and it captured the imagination of the thousands of visitors who flocked to see it. Reade's catalogue, a model of precise and learned commentary, has been the foundation of all subsequent work on Beardsley and established Reade as the doyen of Beardsley studies. His own large illustrated monograph, 'Beardsley' (1967), removed the artist from his position as the subject of an esoteric cult and gave him finally the status of a great master of design. The exhibition went to New York and Los Angeles, and Reade was offered several museum directorships in America, all of which he refused on the grounds that he wished to retain his independence. 

'Sexual Heretics' (1970), a substantial by-product of Reade's enthusiasm for the 1890s, was an anthology of late nineteenth-century homosexual prose and verse with a long scholarly introduction. In 1971 he published a volume of his own poems, 'Eye of a Needle', and in 1987 a revised edition of his monograph on Beardsley. Reade was appointed deputy keeper in the department of prints and drawings in 1958; he retired in 1973. His last exhibition (1972) was on Louis Wain, an unusual artist in whom Reade had been interested for twenty-five years. The manuscript of Reade's biography of Wain, which was based on documentary material that included the private diaries of the alienists who treated Wain in his last years, was lost in the post and has never been found. 
After his retirement Reade acted as adviser to several more Beardsley exhibitions around the world and wrote his last word on the subject, 'Beardsley Re-Mounted' (1989). In 1977 he succeeded Henry Williamson as president of the Eighteen-Nineties Society. 
A friend who knew him in his fifties described Reade as formidable in mind and appearance. He was tall, slender, and aquiline, with a fine voice and a perfectionist sensibility. He was often silent in company. His colleagues at the museum were used to finding him on the floor of his office, sunk in meditation among piles of paper, hidden in swirling clouds of smoke from the elegant oval Turkish cigarettes he liked. 
Not long after his retirement Reade and his wife moved back to St Marychurch, to the house he had inherited from his father. His last years were marred by a mysterious disease resembling multiple sclerosis, which was never satisfactorily diagnosed. He lost the use of his legs and was confined to a wheelchair, but continued to enjoy talking to the young scholars and researchers who came constantly to seek his help and advice. He also endured periods of bitter frustration and depression. He died at home on 1 November 1989, leaving four volumes of unpublished memoirs and stories; he was survived by his wife and their only son. His remains were cremated on 10 November at Torquay. 


@@@@@


doc= 60417


Wright, Ronald William Vernon Selby (1908-1995), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 12 June 1908 in Glasgow, the eldest son in the family of four children of Vernon O. Wright (1879-1942), organist, formerly an officer in the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders and later an insurance inspector, and his wife, Anna Gilberta Selby, daughter of Major R. E. Selby. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and Melville College and at Edinburgh University, where he was deeply influenced by Alfred Edward Taylor, the professor of moral philosophy. He then studied theology at New College, Edinburgh, where he was taught by Hugh Ross Mackintosh, to whom he became deeply attached. During his student years in Edinburgh, 1929-36, he was an officer cadet in the Royal Scots, student assistant at St Giles's Cathedral, and warden of St Giles's boys' club. He was a close friend of George MacLeod, who founded the Iona community, but he never became a member. 
After being assistant minister of St Mungo's Cathedral in Glasgow for one year, Selby Wright was called back to Edinburgh in 1937 to become the minister of the Canongate Kirk, the church of the palace of Holyroodhouse and Edinburgh Castle, where he was to serve for the next forty years. There he continued his student work among the boys from the deprived back streets of the Royal Mile, and re-established the Canongate boys' club, which he was to run for fifty years. Although he was unusually tolerant with young people, his standards were unchangeably high. He was strict on discipline and expected the highest level of honesty and integrity from both old and young alike. The old Canongate Kirk, like much of the lower end of the Royal Mile, was in a very run-down condition, but through Selby Wright's untiring efforts, especially after the war, it was restored to something like its former glory. At the same time he set about recovering the historic worship of the church in line with John Knox's 'Book of Common Order', giving the sacraments a central place in the life of the parish, and provided the congregation with an enriched liturgy. 
Commissioned as a Territorial Army chaplain in 1939, Selby Wright was called up with the outbreak of war and was sent on active service as the padre with the 9th (Highland) battalion, the Royal Scots, to France. There he experienced the disastrous plight of the British expeditionary force, and after some appalling experiences at St Valery managed to escape from the German army on one of the last little ships to leave the beaches of Dunkirk. In June 1941 he was persuaded by Melville Dinwiddie, the BBC Scottish controller, and James Welch, the director of religious broadcasting at the BBC, to become a regular broadcaster on the radio. At first Selby Wright was reluctant to leave his battalion but he was soon regularly broadcasting to the country and to the forces in particular, and he soon became widely known and loved as 'the radio padre'. The whole venture was heralded as an astonishing success. Most notable was his ability to talk in a direct conversational style which gave inspiration, encouragement, and hope throughout the dark days of the war. In 1942 he became senior chaplain of the 52nd (Lowland) division and travelled to the Middle East and around the Mediterranean, continuing his radio ministry from transit camps in Italy. In 1943 he published 'Let's ask the padre', the fruit of what he taught and learned in his many hours leading 'padre's hours', and talking with young servicemen and -women. In November 1943, in his eagerness to be with fighting troops, he was posted to the 10th Indian division as senior chaplain. He saw service in Italy, Austria, and Germany. Throughout his life he maintained close contact with the military. From 1941 to 1976 he was editor of the quarterly 'Scottish Forces Magazine'. 
After the war the kirk and manse of the Canongate were the base from which Selby Wright called for creative reconstruction, not only in the parish and in the old town but through a fresh appreciation of the spiritual, ecclesiological, and literary heritage of Scotland, in which he was steeped. All his many publications, like his Canongate sermons and school addresses, were illuminated with brilliant allusions which reflected unusually wide reading and literary foraging in his extensive library. It was in line with his reverence for the tradition of the Church of Scotland that he devoted considerable attention to renewing the character and form of divine service in the Canongate Kirk. He drew upon the theological and liturgical insights of the universal kirk, but in such a way as to blend together historic reformed and classical liturgical traditions of worship. It was characteristic of him that his concern for the renewal of church worship was not divorced from the life and people in the parish and indeed in Edinburgh as a whole. His ceaseless pressure for reconstruction in Edinburgh brought him into wider civil activities. He served as a justice of the peace from 1963, as a member of the Edinburgh education committee from 1960 to 1970, and as chairman of Edinburgh and Leith Old People's Welfare Council from 1956 to 1969. He was always jealous of the kirk's connection with the state as the established church in Scotland, and accepted appointment by Edward Heath, the prime minister, to the Douglas-Home constitutional committee, which he felt he must serve as a parish minister. He successfully made friends and built bridges across the social divide, and looked upon all men as equal in the sight of God. 
In 1961, in commemoration of his twenty-five years in the Canongate, Selby Wright was appointed by the queen as one of her extra chaplains in Scotland. Two years later he became her chaplain and served the royal family until 1978. It was said that 'he was one of Her Majesty's favourite preachers' ('The Independent'). He was also chaplain to the queen's bodyguard for Scotland, the Royal Company of Archers (1973-93), and he was appointed chaplain to the Merchant Company of Edinburgh in 1973. Just before his sixty-fifth birthday he was called to be moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, from 1972 to 1973. His moderatorial visits took him to India, where he encountered at first hand the horror of the slums of Calcutta and Old Delhi. He did much to strengthen and quicken the link between the overseas work of the Church of Scotland and the church in south India. At home he made a point of maintaining contact with the Roman Catholic church, not only through his friendship with Cardinal Gordon Joseph Gray, but also in his official visitation of various Roman institutions, such as St Augustine's secondary school in Edinburgh when he was moderator, and Sancta Maria Abbey at Nunraw. 
Selby Wright loved the company of others yet he remained unmarried. Always interesting in conversation, he never missed an opportunity to drop names or give a commentary on the activity and movements of the great and the good. He was at all times generous in his judgements of others, with a discreet but sharp sense of humour. He was highly regarded by many, but never lost touch with the needs of the common man. He never tired of the company of young people. He made a point of understanding their needs, temptations, worries, and fears, and of finding simple direct answers to moral and spiritual problems. That was what gave rise to his successful series of little books entitled 'Asking them Questions'. He was a frequent visitor and popular preacher at many public schools and held a number of honorary chaplaincies. Rarely has a minister of the kirk been so widely and happily acclaimed by church and state, crown and university. He was made an honorary doctor of divinity by Edinburgh University in 1956 and was appointed CVO in 1968. He had the cross of St Mark conferred on him by the patriarch of Alexandria when the latter visited the general assembly in 1970. He was remembered for his unfailing kindness to others, his unflagging concern for the needy, especially for the disadvantaged young of the Canongate, for his Christian ministry to poor and rich alike in times of peace and war, for his joyful godliness, for his selfless Christian ministry, and for his utterly impeccable moral character and purity of life. He was in every sense a man of the people but above all else he was a man of God. He died peacefully on 24 October 1995, seated in his armchair at his home, the Queen's House, 36 Moray Place, Edinburgh. His ashes were buried in the churchyard of the Canongate Kirk after cremation on 28 October; a memorial service was held on 6 December 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60418


Spain, Nancy Brooker (1917-1964), journalist and broadcaster, was born on 13 September 1917 at 1 Archbold Terrace, Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne, the second and youngest daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel George Redesdale Brooker Spain (1877-1961), land agent and volunteer soldier, and his wife, Norah Elizabeth (1886-1964), daughter of William Holmes Smiles of Belfast and his wife, Lucy. Her grandfather was the eminent Victorian writer and philosopher Samuel Smiles (1812-1904), author of 'Self-Help' (1859). She was the great-niece of Isabella Mary Beeton (1836-1865), author of the classic 'Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management' (1861); in 1948 she wrote a biography of her great-aunt's short but eventful life. From 1931 to 1935, she was educated at the world-famous girls' school Roedean in Sussex, a place she loathed. 
After leaving school, Spain turned her hand to amateur sports on her native Tyneside, excelling in ladies' tennis, lacrosse, and cricket. This led her into journalism; she became a cub sports reporter for the 'Newcastle Journal' and other north-country papers, and she combined this with regular performances in local radio drama productions. Her sporting activities introduced her to Winifrid (Bin) Sargeant (1912-1939), a well-known Tyneside sportswoman with whom she had her first serious love affair. Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War she joined the Women's Royal Naval Service, serving as a driver, before becoming an officer and working for its press office in London. She was invalided out of the service in early 1945. Her early service days inspired her first book, the autobiographical 'Thank you Nelson' (1945), which became a best-seller and paved the way for her subsequent light literary career as a self-styled 'trouser-wearing character called N. Spain' (Spain, 'A Funny Thing Happened on the Way', 45). She wrote a series of camp detective novels, including 'Poison for Teacher' (1949), inspired by her Roedean days and set in an all-girls school called Radcliffe Hall. 
In 1950, while editing the literary magazine 'Books of Today', Spain met Joan Ann Werner Laurie (1920-1964), a book and magazine editor, who became her life partner and with whom she established an unorthodox household, consisting of Joan's son Nicholas; Thomas, passed off as Joan's youngest son, but in fact Nancy's son from a brief liaison with Philip Youngman Carter, the husband of the crime novelist Margery Allingham; and Sheila Van Damm, the racing driver. 
After a spell at 'Good Housekeeping' magazine, Spain joined the 'Daily Express' in 1952, becoming one of the brightest stars in Lord Beaverbrook's firmament of 'personality' journalists, first as books editor and then as celebrity interviewer, peppering her articles with references to 'my friend Noel Coward' and 'my friend Marlene Dietrich' (with whom she had a brief romance). She cut a striking figure on Fleet Street, with her cropped hair, monogrammed men's shirts, baggy jumpers, and trousers. However, when more formal occasions required, she would borrow couturier dresses from her designer sister Liz Hulse or from her close friend and lover Ginette Spanier (1904-1988), directrice of Balmain. 
In 1956 Spain and her employers were successfully sued for libel by Evelyn Waugh, as she had claimed that his brother Alec outsold him. She survived this hiccup and continued with the paper until 1961, when she left to join the 'News of the World' as a 'stunt/personality' journalist. Throughout the fifties and early sixties she became one of the most popular and recognizable radio personalities; she was a regular and much-requested contributor to 'Woman's Hour' and a panellist on the internationally famous literary quiz 'My Word', from 1954 to 1964, alongside Frank Muir and Denis Norden. Her unconventional appearance and mischievous personality also made her a hit on television panel games, most notably 'What's my Line?' and 'Juke Box Jury'. Her appearances with the irascible Gilbert Harding (1907-1960) helped fuel the long-running and implausible rumour that the pair were to be married. 
Spain was due to cover the Grand National on 21 March 1964 when the Piper Apache plane carrying her, Joan Werner Laurie, and two other passengers crashed outside Aintree racecourse, killing everyone on board. As she and Joan had interchangeable wills, this resulted in both estates passing to Joan's son Nicholas; Nancy's son Thomas inherited nothing. Noel Coward wrote in his diaries: 'It is cruel that all that gaiety, intelligence and vitality should be snuffed out when so many bores and horrors are left living' ('Coward Diaries', 560). Spain was cremated at Golders Green on 26 March, and her ashes were placed in the family grave in Horsley, Northumberland. 


@@@@@


doc= 60421


Laurie, Joan Ann Werner (1920-1964), book and magazine editor, was born on 17 November 1920 at 12 Ashland House, Marylebone, London, the youngest daughter of Thomas Werner Laurie (1864-1944), publisher, and his second wife, (Elizabeth Mary) Beatrice ('b'. 1895), daughter of Henry Blackshaw, with whom he had had three children prior to their marriage in 1931. Her Edinburgh-born father founded the independent publishing house T. Werner Laurie Ltd in 1904 and rapidly built it into a thriving company with a reputation for eclectic titles, such as T. Francis Bumpus's series 'The Cathedrals of...', 'The Encyclopaedia of Sex', and 'The History of Torture through the Ages'. 
Joan Werner Laurie was educated at various private establishments, and sent to finishing school in Switzerland. She nurtured aspirations to be a doctor but these came to nothing. She married Paul Clifford Seyler ('b'. 1914), soldier and son of the playwright Clifford Seyler, on 1 May 1942, but joined the Women's Royal Naval Service soon after, as a clerk and then a driver. After the war she worked in an SPCK bookshop in London, and on 3 March 1946 she gave birth to a son, Nicholas Laurie Seyler. Paul Seyler left England soon afterwards, but his subsequent whereabouts and fate were unknown. 
On its founder's death, T. Werner Laurie Ltd was bought by Clarence Hatry and continued to operate from offices over Hatchards bookshop in Piccadilly, London, where Joan worked as production editor. She met her life partner, Nancy Brooker Spain (1917-1964), when the author and journalist became editor of the literary monthly magazine 'Books of Today'. Nancy had envisaged T. Werner Laurie's daughter as 'an elderly spinster, grown etiolated and dry in the service of the firm' (N. Spain, 'Why I'm Not a Millionaire', 1956, 132). Instead, she found 'a girl four years younger than me, very good looking with rather a long nose' (ibid., 133). 
In 1954 Nancy Spain was approached by the National Magazine Company to be editor of a new women's monthly publication that was being planned. She declined, because of her numerous writing and broadcasting commitments, and suggested that Joan Werner Laurie would be perfect for the job. Marcus Morris, then managing director of the National Magazine Company, said in an obituary: 'Joan believed that intelligent, young-minded women, wanted to be stimulated, shocked, provoked, given cause to think by word and picture. She believed they wanted to know what was going on in the world outside their own backyard or comfortable sitting-room. Her conviction that even the most controversial subject could be tackled without offending more than a handful of readers was completely justifiable. ('She')' Elsewhere he wrote, 'Her personality was stamped on every page' ('Sunday Times'). 
Under Joan Werner Laurie's editorship, 'She' smashed every last brick in the wall of taboos about what women's magazines should contain, and paved the way for the late twentieth century post-feminist titles such as 'Cosmopolitan' and 'Marie-Claire'. In 1963, defending an article about abortion, she was able to boast defiantly: ''She' has dealt in full detail with menstruation, hysterectomy, breast cancer, lung cancer, leprosy, brain tumours. We have even told our enchanted readers exactly what a bidet is for' ('The Listener', 31 Oct 1963, 705). 'She' contained the obligatory recipes but also regular articles on 'Ladies and the law', simple carpentry, 'Building your own boat', and consumer-tested motorcycles. 
Joan Werner Laurie was less sociable and charismatic than her more famous partner, who hogged the limelight while publicly acknowledging the enormous influence Joan had on her life -- including agreeing to pass off as her own child the son born to Nancy in 1952. Her less glittering social circle included Europe's leading woman racing driver, Sheila Van Damm, who shared a home with her and Nancy Spain for several years, and the romantic novelist Denise Robins. On 21 March 1964, on one of the rare occasions when Joan joined Nancy for a celebrity jaunt, they died together in the Piper Apache plane taking them to the Grand National, when it crashed just outside Aintree racecourse. Joan was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 26 March. Joan's and Nancy's interchangeable wills resulted in both estates passing to Nicholas Seyler (later Werner Laurie), which unintentionally disinherited Nancy's son, Thomas Seyler (who later changed his surname to Carter, the same as his natural father, Philip Youngman Carter). 


@@@@@


doc= 60423


Tiller, Terence Rogers (1916-1987), poet and radio producer, was born in Comprigney Cottage, Truro, Cornwall, on 19 September 1916, the son of George Henry Rogers Tiller, a clerk working for the Territorial Army, and his wife, Catherine Mary, 'nee' Stoot. He was educated at the Latymer Upper School, Hammersmith, London, and in 1934 went to Jesus College, Cambridge, where he read history and in 1936 won the chancellor's medal for English verse. He acted as director of studies at Jesus until 1939, when he went to Cairo to teach English literature and history at Fuad I University. During the Second World War he became closely associated with the group surrounding 'Personal Landscape', a review in the Middle East that had been founded and was edited by Lawrence Durrell, Robin Fedden, and Bernard Spencer. In 1945 he married Doreen Hugh, 'nee' Watson, and they had two children. 
Tiller published six volumes of poetry, beginning with 'Poems' (1941), in which Virginia Woolf, who had read it in manuscript, found 'music and imagination... rare for a first book'. This was followed by 'The Inward Animal' (1943), and 'Unarm, Eros' (1947). Much of the verse found in these volumes deals with the condition of a poet-in-exile, and charts Tiller's slow coming to terms 'with the seediness of the Egyptian scene'. In this alien land, his 'customary self', by which he meant that of the aloof intellectual, was put under siege, and his final reaction to the Sphinx in a poem bearing that name was: 'we cannot gaze him down.' Occasionally, a surrealist image would appear in his early work -- 'a camel in a bath', for instance. 
After Tiller's third book had come out there were no further references in his poetry to oases, Coptic churches, or giving lectures to the troops in Tripoli. Nevertheless, it was these poems, with their Middle Eastern setting, which proved his most popular; they were frequently reprinted in anthologies about the Second World War. In his three subsequent books -- 'Reading a Medal' (1957), 'Notes for a Myth' (1968), and 'That Singing Mesh' (1979) -- he indulged in speculations about Adam and the fall of man, Shakespeare's tragic heroes, and the influence of the planets upon mankind. There was a strong metaphysical strain throughout his work (he also translated and edited John Gower's 'Confessio amantis', 1963), and, as he acknowledged, he was indebted to his reading of Dante and Rilke. However, despite the fact that Tiller declared these later poems to be love poems, readers found them difficult and sometimes obscure; for instance, the opening title poem of 'Reading a Medal' breaks off with the word 'because' in mid-line. 
If Tiller's readership shrank, as a successful radio producer he gained a wide audience of enthusiastic listeners. He had joined the BBC features department in 1946, and consequently belonged to the golden period of the Third Programme. His acclaimed radio programmes included adaptations of Chaucer's 'Parlement of Foules' in 1958, of Dante's 'Inferno' in 1966, and of 'The Vision of Piers Ploughman' (broadcast 1980, published 1981). He also produced several features on modern poets, including Durrell and Spencer. 
In manner Tiller was precise and punctilious, and did not always carry his learning lightly. He was a formidable chess player, and an authority on astronomy and astrology. He kept regular drinking hours, went daily at twelve sharp to the BBC club bar, and sat in the same chair. He was shy and secretive but, like many shy men, could be bold when the occasion called for it. His two daughters held him somewhat in awe, but generally speaking theirs was a loving family. 
Tiller retired from the BBC in 1975, and died at Queen Mary's University Hospital, Roehampton, London, on 24 December 1987, the eve of a feast day which he had at several times celebrated with nativity poems. His earliest, called 'The Birth of Christ', closed with this line: 'And over his thin cry, the noise of angels.' His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 60430


Manning, Rosemary Joy (1911-1988), author and headmistress, was born on 9 December 1911 at Rodwell Lodge, Weymouth, Dorset, the only daughter among four children of Thomas Davys Manning (1868/9-1943), a doctor, and Mary Ann Coles (1869-1960/61), a nurse and social worker before her marriage. Manning describes her childhood in this 'overwhelmingly masculine family' in her autobiography 'A Corridor of Mirrors' (1987). She was educated first at a school in Dorchester Road, Weymouth, and then at Camberley, her father having moved the family to Sandhurst in the early 1920s after he had had to resign his practice, following a scandal with an employee. Manning was then sent to a boarding-school in Devon until 1930. At school she wrote and produced several plays and had ambitions to be a writer. The school is fictionalized as Bampfield in her novel 'The Chinese Garden' (1962); in her autobiography she recounts a 'very damaging' affair with her housemistress and her first 'ludicrous, hamfisted attempt' to commit suicide, aged seventeen (Manning, 62). 
In 1930 Manning read classics at Royal Holloway College, where she was a rebellious student. On graduation with a second class degree in 1933 she got a job as a shop assistant in an Oxford Street department store and was living with her mother, who had recently separated from Manning's father; during this time she studied shorthand and typing, and after two years she left her job to become secretary to a brick salesman in Westminster. She wrote little in her twenties and, with the exception of a 'gloomy sonnet on suicide' that was printed in the 'New Statesman', she did not attempt to get her work published (Manning, 92). During the 1930s her political affiliations were socialist and she became increasingly unhappy in her work. She suffered a nervous breakdown and was unsuccessfully treated at the Maudsley Hospital by a series of doctors who were hostile to her lesbianism. By her own account she was 'rescued' by her former headmistress, who offered her some teaching work. She thus embarked on a thirty-five-year teaching career that she later saw as a 'desperate retreat' which cut her off from her creativity as a writer (Manning, 111-12). 
Her interest in left-wing politics led Manning towards the 'progressive' movement in education at a small school in Sussex, where she had an affair with the art teacher. After an unhappy period at a school in Ascot she went into partnership with a friend in buying a small day school in Hertfordshire in 1943. In 1950 they moved to north London to take over a long-established girls' preparatory school. Manning prided herself on giving the arts, especially music, an equal footing with other subjects; she saw herself not as a scholar but as a 'sharer and populariser' (Manning, 132). After two or three years in Hampstead she began to explore both writing and her sexual nature, which she kept hidden throughout her career as a teacher and headmistress. Influenced primarily by Rilke, her writing career began with a clutch of short stories published in the 'Cornhill' and the novels 'Remaining a Stranger' (1953) and 'A Change of Direction' (1955), which were written under the pseudonym Mary Voyle and later disregarded by Manning. She often described her fiction as autobiographical and she certainly used her writing to explore issues emanating from her closeted position as a lesbian. Indeed her work is a strong contribution to the genre of women's confessional writing. 'Look, Stranger' (1960) is a moral, if stylized, account of irrational fears towards the outsider, in this case a woman suffering from epilepsy. In the roman a clef 'The Chinese Garden' (1962) Manning represents with candour the atmosphere of repressed sexual desire between schoolgirls in an atmosphere of hypocrisy and betrayal. 
After a five-year relationship came to an end in April 1962 Manning made a second and nearly successful attempt to kill herself. She used the sleeping pill Luminal, which she had secured through a friend over twenty years previously, 'as a protection in case Hitler was victorious' (Davys, 16). She was saved when a suicide note that she had posted to a friend arrived sooner than she expected. Two months later 'The Chinese Garden' was published to rapturous reviews but nothing could console Manning for having failed to kill herself. She embarked upon 'A Time and a Time' (1971) shortly afterwards; it is a moving and darkly witty account, first published under the pseudonym Sarah Davys, of her love affairs with women and of her failure to commit suicide, which she ascribed to 'the combined forces of the Post Office, the law and I suppose, fate' (Manning, 139). 'A Time and a Time' is perhaps the best summation of Manning's character as self-professed 'clown and melancholic'. Later, in 'Man on a Tower' (1965), she explored the destructive nature of introversion and isolation in the artist, while in 'Open the Door' (1983) she followed the losses that fracture the lives of a group of archaeologists. She was also an accomplished writer for children of both reference books and fiction, which included 'Green Smoke' (1962) and other stories in the 'Dragon series'. 
Later in life Manning lectured in evening classes on subjects such as heraldry and symbolism, and in the 1970s she became interested in the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and feminism. She came out as a lesbian at the age of nearly seventy, in an ITV programme early in 1980. In her candid autobiography 'A Corridor of Mirrors' she explores her development as a writer and as a lesbian with her characteristic wit and tendency towards self-deprecation. 'A Time and a Time' was reissued under her own name in 1982 and she hoped that her work would illuminate the lives of many lesbians who were forced to live a similarly veiled existence in the first half of the century. Towards the end of her life she was living in Dorset and London; she died of cancer in 1988 on 15 April at her home, Devey Cottage, Pembury Grange, Tunbridge Wells. 


@@@@@


doc= 60436


MacLeod, Murdo Allan (1926-1996), Free Church of Scotland minister, was born on 5 September 1926 at Glendale, Skye, the second of four children of John MacLeod (1893-1971), then a postman, and his wife, Christina MacLeod (1897-1972). 
Some of MacLeod's earliest years (1930-39) were spent in Glasgow, where the family was then resident. In 1939 they moved to Inverness, where the parents owned and managed the Kingsmills House Hotel. MacLeod was educated at the Dingwall Academy (1939-42), and then at the Inverness Royal Academy on leaving which in 1945 he began to train for a career in accountancy. Being persuaded of a call to the Christian ministry, however, he entered the University of Edinburgh and undertook an arts degree (1948-52). He then studied theology in the Free Church of Scotland college (1952-5). While in Edinburgh he met and on 11 September 1954 married Nancie Margaret Johnstone ('b'. 1930), a science graduate of the University of Edinburgh and a school teacher. There were four children of this marriage, two sons and two daughters. 
In 1955 MacLeod was ordained to the Christian ministry and inducted as Free Church of Scotland minister in Tarbert, Argyll. This ministry lasted until 1963, when he transferred to Crouch End, London, as minister of the Free Church congregation there. Having had a long interest in Christian missionary work directed to the Jews, in London MacLeod became a member of the council of management of the International Society for Jewish Evangelism (IJS). When in 1970 the directorship of the society became vacant he was appointed to that position and so began what became his most significant life's work, extending over the next twenty-two years. 
As director and general secretary of the IJS, MacLeod negotiated a union with the Barbican Mission to the Jews; the new society adopted the name Christian Witness to Israel. For a few years he was a joint director of the new society, but upon the death of the other joint director, the Revd Stephen Levinson, he assumed sole responsibility. Under his leadership the society adopted a reformed basis of belief and formed significant alliances with other groups worldwide, notably Jews for Jesus, whose board MacLeod joined, as also that of the German Evangeliumdienst fur Israel. This involved almost constant journeys to Europe, the USA, Hong Kong, Australia, New Zealand and, of course, Israel. The work in Israel had a special place in his interest and effort. One of his colleagues there later noted that: 'Murdo transformed the Society into a purpose orientated Society in which direct evangelism was a clear goal. He guided the work of the Society in Israel away from an emphasis on social and medical work toward a Society that had as its goal the strengthening of the local Churches in Israel in the work of evangelism. He made room for local leadership and supported local initiatives. (private information)' A significant part of local initiative was in the founding of a publishing house to supply Christian literature in Hebrew. A bookshop had earlier been instituted and handed over to the local church.Murdo MacLeod became well known in the international scene as a leader in planning missionary strategy. From 1983 to 1991 he was international president of the Lausanne Consultation on Jewish Evangelism. He was a signatory of the Willowbank declaration on the Christian gospel and the Jewish people, a document drawn up by an international group after, as they declared, 'several days of intense consultation' and commended to the churches. 
Over the years MacLeod contributed articles to many books and journals. In 1984 he was elected moderator of the general assembly of the Free Church of Scotland. He retired from the leadership of Christian Witness to Israel in 1992, suffering from heart disease which had necessitated bypass surgery. Heart failure caused his death on 26 April 1996 at his home, 11 St Martins Drive, Eynsford, Dartford, Kent. He was buried in Union Church cemetery, Crockenhill, Kent, on 2 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 60439


Pargeter, Edith Mary (1913-1995), novelist and translator, was born on 28 September 1913 in the Shropshire hamlet of Horsehay, the youngest of three children of Edmund Valentine Pargeter (died 1940), head clerk at Horsehay ironworks, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Hordley (died 1954). The household also included Edith's Welsh maternal grandmother, Emma Ellis. While the Pargeters had little money, living in a two-bedroom cottage with no gas, water, or electricity, the house was, as Edith noted 'full of books and music' (Peters and Morgan, 10). Edith's mother had antiquarian and artistic interests, and introduced her children at an early age to the historical and natural features of the surrounding countryside. For Edith this was the beginning of her notable engagement with the Welsh-English borderland which would inform her fiction so deeply. Her attachment to Shropshire was permanent: she would live within 3 miles of her birthplace throughout her life. 
Edith attended the local Church of England elementary school at Dawley, a mile away from Horsehay, and then the Coalbrooke County High School for Girls as a scholarship pupil. Particularly interested in English, Latin, and history, she successfully gained her Oxford school certificate and left school in 1930 determined to become a writer. From 1933 to 1940 she lived at home and worked at a chemist's shop in Dawley, where she accumulated a knowledge of drugs and poisons which would feature later in her detective fiction. 
Pargeter's evenings were spent writing. She had every reason to be encouraged in her apprenticeship for her profession as a writer. In 1936 her stories appeared in 'Good Housekeeping' magazine and she sent her first book manuscript to the publisher William Heinemann who, while rejecting it, asked to see any further work she might produce. Her first novel, 'Hortensius, Friend of Nero', was published by Lovat Dickson in the same year and, while this did not make a great impact, 'The City Lies Four-Square' (1939), published by Heinemann, established her reputation. By 1939 she had published six novels, including two crime novels published under the pseudonym of Jolyon Carr, and one romance, under the pen-name of Peter Benedict. 
During the Second World War Pargeter continued to write prolifically while she served in the Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS) from 1940 to 1945. Her first posting, to Devonport in Plymouth where she worked for the western approaches command, involved tracking allied convoy routes across the Atlantic. This was her first extended period away from home. The command then moved to Liverpool, where Edith spent the rest of the war, working as a teleprinter operator in the signals office. For her 'meritorious service', she was presented with the British Empire Medal by George VI on VE-day, 8 May 1945, in London where she joined the vast crowds celebrating the end of the conflict. She was demobilized in July 1944, leaving the WRNS with the rank of petty officer. Pargeter published 'The Victim Needs a Nurse' as John Redfern in 1940, and her first best-seller, 'She Goes to War', based on her war service, in 1942. The war, she believed, proved the case for the equality of men and women, and she hoped that work and pay in the post-war period would recognize this principle. In the trilogy comprising 'Lame Crusade' (1945), 'Reluctant Odyssey' (1946), and 'Warfare Accomplished' (1947) Pargeter again put her time in the service to use and chronicled the progress of a young private with a much-praised eye for detail. 
Pargeter's father died in 1940 and after the war Edith returned to Shropshire to live with her mother, a happy arrangement which continued until her mother's death in 1954. At this time Edith and her brother Ellis, neither of whom ever married, jointly bought Parkville, an eighteenth-century house in Madeley, which they shared for the next thirty-five years. The siblings were very close and shared many interests, including a devotion to adult education. Both were members of the Workers' Education Association and helped to found the short-lived Shropshire Adult College at Attingham Hall near Shrewsbury. 
The Pargeters' passion for education also led them to attend an international summer school in Czechoslovakia in 1947. This was an important moment for Edith. She had felt deeply humiliated by Neville Chamberlain's strategy of appeasement in the Munich agreement of 1938, which allowed Germany to annex part of Czechoslovakia. The 1947 Czech summer school not only marked the beginning of friendships with many Czech readers and writers, it also sparked a permanent interest in their language. Pargeter taught herself Czech and put her expertise to work by translating major Czech poetry and prose into English. After 1947 Edith and her brother went to Czechoslovakia every year they could. 
Following her return to Shropshire after the war Pargeter lived by her writing. In the 1940s, publishing with Heinemann, she produced mainly historical and romantic novels, many of which drew on her own experiences, but she returned to crime fiction in 1951 with 'Fallen into the Pit', which was the first of her successful series of novels to feature Inspector George Felse. 'Death Mask' (1959) was the first crime novel Pargeter published under the pseudonym of Ellis Peters, a name she constructed from her brother's and grandmother's name, Ellis, and from Petra, the name of the daughter of her close Czech friends whom she loved for forty years 'without in the least wanting to get married' ('The Times'). Ellis Peters became Pargeter's most successful literary incarnation and the name by which she is best known as a writer. 
In the 1960s and 1970s Pargeter, as Peters, produced seventeen crime novels, most of them featuring Felse, first with the publishing house of Collins and then with Macmillan. During the same period she continued to publish historical and romantic fiction for Heinemann and later Macmillan, which included the 'Heaven Tree' trilogy of novels in the early 1960s. She always regarded this trio of books, 'The Heaven Tree' (1960), 'The Green Branch' (1962), and 'The Scarlet Seed' (1963), set in the twelfth century, as her finest work. Her non-crime fiction, notable for its historical depth and accuracy, and often drawing skilfully on the history of Shropshire and the Welsh borders, was widely admired. However, she attracted the greatest accolades for her crime writing. To her enormous pleasure, she was awarded the Edgar Allan Poe award by the Mystery Writers of America in 1963 for 'Death and the Joyful Woman' (1962) which featured Inspector Felse. 
In 1968 Pargeter's sixteen volumes of translations of Czech poetry and prose by distinguished authors, such as Jan Neruda, were gratefully recognized by the Czechoslovak Society for International Relations with the award of their gold medal and ribbon at the Prague Writers' Club in the spring. A period of the Czech communist government restrictions in the early 1950s had prevented her visits to Czechoslovakia, but after 1956 she and her brother returned each year for long summer holidays. They made many friends and delighted in the increasing liberalization of the country in the 1960s. A week after Pargeter returned home to England after her Czech summer holiday in 1968, however, Soviet tanks moved into the country. By 1969 the Union of Czechoslovak Writers which had honoured her was outlawed and censorship imposed. Pargeter published no more translations from Czech after 1970, though she maintained her Czech friendships and her compassionate interest in developments in the country. Her Prague connections also led to her invitation to travel in India in 1961, an experience which stood behind her two novels set in the subcontinent: 'Mourning Raga' (1969) and 'Death to the Landlords!' (1972). 
Successful as Pargeter's writing career had been for nearly five decades, it was lifted to new heights with the publication in 1977 of her first Brother Cadfael crime novel, 'A Morbid Taste for Bones'. With Cadfael, a former crusader and herbalist turned Benedictine monk at Shrewsbury Abbey in the twelfth century, Pargeter created one of the most memorable and greatly loved of fictional detectives. Although 'A Morbid Taste for Bones' was not initially intended to launch a series, Pargeter was so intrigued by the character that she wrote twenty further Cadfael novels. In these books she helped to develop the highly popular subgenre of historical detective fiction, which only attracted wholehearted publishers' support after the international success of Umberto Eco's post-modern medieval detective novel 'The Name of the Rose' (1981). Slightly annoyed by the comparison, Pargeter pointed out that by the time Eco's best-seller appeared, she had already published seven Cadfael novels. 
Nevertheless, the fashion for medieval mysteries drew a large and faithful international readership to Pargeter's work. Cadfael attracted attention and affection not only for the character but for his author. An Ellis Peters Appreciation Society was founded in the United States in 1989, and there are official leaflets for Cadfael walks in Shrewsbury. Cadfael needlework kits, goblets, pot-pourri, notepaper, and mystery weekends, over which Pargeter had right of veto during her life, have all proved popular. A variety of rose called the 'Cadfael' was introduced at the Chelsea Flower Show in 1990. 
Pargeter's Cadfael novels were not only a popular success. Producing them, she said, gave her the greatest pleasure of her writing life. In addition, her 'medieval whodunnits' attracted high praise and recognition. In 1981 she was honoured by her fellow crime writers in Britain by the award of the Crime Writers' Association's silver dagger for 'Monk's Hood' (1980), and in 1993 by the award of the Cartier diamond dagger for her lifetime's achievement in crime writing, an accolade shared since its inception in 1986 with only a small group of other writers such as Eric Ambler, P. D. James, Ruth Rendell, and John le Carre. The latter award was presented in a ceremony in the House of Lords. Pargeter was further honoured with an OBE in 1994 and an honorary MA from Birmingham University. 
Pargeter's latter years, after her beloved brother's death in 1984, and in spite of increasing frailty, were contented ones. She moved from the house she shared with her brother to a convenient modern house next door to her cousins Mavis and Roy Morgan. Pargeter and Roy Morgan, a retired architect with interests in photography, collaborated on two illustrated volumes on the local area: 'Shropshire' (1992) and 'Strongholds and Sanctuaries' (1993). Her first book-signing tour took place in 1991, when she visited five cities in the United States. During the 1990s, in old age but at the height of her fame, Pargeter took pleasure in the broadcasting of several of her novels on BBC Radio 4 in 1991 and 1993, and was pleased with the filming of Cadfael mysteries by Central TV on a set she visited near Budapest in Hungary. Pargeter produced nearly eighty books as well as many short stories and articles during her life and was working on a Cadfael novel at her death. 
Pargeter, who had her right leg amputated at the knee at the age of eighty-two, died a few weeks after a stroke at home at Troya, 3 Lee Dingle, Madeley, Shropshire, on 14 October 1995. Her funeral was held at the Coalbrookdale church and her body was cremated at the Emstry crematorium near Shrewsbury, where her ashes were scattered in the garden. Her family and friends held a further memorial service to celebrate her life at Shrewsbury Abbey on 18 February 1996. A window in the abbey, depicting St Benedict, is dedicated to her. 
Pargeter was a private, humane, modest, loyal, intelligent, and scholarly woman. A Christian believer but not a regular churchgoer, a woman of generous left-wing convictions who declared herself uninterested in common party politics, she had a great affection for every aspect of her locality, for her family and friends, and for her terriers. As a writer she was a realist, immersed in history and attuned to moral questions. She said that she did not find 'vice and evil more interesting than virtue', and she hoped her books would 'go some way to defy that too-easily accepted judgment' ('Pargeter, Edith Mary', 2279). 'The thriller', she insisted: 'must be a morality. If it strays from the side of the angels... takes pleasure in evil, that is the unforgiveable sin... It is probably true that I am not very good at villains. The good interest me so much more. (Gottschalk, 848)' This serious ethical intent always informed Pargeter's pioneering work in medieval historical crime fiction, whose popularity she did so much to consolidate. In 1999 the Crime Writers' Association honoured her further with the institution and award of its first annual Ellis Peters historical dagger, sponsored by Pargeter's estate, for the best novel in the genre in which she so excelled. 


@@@@@


doc= 60440


Warnock, Sir Geoffrey James (1923-1995), philosopher and college head, was born on 16 August 1923 at Nerike House, Chapel Allerton, Leeds, the only son of James Warnock (1880-1953), a general practitioner originally from northern Ireland, and his wife, Kathleen, 'nee' Hall (1890-1979). He was educated at Winchester College and New College, Oxford, being a scholar on both foundations. Between school and university he served in the Irish Guards (1942-5), took part in the advance into Germany, and attained the rank of captain. In 1948 he gained a first in philosophy, politics, and economics. He was elected to a fellowship by examination in philosophy at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1949, and was subsequently fellow and tutor, first at Brasenose (1950-53) and then at Magdalen (1953-71). During his tutorial years he made several visits to the United States and taught and lectured at a number of American universities. In 1971 he became principal of Hertford College, Oxford, a post he retained until he retired in 1988; and from 1981 to 1985 he served as vice-chancellor of the university. On 2 July 1949 he married (Helen) Mary Wilson ('b'. 1924), daughter of Archibald Edward Wilson and his wife, Ethel Mary, eldest daughter of Sir Felix Otto Schuster, first baronet. Mary Warnock was herself a professional philosopher who became mistress of Girton College, Cambridge (1985-91), headed a number of public inquiries, and was made a life peer as Baroness Warnock of Weeke in 1985. They had three daughters and two sons. 
Both to academic philosophy and to academic administration Warnock brought a rare and valuable combination of qualities. He wrote, of another philosopher, George Berkeley, the following words: 'He was the most acute of critics, a writer of perfect grace and lucidity, and by temperament an enemy to all dullness, pedantry, and needless sophistication' (G. J. Warnock, 'Berkeley', 1953, 12). The words can be applied, with even greater justice, to their author. While Berkeley was led, in the end, to embrace a fantastical metaphysics, Warnock never deviated from the clear and literal truth, and the difficult exercise of cleaving to that path he conducted, in his writings on perception and the philosophy of language, with such an absence of fussiness, with such coolness, urbanity, and elegance, that the result gave (and can still give) not only deep intellectual satisfaction but great aesthetic pleasure. 
Warnock's 'Berkeley' (1953), which exhibited the qualities he praised in its subject, was followed in 1958 by his second book, 'English Philosophy since 1900', an excellent survey, which also possessed a particular interest as marking a moment of transition from the mainly critical work of the immediate post-war period to the renewal of more systematic endeavours in the later part of the century. He next turned to a subject which probably engages the interest of the majority of people more than any other philosophical topic -- namely the nature of morality; and after subjecting some current views to a devastating critique in 'Contemporary Moral Philosophy' (1967) he produced his own positive account in 'The Object of Morality' (1971). The very title was contentious, like the subject itself; yet the author may be held to have come as close in this book to the truth of the matter as any other writer of his age -- or perhaps of any age. It was marked throughout with the coolness and balance, sensitivity and humanity, which were typical of the man. 
It was not only in the sphere of morality that Warnock showed his philosophical venturesomeness. Of all the philosophers of his time the one he admired more than any other was J. L. Austin; and Warnock undertook, and published as his last book, a critical study of Austin's work, 'J. L. Austin' (1989). This was much earlier preceded by his brilliant reconstruction, from very fragmentary notes, of Austin's famous lectures on perception, delivered under the characteristic title 'Sense and Sensibilia' (1962). In this he captured not only the substance of the lectures, but the personal style, the very note, of the man -- the mordant wit, the total originality, the devastating force, the extreme sensitivity to the nuances of language. The reconstruction was a wonderful revelation of these qualities. It was also a tribute. So too, in its way, was his final study of Austin's entire 'oeuvre'. But this was not merely a tribute; for here Warnock gave his own critical, as well as expository, powers their full scope. His concern for accuracy, precision, and literal truth were brought to bear, and most tellingly brought to bear, on his subject. The necessary corrections and qualifications were duly and decisively made; but this without any abatement of recognition of the power and enduring value and influence of Austin's work. The book, in fact, was a demonstration that a sincere and discriminating admirer of a great and original philosopher need not be, and should not be, a mere disciple. 
In the other strand of his career, as college and university administrator, Warnock showed equal distinction. As principal of Hertford College from 1971 to 1988 he presided over the transformation of what was once one of the smallest, poorest, and least regarded of Oxford's men's colleges into a mixed middle-sized college with sound finances and impressive academic results. Although some of the measures that benefited Hertford were in place before his arrival, notably the new and progressive admissions policy, their fruition owed much to his calm, clear-sighted, and good-humoured government. The qualities and leadership he there displayed led to his choice as vice-chancellor of the university in 1981, an office he held until 1985 during a difficult period of government retrenchment on higher education funding. He conducted the business of Oxford's hebdomadal council with such fairness and reasonableness, and such lucidity of presentation, that debate was minimized. He made no secret of the fact that he deplored the erosion of university funding -- a theme he returned to in his last speech, made on the occasion of the opening of Hertford's new student residence, named Warnock House, on the Isis near Folly Bridge. Twelve days later he died of a disabling illness which he had borne with stoicism: it was typical of his courage and courtesy that he held off its advances long enough to come to the opening and to delight his friends and colleagues with a witty and eloquent valedictory speech. He was knighted in 1986 and had been previously elected to honorary fellowships at New College and Magdalen. His was an exemplary Oxford career. 
The bare record of Warnock's professional and public achievement might give an impression of austerity. But he was far from austere. He had a great capacity for enjoyment, and a lively sense of the ridiculous, being vastly and delightfully amused by the absurdities which so often cropped up in human speech and behaviour. He was a games player, a keen cricketer and golfer; and all his friends and colleagues found him a charming companion, invariably courteous and considerate, indeed chivalrous, in personal relations. In the old phrase, he was 'a man of feeling'. He responded with equal warmth to the charm and beauty of Italy, its opera and architecture, and to the prose and poetry of England. He himself wrote and published distinguished verses ('Poems', 1955), in which his characteristic combination of sensibility, realism, and restraint found happy expression in polished and elegant form. He died of fibrosing alveolitis on 8 October 1995 at his home, Brick House, Axford, near Marlborough, Wiltshire, and was buried on 13 October at Axford church. He was survived by his wife and five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 60449


Cairncross, John (1913-1995), spy, was born on 25 July 1913, at Pine Cottage, Lesmahagow, Lanarkshire, the youngest of four boys and four girls of Alexander Kirkland Cairncross (1865-1947), ironmonger, and his wife, Elizabeth Andrew Wishart (1875-1958), schoolteacher. Sir Alexander Kirkland Cairncross (1911-1998), economist, was his elder brother. John Cairncross attended Lesmahagow village school before Hamilton Academy; at seventeen he won an open scholarship at Glasgow University, where his subjects were French and German; next he studied at the University of Paris, at the Sorbonne. In 1934 he succeeded George Painter as Bell exhibitioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained his BA degree in two years. During 1935-6 he participated in communist meetings held at Cambridge, but later he insisted that he had been a fellow traveller rather than a party member; this is not universally accepted. Stuart Hampshire remembered him at this time: 'an absurd and rather untidy scholar, very bright and academic. He was socially from the lower rather than the higher, very talkative, sort of chaotic' (Carter, 189). 
Cairncross passed top of his year in the civil service examinations of 1936 and was appointed to the Foreign Office on 14 October 1936. As his touchy and graceless manners made him unsuitable for a foreign posting he was transferred to the Treasury as an assistant principal on 1 October 1938. He suggested that his frank dislike of appeasement contributed to this move. In 1937, shortly after entering the Foreign Office, he was recruited to work for Soviet espionage in manoeuvres involving the Cambridge Marxist James Klugmann, Anthony Blunt, and Guy Burgess. Cairncross was largely inactive as an agent until after the Nazi attack on Russia in 1941. 
In 1940 Cairncross was appointed private secretary to the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, Lord Hankey. Despite developing an affectionate admiration for Hankey, from June 1941 he transmitted cabinet papers and Foreign Office telegrams to his Soviet controller. Jack Hewit, the working-class lover of Blunt and Burgess, who knew Cairncross at this time, was unimpressed by him. 'He was a nobody; he was dull' (Carter, 265). Similarly Sir John Colville considered Cairncross 'very brilliant but very boring' (Penrose and Freeman, 370). During 1942 Cairncross was called up to the Royal Armoured Corps, but then, as a fluent German speaker, he was posted to the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley, and assigned to work on the Enigma decrypts. He was shocked to find that the Soviets were not trusted with Ultra intelligence obtained at Bletchley, and sought to remedy the situation. According to Russian intelligence archives Cairncross supplied 5832 documents between 1941 and 1945. The Soviets mistrusted his information until in February 1943 he supplied the original flimsy papers containing full intercepted details of the Germans' forthcoming summer offensive. As a result he decisively influenced the outcome of the battle of Kursk, Germany's final major attack on the eastern front. However, working night shifts, together with the strains of his duplicity, weakened his health, and in 1943, after a year at Bletchley, he engineered a transfer to the Secret Intelligence Service, where he joined the section responsible for counter-espionage abroad. 
In 1945 Cairncross returned to the Treasury; both there, and during a brief secondment to the Ministry of Supply, his prickliness remained an obstacle to promotion. Later he denied that in this period he continued to supply the Soviets with information on NATO and other crucial matters, though his Soviet controller Yuri Modin has given a detailed contrary account. 'Cairncross was anti-social and a wretched hand at making friends', with 'a sizeable chip on his shoulder', according to Modin. 'I liked Cairncross best of all our London agents. He wasn't an easy man to deal with, but he was a profoundly decent one' (Modin, 107, 168). An unsigned but compromising memorandum was found in Burgess's flat, after his disappearance with Donald Maclean in 1951, written on the day that the Nazis marched into Prague (15 March 1939). Cairncross was identified as the memorandum's author, but when confronted by the British authorities he outsmarted his interrogators; after admitting to carelessness with official papers he was required to resign from the civil service in 1952. On 26 January 1951 Cairncross had married Gabriele Susanne (1914-1995), daughter of Sebastian Oppenheim, a retired Bristol merchant, from a Frankfurt Jewish family, but they were to separate during the 1960s. 
Cairncross became Rome correspondent of 'The Economist', 'The Observer', and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Subsequently he was employed by the United Nations at Geneva (1953-6), as chief editor (based in Bangkok) for the Economic Council for Asia and the Far East (1957-62), and he was among the Harvard group's advisers to Pakistan's Planning Commission (1962-3). He wrote three books on Moliere, and translated into English verse seven plays by Racine (published in 1963 and 1967) as well as 'La Fontaine fables' (1982). He also wrote a history of Christian sexual morality, 'After Polygamy was Made a Sin' (1974). 
Following Philby's defection MI5 resumed its hunt for Soviet spies, and in 1964 Cairncross made an extended, though possibly incomplete, confession. In subsequent years he continued co-operation with the British authorities. 'He was a clever, rather frail-looking Scotsman with a shock of red hair and a broad accent', according to one of his interrogators, Peter Wright, who found him 'engaging' (Wright, 281-2). Stella Rimington, who re-interrogated him during the 1970s, recalled 'a thin, grey, stooping figure... turning our conversations into intellectual sparring matches and... determined to... tell us no more than he had already admitted, which was nothing like the full story' (Rimington, 119-20). Following Margaret Thatcher's denunciation of Blunt in 1979, journalists established Cairncross's identity, and he endured frantic publicity. In 1982 he was convicted of smuggling currency across the Italian/Swiss border. There were further journalistic storms around his name, notably in 1990 when he had just settled at St Antonin du Var, Provence. 
Cairncross, who was deaf in one ear, could seem unprepossessing: conceited, unpunctual, clumsy, untidily dressed, and a laboriously slow trencherman. His courage and self-sufficiency won the admiration, though, of Graham Greene. Despite suffering a stroke in 1993 he continued writing his self-exculpatory memoirs, which were posthumously published and are not wholly convincing. He returned to England in 1995, settling in a cottage in the Welsh marches, and a week after his wife's death, married on 8 September 1995 his long-term companion, Gayle Anne ('b'. 1952/3), an American opera singer and daughter of John Richmond Brinkerhoff, army officer. Following another stroke, he died of heart failure on 8 October 1995, at Longhope, Weston, Pembridge, near Leominster. 


@@@@@


doc= 60455


Home, Alexander Frederick Douglas-, fourteenth earl of Home and Baron Home of the Hirsel (1903-1995), prime minister, was born in London on 2 July 1903, the first child in a family of five sons and two daughters of Charles Cospatrick Archibald Douglas-Home, thirteenth earl of Home (1873-1951), and his wife, Lilian, 'nee' Lambton (1881-1966), second daughter of Frederick William Lambton, fourth earl of Durham. In 1918, on his grandfather's death, he became Lord Dunglass, the courtesy title of the eldest son of the earl of Home. His father had inherited two Scottish estates amounting to 100,000 acres, divided between the Hirsel on the Tweed in Berwickshire and Douglas in Lanarkshire. The thirteenth earl, a likeable and straightforward man, was no politician and advised his eldest son against a political career. The duties and pleasures which befell the twenty-fifth largest landowner in the country were in his view ample to fill a normal lifetime. Although he ignored this advice, Home never abandoned or strayed far in his thoughts from the border country in which he was brought up. The knowledge of the countryside which he acquired as a boy was fundamental to his later life and loyalties. The flight of birds, the moods of a river, the lie of a hill, the changes of the sky were familiar and dear to him throughout his life, and are well caught in Suzie Malin's portrait (1980) in the National Portrait Gallery. From the same source came a strong sense of family, and an easy self-confidence which showed itself in consideration for others. The three most courteous men I knew in politics were Lord Home, King Hussein of Jordan, and President Nelson Mandela. All three had ease of birth, in the sense that they never needed to worry about who they themselves were and so had more time to concern themselves with the feelings of others. 
Although the family's history was in Scotland, there was nothing narrow about its perspective. The heir to the earldom was born in a specially rented house in London, the imperial capital, that being the custom of the time. His preparatory school (Ludgrove), his public school (Eton College), and his university (Oxford) were all in the south of England, in accordance with the family tradition. At Eton he coincided with an entirely different kind of boy, Cyril Connolly, who produced an early example of those exposes of public school life which became somewhat tedious as the century wore on. In 'Enemies of Promise' (1938) Connolly vividly described Alec Dunglass: 'He was a votary of the esoteric Eton religion, the kind of graceful tolerant sleepy boy who is showered with favours and crowned with all the laurels, who is liked by the masters and admired by the boys without any apparent exertion on his part, without experiencing the ill effect of success himself or arousing the pangs of envy in others. In the eighteenth century he would have become Prime Minister before he was thirty; as it was he appeared honourably ineligible for the struggle of life. (Connolly, 294)' Little in Dunglass's record at Eton or Oxford contradicted this verdict. He distinguished himself at cricket, taking four Harrow wickets at Lord's for thirty-seven runs on a rain-sodden pitch in his last year before a crowd of about 20,000. He moved smoothly up the ladder to become president of Pop, the self-elected society whose members wore coloured waistcoats and were at that time, according to Connolly, the true rulers of Eton. At Christ Church he was tutored by J. C. Masterman, an important and long-lasting influence. He managed only a third-class degree in history (in 1925), hampered partly by illness but to a greater extent by a range of non-academic activities, which included hunting, cricket, bridge, and champagne, of which cricket remained the most important. He did not bother with the debates of the Oxford Union. 
But something had been stirring beneath that pleasant and easy-going surface. Years later Home wrote an airy account of his life called 'The Way the Wind Blows' (1976), a book full of anecdotes about politicians, grouse, and salmon. With one or two exceptions it did not probe deep into the author's emotion. But near the beginning of the book Home described his father's departure for Gallipoli in 1915 with the Lanarkshire yeomanry. The earl took his son down to London from Scotland for the start of his prep school term at Ludgrove. Father and son spent the night in a hotel, parting at bedtime because the earl had to leave early for Southampton next morning to join his regiment. 'I shall never forget the long night of agony in the King's Cross Station Hotel which I somehow came through; squeezed of all emotion but fear and rage at the folly to which man could descend.' This is strong stuff for a lad of twelve, but no one who knew Home could doubt its truth. 'Ever since then, while I revere the patriot, I have detested the jingo tub-thumper, the narrow nationalist and the advocates and practitioners of violence' (Home, 43). 
After Oxford, Dunglass toured South America playing cricket for the MCC before returning to Scotland to pick up the threads of a laird's traditional life -- the Boys' Brigade, the yeomanry, Burns clubs, and nine 20-pound salmon in one morning. But for a perceptive young man these activities so close to the central belt of Scotland could not be separated from the experience of many fellow Scots nearby who were losing their jobs in coal and shipbuilding. Against his father's wishes Dunglass became involved in politics. It might seem from the background so far described that his loyalties would automatically be tory, but that would be to misread both the man and his family. His mother was a Liberal by instinct, his father unpolitical, and much of his early admiration went to Lloyd George, who was entering the sunset of his own political career as a powerful advocate of strong measures against unemployment. But these choices, then as now, often depend on the luck of direct personal magnetism. Dunglass was drawn into the circle of an up-and-coming Scottish Conservative, Noel Skelton, MP for Perth. Skelton was a contemporary and friend of Anthony Eden. It was Skelton who in one of the essays published in his book 'Constructive Conservatism' (1924) coined the phrase 'property owning democracy', which Eden later made his own. If he had not died of cancer in 1935 Skelton would have been a leading figure alongside Eden, Butler, and Macmillan in the post-war renaissance of the Conservative Party. Skelton encouraged Dunglass to fight the 1929 election as the Conservative candidate for Coatbridge, a mining town 10 miles east of Glasgow. Labour had held the seat in 1924 and the tide in Scotland had swung markedly towards Labour since then. So it was no surprise that Dunglass was defeated. An uncertain apprentice in public speaking, he had a rough time from hecklers. He lost decisively, but was not deterred. Not for the last time, luck was on his side. Almost at once the more promising, though narrowly Labour seat of Lanark lost its Conservative candidate, and Dunglass was adopted. He was swept into the House of Commons in the landslide of 1931, standing as a National Unionist. He was immediately asked by Skelton, now a junior minister at the Scottish Office, to serve as his unpaid parliamentary private secretary. 
So in his late twenties the form of Dunglass's Conservatism was set. It remained unchanged through his life. He valued deeply the traditional values into which he had been bred. At the same time he was a shrewd observer of reality, of the way the wind was blowing. He distrusted abstract philosophizing, whether of left or right. He had no rigid devotion to the free market or to any other economic or social creed. He disagreed with those who regarded each ditch as the one in which they had to die. He favoured defence in depth, believing that Conservatives should use their traditional skills not to avert change but to guide it. Thus he believed that Churchill was wrong in the early 1930s to oppose the constitutional concessions in India. At different times in his career he favoured a degree of protection for industry, an elected Scottish assembly, and the banning of the hereditary peerage from the House of Lords. During his premiership in 1963-4 he was caricatured by the left as an unthinking reactionary, but the facts of his career speak otherwise. 
That career moved decisively forward in February 1936 when Dunglass was appointed parliamentary private secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer, Neville Chamberlain, who kept him in that position when he succeeded Baldwin as prime minister the following year. Chamberlain excelled in the competent transaction of business, a political talent which Dunglass valued highly and practised when he himself briefly became prime minister. But Chamberlain lacked the personal charm which makes competent administration palatable to wayward colleagues -- a gift which his parliamentary private secretary possessed in abundance. He developed a strong admiration for the prime minister, tacked on to the loyalty which he would have shown anyway. The premiership was short and disastrous. Chamberlain took Dunglass with him to his final meeting with Hitler at Munich in September 1938. Dunglass went as an aide-de-camp rather than a policy adviser, and sat in outer rooms while the talks proceeded, eating unwanted food and watching the repeated changes in Goering's uniform. He travelled with Chamberlain on the fateful return journey through London, when the king made the mistake of inviting the prime minister to appear on the balcony of Buckingham Palace, followed by Chamberlain's even greater mistake of proclaiming, quite out of character, 'peace for our time' from his own first-floor window in Downing Street. Dunglass defended the Munich settlement all his life. He believed that there was no possibility of successfully defying Hitler in 1938, and that the year gained was essential for the military preparations which Chamberlain had set in hand. But he was not at the time required to justify Munich in public. In this respect he was luckier than Butler, junior minister at the Foreign Office; the label of Munich was only lightly attached to him in later years. But he accepted immediately a quite different burden, the care of an exhausted prime minister. Chamberlain, walking in the woods at Chequers, suddenly felt that he was on the edge of a nervous breakdown. Dunglass persuaded his father to issue an invitation, and Chamberlain spent ten days at the Hirsel in October, at first fishing, then shooting, then beginning on the red boxes as the cloud of exhaustion lifted. Dunglass was in charge of the hospitality. This was easy, for he shared to the full Chamberlain's enthusiasms as a naturalist and an outdoor sportsman. Twice in later years, in 1956 and 1963, he had further occasion to support and advise a failing prime minister. 1940 was the bleakest year of his own life. He joined in the bitterness which Chamberlain's supporters felt in the immediate aftermath of his fall in May -- a bitterness focused not on Churchill, the new prime minister, but on the raffish types who accompanied him into his office, such as Bracken and Boothby. Dunglass continued to serve Neville Chamberlain in his last and powerless office as lord president of the council. But in the autumn Chamberlain was dead of cancer, and a sudden thunderbolt struck Dunglass. He presented himself for a medical examination in Edinburgh as a prelude to rejoining the Lanarkshire yeomanry for active service. A hole was discovered in his spine surrounded by severe tuberculosis. A new and dangerous operation was performed, after which Dunglass was encased in plaster for nearly two years. For a physically active man, this sentence of almost total immobility during the decisive years of the war was an appalling blow: 'I often felt that I would be better dead' (Home, 86). 
But there was strong help at hand. Four years earlier, on 3 October 1936, Dunglass had married Elizabeth Hester Alington (1909/10-1990), second daughter of the Very Revd Cyril Argentine Alington, dean of Durham and former headmaster of Eton. They had four children: (Lavinia) Caroline ('b'. 1937), Meriel Kathleen ('b'. 1939), Diana Lucy ('b'. 1940), and David Alexander Cospatrick ('b'. 1943). The serene success of their marriage, which lasted fifty-four years, was evident to anyone who saw them together or who heard either speak of the other. Elizabeth was gentle and invariably courteous in manner, but there was no doubting her strength, which was exercised in the cause of whatever was straightforward. She rarely expressed strong political views, but her skill as a judge of individuals was added to the native shrewdness of her husband to make a formidable combination. Her support during these two testing years was decisive in securing his recovery. The experience reinforced one of the fundamental facts about his life, namely that his family and its background were more important to him than political success. 
Dunglass used his years in plaster to re-educate himself. He read books for which there had been no time during the cheerful years of champagne and cricket at Christ Church. It was a turning point. No one who knew him would suppose that the reading list was entirely solemn; characteristically in his autobiography he provides a long list of novelists whom he devoured, beginning with John Buchan and ending with Dorothy Sayers and Ngaio Marsh. But these were overshadowed by Marx, Engels, Dostoyevsky, and Koestler, together with the classics of nineteenth-century English political biography. On this reading he built an unpretentious but solid foundation of belief which went deeper than politics. He thought about the religion which he had hitherto taken for granted, one result being the declaration of faith which appeared rather unexpectedly in the middle of his autobiography. He called this 'a weak witness of Christianity' (Home, 81-2), but in fact it was a firm though modest statement based on God the creator and the two commandments of Christ. Perhaps no other modern politician could convincingly have slipped such a chapter into a book about family, sport, and politics. 
At this time another theme took deep root in Dunglass's mind -- partly from his reading, partly from a friendship formed during his illness with a Count Starzenski, who was serving as a tank gunner after escaping from Poland, where he had worked before the war as private secretary to the foreign minister. The books and his new Polish friend persuaded him that the main threat to Britain after the defeat of Hitler would be Soviet imperialism. Nothing which happened during his later career shook this well-researched conviction, which he had formed well before it became fashionable and which became the mainspring of many of his later decisions on foreign policy. 
After his recovery and return to parliament in 1944 Dunglass found early evidence to justify his suspicions. He was bold enough to criticize the Yalta agreement in the Commons because it transferred Polish territory to the Soviet Union and fell short of elementary standards in international behaviour. Churchill bore no grudge and appointed Dunglass as under-secretary at the Foreign Office in the caretaker government of summer 1945. The prospect of a period of steady work in what had become his main interest was shattered when he lost Lanark by nearly 2000 votes in the Labour landslide of July 1945. 
For the next five years Dunglass relapsed, without complaint, into the kind of life which would naturally have been his had he never felt the pull of politics. A directorship of the Bank of Scotland, a few articles in the press, increasing care of the two Scottish estates as his father grew old -- to these he added continued cultivation of the Lanark constituency. In the general election of February 1950 his persistence was rewarded when he recaptured the seat by 685 votes. The sitting member, Tom Steele, had five years earlier written to the 'Daily Worker' thanking the local communists for their support. A connection which had seemed harmless in 1945 looked more sinister in 1950; Dunglass republished the letter and exploited it to the full. This was a legitimate election tactic, but it showed what was sometimes forgotten, that beneath the surface of a gentle, even simple manner he possessed the instincts of a shrewd political operator. 
Once again the road of a promising career in the Commons was open, but once again it was blocked. Dunglass had to give up his newly regained seat when he became the fourteenth earl of Home on his father's death in July 1951. By now his main patron was James Stuart, a chief whip of legendary skill who was the leading political figure in Scotland, becoming secretary of state when the Conservatives won the election of October 1951. Churchill took little interest in junior ministerial appointments and Stuart had no difficulty in allocating to Home the new post of minister of state at the Scottish Office. His work lay in Scotland rather than the House of Lords, and must have been thoroughly enjoyable. For this was a golden age of Conservative strength in Scotland based on political and economic contentment, before the collapse of traditional industries and the resurgence of nationalism. Home built up a reputation for steady good sense and skill in handling people, which led the next prime minister, Anthony Eden, to promote him to the cabinet as Commonwealth secretary in April 1955. Eden understood that the usefulness of the Commonwealth depended not on any pretensions to political or economic strength as an institution but on the personal contacts which enabled it to act as a lubricant in the world's affairs. The Homes undertook a huge tour of the Commonwealth between August and November 1955. But the prime minister who had made such a shrewd appointment dealt the Commonwealth a near fatal blow in the botched Suez enterprise of 1956. As at Munich in 1938, Home was quietly there, near but not quite at the centre of disastrous events. Though himself loyal to Eden, he warned him of the unhappiness of cabinet colleagues, in particular Butler. His correspondence with Eden when the latter fell shows a genuine sadness and sympathy. By the imperceptible process characteristic of British politics he found himself month by month, without any particular manoeuvre on his part, becoming an indispensable figure in the government. Harold Macmillan confirmed him in office, and for the next few years his main preoccupation was to bind up the wounds dealt by Suez to the idea of a modern multiracial Commonwealth. As this task came to an end, another subject began to fill his red boxes, which in turn became the next testing strain for the Commonwealth. The effort spent by British politicians on the future of central Africa between the start of the federation in 1953 and Lord Carrington's final settlement of the Rhodesian question in 1980 was immense. The strains in the federation were becoming formidable while Home was at the Commonwealth Office. He respected and supported the efforts of Roy Welensky to bridge the gap between black aspiration and the interests of the white settlers, but showed no particular passion in anyone's cause. For him it was a matter of managing as decent a transition as possible from British sovereignty to a successor regime. Home worked in close friendship with the colonial secretary, Alan Lennox Boyd, but could never strike up a good relationship with his successor, Ian Macleod. This was a matter of temperament rather than belief. Macleod was a hard, tense, imaginative party politician, far removed from the atmosphere of calm, unintellectual discussion leading to reasonable compromise in which Home naturally thrived. 
In the summer of 1960 Harold Macmillan wished to transfer his foreign secretary Selwyn Lloyd to the Treasury. On grounds of talent and experience Home would have been a natural successor if he had still been in the Commons. There had been no example since the war of a foreign secretary in the Lords. When despite this Macmillan announced Home's appointment as foreign secretary on 27 July, there was an uproar in the press which the Labour Party prolonged with enthusiasm. Like all such artificial commotions it died down after a time (and indeed was not renewed with any strength nineteen years later when Margaret Thatcher appointed another peer, Lord Carrington, to the same post). The argument that the government's foreign policy must be presented in the Commons by a member of the cabinet was met by the promotion of Ted Heath as lord privy seal, based with particular responsibility in the Foreign Office. Thus began a close fifteen-year partnership between Home and Heath which served both men well -- indeed, helped each of them to the premiership. Home was as different in character and upbringing from Heath as he was from Macleod, but with Heath his relationship ran smoothly from the start. Neither man lived in the other's pocket nor attempted a social relationship which would have been artificial. But Heath felt and, equally important, required from others a consistent respect for the elder man, and Home gave Heath steady support in the various scrapes in which the latter found himself over the years. Because each had given serious thought to getting the relationship right, Home moved in relation to Heath from superior to subordinate without any serious friction. 
During his periods as foreign secretary from 1960 to 1963 and from 1970 to 1974, Home saw himself essentially as a navigator. He did not regard it as his job to scale high peaks and plant his personal flag on them. Rather, his purpose was to steer a vessel without mishap down a river made dangerous by imperfectly charted rocks and rapids. As Commonwealth secretary he was already familiar with the task of managing with skill the decline of the British empire. To this he now added the task of frustrating the attempt of the Soviet Union to dominate the world, which he had foreseen and analysed during his wartime illness. This was the consistent theme which ran through his principal decisions and speeches. He did not believe in noisy diplomacy or theatrical flourishes. Indeed he relished and used the amusements and small adventures of traditional diplomacy. For example, he formed a cautious though friendly relationship with the Soviet foreign minister, Andrey Gromeko. But he wrote: 'Such are the amenities of international public life, and they are necessary to sanity. But one must always force oneself to remember -- odious and boring though it is -- that all Communists are devoted to a single end -- victory over every other creed and every other way of life. (Home, 250)' Practical examples were not slow to come. Khrushchov as Soviet leader compensated for his relative moderation compared to Stalin with occasional rash and dangerous lunges against the West. In January 1961 he lodged an unprovoked ultimatum against the western portion of Berlin. The West refused to budge. Khrushchov followed in 1962 with the dispatch of missiles to Cuba, an act bound to test to the full the courage of the new American president, John Kennedy. Historians will continue to argue about the importance of the role played by Harold Macmillan and his colleagues in keeping Kennedy steady yet strong during the critical weeks of October 1962. What is not in doubt is Home's role in keeping Macmillan steady. The two men got on well together, but were very different. Macmillan's calm was assumed with difficulty by a skilled actor who knew its importance as a political technique. Beneath his calm at moments of crisis bubbled all manner of anxieties and complex emotion. To Home, by contrast, calm came so naturally that he could effectively communicate it to others. He was not capable of Macmillan's flights of imagination but was by now expert in keeping policy close to the ground, making full use of its contours. The combination worked well. Home earned the respect of skilled practitioners like Dean Rusk, and also of the foreign service. He was customarily brief in speech and on paper. He did not skimp the detailed work in his boxes, but had the gift of extricating from each document the essential point, and communicating a clear decision on what should be done. 
The Macmillan administration lost impetus in 1963, becalmed in a sea of satire and scandal. Home was not particularly involved in the Profumo affair. His main enterprise that year was the negotiation and signature in Moscow of the nuclear test ban treaty, one of the most significant staging posts on the road to 'detente'. But he privately advised Harold Macmillan to step down as prime minister before the next election, which had to be held at latest by autumn 1964. Macmillan did not resent this advice from a friend, but it was not welcome; indeed he persuaded himself that Home's real view was that he should stay. There is no need to record here the story of Macmillan's indecision during the autumn of 1963, both as regards his own future and the identity of his successor once illness appeared to force his hand. Clearly Home during most of this period had virtually excluded from his mind the thought that he would or could succeed Macmillan as prime minister. This was not because he doubted his own ability, for in this he always had quiet confidence. Nor was his peerage any longer an obstacle since, as a result of Anthony Wedgwood Benn's efforts, the law had been changed to enable hereditary peers to renounce their titles. But Home, though by now widely respected among those who knew him, was not yet a household name. A general election could not be more than a year away, and the Conservative Party badly needed a well-known leader to rally it from the setbacks of 1963. This might be Hailsham, well qualified as a trumpeter; or Butler, with his subtle intelligence and unrivalled experience; or conceivably Maudling, an up-and-coming new man. At cabinet on 8 October when the succession was discussed Home said that he was not a candidate. This was the only notable occasion in his life when he acted in a way which some criticized later as not honourable. The criticism was unwarranted. What Home said on 8 October was a statement of present fact, not a pledge for the future; but Ian Macleod and Enoch Powell later regarded it as misleading and therefore wrong. Events moved rapidly. Senior members of the party began to put it into Home's mind that he should stand. Luck put cards into his hand. Macmillan charged him as the president that year of the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations to tell the party conference at Blackpool on 10 October of Macmillan's decision to resign. This propelled Home to the centre of the stage. His own foreign affairs speech at the conference went well, whereas in different ways Butler and Hailsham mismanaged their own opportunities. The party conference had no say in electing the party leader, but the publicity which it generated influenced the outcome. Meanwhile soundings in the traditional manner were being made among Conservative MPs and peers, and the results reported to Harold Macmillan in his hospital sickbed, so that he could make the decisive recommendation to the queen. Macmillan himself had earlier favoured Hailsham, but doubts about Hailsham's judgement were increased by American unhappiness over the way he had handled his part in the test ban negotiations. The soundings pointed to the less than emphatic conclusion that Home would have less difficulty in forming and carrying on a government than any of his rivals. Macmillan was content with this, and advised the queen to ask Home to form a government, which she did on 18 October. He had already checked with his doctor that his health could stand the strain. By another stroke of luck the safe Commons seat of Kinross and West Perthshire was vacant. The remaining hazard was that Butler would refuse to join a Home government and so make his task impossible. Macleod and Powell were for this reason anxious that Butler should indeed refuse; but Butler, true to his own tradition of diffident but determined public service, agreed to serve as foreign secretary. Home became prime minister on 18 October 1963. Five days later he disclaimed his peerage for life, becoming Sir Alec Douglas-Home (having been made a knight of the Thistle the previous year). 
The twelve months of Home's premiership were not dramatic in British history. The prime minister scaled no peaks; his vessel hit no rocks. The most striking world event was the assassination of President Kennedy in November 1963. Home had worked well with Kennedy but found it hard to build a relationship with his successor, Lyndon Johnson; indeed the two governments staged a substantial row on the issue of British trade with Cuba. Rhodesian affairs drifted slowly in the wrong direction. The Commonwealth prime ministers met in London. In domestic as well as foreign affairs the prime minister was quietly competent in the transaction of business. The main argument of substance concerned Heath's proposal to abolish retail price maintenance. The plan roused fierce opposition inside the Conservative Party, many of whose members thought it folly to antagonize small shopkeepers in the run-up to a general election. Heath showed his determination. Home would almost certainly not have originated the measure himself, but he was persuaded of its merits, and Heath had served him well. As a result Home staunchly supported his colleague. Thus the first and one of the most important acts of liberalizing the British economy, in a series later known as 'Thatcherite', was carried through by Heath and Home, neither of whom rate in the history books as disciples of Margaret Thatcher. 
But the main preoccupation of British politicians was the forthcoming election. Everything pointed to a substantial Labour victory. Labour was led with skill, sometimes with brilliance, by Harold Wilson. The Conservatives had been in office for thirteen years. They were caricatured as old-fashioned and upper class; they seemed to play into the hands of their opponents by choosing a grouse-shooting earl as their leader. Home had once admitted that he used matchsticks to do his sums; Wilson promised in contrast to mobilize for Britain the white heat of the technological revolution. Home disliked television appearances and found the quarrelsome noise of the House of Commons distasteful, whereas Wilson thrived on both. But when the contest came, right up against the deadline of October 1964, it did not go entirely as expected. The campaign was noisy, and the prime minister fared particularly badly at the hands of hecklers in the Bull Ring at Birmingham. Labour won, but narrowly, winning 317 seats against the Conservatives' 304. It was enough, but not a walkover, and the Conservative Party was not demoralized as in 1945 and 1997. During his premiership Home had gradually asserted himself as an honourable leader, albeit in an unfashionable tradition. The poisons of 1963 slowly drained out of British political life in 1964, making possible a straightforward election with no backdrop of scandal or what was later called sleaze. Home's decent, matter-of-fact premiership helped to bring this about, and his riposte to Harold Wilson gained him a place in the quotation books and scored a palpable hit: 'As far as the fourteenth Earl is concerned, I suppose Mr Wilson, when you come to think of it, is the fourteenth Mr Wilson' ('Oxford Book of Quotations'). 
But a defeat was a defeat. Back in opposition Home quickly changed the rules for electing a Conservative leader. He responded to the widespread criticism of the secretive way in which he himself had been chosen in 1963 by what Macleod in a famous 'Spectator' article had called the 'magic circle'. The new rules, which placed the power firmly and openly with Conservative MPs, lasted with one revision until they were in turn criticized after the fall of Margaret Thatcher in 1990. Home did not at once resign as leader of the Conservative Party. Many of his friends as well as his wife wanted him to continue. But the criticisms which he had felt bound to endure while governing the country became intolerable to him once that responsibility had passed. 'My reaction', he wrote, 'was boredom with the whole business' (Home, 220). On 22 July 1965 he told the 1922 committee of the parliamentary party that he intended to step down. Ted Heath was elected to succeed him under the new rules. Home served as shadow foreign secretary during the following five years of opposition, travelling the world, maintaining his foreign contacts, and wrestling as president of the MCC with the baleful influence of apartheid on the aborted English cricket tour of South Africa. Returning to his earlier involvement in Scottish politics, he supported Heath's declaration at Perth in favour of devolution and chaired a commission which produced a plan for a Scottish assembly. Much pain and damage to the union would have been avoided if the Heath government had later acted on that report. 
Home was by now the unrivalled elder statesman of the Conservative Party. His appearance at each year's party conference was greeted with tumultuous applause, in which guilt mingled with affection. Senior members of the shadow cabinet turned to him in early June 1970 when it looked as if Labour would win a third election victory in a row, an outcome which would have condemned Heath to failure and compelled him to resign as leader. Home refused to discuss the issues in advance, and Heath confounded all expert opinion by winning a satisfactory majority on 18 June. Home returned with pleasure to a second stint at the Foreign Office. 
As during Home's previous tenure of that office between 1960 and 1963, Britain's desire to enter the European Economic Community quickly came to the fore of events. Once again Home had alongside him a fellow cabinet minister, this time Geoffrey Rippon, who handled the actual negotiations under the active supervision of the prime minister. But Home was more than a bystander. By temperament and background he was some distance removed from Heath's passionate commitment to a united Europe. All the more important was his steadfast support for British entry, which he based on a clear assessment of Britain's place in the modern world, and in particular her relationship with France and Germany on the one hand and the United States on the other. Home brought the traditional analysis of Foreign Office diplomacy to bear on the European issue, and reached the same conclusion as Heath by another route, thus providing the right of the Conservative Party with much needed assurance. Otherwise his main concerns at the Foreign Office were again the Soviet Union and Africa. In September 1971, after much unproductive correspondence with Gromeko, Home created a sensation by expelling 105 Soviet spies from Britain. This worked well. The KGB suffered a heavy blow and the roof did not fall in on Britain's relationship with the Soviet Union. Largely as a result of his efforts a compromise agreement was reached with Ian Smith, the rebel white prime minister of Rhodesia, which would have led in stages to African majority rule. To Home's great disappointment a commission led by Lord Pearce reported in May 1972 that most Africans rejected the proposals, which then fell. 
After Heath's defeat in the election of February 1974 Home's active political career came to an end. He accepted a life peerage, as Baron Home of the Hirsel, in October 1974, and re-entered the House of Lords. Two years later he published a good-natured autobiography, with perhaps more anecdotes than insights, which he called 'The Way the Wind Blows'; it was an instant success. As the years passed he spent more time in Scotland, with his family and the country pursuits which gave spice to his life. There was no sudden moment when he abandoned politics, but his interventions became fewer and fewer. In 1990 his wife died two months before her eighty-first birthday. The gap thus torn in his life could never be repaired. Margaret Thatcher rightly wrote: 'Goodness and kindness radiated from Elizabeth to all the people she came in contact with' (Thorpe, 460). For five years he lived on at the Hirsel, well nursed and cared for, but with the light gradually fading. He died of bronchopneumonia at the Hirsel at the age of ninety-two on 9 October 1995. 
Home was the fourteenth earl of Home, the thirteenth prime minister of this country to be educated at Christ Church, Oxford, and the eighteenth prime minister to be educated at Eton. Such a combination, surprising at the time, has become even less probable. Home represented the last flowering of a highly sympathetic tradition of political service based on a mixture of patriotic duty, personal ambition, and inherited land. During the frenetic days of October 1963 Macmillan had written a private memorandum in hospital which he never sent to the queen but which expressed frankly his views on the different men who might succeed him. His comments on Home will serve as a summary: 'Lord Home is clearly a man who represents the old governing class at its best... He is not ambitious in the sense of wanting to scheme for power, although not foolish enough to resist honour when it comes to him... He gives that impression by a curious mixture of great courtesy, and even if yielding to pressure, with underlying rigidity on matters of principle... This is exactly the quality that the class to which he belongs have at their best because they think about the question under discussion and not about themselves. (Thorpe, 301)' 



@@@@@


doc= 60456


Eddington, Paul Clark (1927-1995), actor, was born on 18 June 1927 at 174 Sutherland Avenue, Paddington, London, the son of Albert Clark Eddington, a decorative artist, and his wife, Frances Clark Eddington, 'nee' Frances Mary Roberts. He was brought up in St John's Wood, London. His father, a Quaker related to the Quaker Clark family of Somerset shoemakers, was an addictive gambler who had emotional problems after serving in the trenches in the First World War. His mother, a Roman Catholic, was a radical thinker and hostess to artists and intellectuals. Eddington was brought up as a Catholic and was educated at the Holy Child Convent, Cavendish Square, London, but when his parents' marriage ended his mother sent him to board at the Friends' school at Sibford Ferris, Oxfordshire. He remained a Quaker for the rest of his life. Leaving school at seventeen with no ambition but to do something artistic, he became a window dresser at a Birmingham store and an amateur actor. In 1944 he joined the Entertainments National Service Association at the garrison theatre, Colchester, but he acted only briefly for the troops before it was discovered that he was a registered conscientious objector and he was dismissed. After the war he spent over ten years at the repertory theatres in Birmingham, Sheffield, and Ipswich, with a year at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in 1951. On 28 April 1952 he married (Vida) Patricia Scott ('b'. 1929/30), an actress whom he had met in the wings at Sheffield repertory theatre. She was the daughter of Jonathan Joseph Scott, a police officer. They had three sons and one daughter. 
After several years in television Eddington made his West End debut as the Rabbi in 'The Tenth Man' (1961). He joined the Bristol Old Vic as leading man in 1962. In transfers to London he was seen as Prince Andrei in 'War and Peace' (Old Vic and Phoenix, 1962-3), a sexually obliging psychiatrist in Iris Murdoch's 'A Severed Head' (Criterion, 1963; New York, 1964), and Benjamin Disraeli in 'A Portrait of the Queen' (Vaudeville, 1965). Other roles at Bristol included Ibsen's Brand, Brutus in 'Julius Caesar', Henry II in Anouilh's 'Becket', Parolles in 'All's Well that Ends Well', and Biedermann in Frisch's 'The Fire Raisers'. 
Still unambitious by nature but with a growing family to support, Eddington -- who had long been familiar with the labour exchange -- once considered giving up the theatre for a job as salesman with an oil company, but in 1966, as Captain Doleful in the musical comedy 'Jorrocks' (New), he won the Clarence Derwent award as the season's best supporting actor. This led to another West End musical comedy, but it was Alan Bennett's musical satire 'Forty Years On' (Apollo, 1968) that brought better luck. As a nervous young housemaster trying to impress John Gielgud's haughty headmaster, Eddington learned not only the technical value of keeping still on stage but he also learned how much he had in common with Gielgud: once, in their mutual desire not to upstage the other, the two actors nearly fell into the orchestra pit. It was a feature of Eddington's later career that he thrived in some of Gielgud's finest roles. After the headmaster in a revival of 'Forty Years On' (Chichester and Haymarket, 1984), Eddington shone as Spooner in Harold Pinter's 'No Man's Land' (Almeida and Comedy, 1993), though he did not smoke, as Gielgud had in imitation of W. H. Auden, on whom the part was based. Eddington also proved an affecting Harry in David Storey's 'Home' (Wyndham's, 1995). Although he wanted to cover his baldness, caused by medical treatment for a skin disease, with a straw hat, the author persuaded him not to. It was his last stage performance. 
It was, however, on television that Eddington achieved renown for his light touch and expert sense of understated comedy. He was the henpecked husband of Penelope Keith's snobbish Margo in 'The Good Life' (1975-9), and a wily but naive Jim Hacker MP in 'Yes, Minister' and its sequel, 'Yes, Prime Minister', which ran through the 1980s. It was while watching Alan Ayckbourn's suburban comedy 'Absurd Person Singular' (Criterion and Vaudeville, 1974), that a television producer took a shine to Eddington's diffident style, with his slight stoop, wary eyes, and drawn cheeks. Eddington was at heart a more serious-minded actor than his light touch on television might indicate; at this time he had just played James Tyrone in 'Long Day's Journey into Night' and Osborne in 'Journey's End' for the Bristol Old Vic, and whenever he could he evaded typecasting with surprising success. As the cruel and drooling husband George in Edward Albee's 'Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?' (National, 1981) and as the pathetic old classics master in Terence Rattigan's 'The Browning Version' (Theatre Royal, Bristol, and Royalty, London, 1984), Eddington's command of the stage was emotionally complex and deep. His moral philosopher in Tom Stoppard's 'Jumpers' (Aldwych, 1985), his exuberant Sir Hartley Courtly in Boucicault's 'London Assurance' (Chichester, 1989), and his Orgon in Moliere's 'Tartuffe' (Playhouse, 1991) were further evidence of his power, range, and technique. 
Eddington's role as the embattled Jim Hacker MP (and later as prime minister) brought him fame, and sometimes also embarrassment. He was happy to have been one of the few non-politicians to address Westminster's lobby correspondents -- he was appointed CBE in 1987 -- but he could only smile wrily at the frequency with which the red carpet was rolled out for him on his travels, as if he had political influence: breakfast with the prime minister of Norway and an invitation to address a general election rally in Australia were only two examples. While the party allegiance of the character Hacker was never proclaimed, he was assumed to be right-wing, whereas Eddington himself belonged to the left. When he was asked by 10 Downing Street to pose for publicity pictures with the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, he replied: 'To put it bluntly, she needs us more than we need her' ('The Times', 7 Nov 1995). As a governor of the Bristol Old Vic Theatre trust, Eddington declared that he would never act there again until the company declined a tobacco company's grants. A former campaigner against nuclear arms and the chairman of the International Committee for Artists' Freedom -- which raised funds for dissident theatre groups -- Eddington also strove in vain for the admission of women as members of the Garrick Club. 
During his illness, which was not identified until the mid-1980s as a form of skin cancer, mycosis fungoides, Eddington resolved that his health should not interfere with his acting. His Justice Shallow in 'Henry IV' for BBC television was shown shortly before he died in London on 4 November 1995. His memoirs, 'So Far, so Good', were published the previous month. His wife and four children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 60459


Beeston, Alfred Felix Landon (1911-1995), orientalist, was born at 12 Glebe Road, Barnes, south London, on 23 February 1911, the second child and only son of Herbert Arthur Beeston (1872-1941), an engineer and draughtsman, and Edith Mary Landon (1873-1965). In his undergraduate days he came to be called Freddie, a name by which he was universally known to friends, colleagues, and students for the rest of his life, though he was called Rogo by his close family. 
At fourteen Beeston was elected a king's scholar at Westminster School. From at least the age of ten he had had 'a passionate interest in foreign languages' (Beeston, 'The Making of an Orientalist', 4) and he spent much of his spare time exploring them. While he 'avidly scanned any language manuals I could lay my hands on, from ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs to Spanish and Welsh, etc. -- the more exotic the better' (ibid.), his principal 'interest was in theoretical linguistics, in the structure of a language and its strategies for expressing ideas' (ibid.). He had 'always had an inclination for specializing in something unusual and exotic' (Beeston, 'Autobiography', xv) and toyed with the idea of studying Sanskrit or Chinese, but was unable to find suitable books. However, when he picked up an Arabic grammar in a second-hand bookshop he began to teach himself as much Arabic as he could, helped by an Arabic dictionary and a copy of the 'Koran' which he had asked for as school prizes. Thus it was almost by chance that he concentrated his considerable energies on Arabic, though in later life he also acquired a knowledge of Chinese and a sophisticated understanding of its structures with which he sometimes startled Sinologists. 
In 1929 Beeston won a scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, where he read classics for honour moderations and then Arabic and Persian for the final honours school under the Laudian professor, D. S. Margoliouth. To his delight he discovered that Margoliouth had placed on the Arabic syllabus an optional paper on South Arabian epigraphy. Beeston was the first student to take this and, after he had graduated with a first in 1933, he decided to make Sabaean inscriptions the subject of his DPhil thesis. 
In 1935, while he was still working on his DPhil, Beeston was appointed a senior assistant in the department of oriental books of the Bodleian Library, where he remained for twenty years (not counting five and a half years of war service from 1940 to 1946). There he threw himself into several cataloguing and catalogue revision projects, the most important of which resulted in his completion in 1954 of the 'Catalogue of the Persian, Turkish, Hindustani, and Pushtu manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, part III: additional Persian manuscripts'. During this period he also produced a number of articles on the Bodleian's oriental holdings (Arabic, Persian, Chinese), and a booklet on Mughal miniatures, as well as numerous papers on South Arabian epigraphy. However, he regarded his principal service to the library to have been 'the acquisition of several particularly fine manuscripts at pretty reasonable prices' (Beeston, 'The Making of an Orientalist', 5). After he left the library he continued to make generous donations from his own resources to enable the Bodleian to acquire important oriental manuscripts. 
During the Second World War, Beeston served in Palestine as lieutenant, and then captain, in the intelligence corps. There he improved his spoken Arabic, though he later recalled that, when caught off guard, he was still capable of answering the shouts of boys in the street with literary expressions which elicited gales of laughter. On his return to the Bodleian in 1946 he was promoted to the post of keeper of the oriental department and sub-librarian. He remained there until 1955, when Sir Hamilton Gibb, who had succeeded Margoliouth as Laudian professor of Arabic, resigned to take up a post at Harvard. Sir Godfrey Driver immediately 'instructed' Beeston 'in the most positive terms' to apply for the chair (Beeston, 'The Making of an Orientalist', 5). At this point Beeston had reached the summit of his career in the Bodleian and had completed all but one of the major projects on which he had embarked. Thus a change of direction offered exciting, if slightly alarming, prospects. The chair carried with it a professorial fellowship at St John's College. There he quickly found himself entirely at home. 
Beeston brought to the chair a profound knowledge and understanding of all periods of the Arabic language and the literature expressed in it. In 1955, when he was appointed, the Arabic syllabus did not go beyond AD 1400 and one of his major achievements was to rewrite it so that students were required to read works from all periods, from the pre-Islamic poetry to twentieth-century plays and novels -- and this at a time when the English literature syllabus at Oxford stopped at 1900. 
Beeston had an intense love of his subject and his enthusiasm inspired generations of students. He was a modest, courteous, and patient teacher with a deep interest in awakening in others an understanding and appreciation of the Arabic language and its literature. Unlike most Oxford professors of his day he undertook a great deal of undergraduate teaching, in lectures, classes, and tutorials, and both during his tenure and after his retirement he was in great demand as an examiner of doctoral theses. His lecturing style was ponderous, full of long pauses, and punctuated by appalling fits of coughing (he was a very heavy smoker), but the content and his enthusiasm held his audience fascinated. Many of the books he wrote were intended for students, though they had a far wider readership; they included 'Written Arabic' (1968), 'Arabic Historical Phraseology' (1969), 'Samples of Arabic Prose in its Historical Development' (1977), 'Baidotawi's Commentary on Surah 12 of the Qur'an' (1963), and 'The Epistle on Singing-Girls of Jahiz' (1980). He was interested in languages not simply as abstract systems but in how they could be used to express complex thoughts. This came out in his numerous articles on points of grammar, in his classes on the translation of poetry and difficult passages in al-Tanukhi and Ibn Khaldun's 'Muqaddimah', and above all in his book 'The Arabic Language Today' (1970). 
Beeston was, without doubt, one of the foremost Arabists of the twentieth century, but by the time he retired in 1978 he was also the doyen of experts in Ancient South Arabian. He produced two grammars of Sabaic (1962 and 1984), led the project which produced the 'Sabaic Dictionary' (1982), and wrote innumerable articles and contributions to books on every aspect of life in pre-Islamic Arabia. Here again his passion for teaching was engaged, and he was the driving force in the multi-author Arabic 'Chrestomathy of Ancient Yemeni Inscriptions' (1985), designed to introduce Arab students to the subject. Between his retirement in 1978 and his death in 1995 he produced an astonishing number of books and articles on the Arabic language, Arabic literature, and pre-Islamic Arabia which have made major contributions to all three fields. 
Beeston could be a devastating reviewer, but he was never vicious or personal in his criticism. He simply and calmly pointed out faults when necessary and gave praise where it was due. He believed that 'error must be corrected' (personal knowledge) and was himself happy to be corrected by others. His interest was in the progress of knowledge and there was no shred of personal vanity in him. He received two Festschriften. One, 'Sayhadica: recherches sur les inscriptions de l'Arabie preislamique' (1987), is devoted to pre-Islamic Arabia and the other, 'Arabicus Felix: luminosus Britannicus', which was presented on his eightieth birthday in 1991, mainly contains works on Arabic language and literature. 
Until 1963 Beeston's appearance was relatively conventional, largely out of respect for the views of the president of St John's College, Austin Lane Poole. However, after the latter's death, Beeston developed the flowing locks and informal garb which made him instantly recognizable in Oxford and elsewhere. He loved good food and drink and good company. His appearance and somewhat 'monumental' manner were reminiscent of Dr Johnson and could be a little daunting on first meeting. However, his modesty, humour, and total lack of pretension quickly put people at their ease. He was as comfortable playing darts with the college servants in the pub as he was dining at high table, and frequently did both in the same evening. Indeed there were many in Oxford who knew him simply as 'Freddie' and had no idea that he was a professor. 
He was a very popular participant in conferences and was a co-founder and one of the most faithful members of the annual international Seminar for Arabian Studies. He served on the councils of many learned societies and was elected fellow of the British Academy in 1965. Throughout his life he was a devout Anglo-Catholic and regularly attended mass at the church of St Mary Magdalen in Oxford. 
On his retirement Beeston bought a small house in Iffley, but still spent much of his day in college since St John's had made him an emeritus fellow. He never married and though he was a much-loved uncle, great-uncle, and godfather the college was in many ways his home and close family. In 1993 he developed cancer and moved back into college to be closer to the hospitals for treatment. His death, when it came, was swift and merciful. He collapsed and died on 29 September 1995 at the gates of St John's College. 


@@@@@


doc= 60464


Pinker, James Brand (1863-1922), literary agent, was born in east London of a working-class family. Few facts are known of his early background and family connections, but it appears that he had little formal schooling, and began his working career as a clerk at the Tilbury docks in London. In either 1887 or 1888 he moved to Constantinople to become correspondent and agent for the 'Levant Herald', remaining there until about 1890. Some time during these three years, his fiancee, Elizabeth Seabrooke, joined him from Britain, at which point they were married. They had three children: two sons, Eric ('b'. 1892) and James Ralph ('b'. 1900), who entered into business with their father, and a daughter, Mary Oenone ('b'. 1903), named after the Irish novelist Edith Oenone Somerville, with whom the Pinker family was particularly friendly. 
Late in 1890 or in 1891 the couple left for London, where Pinker began work as a reader and then assistant editor to C. N. Williamson, editor of the illustrated weekly 'Black & White', which began publication in early February 1891. Pinker also began reading manuscripts for a publishing company. There is evidence that he briefly edited 'Woman' (founded in 1890) and was the first editor of 'Pearson's Magazine' (launched in January 1896). James Hepburn suggests in his introduction to the 'Letters of Arnold Bennett' that Pinker's role in the latter publication was short-lived and limited to enabling the launch of the first issue. What is clear is that through these positions Pinker gained an intimate knowledge of and contacts in the British literary and publishing world, both of which stood him in good stead in his subsequent career as literary agent. 
By the turn of the twentieth century the professionalization of the literary market place had begun in earnest. Increased productivity, technological advances, and expanding national and international literary markets coincided with the establishment of associations to represent the professional interests of various sectors of the British and American book trade. The development of international copyright acts and agreements during the late nineteenth century also played its part in establishing regular patterns of income for authors. The literary agent subsequently became a major player in the literary arena, acting as a mediator between author and publisher in arbitrating and evaluating literary property. Establishing himself in an office in Arundel Street, London, in early 1896, Pinker set out to exploit the potential of this newly emerging profession, with H. G. Wells as one of his first clients. Within two years his skill at negotiating rights and contracts for authors in both the American and British markets had established him as one of the leading literary agents of his time, alongside Alexander Pollock Watt and the American-born Curtis Brown. 
Not all authors found his services of value, though. Oscar Wilde, for example, concluded after Pinker's failure to find an American publisher for 'The Ballad of Reading Gaol' in 1898 that 'he was not to be trusted' ('Letters of Arnold Bennett', 23). Likewise D. H. Lawrence dismissed Pinker as 'that little parvenu snob of a procureur of books' (ibid., 26). His negotiating skills were recognized by others, however, including Frank Swinnerton, for whom Pinker was a man 'who knew the monetary secrets of authors and the weaknesses of publishers, terrified some of these last and was refused admittance by others, dominated editors, and of course enjoyed much power' (ibid., 27). 
As well as representing established authors such as Wells and Galsworthy, Pinker concentrated on promoting and developing the careers of newly emerging writers. Numbered among his clients were Jack London, Henry Lawson, Stephen Crane, Ford Madox Ford, James Joyce, George Gissing, Violet Hunt, and Arnold Bennett. He formed particularly close relations with Henry James, acting as his agent from 1898 until James's death in 1916. James viewed Pinker as 'excellently effective', and in light of his subsequent friendship had Pinker act as one of his sponsors for his application for British naturalization in 1915 (Gale, 515). 
Pinker also befriended Joseph Conrad, for whom he served as a prominent and imposing negotiator of literary property -- a man of patience who, as Conrad wrote in 1904, 'has treated not only my moods but even my fancies with the greatest consideration' (Hepburn, 58). Pinker, 'the rosy, round-faced clean-shaven grey-haired sphinx with a protrusive under-lip', as one contemporary described him ('Letters of Arnold Bennett', 27), was to become the major financial provider and buffer in Conrad's life; between 1903 and 1922 he acted as Conrad's banker and financial manager, paying for hotel rooms, comestibles, and clothing, advancing him money, and cajoling and coaxing long-awaited manuscripts from him. At one point in 1908 Conrad owed Pinker over $1600 in outstanding debts, then a substantial sum. Not until 1912, when Pinker scored a coup by negotiating major sums for the serialization of Conrad's novel 'Chance' in the 'New York Herald', did this long-term investment begin to pay off for both men. Conrad relied on him for support and financial guidance until Pinker's death. While on a business trip accompanied by his daughter Oenone, Pinker died at the Biltmore Hotel, New York, on 8 February 1922 from influenza and pneumonia-related complications contracted on the boat voyage from London. His agency continued under the direction of his two sons until crashing in 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 60465


Brown, George Mackay (1921-1996), poet and writer, was born on 17 October 1921 in Victoria Street, Stromness, on mainland Orkney, the last of six children of John Brown (1875-1940), tailor and postman, and his wife, Mhairi 
(Mary Jane; 1891-1967)
, daughter of Hugh Mackay of Strathy, Sutherland, and his wife, Georgina. His parents were both Scottish, although Brown, like most Orcadians, always stressed the cultural gulf between the islanders and their neighbours on the Scottish mainland. His mother was a native Gaelic speaker. 
The formal education Brown received in local schools was ultimately less important to him than the reading discoveries he made for himself as a young man. The stories told by his elder sister Ruby were formative, and as he himself wrote, 'literature entered the mind stealthily, like a thief; only it was a good thief, like Robin Hood or Brecht's Asdak, and left treasures instead of taking them' (Brown, 'For the Islands I Sing', 41). His lifelong tendency to poor health began with a bad attack of measles during his mid-teens, though his smoking from the age of twelve may not have helped, as he freely acknowledged. Brown's father died suddenly in 1940, leaving his youngest son living with his mother but unable to earn an adult wage. Pulmonary tuberculosis confined him to a sanatorium in Kirkwall for six months in 1941, after which he began to write verse and to contribute articles and reviews to a local newspaper, the 'Orkney Herald'. Journalism provided an important and congenial outlet for his writing throughout his life. He extended his knowledge of literature, music, and history, and made friends with local artists and intellectuals. He was later encouraged to apply for a place at the newly established Newbattle Abbey College (at Dalkeith, south of Edinburgh), an adult education college under the wardenship of the poet Edwin Muir. A meeting with Muir and his wife Willa, in summer 1951, secured Brown a place for the 1951-2 session: 'Newbattle stimulated me, and gave me a sense of purpose and direction' (ibid., 93). He published his first poetry collection, 'The Storm, and other Poems', in 1954 at his own expense. Muir provided an introduction. 
Further illness preceded a second brief spell at Newbattle in 1956. This in turn encouraged Brown to enter Edinburgh University as an undergraduate (1956-60). At Muir's instigation the Hogarth Press issued Brown's next collection, 'Loaves and Fishes', in 1959. Thereafter, a brief taste of teacher training convinced him that teaching was not an appropriate career; in any case, his health broke down once more and he spent winter 1960-61 in Tor-Na-Dee sanatorium west of Aberdeen. After his recovery Brown became a Roman Catholic in 1961. Never satisfied by the Calvinism in which he was brought up, he had been drawn to Roman Catholicism since his teens, especially after reading Lytton Strachey's essay on Cardinal Manning. Whatever Strachey's intention, this account allowed Brown to glimpse something of the strength and durability of the Catholic faith. As with the other values on which his life was founded, literary expression was central to his commitment to it: 'In the end it was literature that broke down my last defences. There are many ways of entering a fold; it was the beauty of words that opened the door to me' (Brown, 'For the Islands I Sing', 53). 
During a further two years of postgraduate work in Edinburgh, Brown studied Hopkins, a poet he had long loved but whom he claimed to have chosen for this purpose because 'Hopkins' collected poems are probably the fewest in English literature' (Brown, 'For the Islands I Sing', 149). He gained no second degree, however. His years in Edinburgh were important for the contacts and friendships he made among the poets and literati there, including Norman MacCaig, Sydney Goodsir Smith, and Hugh MacDiarmid. Smith's 'Kynd Kittock's Land' (1965) gives a glimpse of Brown in their convivial company: '
While lean MacCaig stauns snuffin the Western seas 

And Brown leads wi his Viking chin 

And winna be rebukit. 

' In all Brown published thirty-one books of poetry, many of which are limited editions, or collaborations with artists. Fourteen, however, are substantial collections. His poems, characteristically, are impersonal and avoid autobiographical confession. Many tell stories, however briefly; many, also, illustrate his instinct for pattern and order. All demonstrate his care as a craftsman and his sensual responsiveness to the sounds of words. 
Like his mentor Edwin Muir, Brown strove in his verse 'to express universal insights' (Bold, 19). Whereas Muir's means of achieving this, however, often involved his turning to regions of dream and archetype, Brown habitually draws on Orkney life, on history, and on religious ritual. 
Brown's origins were as humble and geographically obscure as the role of 'lad o' pairts' usually demands, but where an immense talent might have been expected to elevate its possessor above his origins Brown defied the pattern and continued living unpretentiously in Stromness for most of his life. His achievement as a writer did not propel him into the wider world; rather, it brought the world to him and to Orkney. This was not only literally true, though his fame eventually drew many visitors and scholars. It was also true in the sense that the world has accepted Brown's vision of Orkney as valid and enriching, a place created in literature like Joyce's Dublin and Dickens's London. 
Brown's first collection of short stories, 'A Calendar of Love and other Stories', appeared in 1967. In all, twelve volumes of stories were published during his lifetime and for many readers it is for his prose stories that he is best remembered and most valued. They share many of the characteristic features of his poems, especially as regards subject matter and approach to structure. As he said himself during an interview: 'Lots of my poems are sort of compressed stories and you could expand them and make a short story of them. Maybe a novel if you wanted to go to town. And also lots of the stories could be compressed a good bit into a poem, you know, with all the inessentials left out. (Murray, 51)' His five novels, like his poems and short stories, reflect Orkney past and present, sometimes realistically, sometimes in fable. Many readers find the first, 'Greenvoe' (1972), to be the most appealing: it is a portrait of a modern Orkney island snuffed out by a sinister government conspiracy but with the possibility of resurgence thanks to the spiritual strength of the indigenous inhabitants and their rituals. 
The destruction of the fictional Greenvoe by the bureaucratic project Black Star (read by some as a foreshadowing of the impact of the oil industry on Orkney, but later described by Brown as a project of 'preparations for a third world war, much more hideous than its two predecessors'; Brown, 'For the Islands I Sing', 173) is one of many instances in which he made clear his opposition to the doctrine of progress. That opposition was memorably spelt out in 'An Orkney Tapestry' (1969): 'There is a new religion, Progress, in which we all devoutly believe, and it is concerned only with material things in the present and in a vague golden-handed future. It is a rootless utilitarian faith, without beauty or mystery; a kind of blind unquestioning belief that men and their material circumstances will go on improving until some kind of nirvana is reached and everyone will be rich, free, fulfilled, well-informed, masterful.... I feel that this religion is in great part a delusion, and will peter out in the marsh. A community like Orkney dare not cut itself off from its roots and sources. (Brown, 'Orkney Tapestry', 20-21)' Against this trend he emphasized the simplicity of traditional Orkney life, the interpenetration of past and present, and the ceremonies of Catholicism. In his later years he softened his vehemence against progress (even eventually owning a black and white television) but insisted on the necessity to 'keep people in touch with their roots and sources' (Murray, 42). 
Brown's last novel, 'Beside the Ocean of Time' (1994), won the Saltire Scottish Book of the Year award and was shortlisted for the 1994 Booker prize. All his novels are deeply characteristic of their author, as are his plays; nevertheless, it is as a short-story writer that his finest achievement outside his verse lies. His plays, by his own acknowledgement lacking true theatrical vitality, contain much excellent writing: 'I think they're probably better read than seen on the stage' (Murray, 34-5). He was a natural tale-teller, however, and his large body of short stories is a significant contribution to twentieth-century literature. 
Brown was awarded an OBE in 1974 and became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1977. He was awarded honorary degrees by the Open University (MA, 1976), the University of Dundee (LLD, 1977), and the University of Glasgow (DLitt, 1985). 
Just as, by and large, he felt no call to move beyond Orkney in his quest for things to write about, so in real life Brown seems to have disliked travelling outside his familiar northern landscape. Despite the happiness of his time at Newbattle and Edinburgh, a city he came to love, Orkney was his only possible home. His sense of values and also his sense of Orkney were steeped in his response to the islands' past. That past, in which a simple way of life founded on farming and fishing changed little, as he saw it, over the millennia, was characterized by a striking historical narrative, especially in the viking period, and also by a religious richness and strength which reached a peak of holiness in the martyrdom of St Magnus on the island of Egilsay on Easter Monday 1117. The figure of Magnus was a potent one for Brown throughout his life, and one whose story he retold several times, most notably in 'The Martyrdom of St Magnus', an opera written in collaboration with his friend the composer Peter Maxwell Davies. Closely associated with Brown from the time of his first visit to Orkney in 1970, Davies set many of Brown's works and with Brown's help founded the St Magnus Festival in 1977. Imaginative and spiritual elements were further bound together for Brown in the distinctive literary achievement of 'Orkneyinga Saga' (written early in the thirteenth century), a work which not only provided him with much literary inspiration, but also helped him discern a significance in his obscure corner of the globe which he communicated to the rest of the world through his writing. 
After his mother's death Brown lived in a council flat at 3 Mayburn Court, Stromness; his writing desk was the kitchen table and he wrote at it every morning with the self-discipline of a craftsman. He had a weekly column in 'The Orcadian' newspaper, which he continued to write up until the last week of his life. All who knew him stress his gentleness, his shyness, his reticence, though those close to him also recall his strong sense of humour. He never married. 
Brown's features were striking, often described as 'craggy'. Photographs from his final years show how severe his health problems had become. An operation for cataract in 1988 was followed by one for cancer in 1990. His death certificate lists several problems, including kidney and heart failure possibly brought about by the onset of bronchitis. He died in Balfour Hospital, Kirkwall, on 13 April 1996. Peter Maxwell Davies's sixth symphony, completed on the day of Brown's death, is dedicated to him. George Mackay Brown was buried in Stromness kirkyard on 16 April, St Magnus's day. 


@@@@@


doc= 60467


MacCaig, Norman Alexander (1910-1996), poet, was born at 53 East London Street, Edinburgh, on 14 November 1910, the only son and the fourth child of Robert McCaig (1880-1950?), a chemist, and his wife, Joan, 'nee' MacLeod (1879-1959). His father was a lowland Scot from Dumfriesshire and his mother came from Scalpay on the island of Harris in the Outer Hebrides. A few months before his fifth birthday he was sent to school in the primary department of the Royal High School, Edinburgh, moving from there, in 1922, to the upper school. In 1928 he proceeded to Edinburgh University to read classics and graduated in 1932 with an honours degree. After university he attended Moray House College in Edinburgh to train as a teacher. 
It was a difficult time to become a teacher and McCaig, unable to find a full-time job teaching classics, took on a series of part-time posts. For a few years he taught Latin, including a period at Portobello High School, where the art teacher, George Findlay McKenzie, painted the portrait which now hangs in the school of Scottish studies at Edinburgh University. After a series of temporary posts he accepted a permanent post in Craiglockhart primary school, and all his teaching thereafter, until 1970, was in primary schools. He was at Craiglockhart in 1939 when war broke out. 
On 6 April 1940 McCaig married Isabel Robina Munro (1910-1990), a teacher, whom he had met at university, and they settled in a house in Broughton Street, Edinburgh. They had two children, Joan, born in 1942, and Ewen, born in 1944. McCaig lived in Edinburgh throughout his life but, 'a threequarter Gael' (MacCaig, 81), he spent most of his summers in a cottage in Achmelvich on the coast of Sutherland. 
McCaig had been writing poems of what he called 'an elaborate and increasing awfulness' (MacCaig, 86) since his senior years at the Royal High School and during the 1930s and early 1940s he became involved with the short-lived New Apocalypse movement, which published his first poems in 1939, in the anthology 'The New Apocalypse'. These were followed by two books, 'Far Cry' (1943) and 'The Inward Eye' (1946), which collected his various periodical publications and added to them; they were all a reflection of his association with the New Apocalypse movement and were publications that he later desperately wished to disown. Many years later he declared that these two books illustrated not a revelation but an obscurement, and he totally repudiated them. Always a joker, he frequently used to tell the story that a friend to whom he had lent the second of these two volumes returned it to him with the words 'When are you publishing the answers?' (MacCaig, 85); so, he explained, he set about looking for the answers and they were not in the New Apocalypse Movement. Certainly, the poems from both books were completely expunged from his 'Selected Poems' (1971) and from the later 'Collected Poems' (1985). 
During the Second World War McCaig was a conscientious objector, though not on religious grounds for, as he asserted in an interview, 'I was born an atheist' (Murray, 88). Yet he was a pacifist and objected to war for humanistic reasons, insisting that nothing could persuade him to 'drop bombs on Hamburg' (Murray, 96). When he was called up in 1941 he refused to serve in the armed forces. At the tribunal, however, he agreed to do non-military work and was drafted into the non-combatant corps. Later, when asked to service tanks, he refused and was court-martialled; as a result he was sent briefly to Winchester prison and then to Wormwood Scrubs, where he spent the official prescribed three months before being released and directed to 'war work' as a gardener. 
After the war McCaig returned to teaching, which he loved. He was a marvellous teacher, full of wit, and a fountain of great stories. Despite Hugh MacDiarmid's well-known assertion that conscientious objection ruined McCaig's life, Norman enjoyed his years as a primary school teacher. They perhaps gave him the freedom to think and write, which intellectually more demanding and time-consuming grammar school teaching would have been likely to impede. The Scottish Renaissance movement which MacDiarmid nurtured in the 1920s aimed to revive the use of the Scots language in contemporary literature and at the same time to dissociate it from the sentimentality of the 'kailyard' school. Despite his admiration for MacDiarmid, Norman was not persuaded that he should write in a language not his own, and his own language, he often asserted, was English. Furthermore, he was out of sympathy with his friend's political interests, describing himself as 'a-political'. He nevertheless went to New York with MacDiarmid in 1967 and counted him as one of his closest friends. 
Some time between 1946 and 1955 McCaig adopted the spelling MacCaig, which he used for his publications, keeping the original for family matters. When asked about the change, he generally replied that it was because people kept mis-spelling it. His real poetic debut came in 1955 with the publication of 'Riding Lights'. The poems in this book show an awareness of nature in all its variety, of the cycle of the months and the seasons, and, in almost every poem, the poet himself is present in some way. The poems move between Edinburgh, MacCaig's physical home, and the highlands and islands of his spiritual home; they embrace landscape and history as well as the carefully carved cameos of familiar nature. The imagery is colourful and striking, as in 'End of a Cold Night': '
The pond has closed its frozen eyelid, 

The grass clump clenched its frozen claws. 

' Most of the poems in this volume are in formal rhyming four-line stanzas, with the occasional incursion of six-, eight-, or twelve-line stanzas. Sometimes there are no rhymes; sometimes assonance is used.The structural formality of 'Riding Lights' is maintained, though with increasing variety, through the next three volumes, 'The Sinai Sort' (1957), 'A Common Grace' (1960), and 'A Round of Applause' (1962). By the mid-sixties, however, in 'Measures' (1965), there is a noticeable emphasis on different forms and by the time 'Surroundings' was published in 1966 MacCaig seemed to have accomplished a painless shift to the use of free verse. In discussing his gradual move to his own particular brand of free verse, he commented, 'How many free verse poems are ruined by the lack of a thorough-going rhythm to articulate the whole and by line-endings which are purely arbitrary and serve no functional purpose whatever' (MacCaig, 83). This remark encapsulates the significance for him of rhythm in all his poetry, formal or free. 
In 1967 MacCaig was appointed creative writing fellow at Edinburgh University and on his return to teaching in 1969 he became headmaster of Inch primary school, Liberton, south Edinburgh. The following year, however, he left schoolteaching for good when he was appointed, first as lecturer, and then as reader in poetry at Stirling University, where he remained until he retired in 1978. During this time and for the next ten years he continued to write poetry; another eight volumes were published at fairly regular intervals, the last one, 'Voice-over', in 1988, making sixteen in all. 
MacCaig was essentially a writer of short poems and throughout his career he continued with his descriptions of landscapes and places, as well as choosing as his subjects the living world around him -- animals, birds, flowers, and people -- treating them with understanding and compassion. He was well known for his acerbic wit, though he frequently described himself as 'a big softy at heart'; both these qualities are apparent in the poem 'Responsibility': '
They left the horse standing for two days 

with a shattered leg 

till the vet signed a paper. 

Then they dug a hole beside it 

and put a bullet in its skull.... 

This could have been worse only 

if they had had to wait 

till the horse signed a paper. 

Some day they'll dig a hole 

near enough to the vet's bed, for him to know it's there. 

' Here, the pronounced rhythmic patterning and the paralleling of the death of the horse with that of the vet is typical of MacCaig's free verse of this period. 
MacCaig was always a cheerful, sociable man and during the 1940s and 1950s he frequented the various bars in Rose Street, Edinburgh, where he could be found talking with fellow Scottish poets -- Hugh MacDiarmid, Sorley Maclean, Sidney Goodsir Smith, Tom Scott, George Mackay Brown, and others. He was later to become acquainted with Iain Crichton Smith and, later still, struck up a warm friendship with Seamus Heaney. Though he is best-known as a poet, MacCaig also delighted in music, both classical and traditional Scottish; he had a good singing voice and played the violin more than competently. He frequently claimed that he preferred music to poetry and that Bach, in particular, was a source of great solace to him. 
As MacCaig grew older and the deaths of friends such as MacDiarmid and Angus MacLeod occurred, his poems began to reflect ideas of old age and death. In his summers away from Edinburgh in the wild countryside of Sutherland, MacLeod was his dearest friend and MacCaig found his loss hard to bear. The sequence of 'Poems for Angus' in 'The Equal Skies' (1980) comprises some of his most beautiful and moving work. They voice the simplicity of his memories of MacLeod, represented in 'In Memoriam' as 'a top branch... on the biggest tree in my garden', which, though broken off, remains held up by the 'living branches'; his feeling of loss is intensified in 'Angus's Dog': '
in that blank no-time, no-place where 

you can't even greet your master. 

' During the 1970s and 1980s MacCaig was much in demand to read his poetry to audiences of students, schoolchildren, and others. He was a popular reader, presenting his poems with a laconic wit and a wealth of funny stories to accompany them. One of his most potent weapons was the pregnant pause; his audience could hardly bear to wait until he came out with his punchline. He was a tall, loose-framed man, very imposing as he stood on a rostrum or sat on a classroom desk; his craggy features, the sometimes rather wistful set of his mouth, and, as he grew older, his silver flyaway hair gave him an endearing air of authority and his audiences, particularly the children, loved him. Asked about his methods of composition, he would tell them with appropriate dramatic gestures that his poems came straight out of his head onto the page and, miming screwing up a piece of paper and throwing it into a waste-paper basket, that he never laboured over his poems; if they were unsatisfactory he destroyed them. A glance through his 'Collected Poems', however, will show that he certainly hoarded some of them for many years; of the hundred or so new poems in that book, twenty-seven date from the 1950s. 
MacCaig's well-known public trademark was the cigarette held in his left hand as he explained or disputed a point. He repeatedly claimed that it took him two 'fags' to write a poem. When he tried to give up smoking, he found that his muse disappeared. He was ordered for medical reasons to stop smoking, but despite many efforts it proved impossible. 
In the last fifteen years or so of his life MacCaig received considerable public recognition, with honorary doctorates from Stirling, Edinburgh, St Andrews, and Dundee. In 1979 he was made an OBE and in 1986 received the queen's medal for poetry. Though he wrote neither in Gaelic nor in Scots, MacCaig was one of the most influential of the Scottish poets writing in the second half of the twentieth century. Writing in English, he nevertheless celebrated the Scottish landscape, Scottish characters, Scottish music, Scottish culture. He will remain a major Scottish poet. 
Norman MacCaig never really recovered from his wife's death in 1990. Three years later he had a slight stroke and was no longer able to write. Early in 1996 he had another stroke and was taken to Astley Ainslie Hospital, Edinburgh, where he died on 23 January. He was cremated on 29 January at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh. 
Even though MacCaig always declared that he threw away all the poems he did not intend to publish, his son, Ewen McCaig, discovered after his death a mass of unpublished material, now part of the Norman MacCaig archive, Edinburgh University. 


@@@@@


doc= 60468


Scott, Alexander Mackie (1920-1989), poet and scholar of Scottish literature, was born on 28 November 1920 in a two-roomed cottage at 13 Western Road in the Woodside suburb of Aberdeen, the only child of Alexander Mackie Scott (1894-1976), a power-loom tuner, and his wife, Magdalina Cheyne (1895-1988), daughter of Robert Adams and his wife, Elizabeth. His parents were both Scottish; his forebears were craftsmen and farmers from the rural north-east of Scotland. 
While Scott was at the Kittybrewster primary school in Aberdeen, he began to imitate stories he found in children's comic magazines. Between 1932 and 1935 this led to his creating in longhand his own weekly magazine, complete with serial stories and hand-drawn illustrations. In the tales he devised, fantasies of buccaneers, detectives, and 'redskins' were juxtaposed with versions of the English public-school life depicted by Frank Richards and others. These last retained their interest for him (he was working on a study of Richards before he died). He also wrote much verse in English following Romantic and Victorian models. 'The Red Planet Calling Red Circle' was his first publication, appearing in the 'Hotspur' (13 July 1935) while he was at the Aberdeen central school. When he entered Aberdeen University in 1939, Scott was not only writing copious amounts of poetry but had attempted a novel, and was writing anti-war stories and dramatic sketches as well as material for school and undergraduate reviews. He started to read contemporary poetry while a first-year undergraduate, and discovered Burns during summer 1940. 
In autumn 1939 Scott joined the Peace Pledge Union, but his pacificism crumbled in the crisis of Britain's isolation at the beginning of the Second World War; he was not called up until November 1941. He was commissioned in the Royal Artillery but transferred to the Gordon Highlanders. He landed on D-day with the 5th/7th Gordon Highlanders. Wounded at the battle of Falaise Gap in August 1944, he returned to duty and won the Military Cross for his conduct in leading a company attack during the battle of the Reichswald Forest on 8 February 1945. He married Catherine Goodall ('b'. 1920), a schoolteacher, on 10 May 1944. They had two sons, Crombie and Ewan. 
After the war Scott returned to Aberdeen University to complete his degree in English language and literature, and graduated in 1947 with first-class honours. Scott's commitment to Scottish literature developed during the later years of the war: an unpublished poem suggests that he was reading Hugh MacDiarmid in barracks in Germany before being demobbed, and his concluding post-war years as an undergraduate consolidated his knowledge of Scottish verse through the ages. He began writing verse in Scots during the war, and thereafter wrote in both Scots and English; he claimed that the choice of language for a new poem was dictated by the language of the first line which came to him. 
While completing his degree, Scott was briefly an editor of the 'North-East Review', an Aberdeen-based literary journal in which some of his earliest published poems appeared. This was the first of his several editorships of small magazines, a field in which his contribution was individual, important, and distinguished. He was offered, but refused, a scholarship to Merton College, Oxford. His first academic employment was as assistant lecturer in English at the University of Edinburgh (1947-8), but within a year he was a lecturer in Scottish literature at the University of Glasgow, and he lived in Glasgow for the rest of his life. 
Scott's first collection of poetry, 'The Latest in Elegies', appeared in 1949, and thereafter he was seen as one of a group of poets sometimes referred to as the Lallans Makars, associated with MacDiarmid's programme for a nationalist literary revival. A brief 'Selected Poems' followed in 1950. 'Mouth Music' came out in 1954 but he wrote few poems in the mid-1950s, and apparently none at all between 1957 and 1965. His impulse to write was subject to hiatuses which he found distressing. 
Much of Scott's creative energy in the 1950s was directed towards drama. The short comedy 'The Last Time I Saw Paris' won a Festival of Britain award for verse drama in 1951, and several other plays gained him lesser awards in the 1950s. In all, seventeen plays can be traced, many written for radio. Most are in Scots, several in verse. Three are full-length stage plays and were produced by the Glasgow Citizens' Theatre. They include 'Right Royal' (produced in 1954) with which he had a notable success. Later Citizens' productions of his work were less successful, though still attractive to popular audiences. He turned away from the stage, however, believing that commercial theatre in Scotland no longer provided sufficient encouragement for distinctively Scottish drama. 
Scott returned to poetry from the mid-sixties until the early 1980s, when his poetry petered out again. His work from this period includes 'Cantrips' (1968) and 'Selected Poems, 1943-1974' (1975). One of his most frequently anthologized poems is 'Coronach', written in memory of fallen comrades on the second anniversary of D-day. It is characteristic of him in its use of Scots to combine terse, tough manliness with tender emotion. It is, however, uncharacteristic of him in being a war poem: this successful soldier wrote surprisingly few poems reflecting his wartime experiences, and allowed only a few of those poems to see print. Among his generation of Scottish poets he was one of the most craftsman-like, producing poems reflecting a care for traditional features of sound and form. He presents himself in many of his poems in Scots as a downright, plain-speaking common man who nevertheless is compassionate towards the follies and sufferings of humankind. He is also seen as placing a premium on intellectual and aesthetic values. His characteristic voice leans towards the satirical and the humorous, perhaps best exemplified in 'Scotched', the famous sequence of tersely hilarious two-line squibs evoking typical Scottish attitudes on a medley of topics, such as 'Scotch Passion'. Many of his best poems are satirical or critical responses to aspects of life and popular culture after the 1950s. On the other hand, he produced love poems of great tenderness. Most of his virtues as a poet are found in his long and subtle poem on his native city, 'Heart of Stone', the writing of which brought him a new creative impetus in the mid-1960s. 
As an academic Scott contributed immensely to the emergence of Scottish literature as a subject in universities and schools (he was made the first head of the department of Scottish literature at Glasgow in 1971). His major contribution to research came early in his career. His work on the poet William Soutar was particularly important. He produced an edition of Soutar's diaries, 'Diaries of a Dying Man' (1954), and a study of the poet, published in 1958. He also produced selected editions of the poems of his own sixteenth-century namesake (1952), and one of the poems of William Jeffrey (1951). He was a gifted anthologist, and at different stages in his career edited important small journals, including 'The Scots Review' (1950-51) and 'The Saltire Review' (1954-8). He was joint editor of 'The Scottish Review' (1980-85) and 'New Writing Scotland' (1983-6). He was skilled in spotting talent in emergent writers, and his encouragement and nurturing of these were not the least of his contributions to the literary life of Scotland. His vigorous-minded critical comment found regular outlet in the press and on radio. Above all, he was a memorable university teacher, inspiring generations of students, several of whom became academics in Scottish literature. 
Alexander Scott was tall and striking in appearance, his strong features crowned by a profusion of long hair which he never lost. His forceful personality and strong opinions made him a powerful presence in committees, and his energy and commitment were decisive in establishing a number of fledgeling literary and academic projects throughout his career. His combativeness was both valuable and a drawback: in the small world of Scottish literary and cultural politics he made some enemies. It may also have contributed to his failure to be awarded a personal chair; his university rank was that of reader when he retired. 
In 1977 Scott was diagnosed as suffering from emphysema, which gradually worsened; he retired as head of department in 1983. He died of lung cancer on 14 September 1989 at Stobhill Hospital in Glasgow, and was cremated at Maryhill on 16 September. He was survived by his wife. His ashes were scattered in the O'Dell Garden, King's College, Aberdeen, on 2 December. A large collection of poetry, 'Incantations: Poems and Diversions' was unpublished at his death; it was incorporated into the 'Collected Poems' (1994). Much unpublished and uncollected verse remains. Despite his intermittent career as a poet, he remains, nevertheless, one of the leading poets in Scotland to build on Hugh MacDiarmid's achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 60469


Urquhart, Frederick Burrows (1912-1995), writer, was born on 12 July 1912 at 8 Palmerston Place Lane, Edinburgh, first among the three sons of Frederick Burrows Urquhart (died 1958), a chauffeur, and Agnes, 'nee' Harrower. His father was unfit for war service and became in turn chauffeur to a series of wealthy men. Urquhart's childhood was spent in Edinburgh, Granton, Perthshire, Wigtownshire, and Wardie. He thus attended the village schools of Torryburn, Styx, Perthshire, and Kirkcolm, before progressing to Stranraer High School and Broughton Academy, Edinburgh. The last he disliked, and he left school at fifteen to work in an Edinburgh bookshop, thus beginning a lifelong professional connection with books; he claimed that this was the best university for an aspiring writer. An avid film and theatre fan, he nourished ambitions in both these directions, as he related in his memoir of his early days, 'My many splendoured pavilion' (1979), but above all, in his seven years in the bookshop, he wrote. His first two novels, aside from being handwritten and betraying inexperience, were marked by a strong homosexual interest and were repeatedly refused by publishers; they remained unpublished, in manuscript, in the National Library of Scotland into the twenty-first century. His first published novel was 'Time will Knit' (1938). This was followed by 'The Ferret was Abraham's Daughter' (1949) and 'Jezebel's Dust' (1951). The first of his novels to deal with a homosexual theme was 'Palace of Green Days', not published until 1979. It was in many ways autobiographical and the first of a projected series that did not materialize. It treats the childhoods of a young girl and her brother, the children of a chauffeur. The sister is film- and theatre-crazy, and the brother notably drawn to sewing doll's dresses rather than to toy trains and guns -- definitely 'feminine' in his tastes. The book treats this apparently cross-gender feeling -- and a fair amount of child sexual abuse -- unsensationally, even matter-of-factly. The promised sequel, with the boy reaching puberty, was never published; Urquhart felt that an audience was not yet ready. 
Fred Urquhart is best known and most widely admired among a small body of critical cognoscenti for his short stories. Short-story writers are too easily overlooked, and Urquhart was very seriously neglected by the larger book-reading public. He was successful from the thirties to the sixties and prominent in all the fashionable literary magazines of the time, excelling both in pathos and comedy, but almost none of his stories remained long in print. Alexander Reid described him as 'Scotland's leading short story writer of the century' (Roberts, vii). Stevie Smith and others drew attention to the unusual understanding and effectiveness of his treatment of women and to the polish of his 'diamond style' (ibid.). 
It was early in his career that Urquhart earned tributes to his understanding of unhappy or frustrated women -- the girl dying of TB, deserted by her lover, in 'We never died in winter'; or 'Sweat', where the girl tries to disguise the effects of working in a basement sweatshop only to disgust her admirer by the crudity and ineffectiveness of her cheap perfume. 
Urquhart was living in Cupar at the start of the Second World War, and his observations of relations between the local girls and incoming Polish soldiers informed his subject matter in 'The laundry girl and the Pole' and a number of other works. But the war, in which both his brothers served, clarified for Urquhart his (non-religious) conscientious objection to fighting. As a result he was sent as farm labourer and secretary to Bent Farm, Laurencekirk. He lost 3 stone over four years there, no small matter for a man of his slight build. Auchencairn was his fictional name for the town in the Howe of the Mearns where he set his fine stories of the agricultural north-east of Scotland -- such as 'The prisoners', 'The red stot', and 'The last sister' -- which have borne comparison with Grassic Gibbon and Jessie Kesson. In 1967-8 Rupert Hart-Davis published a two-volume 'collected' edition of the stories (in fact generously selected) entitled 'The Dying Stallion' and 'The Ploughing Match'. 
As Graeme Roberts has pointed out, later treatments of the theme of romantic yearning tend to be more 'robustly comic' (Roberts, ix), like the wall-eyed servant lass in 'Beautiful music' with her dung-splashed legs and fingers like 'red rationed sausages'. But Gillian Ferguson points out how completely Urquhart could capture both admirable and unattractive sides of Scottish womanly submissiveness: 'He raises what might seem the surrender of the ego, or unattractive acquiescence to powerlessness, to nobility, wisdom' (Macpherson, 29). The same is true of his treatment of children, old people, the desperate, and the lonely. He supplies an important documentary insight into the mid-twentieth-century period and especially civilian life during the war, whether writing about pub life or family life, Polish soldiers or the brides of American servicemen, the impact of the new National Health Service, the Co-op, the pictures, or the erring milkman. Despite his long residence in England, Urquhart told Hugh Macpherson: 'On the whole I still think in Scots, and very often what I have done is I've found a situation in England and transferred it up to Scotland for the story' (ibid., 28). 
After the war Urquhart gravitated to London's Soho, where he met and enjoyed a sexually more liberated society than he had known in Scotland. He resumed his career in the world of books, he was a scout for Walt Disney and a reader for a literary agency, for MGM, and for a number of publishers. He also edited a number of books on varied subjects, from a cartoon biography and a book of horses to several collections of short stories. 
In 1946 Urquhart met his life partner, Peter Wyndham Allen (1908-1990), who had been a dancer. In 'Forty-three years: a benediction', written after Allen's death, he finally felt able to speak about their love, celebrating their life together in a 'happy homosexual marriage', first in London and latterly in a cottage in the middle of Ashdown Forest. This was an idyll in which Urquhart was writer, editor, and earner, and for the most part Allen was carer and kept house. Early in the 1990s Urquhart, now diabetic and subject to minor strokes, returned to Scotland to live in Musselburgh, near his brother Morris. But undaunted he proceeded to write more stories, add polish to the autobiography that he had been long composing, and at last attempt a mature, open, and sexually complex novel; this he developed from a short story that he had published, 'Robert/Hilda', which can be found in Carl MacDougall's anthology of Scottish short stories, 'The Devil and the Giro' (1989). It begins: 'After she died Robert Greenlees took to dressing up in his wife's clothes'. Robert and Hilda had led an apparently harmonious married life but 'he'd been dominated enough all his life by women, and he wanted a change'. Recapitulation of the marriage involves a masterly compressed social history, after which the narrative returns to a present where Robert, now regularly dressed and made-up as a woman, persuades his son to take him out to a pub. There a contemporary, George, admiringly buys Robert/Hilda a drink, and by the end of the story the two are planning to set up house together. Once Urquhart felt free to write about eccentric sexual preference he did so convincingly, although again unsensationally and matter-of-factly. 
Urquhart died in Roodlands General Hospital, Haddington, East Lothian, on 2 December 1995. On his death his papers were deposited in Edinburgh University Library, and it is to be hoped that among these will be found a final version of 'Robert/Hilda and George', the novel. Its publication would be an important vindication of a very neglected Scottish fiction writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 60471


Beaton, Norman Lugard (1934-1994), actor, was born on 31 October 1934 in Georgetown, British Guiana, the son of William Solomon Beaton (died 1983), civil servant, and his wife, Ada, 'nee' Mackintosh (died 1962). He was educated at St Stephen's School and Queen's College, Georgetown, and the Government Teachers' Training College, where he later became a deputy headmaster. In 1958, at the height of the calypso craze, he became calypso champion of British Guiana. He released twenty-four singles with the Four Bees, a close vocal harmony group he formed in Georgetown, and had several hits. One of the singers with the group was Gloria Moshette, a former darkroom technician; they married in 1958 and had a son, Jayme ('b'. 1958), and a daughter, Kim ('b'. 1960), both born in British Guiana. 
Beaton left British Guiana for Britain in 1960. He was soon joined by his wife, Gloria, and later by their two children; a third child, Jeremy ('b'. 1962), was born in England. After postgraduate studies at London University's Institute of Education, Beaton became a teacher in Liverpool. The success of 'Jack of Spades', his first stage production at Liverpool's Everyman Theatre, for which he composed the music, encouraged him to give up teaching and become a full-time actor. His reputation grew steadily. He progressed from regional theatre to leading roles at the Old Vic, the National Theatre (where he played Angelo in a black cast version of Shakespeare's 'Measure for Measure' in 1981), and the Royal Court Theatre. Apart from Shakespeare, his stage roles also encompassed Pinter, Beckett, Gilbert and Sullivan, Brecht, Moliere, and pantomime. In 1974 he started the Black Theatre of Brixton, which was instrumental in developing contemporary black theatre in Britain. For years he acted in plays by a range of black dramatists, including Michael Abbensetts, C. L. R. James, Mustapha Matura, Derek Walcott, and Edgar White. 
Beaton also became one of Britain's leading film and television actors. For his performance in 'Black Joy' (1977) he was named best film actor by the Variety Club of Great Britain, the first black British actor to be honoured with a film award. Nine years later he starred in 'Playing Away', with a screenplay by the black writer Caryl Phillips. He gave an outstanding performance as the quiet but determined captain of an all-black cricket team invited to a challenge match against a rural Suffolk side. Among his most memorable television successes were 'The Fosters' (1976-7), 'Black Christmas' (1977), 'Empire Road' (1978-9), 'Nice' (1984), 'Big George is Dead' (1987), and 'Little Napoleons' (1993), but his most memorable role was as the manic barber's shop owner in the long-running situation comedy series 'Desmond's'. With sharply observed scripts by a young black writer called Trix Worrell, 'Desmond's' ran from 1989 to 1994 on Channel 4. This show was described as an African-Caribbean equivalent of America's 'Cosby Show' and, as a result of its popularity in America, in 1991 African-American television star Bill Cosby invited Beaton to make a couple of guest appearances in the 'Cosby Show'. Beaton readily accepted a role as a cricket-loving doctor, and Cosby was so taken by the actor that he wore Beaton's gift of a 'Desmond's' baseball cap in the show. 
Beaton's first marriage ended in divorce, and in 1969 he had a third son, William, with Jane Atto, with whom he briefly ran a restaurant in London. In 1976 he married Leah Garady, who adopted the children of his first marriage; but this marriage too broke up, and in 1978 he formed a more lasting relationship with Jane Cash. His autobiography, 'Beaton but Unbowed' (1986), detailed several other, shorter-lived, relationships. 
Towards the end of his life, Beaton reflected on the roles available to black actors and actresses: 'My own view is that what you've seen me in are the only roles that are available for black men in this country, and they don't really reflect our views, our understanding of life, our intelligence, or where we are coming from. In that respect I would say that Caryl Phillips' scenario for 'Playing Away' did get around that particular hurdle. It lived up to nearly all the expectations that black people ought to be living up to.... But what I find difficult to come to terms with is the absence of a heroic figure like Paul Robeson in all the work I've done. There is no writer on that scale, or in those grand, magnificent terms for film and television about a black figure who we all admire or aspire to be like. And I don't know when our people are going to actually start saying 'We are terrific!' and start writing something wonderful about just being us. (Pines, 118-19)' Beaton died on 13 December 1994 in Georgetown, in the land of his birth, Guyana, when he collapsed in a friend's arms hours after going home to die. Carmen Munroe, who played Beaton's wife in 'Desmond's', told 'The Voice': 'He put his whole life and soul into any part he was asked to play and never spared himself. He worked at his craft and produced brilliance. His particular blend of comic energy and professional application will be missed most keenly in the future when excellence is sought. ('The Voice', 20 Dec 1994)' Shortly after his death Channel 4 screened 'Shooting Stars' in its 'Black Christmas' season, with a memorable appearance by Beaton, reading a sonnet by Shakespeare. 


@@@@@


doc= 60481


Jay, Douglas Patrick Thomas, Baron Jay (1907-1996), politician, was born at the Tower House, Plum Lane, Woolwich, London, on 23 March 1907, the son of Edward Aubrey Hastings Jay, barrister, and his wife, Isobel Violet, 'nee' Craigie. His father represented Woolwich on the London county council as a Municipal Reformer (conservative), and was chairman of the education committee. He was educated at Winchester College and was a scholar of New College, Oxford, where he obtained first-class honours in 'literae humaniores' in 1929. He was a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, from 1930 to 1937 and from 1968 until his death. On 30 September 1933 he married Margaret Christian (Peggy) Garnett ['see below'], his neighbour in Well Walk, Hampstead, and a student at Somerville College, Oxford; they had two sons and two daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1972, in which year he married Mary Lavinia, daughter of Hugh Lewis Thomas. 
After leaving Oxford Jay worked as a journalist successively on 'The Times', 'The Economist', and the 'Daily Herald', where he was City editor from 1937 to 1940. In the 1930s he was active, together with Hugh Dalton, Hugh Gaitskell, and Evan Durbin, in developing policies for the next Labour government. During the Second World War he was a temporary civil servant at the Ministry of Supply (1940-43) and the Board of Trade (1943-5). On the election of the Labour government in July 1945, he became personal assistant to the prime minister, Clement Attlee. He was elected MP for Battersea North in July 1946 and held the seat until his retirement from the House of Commons at the 1983 general election. He was economic secretary to the Treasury from 1947 to 1950 and financial secretary to the Treasury from 1950 to 1951. He was sworn of the privy council in 1951. He entered the cabinet as president of the Board of Trade in 1964, and held the post until 1967. A politician of unquestionable integrity, and of the highest intellectual calibre, though lacking in personal charisma, Jay was significant in the history of the Labour Party for three reasons. The first was his attempt to reconcile socialism with Keynesianism. Second, he exercised considerable influence on his close friend and fellow Wykehamist Hugh Gaitskell, chancellor of the exchequer from 1950 to 1951 and leader of the Labour Party from 1955 to 1963. Third, he was probably the most consistent socialist opponent of British participation in any form of European economic integration involving supranational institutions. 
The high unemployment of the 1920s and 1930s was socialism's best recruiting sergeant. Keynes's 'General Theory' (1936) was a threat to the Labour Party because it purported to demonstrate that full employment could be realized by managing capitalism, and without recourse to socialism. Some socialists, such as G. D. H. Cole and Aneurin Bevan, doubted that Keynes's demonstration was foolproof. Others, such as Evan Durbin, questioned whether Keynes's ideas could be implemented without serious inflationary side-effects. Jay, in his book 'The Socialist Case', first published in 1937, accepted Keynes's argument that full employment could be achieved by managing 'total effective demand'. He therefore emphasized equality as the principal argument for socialism. 'In most modern societies one of the chief reasons why the poor are very poor is that the rich are very rich... poverty cannot be removed without some mitigation of inequality' (D. Jay, 'The Socialist Case', 1947, 3). While supporting the need for the nationalization of coal and the major utilities, he thought that socialists were in error in their obsession with nationalization: 'Socialists have been mistaken in making ownership of the means of production instead of ownership of inherited property the test of socialization.... It is not the ownership of the means of production as such, but ownership of large inherited incomes, which ought to be eliminated. (ibid., 195)' Unlike most other contemporary socialists, he valued the activity of the individual entrepreneur. 'Great entrepreneurs... are of a value so great that it would be impossible to overpay them' (ibid., 116). Later Jay came to accept that he had underestimated the inflationary consequences of demand management. But in his rejection of nationalization as the core of socialism, he anticipated later socialist revisionists. 
There were three young economists in the Attlee government who acquired great influence owing mainly to the declining health of Sir Stafford Cripps, who, in November 1947, had succeeded Dalton as chancellor of the exchequer. The three were Harold Wilson, Hugh Gaitskell, and Douglas Jay. They regarded full employment as the principal achievement of the Labour government but were sensitive to the threat constituted by the dollar shortage, by the liberalization of trade under American pressure, and by the 1948 American recession. Jay, together with Gaitskell, played a leading role in persuading the Attlee government, including a reluctant chancellor, to devalue sterling in September 1949. They had concluded that the UK's lack of competitiveness could prejudice full employment and that economic planning could not operate sufficiently rapidly to prevent it. Wilson, they both thought, played an equivocal role in pressing the case for devaluation, and this was one source of the distrust subsequently manifested towards Wilson by both Jay and Gaitskell. Gaitskell and Jay also attempted to devise a system of international economic relations that would defend full employment in Britain against the impact of external events. There would be two worlds, one based on the sterling area (which could for this purpose include western Europe) and the other based on the dollar area. The use of gold and dollars would be permitted only in relations with the dollar area. Unfortunately for their scheme, western Europe exhibited a higher tolerance of unemployment than was considered politically acceptable in the UK. The deflationary policies pursued by western European countries resulted in surpluses in their trade with the UK, which they wished discharged in gold and dollars, of which Britain was desperately short. This refusal to co-operate with Jay's plan was a source of his deep and lifelong hostility to economic integration with western Europe. Jay believed that, to guarantee full employment, the UK must retain control of its own economic destiny, including the right to limit the import of manufactured goods whenever the balance of payments required it. 
On 2 June 1950 Jay represented the chancellor, Stafford Cripps, who was on holiday, at the cabinet meeting that finally decided to reject British participation in the Schuman plan for the creation of a European Coal and Steel Community. The previous day an ultimatum had been received from Paris demanding to know by the evening of 2 June whether or not the British would join the negotiations to establish the community. Jay's resentment at French impertinence emerges in his autobiography, published thirty years later: 'The ultimatum is not explicable except on the assumption that the French were determined to keep future moves for so-called 'European Unity' under French control, and exclude the British at least until such time as the whole arrangement had been so devised as to promote French interests and where possible to damage this country. (Jay, 200)' The French ultimatum followed two weeks of telegraphic exchanges during which they had attempted to persuade the British to take part and during which no British minister had thought it worthwhile to cross the channel to determine whether British anxieties could be assuaged. But, for Jay, the French objective had been to damage Britain. Jay's antipathy to European economic integration never softened. He was an influence in determining Gaitskell's opposition to Macmillan's 1961 application to join the EEC on the terms that appeared to be emerging. As president of the Board of Trade, he opposed the 1967 decision of the Wilson government to apply for membership. Wilson removed him from office, ostensibly on the grounds of age but probably even more because of his implacable opposition to the British application. Three months later General de Gaulle delivered his second 'Non'. Jay had served three leaders of the Labour Party, Attlee, Gaitskell, and Wilson. For the first two he had nothing but admiration, for the third little but contempt. Thereafter, whether during the governments of Heath or of Wilson, Jay remained adamantly in the forefront of the opponents of British membership of the EEC; he was chairman of the Common Market Safeguards Campaign from 1970 to 1977. In his view the argument against membership had been reinforced by the community's adoption of the common agricultural policy, because it would cut Britain off from cheap sources of food, including from the Commonwealth, and thus make British manufacture less competitive. 
Jay was one of the intellectual leaders of Labour's right wing. After Labour's defeat at the 1959 general election, he bravely, or perhaps insensitively, speculated publicly about the desirability of changing the party's name in order to transform its proletarian image. He thereby incurred deep left-wing hostility. It was one idea which did not command Gaitskell's assent, though Gaitskell was suspected of encouraging Jay to fly the kite. One effect of Jay's inflexible rejection of the EEC was to divide, and weaken, the right of the Labour Party. When, in 1981, many 'European' Gaitskellites defected from the Labour Party to form the Social Democratic Party, Jay was not one of them: his own concerns about the direction of Labour Party policy in the early 1980s were submerged by the principal passion of his political life, to keep Britain free of European entanglements. 
Jay was created a life peer in 1987. He died in Minster Lovell, Oxfordshire, where he lived, on 6 March 1996 and was buried in the churchyard there. He was survived by both wives. 
Jay's first wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 60482


Smith, Brian Abel- (1926-1996), economist and social policy analyst, was born on 6 November 1926 at 24 Kensington Court Gardens, London, the younger son of Brigadier-General Lionel Abel Abel-Smith (1870-1946), officer in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Genevieve Lilac, 'nee' Walsh, daughter of Robert Walsh, of Armagh. Through his kinsman Sir Henry Abel-Smith, who was married to Queen Mary's niece Lady May Cambridge, he was distantly related to the royal family. Friends wickedly introduced him as twenty-seventh in line to the crown. Along with his erect bearing and extraordinarily acute command of the skills of diplomacy, that connection seemed to make his embrace of socialism all the more impressive and influential. 
Abel-Smith was educated at Haileybury College from 1940 to 1945, before entering the army as a private. He was commissioned in the Oxford and Buckinghamshire light infantry in 1946 and was aide-de-camp to the military governor of the British zone in Austria during 1947-8. He then entered Clare College, Cambridge, where he studied economics from 1948 to 1951. He remained at Cambridge for a further two years to study the cost of the National Health Service (NHS); he was awarded his doctorate in 1955. He served his research apprenticeship from 1953 to 1955 at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, and at the London School of Economics (LSE) with Professor Richard Titmuss, collecting evidence about the cost of the NHS for the Guillebaud committee. His academic career at the LSE took him from assistant lecturer in 1955 to lecturer in 1957, reader in social administration in 1961, and full professor in 1965. He retired in 1991. In 1968-70 he became senior adviser to the secretary of state for social services, Dick Crossman, was reappointed to a similar post in 1974-8 by Barbara Castle and then David Ennals, and in 1978-9 was the special adviser to the secretary of state for the environment, Peter Shore. During 1960-73 he served on government committees dealing with both health and social security, played a key practical role on the boards of regional and teaching hospital management committees, such as St Thomas's Hospital, and from 1956 until his death was consultant and expert adviser to the World Health Organization (WHO) in its work in many countries. 
Some great people are insufficiently appreciated in their lifetime -- and among them are those who avoid the limelight quite deliberately. Abel-Smith matched sheer brilliance and assurance with genuine modesty. His contributions to international health and health services, social policy, government administration, and politics read like the considerable careers of four separate people, equally intriguing and displaying enviable versatility. 
First, health: it was the NHS that earned Abel-Smith's particular devotion. More than anyone he explained the reasons for its existence -- and how it had to be adapted to new circumstances. His early books, 'The Cost of the Health Service in England and Wales', with Richard Titmuss (1956), 'A History of the Nursing Profession' (1960), 'Paying for Health Services' (1963), and 'The Hospitals, 1800-1948' (1964), established a formidable case for a comprehensive public service and remained among the best books on the subject that any student could read. His contribution to better health services was sustained for another thirty years. Twenty-five of his 37 books, and 98 of his 166 published articles and papers were on health. Influential examples from his middle and later years were: 'An International Study of Health Expenditure' (1967), 'Value for Money in Health Services' (1976), 'National Health Service: the First 30 Years' (1978), 'The Organisation, Financing and Cost of Health Care in the European Community' (1979), 'Planning the Finances of the Health Sector' (1984), and 'An Introduction to Health: Policy, Planning and Financing' (1994). 
Abel-Smith's work for the Guillebaud committee marked the start of the unrivalled lifelong contribution he made to improvements in health care. Set up by the Conservative government in 1952, this committee, chaired by Claude Guillebaud, an economist who had been Iain MacLeod's tutor at Cambridge, was asked to investigate what at the time was believed to be the uncontrolled rising cost imposed on the exchequer by the NHS and whether this could be avoided while maintaining an adequate service. Abel-Smith showed that, far from rising, the cost of the NHS was in fact falling as a share of gross national product. If the same share of national resources had been devoted to the NHS in 1953 as in its first full year of 1949, expenditure would have been $67 million, or one-sixth higher. The committee confessed themselves unable to make a case for new or higher charges. Instead they recommended increases in expenditure, including capital investment to improve the service. 'In large measure', as one authority testified, 'Guillebaud spiked the Treasury guns' (Timmins, 207). 
Abel-Smith's investigation has been described as 'a minor classic of modern social analysis' (Webster, 207). It provided the basis for his subsequent book with Richard Titmuss (also drawn from Abel-Smith's doctorate), 'The Cost of the National Health Service in England and Wales' (1951). His work on health became vigorously cross-national and, through the WHO, he visited a stream of poor countries -- starting with Mauritius in the 1950s and ending with Indonesia in 1995. This was matched during the same period by his repeated visits around Europe. He influenced overseas developments in health care even more than in his own country. After his death the Mauritius government issued a set of commemorative stamps to mark his contribution to the establishment of the country's health service. 
Second, Abel-Smith's contribution to social policy: as an economist he also developed a parallel interest in anti-poverty policies, starting when writing his doctorate on health at Cambridge University. This shaped his contribution to social policy. He began to write extensively, sometimes with Peter Townsend, on poverty, pensions, and social security. They collaborated in writing together as well as independently for eighteen years on these three themes. Their book 'The Poor and the Poorest' (1965) has been highlighted as marking 'the rediscovery of poverty' in the UK after people had come to believe that the introduction of post-war welfare measures had resolved pre-war poverty and many other long-standing social problems. The book was based on a new method of constructing a poverty line to track the value of government policies. The method was to specify and assemble the weekly rates of social assistance to which families of different size and composition were entitled as an implicit measure of what the state actually defined as the income required to meet their needs, and then compare these with their actual income (and expenditure). By that standard poverty had increased in the 1950s. The extent of poverty was also shown to be larger than that described by Seebohm Rowntree, in his third book on the subject, 'Poverty and the Welfare State' (1951). Rowntree's conclusions were found to be over-optimistic and his data less reliable than in his previous investigations of the subject. Abel-Smith and Townsend's 'The Poor and the Poorest' was not just a report drawn from official sources about trends in poverty. It was credited with influencing Labour government thinking in the 1960s and 1970s on social policies generally. 
Abel-Smith had that rare ability of combining penetrating mastery of Keynesian (and later monetarist or neo-liberal) theory with detailed understanding of how the welfare state works in administrative practice. He embodied all the strengths of what was taught about the welfare state at the London School of Economics. His early contribution, 'Whose welfare state?', to a book called 'Conviction' (1958) had as much of an impact in later years as it did when it was published. 
Abel-Smith's wider command of social policy included legal institutions. His capacity for penetrating, indeed adventurous, analysis led to one of the most original contributions to the role of law of the twentieth century. His book with Robert Stevens, 'Lawyers and the Courts' (1967), was a sociological study of the English legal system from 1750 to 1965 which showed its social origins and mode of control and helped to make an unanswerable case for root-and-branch modernization. The sequel, 'In Search of Justice' (1968), demonstrated the failings of the legal system as a social service and, had the book attracted the attention it deserved, might have led to some of the changes still required in the early twenty-first century. 
Abel-Smith's third contribution, to government, was less well known than his contributions to academic social science, but none the less intriguing. Cabinet ministers grew to depend on his total discretion and, unusually for an academic, he earned glowing tributes from career civil servants. His top advisory appointments to successive cabinet ministers -- Dick Crossman, Barbara Castle, David Ennals, and Peter Shore -- provided glittering opportunities to influence legislation, but also had costs for his academic research career. He was also too much of a socialist to accept a life peerage. Barbara Castle paid high tribute to his experience and skill. He was 'the most outstanding' of the specialists on whom she could draw; and possessed 'an unparalleled mastery of the details of social policy' (Castle, 'Fighting All the Way', 461). 
Finally, in the political domain, as government adviser he concealed his regret at not entering a career in politics. He gave the Fabian Society a modern social influence and served it for many years as treasurer and vice-president. For thirty-one years, except when he was a senior adviser to government, and until they were both elected vice-presidents, he and Townsend were elected annually to the executive committee of the Fabian Society. He wrote influential pamphlets on social security and health and, with Peter Townsend in 1955, on the future of pensions: 'New Pensions for the Old'. This was picked up by Dick Crossman, who persuaded Hugh Gaitskell and later Harold Wilson to invite Abel-Smith and Townsend, with Richard Titmuss -- a trio described by the then Conservative minister of pensions as the Labour Party's 'skiffle group' -- to prepare a new detailed plan for national superannuation, published and endorsed at the party's annual conference in 1957. This was the basis of the bill that fell during its parliamentary committee stages when the election was called in 1970 and of the bill eventually passed in 1975. In 1970 Crossman described Abel-Smith as 'my closest personal friend... without [whom] I could have done very little in the past two years' (Crossman, 921). Although Titmuss had the policy judgement and Townsend had some of the necessary sociological knowledge of family living conditions, it was Abel-Smith who had the economic skill and dexterity to make this a visionary as well as a politically appealing plan for the late twentieth century. 
Abel-Smith had been picked out by Hugh Dalton, a former chancellor of the exchequer, as someone with a potentially glittering political future, especially in the Treasury. Nevertheless he refused to apply for safe seats, more because of the risk of public humiliation if he was discovered to be homosexual than anything else. In the less censorious climate of the 1990s and 2000s his political gifts would have been regarded as nationally precious. When he was working for Barbara Castle she happened to appoint Jack Straw as political adviser. 'Let me be clear', she said to Straw, 'I have appointed Brian for his brilliance. I have appointed you for your low cunning.' At the end of her cabinet career she wrote that 'Brian's steady, informed and perceptive help is a tower of strength' ('Castle Diaries', 721). 
As a socialist Abel-Smith appreciated the importance not just of creating public institutions but of standing by them through thick and thin in a practical capacity. He played a big part in the foundation of the Child Poverty Action Group. In the early 1960s he and Townsend, with others, had been giving early warnings about the extent of poverty among different groups, and they anticipated some of the findings of 'The Poor and the Poorest' in articles and pamphlets in 1962 and 1963. An apparent lack of response from the new Labour government in 1964 and early 1965 led to meetings between social workers and academics who were having everyday experiences interviewing and trying to help people in poverty. The decision to set up a campaigning group and to use the publication of 'The Poor and the Poorest' in December 1965 as a rallying message was taken. It was a build-up fomented by the two authors, working with others, including Tony Lynes and Harriet Wilson, during the critical months from February 1965 to the end of that year. Abel-Smith gave a speech to the Society of Friends at Toynbee Hall in March which crystallized intentions. Another practical role for Abel-Smith was as governor of St Thomas's Hospital for many years. He helped to shape the policies and management of this internationally famous teaching hospital. Most importantly he supported the cause of social policy at the London School of Economics, and played a key part administratively for more than three decades. By the end of the century the department of social policy had been ranked as the leading department in the country on the subject. 
Affordable but adequate welfare, detailed planning on behalf of the underdog, universal public services -- these were Abel-Smith's cardinal values, reflected in one of his last published essays, published in 'LSE on Social Science: a Centenary Anthology' (1996). Even more than Titmuss, he saved the National Health Service in its early days from savage spending cuts; it was his resolute defence of the advantages of making health a truly public service that saved the NHS from being weakened irretrievably. He was also the powerful figure, within government administration, behind a list of measures on pensions, disability allowances, and community care, as well as health services, which did much to make Britain a more settled and less divided country in the 1960s and 1970s than it later became. 
Abel-Smith's wit could be discomfiting, and could be applied with devastating, but also fundamentally constructive, effects. One evening in the 1960s he unravelled the reputation of Nightingale nurses with a group of them. They were never the same again. He revered Florence Nightingale but showed that some of her ideas had been applied dogmatically or misinterpreted both in her lifetime and later; and had led to a stiff and autocratic regime. To improve standards and obtain public support Florence Nightingale had 'popularised nursing as an occupation for ladies' (Abel-Smith, 'A History of the Nursing Profession', 1960, 241). She created upper-class missionaries who had to prove they were chaste, so that parents of other young ladies would encourage their daughters to become nurses. However, these ladies subsequently sought status and power for women like themselves instead of spreading the advantages of adequate basic one-year training, which Nightingale wanted to establish for women generally. They pulled up the ladder. They became medical mercenaries and imposed a socially distant and inflexible regime for patients in the mass. 
Deeply radical people have an ability to analyse individuals like Florence Nightingale, who are almost mythical figures, and turn them into recognizable human beings. Along with Barbara Wootton, Abel-Smith was a relatively neglected creative genius of post-war social policy in Britain. Perhaps this was because he was both a distinguished social scientist and a politician 'manque', perhaps because he was unreservedly loyal to Titmuss and to the department at the LSE leading the analysis of the maturing welfare state. 
Abel-Smith created a wonderful garden in his home in Kent with John Sarbutt, and was a fine cook, as well as skier and raconteur. He died of carcinoma of the pancreas at his home in London, 10 Denbigh Street, Westminster, on 4 April 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 60484


Ravenhill, William Lionel Desmond (1919-1995), geographer and historian of cartography, was born on 30 December 1919 in Carmarthen, the son of George Ravenhill ('c'.1880-1967), a master plumber, and his wife, Elizabeth (1893-1993). He had a brother and a sister. Ravenhill won a scholarship to Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Carmarthen, in 1930 and entered the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, in 1938 to read geography. His academic studies were interrupted in 1940 by war service as a Royal Air Force fighter pilot in Malta, Italy, Yugoslavia, and Egypt. After demobilization, he completed his degree and took a diploma in education; he was then appointed to an assistant lectureship at the University College of the South West, later the University of Exeter (1948), and was subsequently promoted to lecturer (1951) and senior lecturer (1962). He became professor of human geography in 1969 and Reardon Smith professor of geography and head of department in 1971, which post he held until his retirement in 1983; he also served the university as dean of its faculty of social studies and deputy vice-chancellor. 
Ravenhill inherited a department of geography which the university had allowed to languish in the 1960s -- that decade of great expansion elsewhere in higher education. But he had a clear, long-term vision for the future of what he saw very much as his department. He devoted himself to its development, won a series of new posts in the 1970s, and appointed wisely -- no fewer than eight of his then 'junior' colleagues (Ravenhill had a strictly hierarchical view of university departments and their personnel) later held professorial chairs. Always a very formal man, even somewhat austere and forbidding to the non-academic members of his department, Ravenhill delighted in the collegiality of the senior common room and lectured with the panache and sense of theatre so characteristic of university teachers of his generation. 
Despite a long life in, and great affection for, the south-west of England, Ravenhill remained fiercely proud of his Welsh roots. It is thus no surprise that his earliest research concerned the Celtic origins of settlement. His MA thesis for the University of Wales (1951) analysed early settlement in Devon, and his doctoral thesis for the University of London (1957) investigated early settlement sites in Devon and Cornwall and their influence on the modern settlement pattern. His seminal contribution to the historical geography of south-west England is his analysis of the settlement patterns, agrarian economy, and rural society of eleventh-century Cornwall, published as 'Cornwall' in 'The Domesday Geography of South-West England' (H. C. Darby and R. Welldon Finn, 1967). A series of articles in learned journals by Ravenhill in association with the archaeologist Lady Aileen Fox confirmed the academic reputation of this geographer among archaeologists. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London and in 1989 was appointed president of the Devon Archaeological Society. In his retirement he was co-editor with Roger Kain of a 'Historical Atlas of South-West England' (1999), a work which celebrates his lifelong commitment to the University of Exeter's regional mission. 
Significant though these works on the historical geography and archaeology of the south-west are, Ravenhill's particular and lasting academic contribution was to pioneer the history of cartography in Devon and Cornwall. It was within the close-knit academic world of cartography and map history where humanistic scholarship is combined with scientific analysis that he felt academically most comfortable. His 'Benjamin Donn: a Map of the County of Devon, 1765' (1965) was followed by 'John Norden's Manuscript Maps of Cornwall and its Nine Hundreds' (1972) and (with Oliver Padel) 'A Map of the County of Cornwall Newly Surveyed by Joel Gascoyne, 1699' (1991). These major studies are supported by numerous papers in local and national journals and more popular books such as 'Christopher Saxton's 16th-Century Maps: the Counties of England and Wales' (1992). Leukaemia, fought with great stoicism over a number of years, took Ravenhill from this life before he could bring all the strands of his cartographic work together in a much-hoped-for monograph on the cartographic history of south-west England. He died in the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Wonford, Exeter, on 9 October 1995, and was cremated on 16 October. His widow, Mary Rose, 'nee' Atkinson ('b'. 1928), whom he married on 5 August 1952, worked with him throughout his life, and following his death continued his work with publications on historical maps of the west country. They had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 60498


Fisher, June Rosemary (1929-1995), educationist and trade unionist, was born on 18 September 1929 at 18 Clover Street, Chatham, Kent, the only daughter of Harry Llewellyn Jones Lewis, haulage contractor, and his wife, Florence Edith, 'nee' Brewington (1907-1974). Following her mother's re-marriage in 1934, June Lewis took the surname of her stepfather, John Thomas Thorndycraft, by deed poll in 1937. She was educated at St Joseph's Convent, Chatham, from 1941 to 1948, and at the University of Bristol from 1948 to 1952, graduating with an honours degree in history in 1951 and being awarded a certificate in education in 1952. Remarkably, in view of her subsequent career, she was also chairman of the Conservative Club. 
June Thorndycraft's direction was set in 1952 when she was appointed a history teacher at Peckham Girls' School, a pioneering London county council comprehensive in south-east London. At Peckham she was hugely influenced by the headteacher, Margaret Clark, a member of the National Union of Teachers' executive and of the Communist Party of Great Britain. Still at Peckham, she became the youngest head of history in London, and then senior mistress. For a short period (1968-71) she was deputy head and acting headteacher at Acland Burghley School in Camden, north London, before returning to south-east London, where for twenty-three years she was head of Catford County School for Girls. She married, first, on 4 April 1953, (Gordon) Geoffrey Partington, professor of education. The marriage ended in divorce in 1967, and on 24 February 1968 she married Robert Samuel (Sam) Fisher (1914-1992), himself a headteacher in inner London, and a leading member of the executive of the National Union of Teachers in the 1960s and 1970s. He supported her throughout the key part of her professional and trade union life. They had two sons, Matthew and John. 
The forty-two years June Fisher spent as a teacher and headteacher in inner London schools was a period of great change in secondary education. In 1952 the school-leaving age was still only fifteen; the few comprehensive or all-ability schools were pioneering or experimental; public examinations were for an elite few; and the position and status of women teachers was underlined by their separate and inferior pay scale. June Fisher had an influence on developments especially in these and other areas of education. She did this through her own teaching in inner London, where there was a pioneering local education authority, and as a national teacher leader. A dominant and colourful personality, she was able to use her physical presence to attract and hold attention in a school assembly, addressing a national conference, or representing teachers on television. This was accompanied by a capacity for valuing and taking an interest in every individual, whether a disadvantaged pupil, a part-time member of staff, a political opponent, a casual acquaintance met on her many travels, or a senior education official. It earned her great loyalty. 
June Fisher's commitment to developing comprehensive education and other causes motivated her involvement beyond the classroom. The influences of her early years at Peckham led her into the Communist Party and the National Union of Teachers (NUT), where as a leading member of the broad left caucus she held office locally and nationally. A member of the national executive (1984-92), she served as chair of its influential education committee. Her role within the NUT was very significant. At a time of teacher industrial disputes, when the 'moderate left' leadership was coming under attack from the 'ultra left', creating divisions which could be exploited by a hostile government and a cynical national press, her headmistress and often motherly approach secured a hearing for teachers. 
A key area of June Fisher's influence and concern related to the development of a curriculum and public examination system appropriate to a comprehensive system of education. She represented the NUT in negotiations with the government and took the chair of the Schools Council history committee. As chair of the Metropolitan Regional Examinations Board she influenced the development of the CSE (certificate of secondary education) and helped prepare the ground for the eventual adoption of a single examination at 16+, the GCSE (general certificate of secondary education). As chair of the NUT education committee, she played a key role in persuading the government to finance the implementation of the single examination system. As a member of the London University examinations council she continued to represent the teaching profession in the implementation of that system. Some of her earliest campaigning was in support of equal pay for women teachers, and throughout her life she continued to champion the equality of educational opportunity for girls both in the schools where she worked and beyond. She was also prominent within the NUT in the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, participating in the Aldermaston marches of the 1960s and recalling with pride her overnight imprisonment following a demonstration at Holy Loch. 
The high point of June Fisher's career was to be elected national president of the National Union of Teachers in 1989, by which time the Thatcher government's impact on the trade union movement had been profound and, following the 1987 'Education Act', the morale of teachers was at a very low ebb. Her presidential address, 'Win from within', was prescient, pointing out that educational change could be achieved only from within schools and that this challenged teachers to reassert their professionalism and values in promoting the best education for the children, without posturing or absurd opposition. Throughout her presidential year she assiduously travelled the country, encouraging teachers to adopt this approach. 
June Fisher died at St Christopher's Hospice, Sydenham, London, on 30 November 1995 after a long fight against breast cancer, and was cremated at Beckenham on 8 December. She was survived by the two sons from her second marriage. A celebration of her life was held at Catford county school in December 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60499


Gray, John Henry (1866-1934), author and Roman Catholic priest, was born at 2 Vivian Road, Bethnal Green, a working-class suburb of London, on 10 March 1866. He was the eldest of the nine children of John Gray (1843-1892), of Scottish ancestry though born in Kent, a carpenter and wheelwright employed in the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, and his wife, Hannah Mary Williamson (1845-1903). In 1893 John Henry Gray's mother converted to Roman Catholicism and raised her three youngest children in the faith. (Beforehand the family was nonconformist, probably Methodist.) 
At the age of thirteen Gray's formal school ended when his father arranged for his apprenticeship as a metal turner at the Royal Arsenal. Three years later he entered the civil service as a clerk, eventually moving to the Foreign Office library in 1893. From 1888 he began associating with artists and writers, the result of his friendship with the artists Charles Ricketts and Charles Shannon, editors of 'The Dial', to which he contributed prose and verse. 
In 1889, after Gray met Oscar Wilde, a relationship developed, the precise nature of which remains unknown, though Gray adopted Wilde's dandiacal mannerisms and appearance. He signed himself Dorian in letters to Wilde and, in Richard Ellmann's view, Wilde's naming of the hero of his novel 'The Picture of Dorian Gray' 'was a form of courtship' (Ellmann, 290). From 1890 Gray attended (as a guest) meetings of the Rhymers' Club and also moved in Parisian avant-garde literary circles; as a result he translated (or 'imitated', he said) poems of Baudelaire, Verlaine, Mallarme, and Rimbaud for his first volume of verse, 'Silverpoints' (1893). 
In late 1892 Gray (a convert to Roman Catholicism since 1890) suddenly suffered a mental collapse, apparently precipitated by a spiritual crisis at the time of his relationship with Wilde, his recovery resulting in translations of devotional verse, later published in 'Spiritual Poems' (1896). In early 1893 the wealthy Russian-Jewish emigre and poet Andre Raffalovich rescued Gray with financial and emotional support. A homosexual and, in 1896, a convert to Catholicism, the devoted Raffalovich moved to Edinburgh in 1907 after Gray was assigned to a parish there following his ordination in 1901 as a priest while studying at Scots College, Rome. 
During the years that Father (later Canon) Gray served at St Peter's Church in Edinburgh, built through Raffalovich's generosity, he continued his literary career: in addition to many essays and poems, he edited 'The Last Letters of Aubrey Beardsley' (1904) and wrote 'Park: a Fantastic Story' (1932), an experimental novel. On 14 June 1934 he died of heart failure in Edinburgh following an operation for an abscessed lung, just four months after Raffalovich died in his sleep. Both were buried in Mount Vernon cemetery outside Edinburgh, Gray, on 19 June, in the section reserved for clergy. 


@@@@@


doc= 60503


Shils, Edward Albert (1910-1995), sociologist, was born on 1 July 1910 in Springfield, Massachusetts, USA, the younger son of Nathan Shils ('b'. 1881), a worker in a cigar making factory, and his wife, Esther. His parents were immigrant Russian Jews, his mother a housewife with the conventionally fabled educational aspirations for her sons. Shils was brought up in Philadelphia, where he was educated at the local high school and local university (the University of Pennsylvania, where he majored in French literature), from which he emerged with a BA degree in 1931 to face the severe conditions of the labour market of that decade. At first and briefly he worked as a social worker, but then he gradually found his way as Louis Wirth's research assistant into what he saw as the high intellectualism of the University of Chicago. Unsurprisingly in the 1930s he was a Rooseveltian new dealer but, as he matured in the Chicago atmosphere, he became a liberal, distrustful of 'the powers', bellicose against state tyranny of the right and the left, and a devotee of freedom. In the 1970s he also became a neo-conservative in the twentieth-century American sense, trustful of tradition, seeing social order as rooted in face-to-face ties, and finding his utopia in the networks of scientists and scholars intensively looking for truth and protected by the institutions of free science. Co-founder of the 'Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists' and actively opposed to the tendency which manifested itself as McCarthyism during the cold war, he defended democratic pluralism in his 'Torment of Secrecy' (1956). He was among the last passionate missionaries of academic freedom, enamoured of German universities in their Humboldtean heyday, always seeking to preserve and to reinvent what he increasingly feared to have been lost by Marxist ideological betrayal and state patronage. 
At Chicago, Shils taught first in the college where Hutchins had pioneered the 'great books' tradition as a suitable modern but traditional education for undergraduates. He was influenced by Robert Park in the period of Chicago empirical sociology, by Frank Knight in the pursuit of a rigorous logic, and by Leo Szilard in the relentless search for persuasion of the political authorities. He occupied himself energetically with the associated movements towards international control of nuclear weapons. Yet he was faithful to his academic calling, reading the European classics and modern American empirical work, working closely with Talcott Parsons, and publishing widely. Indeed it came to light beyond the circle of his close friends and only on his death that he was engaged on a breathtakingly ambitious, Weber-like project on the movements of knowledge down the ages and across cultures and religions -- an unfinished and probably unfinishable programme of scholarly research. Such was the grandeur of his reading and his knowledge of disciplines, languages, and history. 
When the USA entered the war Shils seized the opportunity of coming to Europe, not, for obvious reasons, to extend his already formidable knowledge of German sociology, but to visit England where he worked jointly for the British government and for the US office of strategic services, interviewing German prisoners. His conclusion, confirmed by later research, was that the influence of primary group loyalties rather than the Nazi ideology sustained the fighting power of the Wehrmacht. Meanwhile he soon penetrated and enjoyed the London circles of European intellectuals, including Raymond Aron (then a member of the Free French forces). After the war he became one of the first 'transatlantic' academics, with a joint post at the London School of Economics (LSE) and Chicago. He became interested in monarchy, writing perceptively on the coronation of 1953 in the 'Sociological Review'. Later, in 1961, he went to King's College, Cambridge, and later still (in 1970) to Peterhouse to escape the influence of Edmund Leach, who was referred to by Lord Dacre as 'the swinging provost' ('Minerva', 92). He meanwhile retained his connection to Chicago where he had, with John Nef, founded the Committee on Social Thought. He knew an extraordinary number of intellectuals in Europe, North America, and Africa, as well as in India -- where he made a special study of their place in society and wrote a much discussed monograph, 'The Intellectual between Tradition and Modernity' (1961). He seemed to be in perpetual motion, arriving everywhere to congresses, conferences, and conversations, yet he was an essentially private man. 
Shils was also a busy man, with a fresh, freckled face and ginger hair, aggressive, and either scowling in the face of an enemy or smiling at the sight of a friend, 'Not', as Noel Annan has written, 'afraid to bludgeon with his erudition those who did not realise sociology was a subject that rested on a great European intellectual tradition' (Annan, 255). For the students at the LSE after the Second World War there was as magnificent a professorial presentation of the social science scenery as could be found in the Western world. For a small minority of them, mostly grammar school boys returned from the war, the ambition to become professional sociologists formed the first generation of a remarkable group of academics who went on as the vanguard of a rapid expansion of the subject in the British provincial universities. Two men stood out as their guides -- David Glass and Edward Shils. Both, oddly enough, were indifferent lecturers, but they were endowed with a compelling charisma (a word which came into lay vogue in the 1940s). Glass was precise in research technique and learned in the LSE tradition of demographic and statistical investigation. Shils provided an alternative spur to their implausible academic aspiration. He not only presented classical European sociology to them but did so in an American voice which simply assumed that undergraduates would become graduate students and subsequently professionals. His blend of tutorial ferocity and Olympian erudition challenged their still half-formed ambition to fearful effort. His 'Current State of American Sociology' (1948) conveyed the conviction that a subject of great difficulty and worth was at once both dignified in its European antiquity and accessible in its American modernity. Sociological research beckoned as a living practice as well as a hallowed tradition. 
Perhaps Shils's most enduring interest was in the university as an organization for the creation and preservation of important knowledge. To this end he founded 'Minerva' in 1962 and was its active, some thought over-active, editor until the end of his life. Many if not most contributors would have their scripts returned and find them cascaded in showers of green ink by the editor's comments and suggestions -- in effect rewritten. For Eric Ashby this gave Shils a claim to being the outstanding editor of the century. Certainly no editor put a firmer stamp on his journal. Accordingly he earned many enemies, not only as an overbearing editor but as a rancorous disputant and a ruthless manipulator of colleagues and students. Yet he also had the love of many friends, as the memorial issue of 'Minerva' amply showed. 
Shils was a complicated man. Sometimes his prose could be turgid, sometimes weighty and incisive. Sometimes his conversation could be portentous and delivered in long, Latinate, and periodic paragraphs. At other times he could relax over a good meal, perhaps one he himself had cooked, to retail academic and literary gossip and anecdotes in short, sharp, racy quips from the New York and Chicago Jewish communities. Community is what he longed for. He could not find it in marriage: he was married twice (first to Ruth Almond, second to Irene Coltman), and was divorced twice. Even survey interviewing was seen by him as a kind of moral conviviality. He was a Jew who neither believed nor practised, but he was nevertheless proud of his ancestry and deeply if sceptically pious, knowing and deploring the secular tendency among his colleagues towards the false belief that reason could put religion to flight. For him the unsolved mystery of life was that the roots of rationality lay in human emotions. A large picture of him is hung in the Shils Seminar Room at the University of Chicago. He was a generous benefactor to Peterhouse, Cambridge, both to the college library and in endowing the Dacre lectures. He died of cancer in Chicago on 23 January 1995, leaving one son from his second marriage. His ashes were scattered over the river in Philadelphia. 


@@@@@


doc= 60508


Plarr, Victor Gustave (1863-1929), poet and librarian, was born on 21 June 1863 at Le Kupferhammer, near Strasbourg, the only son of Dr Gustavus Plarr (died 1892), a distinguished Alsatian mathematician and foreign corresponding member of the British Association from 1857 to 1892, and Mary Jane Tomkins, who was English. The family moved to Scotland after their home was burnt in the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71. Plarr was educated at Madras College, St Andrews, Fife, at Tonbridge School, Kent, and at Worcester College, Oxford, where he took a second in modern history in 1886 and proceeded MA in 1897. 
He spent four years as literary journalist and translator before becoming a librarian, from 1890 at King's College, London, and from 1897 until his death at the Royal College of Surgeons; it is here that Ezra Pound memorably pictures him as Monsieur Verog 'Among the pickled foetuses and bottled bones' in his poem 'Hugh Selwyn Mauberley' (Pound, 202). On 10 August 1892 he married Helen Marion (1866/7-1930), daughter of Albert Shaw, with whom he had a daughter, Marion, in 1893. 
Plarr's poetic and professional publications indicate the balance of his life. He published in both books of the Rhymers' Club in 1892 and 1894 and brought out his major collection of poetry, 'In the Dorian Mood', in 1896. He published 'The Tragedy of Asgard' in 1905, and with Pound's encouragement contributed to the second and third books of the Poets' Club in 1911 and 1913. 
Plarr edited the fourteenth and fifteenth editions (1895 and 1899) of 'Men and Women of the Time', a predecessor of 'Who's Who', and continued to publish occasional poems and essays while engaged on catalogues and lists connected with his professional work, notably his 'Lives of the Fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons' (published posthumously in 1930). In 1914 he was the eccentric memorialist of his friend Ernest Dowson. He is remembered as charming, stooping, bald, and usually smoking. He died of bronchitis at his home, 7 Laurel Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 28 January 1929, and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60512


Wratislaw, Theodore William Graf (1871-1933), poet and civil servant, was born on 27 April 1871 in Rugby, Warwickshire, the son of Theodore Marc Wratislaw (1831-1919), solicitor, and Sarah Townsend. Educated at Rugby School from 1885 to 1888, he went into his father's office but loved poetry rather than the law, though in 1893 he passed his solicitors' finals. He published two slim volumes at his own expense in Rugby in 1892 and moved to London to mix (uncommittedly) in the 'Uranian' circle centring on the 'Artist and Journal of Home Culture'. 'Caprices' (1893), with dedicatees such as Charles Kains Jackson, Lord Alfred Douglas, Oscar Wilde, and Gleeson White, and poems such as 'To a Sicilian Boy' (replaced at proof on the objection of a journalist), associates his name with decadent ideals, but three years later the 120 copies of the edition had not sold out. 
Wratislaw returned to his father's office but continued to contribute to the 'Yellow Book' and 'The Savoy', and published 'Orchids' in 1896, again in a limited edition. In 1895 he entered the estates office at Somerset House, London, where he did what he described in a 1914 letter as 'penal servitude' until December 1930 (unpubd letter, 3 March 1914). On 20 September 1899 he married Sara Caroline Ester Harris ('b'. 1875/6), daughter of Elias Harris, a stock- and sharebroker from Cape Town, Cape Colony. Sara died on 22 September 1901, and on 9 April 1908 he married Theodora Russell ('b'. 1875/6), a widow, the daughter of Robert Percival Banks, the former vicar of Drumbeg, Sutherland. They divorced in 1913, and on 19 May 1915 he married Ada Ross (1884/5-1942), daughter of Thomas Philip Ross, an insurance manager. The daughter of his first marriage, Isolde Eleanor Josephine Wratislaw (1901-1984), worked in the consular service in Italy, ending her career as British consul-general in Palermo and Milan. 
Wratislaw lived long enough to see his inclusion by A. J. A. Symons in 'An Anthology of 'Nineties Verse' (1928). Perhaps too close in style and subject to Arthur Symons to achieve a truly independent voice, he has remained an essential component of the picture of 1890s poetry. His yearning for literature remained until his death, at his home, York Lodge, Ashley Road, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, on 13 September 1933. A correspondent in 'The Times' of 18 September 1933 commented that 'the beautiful voice that lent added grace to his poems is silent as the night'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60514


Olive Eleanor Custance (1874-1944). She was born in London on 7 February 1874, the elder daughter of Colonel Frederick Hambleton Custance (1844-1925), a retired guards officer, of Weston Old Hall, Norwich, and his wife, Eleanor (died 1908), daughter of Captain Hylton Jolliffe. They eloped, and married on 4 March 1902, and although their life together had a radiant beginning, after ten years of marriage they separated. Douglas lost custody of their only child, a son, Raymond (1902-1964). The Douglases did their utmost to remain respectful of each other over the remaining years of their lives. When Olive died at Viceroy Lodge, Hove, in her seventy-first year on 13 February 1944, she was eulogized as a gifted poet. She had published her early poems under the pseudonym Opals, later works under her family name. Among her most significant publications are 'Opals' (1897), 'Rainbows' (1902), 'The Blue Bird' (1905), and 'The Inn of Dreams' (1911). 


@@@@@


doc= 60518


Ascough, Jesse (1823-1897), borax manufacturer, was born on 6 March 1823 in Coventry, the only son and fifth child of Jesse Ascough (1780-1857), ribbon manufacturer, and his wife, Sarah. He had qualified as a master chemist by the time he married Maria Agnes Fellows (1823-1897), in Wolverhampton, on 21 July 1853. By 1860 the couple had moved to Handsworth, Birmingham. They had three daughters. 
While acting as agent for a Liverpool soap manufacturer, Ascough worked at his own inventions and in the 1870s registered a number of patents, including one for a brush which had bristles treated with a compound of sodium borate. This led to Ascough's interest in the commercial possibilities of borax, from which sodium borate was derived, as a cleansing agent in personal hygiene. In 1874 Arthur Robottom, a prospector, bought 120 square miles of borax deposits at Lake Boron, in southern California. The crystals were shipped to Birmingham, where he established the Borax Company in 1876. Robottom voluntarily liquidated the company in July 1878, giving Ascough the opportunity to exploit his abilities. After the latter secured all Robottom's rights, the firm was renamed the Patent Borax Company. 
Dry soaps and a variety of toilet preparations, including the 'Queen's Starch Glaze', were subsequently developed, and Ascough proved to be a pioneer in devising colourful, attractive labels for his products, printing many of his advertisements by chromolithography. An astute businessman, he adapted his soaps so as to reach the widest possible market. Aware of the lack of hygiene among the poor, he also had some of the merchandise packed in small but affordable containers to reach the humblest household. He obtained the endorsement of Lillie Langtry for toiletries and anticipated HMV by reproducing a painting of Jupp, his St Bernard dog, on a soap packet. This was painted by a daughter, Jessie, who frequently exhibited at the Royal Birmingham Society of Artists. 
By 1892 Ascough had spent more than $125,000 on the production of over a hundred labels and in advertising in more than 3000 newspapers. He vigorously protected his worldwide patents, establishing offices throughout Europe, Asia, Africa, America, and Australia. Within fifteen years, the Patent Borax Company won many international prizes at advertising exhibitions, including a medal from Tasmania in 1893. The demand for the Patent Borax products forced a move to larger premises, covering 2 acres, in Ladywood, Birmingham, into which led an arm of the Birmingham and Wolverhampton Canal. A model factory was built in 1893, with spacious working conditions and with canteen and recreation rooms for the employees, who also received free frequent medical examinations. 
Ascough constantly improved his products and he registered his last patent, for an 'antiseptic preparation', less than a year before he died. He was an industrious Victorian entrepreneur, whose facial features resembled those of his dog Jupp, with a heavy, bewhiskered jowl. He was admired by his employees and was concerned for their welfare; and many of the factory workers remained with the company all their working lives. Locally he was liked, not least by those at Handsworth poorhouse, for whom he would carve the joint on Christmas day. Ascough died of pneumonia after a short illness, on 11 April 1897, at his home, The Grange, Laurel Road, Birmingham, where he had lived since 1878; he was buried on 14 April in St Mary's churchyard, Old Handsworth. His wife, who had been in poor health for some years, died three months later. Their grave, surmounted by a massive 'angel and child', is known as 'the Ascough memorial'. 
Jesse Ascough lived to see his Patent Borax products become internationally known and would have been delighted by the remark of a character in Noel Coward's 'Private Lives' (1930), who stated, 'I love borax'. The company was appointed borax makers to Queen Victoria in August 1897, and was granted the royal warrant, held until the death of George V, in 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 60527


Finzi, Gerald Raphael (1901-1956), composer, was born on 14 July 1901 at 53 (now 93) Hamilton Terrace, St John's Wood, London, the fifth and last child of John Abraham Finzi, known as Jack (1860-1909), founder of a shipbroking company, and his wife, Eliza Emma Leverson, known as Lizzie (1865-1955), daughter of Montague Richard Leverson. The family was prosperous, and both parents were musical. All seemed set fair. But just before Gerald's eighth birthday his father died of cancer. The London house was sold, and the widow moved to Camberley, where the boy attended Kingswood School. Here he was a misfit; this fostered his lifelong distrust of academic education. He made up his mind to become a composer, and faked illness to be taken away. A year in Switzerland -- almost his only time out of England -- came before the outbreak of war, when the family settled in Harrogate. 
There Finzi studied music privately, first (1915-16) with the young composer Ernest Farrar, then (1917-22), when Farrar was called up, with the fine disciplinarian E. C. Bairstow, the organist of York Minster. Farrar was killed in 1918, by which time Finzi's three elder brothers had died; together with his father's death, such bereavement might have blighted Finzi's nature. Indeed, he became introspective and solitary, turning to the English poets for sustenance; but he also became single-minded and fiercely principled. 
After the war Finzi attended two of Rutland Boughton's Glastonbury festivals in the west country, then in 1922 settled with his adoring but ineffectual mother at Painswick in Gloucestershire. Here he came to know the family of the Arts and Crafts architect Detmar Blow. Gradually Finzi was absorbing influences that shaped his life: love of England, rural beauty, simple honest craftsmanship, the importance of the amateur. Here he composed a non-liturgical 'Requiem da camera' in memory of artists who died young. His early vocal compositions are notable for their poetic affiliations: settings of Henry Vaughan, Thomas Traherne, and -- in 'By Footpath and Stile', his first song cycle to be performed (1923) and published (1925) -- Thomas Hardy. His orchestral 'Severn Rhapsody' won a Carnegie award, and so publication (1924). 
In 1926 Finzi moved to London and studied counterpoint with R. O. Morris, who fostered the young composer's friendships with Gustav Holst and Ralph Vaughan Williams, already influences on his own music. Finzi also made younger lifelong friends, among them Arthur Bliss, Edmund Rubbra, and in particular Howard Ferguson. His curly blue-black hair, his intense gaze, his earnest commitment, marked him out as a personality. He eagerly grasped everything he could from London, attending concerts, opera, theatre, and exhibitions. He heard all the metropolis could offer, including Igor Stravinsky and Arnold Schoenberg, and if his own style remained conservative it was through choice and not ignorance. 
A violin concerto composed for Sybil Eaton and conducted by Vaughan Williams was not well received (London, 1928) and had no further performances until the late 1990s. For a time Finzi kept to the songs which made his name, always publishing them in sets, such as 'A Young Man's Exhortation' (1933). He worked slowly, with much revision, and would put a piece aside for years before completing it (dates given here are of first performance). Part of his 'Grand Fantasia and Toccata' for piano and orchestra was drafted in the 1920s, but the toccata was not finished until 1953. 
In 1928 Finzi had to spend three months in Midhurst Sanatorium with suspected tuberculosis, which turned out to be pleurisy. From 1930 to 1933 he taught for one day a week at the Royal Academy of Music. In 1931 he met the beautiful and talented Joy Black [Joyce Amy Finzi (1907-1991)], artist and poet. She was born on 3 March 1907 in Hampstead, London, the elder daughter of Ernest Harry Black (died 1926), East India merchant, and his wife, Amy, 'nee' Whitehorn (died 1932); she grew up in Eastbourne, and attended Moira House School there. After some doubts about whether matrimony would hinder his composition, Finzi proposed, and they married on 16 September 1933; Ralph and Adeline Vaughan Williams were witnesses. After their marriage the Finzis lived in Hampstead, then in 1935 moved to Aldbourne in Wiltshire. Christopher was born in 1934 and Nigel in 1936, and with nannies and servants the Finzis lived an agreeable life, supported by Joy's money and unobtrusive practicality. Finzi was however always conscious of those less fortunate. As Bairstow's pupil he had been overwhelmed by Ivor Gurney's setting of John Fletcher's 'Sleep', and began to repay his debt to this poet and composer, now in an asylum. He enlisted Edmund Blunden's help, and was responsible for the Gurney number of 'Music and Letters' (1938) and for the publication of 'Poems by Ivor Gurney' (1954). With Ferguson's collaboration, he edited four volumes of Gurney's songs. He also championed Parry, gathering his autographs safely into the Bodleian Library. 
In the late 1930s the Finzis built a house at Ashmansworth on a 16 acre site on the Hampshire downs near Newbury. They moved in just before war was declared. An agnostic who never admitted his Jewish descent, Finzi was by nature a pacifist, and found himself tortured by events in Europe. Their beautiful new home became filled with refugees, and from 1941 to 1945 Finzi worked in London in the Ministry of War Transport. His real war work lay in founding (1940) and conducting the mainly amateur Newbury String Players, who gave concerts in chilly village churches and halls, so bringing live music to audiences starved by wartime restrictions. The little orchestra became Finzi's 'instrument', for he was never a good executant; as time passed he expanded its repertory with contemporary works and eighteenth-century revivals. 
The outbreak of war meant the cancellation of Finzi's first major premiere, of the cantata for high voice and strings 'Dies natalis' at the Three Choirs Festival. This was given in London in 1940, and at the Three Choirs in 1946. From then on Finzi became a Three Choirs composer. 'Dies natalis' formed one strand in his character, for the words he selected from Traherne's 'Centuries' celebrate the rapturous beauty of the world as seen by a new-born child. Among Finzi's many strong convictions were those on bringing up children; he sent his sons to the progressive school Bedales. 
Another strand in Finzi's thinking was the belief that no words were too famous or too self-contained for a composer to use. Critics had chided him in 1936 for his two Milton sonnets. He foresaw further trouble for his setting of Wordsworth's great 'Intimations of Immortality', but insisted on the composer's right to identify with what moved him. At the first performance (Gloucester, 1950) the climate of opinion was against his post-Brahmsian work, which was heard by some as largely derived from Elgar, Vaughan Williams, and Walton. As time passes, influences recede, and Finzi's voice sounds clear. 'Intimations' has its structural flaws, but these are far outweighed by stretches of vision and beauty. At the centenary performance of 2001 the Barbican Hall in London was packed, and the silence before the applause began was a tribute to the melancholy grandeur of Wordsworth-Finzi. Finzi was a wide reader and a prolific, sometimes provocative, letter writer, and eventually gathered his thoughts into the three Crees lectures, 'The composer's use of words', given at the Royal College of Music in 1955. 
Life at Ashmansworth after the war could have been self-indulgent, had it not been for Finzi's urgent sense of duty. Gerald's and Joy's shared enthusiasms attracted artists and musicians, young performers and composers, and researchers. They delighted in the home-grown vegetarian food, in Gerald's large library, and in his apple orchards, in which he lovingly rescued almost forgotten varieties, as in his study he rescued minor eighteenth-century worthies such as Charles Avison and William Felton. Impatient with uncreative people, Gerald was devoted to cherishing young and emerging talent. Joy's hospitality became legendary. Her eye for shape and texture had given the house its atmosphere; she also (when the demanding Gerald gave her time) began the remarkable series of portrait drawings, incidentally revealing how distinguished was her circle of friends, eventually published as 'In That Place' (1987). By then she had also published two volumes of poetry, 'A Point of Departure' (1967) and 'Twelve Months of the Year' (1981). 
During the war Finzi's popular Shakespeare songs, 'Let us Garlands Bring' (1942), and clarinet and piano bagatelles (1943) reached performance. For St Matthew's, Northampton, he composed his brooding, devotional anthem to Richard Crashaw's words 'Lo, the Full, Final Sacrifice' (1946). Then collaboration with a living poet, Blunden, produced the ceremonial ode 'For St Cecilia' (1947) and also the detailed, amicable letters showing how poet and composer worked together. All the time Finzi was composing songs: 'Earth and Air and Rain' (published in 1936) and 'Before and After Summer' (1949), both to Hardy's poems. His affinity with Hardy shows the more sombre, fatalistic side of his character, and the songs themselves prove that within his limited idiom he was capable of a wide range, from an apparently simple ditty to the tremendous 'Channel Firing' (1940). His one-note-to-a-syllable word-setting, his flexible distinctive melodic line, brilliantly convey -- even clarify -- the sense of Hardy's sometimes packed, crusty verses. Led always by the words, Finzi devised unconventional but convincing structures that enhance the emotional power of each poem. A new venture was his composing incidental music for a broadcast of 'Love's Labour's Lost' (1946), which he later expanded for a suite (1955). 
In 1951 Finzi was diagnosed as suffering from leukaemia (non-Hodgkin's lymphoma), and was given at most ten years to live. Keeping the verdict within his family, he seemed to increase his workload; he combined radiotherapy treatment in Oxford with research at the Bodleian. By now he was in demand as a lecturer, an external examiner for St Andrews University, an adjudicator, and a county adviser -- this, as well as his composition, running the Newbury String Players, and finding repertory for them. Fruit of his research came with volume 13 in the series 'Musica Britannica', consisting of Boyce overtures. His editions of unpublished and neglected works by John Stanley, William Boyce, Richard Mudge, John Garth, Capel Bond, and Charles Wesley were an important part of his post-war output. 
From the sunny days of 1949 came the concerto for clarinet and strings. The more turbulent cello concerto (1955) dates from Finzi's final years, and something of their pressure and desperation inform it. It sadly suggests the possibility of further expansion, had he lived longer. For 'In terra pax' (1954) he enclosed St Luke's message 'Fear not' within Robert Bridges' poem 'Noel', and composed a luminous Christmas scene which perfectly conveys his longing for peace and his acceptance of the artist's solitude. It had been inspired in 1925 when he stood at night on Chosen Hill near Gloucester listening to church bells. At the 1956 Three Choirs Festival the Finzis took the Vaughan Williamses back to Chosen; there Finzi developed shingles which led to his death in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 27 September 1956. 
Finzi was cremated privately on 2 October 1956; then there was a memorial concert in London in 1957, when both his sons played in the orchestra. His ashes were scattered on May Hill, Gloucestershire, in 1973. Finzi left enough unpublished songs for Joy and Howard Ferguson to make into four sets, two of Hardy, two of mixed poets. They gave his autographs to the Bodleian. Finzi had gathered a fine private collection of eighteenth-century English music, which was bought in 1965 by Cedric Thorpe Davie, Finzi's friend and fellow enthusiast, on behalf of St Andrews University. In 1974 Joy gave her husband's library of English literature to Reading University, where it is housed in the Finzi book room, with furniture and pictures from his study (P. Dingley, 'The Finzi Book Room', 1981). In 1969 this indomitable woman also formed a trust from his royalties to further his varied interests. She remained actively involved in its affairs until her death on 14 June 1991 at Church Farm, the house she and Gerald had built at Ashmansworth; she was survived by their two sons. In his quiet determined way Finzi composed a distinguished body of lyrical but intense music and by his probity and zest influenced the many people who think of him with gratitude. 


@@@@@


doc= 60528


Bloch, Martin (1883-1954), painter and graphic artist, was born on 16 November 1883 in Neisse, Upper Silesia, the younger of two children of Maximilian Bloch (1852-1932), a textile factory owner, and his wife, Margarete, 'nee' Mosse (died 1942), who died in a concentration camp in Theresienstadt. Both parents were Jewish. 
Bloch's earliest known drawings were of the Sudeten mountains. His parents opposed his wish to become a painter, hoping his gift for drawing could be used to design patterns for lace. As a compromise he studied architecture in Berlin from 1902; he went on to study history of art, aesthetics, and psychology in Munich in 1905, and returned to Berlin in 1907 to study classicism and the baroque under the art historian Heinrich Wolfflin. In Berlin Bloch also took drawing lessons from the German impressionist Lovis Corinth and from the landscape and portrait painter George Mosson. Largely self-taught as a painter Bloch studied old master techniques intensively. He joined the Berlin Sezession and, in 1909, rented his first studio. The Paul Cassirer Gallery, which played a major role in promoting artists from the Berlin Sezession, mounted Bloch's first solo exhibition in 1911 and a second in 1913. Between these exhibitions Bloch worked in Paris, where he belonged to a circle of artists who admired Henri Matisse. Here he learned to apply colour in clean, unadulterated masses. He drew inspiration from southern France, where he spent the first half of 1914, and, throughout the First World War, from Spain. He then returned to Berlin, where, in 1920, the Paul Cassirer Gallery organized his third and highly successful exhibition, of fifty-four paintings, almost all produced in Spain. His large triptych 'Southern Light' (1914-20; Harvard U., Fogg Art Museum) surprisingly has survived; many of his works were lost or destroyed during the Nazi regime. 
In 1920 Bloch married a journalist, Charlotte Dorothea, 'nee' Ruhemann (1886-1979), whose first married name was Reiss and whose second married name was Zavrel, with whom he had a daughter, Barbara Grant ('b'. 1922). In 1923 he founded the Berlin Bloch-Kerschbaumer school of painting with Anton Kerschbaumer. After Kerschbaumer's death in 1926 Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, a former member of the expressionist group Die Brucke, helped Bloch to run the school. During the 1920s and early 1930s Bloch took his students to Malcesine, Lago di Garda, Italy, each summer, where he gave them intensive individual tuition. In his art he interpreted elements of fauvism and expressionism in softened form. Although he lived in Berlin he was less interested in the social and political interests of the German expressionists and their harsh forms than in the high-keyed colour transpositions of the Fauves. He himself employed a green sky in 'Casa Rigo: Lago di Garda' (1925; Tate collection), a painting that captures the atmosphere of a Lombard lake scene. 
In 1932 Bloch became secretary of the Reichsverband Bildender Kunstler Deutschlands. While he was hanging the 1933 winter exhibition Sturm Abteilung guards forced entry and removed paintings disapproved of by the Nazis. Bloch convened a meeting of protest and, as a result, was expelled from the Reichskammer der Bildenden Kunste. Deprived of his rights as a painter, he and his wife and daughter emigrated to Britain, via Denmark, taking up an invitation from Karin Michaelis, the Danish novelist, who assisted many emigres, including Bertolt Brecht. Bloch arrived in London in 1934 and opened the School of Contemporary Painting in association with the Australian artist Roy de Maistre. Bloch remained true to his aim, established in Germany, of fostering each student's individual style: 'Treat everybody as a potential artist, be tolerant, do not force any rubber stamped theory on the pupil. Encourage, try to discover his personal approach' (Bloch). He ran the school until 1939, teaching, among others, May Hillhouse, Heinz Koppel, and Harry Weinberger. In that year Bloch had his first solo show in Britain, at the Alex Reid and Lefevre Gallery, London. In 1940, having failed to be naturalized owing to the outbreak of war (he received British citizenship in 1947), he was interned at Huyton, Lancashire, and at Sefton, Isle of Man. After his release in 1941 he returned to London and was given Ministry of Information clearance to record war damage in the City of London. The resulting works combine a sense of drama with a documentary purpose. 
In the 1940s Bloch became friends with Josef Herman, with whom he shared a studio from 1943. Herman recalled Bloch thus: '[He] was a methodical man, he got up in the morning, had a small breakfast, would light his pipe... He would choose a drawing and decide to translate it into painting, tense and excited, he would make an outline of the composition with charcoal... then start to underpaint the canvas. ('Conversations with Josef Herman', 'Omnibus', BBC television, 1983)' From 1943 Bloch regularly visited Wales, where he and Herman painted the miners and landscapes of north Wales; his 'Down from the Bethesda Quarries' (1950-51) is in the National Gallery of Wales, Cardiff. After the war Bloch, aged sixty-five, travelled throughout North America, painting, for example, 'The Mississippi at Minneapolis' (1948; Tate collection), teaching at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, and exhibiting there, in Princeton, and in New Jersey. From 1949 until his death he taught painting at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts, London. Bloch exhibited widely in Britain, including at the Ben Uri Gallery, London, in 1945, 1949, and 1953. He contributed to the Festival of Britain exhibition '60 Paintings for '51' and to exhibitions abroad, including a Canadian touring exhibition in 1952. He died, of a heart attack, in Fulham Hospital, London, on 19 June 1954 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. His 'oeuvre' comprises over 200 paintings and innumerable drawings, shown in retrospectives such as the 1957 Arts Council and the 1984 South London Art Gallery exhibitions. Bloch's great achievement was to convey his understanding of colour through his painting and teaching. Locations for his works in permanent collections include the Tate collection; Leeds City Art Gallery; the Cecil Higgins Art Gallery, Bedford; Leicestershire Museum and Art Gallery, Leicester; and the National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa. 


@@@@@


doc= 60537


Youngman, Nancy Mayhew (1906-1995), painter and art educationist, was born in Lensfield House, Maidstone, Kent, on 28 June 1906, the daughter of John Henry Youngman (1868?- 'c'.1948), a partner in the corn merchants Bradley, Taylor, and Youngman, and his wife, Adelaide Edith (Bida), 'nee' Marshall (1871?- 'c'.1950). Nan Youngman had two elder brothers, one of whom was killed in Flanders in 1916. She was educated at Wycombe Abbey School, Buckinghamshire, and at the Slade School of Fine Art (1924-7). Nan Youngman lived through one of the most formative periods in British painting during a period of social, ideological, and political change to which most artists of her time felt obliged to respond. Her painting was anchored in the craftsmanship demanded by Henry Tonks and Philip Wilson Steer at the Slade and was initially linked, broadly, with social realism. Her painting was always uncompromisingly original as was her approach to her work in education, her personal life, and the relationships in which she was involved. Nan Youngman belonged to no school. While moving on from her rather austere palette knife paintings of the 1930s she remained consciously apart from any of the modernist movements. But her sharp and humorous eye for the incongruous resulted in what are, at times, surrealist images -- a ruined freestanding wall and iron gate juxtaposed with an ancient bicycle, a forlorn red sign on a deserted station, or a couple of windswept beach huts which appear to be knowingly returning the viewer's gaze. The people in her paintings are acutely observed but this acuity of vision is recorded more through their signs and works than in their figures. The surrealist quality of these pictures, while less obvious, is present in the gentle irony that informs all her work, even the most serious of her industrial landscapes. 
Nan Youngman saw herself as a socialist, but was offended by Soviet communism. She was a freethinker and a religious sceptic with a liking for ribald and irreverent jokes. Behind the diminutive figure with the pudding basin haircut, trousers, blue smock, and ready grin was a formidable organizer, a leader, and a teacher who inspired admiration, at times adulation, among those she led and taught. 
Nan Youngman's working life was divided between painting and teaching. After leaving the Slade she took an art teacher's diploma at the London Day Training Centre under Marion Richardson and began to teach part-time at Highbury Girls' School, London. From Richardson she inherited the strong belief in the importance of art in the curriculum which underlay all her subsequent work in art education. 
In the 1930s she showed at the Wertheim Gallery and with the London Group. In 1936 Youngman became involved in the left-wing Artists' International Association (AIA) after the death in action in Spain of her Slade friend Felicia Browne. Here she met the sculptor Betty Rea, with whom she lived until Rea's death in 1965. She worked on the Paris World Fair peace pavilion in 1937 with Rea and many other AIA artists including Mary Adshead. In 1939 Youngman and Rea moved, after the evacuation of Highbury School to Huntingdon, first to a caravan in the grounds of Hinchingbrooke Castle and then to Godmanchester. In 1944 she was appointed art adviser for Cambridgeshire. She became chair of the Society for Education through Art and was on the editorial board of 'Athene'. In 1947 she founded the 'Pictures for Schools' series of exhibitions showing the work of many distinguished artists, which was widely patronized by local education authorities. These exhibitions later extended to Wales and Scotland. She was a chief examiner, founder of the Cambridge Studio Workshop, later extended to the Mill Group at Overy Staithe, Norfolk, and lectured widely in Britain and abroad. Archive material on Youngman's educational work, including writing on art teaching, is held at Reading University. 
In 1954, encouraged by the writer and art critic Bryan Robertson, Nan Youngman began full-time painting, showed at the Leicester Gallery, and, in 1955, with Rea, Cecil Collins, Elisabeth Vellacott, and others founded the Cambridge Society of Painters and Sculptors. Papermills, the large and picturesque house in Cambridge she shared with Rea and her children and many visitors, was the social centre of the society. This was a productive period yielding many of her best and most important oil paintings, especially those of the south Wales mining valleys then at their peak. These were shown in many one-woman and group exhibitions and are in several permanent public collections. With Rea's death in 1965, Nan Youngman moved to The Hawks, Ely Road, Waterbeach. She continued to spend time in Cardiff with the Welsh painter Esther Grainger but her life became quieter and her paintings increasingly focused on the works of nature rather than man. Many of her later paintings are of the sands and skyscapes of the Norfolk coast, mainly in watercolour and gouache. The first Youngman retrospective was held at the Minories Gallery, Colchester, in 1974. Apart from selling exhibitions her work was shown in 'The story of the AIA' at the Oxford Gallery in 1983, at her second retrospective at Kettles Yard, Cambridge, in 1987 and in the 'Ten decades' exhibition of leading women artists of her generation in Norwich and London in 1991. She was appointed OBE in 1987 for services to art. 
Nan Youngman died at home, at The Hawks, on 17 April 1995. She was cremated in Cambridge. A summary exhibition of her life and work was held at the Morley Gallery, London, in October 1997. Nan Youngman distrusted the commercial establishment surrounding artists. She never employed an agent and her work was never self-consciously promoted. Despite this there is a large body of her work in public collections including 'Steelworks Ebbw Vale' (1951; Newport Gallery), 'Rhondda Saturday' (1953; Newport Gallery), the Welsh Contemporary Art Society, Manchester City Galleries, the Whipple Museum, and numerous local authorities, colleges, and schools. There are a number of private collections of her work in Britain and the United States. 


@@@@@


doc= 60539


Deutsch, Andre (1917-2000), publisher, was born on 15 November 1917 in Budapest, Hungary, the only child of Bruno Deutsch, dental surgeon, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Havas. His father was Jewish and his mother partly so. Deutsch was educated at various schools in Budapest, Vienna, and Zurich; the atmosphere at home was Anglophile and he learned to speak English at an early age. In 1939 when he was twenty-two he went to London aiming to become a student at the London School of Economics. But with the outbreak of war, funding from his parents, who remained in Hungary, ceased and he was forced to take a job at the Dorchester Hotel. 
As a Hungarian citizen Deutsch was rounded up under the 'Defence of the Realm Act' and interned on the Isle of Man. He was soon released, however, and returned to the wartime London of the blitz. He became a fire-watcher and joined the Home Guard. An introduction from a fellow internee to John Roberts, the volatile Welsh managing director of the publishers Nicholson and Watson, resulted in Deutsch's joining its staff as sales representative and soon after becoming sales manager. He acquired a thorough grounding in all aspects of the book trade and became convinced that publishing was his vocation. 
Deutsch belonged to a circle of gifted refugees from Europe. He was a friend of George Weidenfeld who, exiled from his native Vienna, was then working for the BBC with plans to publish 'Contact', a high-level miscellany that would serve as a forum for the cultural and political life of post-war Britain. Thanks to Deutsch this compilation, which ran for several numbers, appeared under the imprint of Nicholson and Watson. As the war in Europe drew to an end Deutsch decided it was the time to found his own publishing company. With an initial capital of only $3000, the firm Allan Wingate, a name he conjured out of the air, was born. It was saved many times from bankruptcy by the irrepressible buoyancy of its founder and his knack of finding people prepared to inject fresh capital into the company in exchange for directorships. 
Deutsch had a nose for the kind of book that, in journalistic parlance, is called a 'scoop'. It led him to go to Turkey after the Second World War in pursuit of the spy Elyesa Bazna (Cicero), valet at the British embassy, who had sold allied secrets to the Germans. This led to two books Deutsch published at an interval of ten years: 'Operation Cicero' by Bazna's German contact L. C. Moyzich, and a later one by Bazna himself, 'I was Cicero'. While on the trail of Cicero, Deutsch met Franz von Papen, Germany's wartime ambassador in Turkey. Deutsch quickly realized that here was an even bigger potential catch for his list. He persuaded von Papen to write a volume of memoirs to be published by Wingate. Unfortunately by 1951 when these were written the company was in total disarray. Deutsch lost control to his fellow directors and had to resign. 
Deutsch soon set about forming a new publishing company, Andre Deutsch Ltd. He persuaded Diana Athill ('b'. 1917), who had been with him at his former firm since its outset in 1945, to join it. Athill, an Oxford English literature graduate, became Deutsch's business partner for the rest of their publishing careers. Her cool sound judgement and skill as an editor were the perfect complement to Deutsch's initiative and flair. At the start for a short time they became lovers, or, as Athill explains in her entertaining memoir 'Stet: an Editor's Life' (2000), 'we ate an omelette and went to bed together, without -- as I remember it -- much excitement on either side'. Excitement often came to them but in a different form, as colleagues in the two publishing houses that Deutsch founded. Deutsch exploited Athill, but she put up with it because she loved her work. 'So while it is true that Andre took advantage of my nature', she wrote, 'in getting me cheap and having to bother so little about my feelings, it cannot be said that 'in relation to the job' he did any violence to those feelings' (ibid.). 
Deutsch regarded the rights to the von Papen book as his and planned to publish it. His former director-colleagues took a different view of the matter and made an approach to the author to keep the book on the Wingate list. A puzzled von Papen telephoned Deutsch to find out what was going on and after talking to him at some length affirmed his loyalty to Deutsch and his right to be the publisher of the book. Deutsch then sold the serialization rights to 'The People', the Sunday newspaper, for $30,000. The book was successfully published by Deutsch's new company in 1952 and was the means of its early survival. 
In seeking authors Deutsch made an annual trip to the USA where he signed up Philip Roth and John Updike before either was known in Britain. Back home on his expanding fiction list he published Roy Fuller, the wartime poet turned novelist; Brian Moore, the Belfast writer whose first novel, 'Judith Hearne', appeared in 1955; and Wolf Mankowitz, whose novella about the antique business 'Make me an Offer' struck a refreshingly new note of Anglo-Jewish humour. Even more successful in the comic field was a short book, 'How to be an Alien', by Deutsch's fellow Hungarian George Mikes, destined to remain in print for many years. Illustrations for it by the artist Nicolas Bentley resulted in Bentley's becoming a working director of the company. 
A meeting in London between Athill and V. S. Naipaul led to the publication of 'The Mystic Masseur' (1957) and many of Deutsch's subsequent books. His appreciation of Athill as an editor was shared by many of the firm's authors. The Trinidad historian and politician Eric Williams was another Caribbean writer published by Deutsch. The discovery of Jean Rhys's prequel to Charlotte Bronte's 'Jane Eyre', 'Wide Sargasso Sea' (1966), set in Dominica (where the author was born) and Jamaica heralded a revival of interest in a hitherto unjustly neglected writer. In 1962 Deutsch founded the African Universities Press in Lagos, Nigeria, and in 1964 the East Africa Publishing House, Nairobi, Kenya. During the 1970s his friendship with Harold Evans, the editor of the 'Sunday Times', resulted in Deutsch publishing the work of the paper's Insight team, investigative journalism in book form. Deutsch's love of travel made him an ideal ambassador for his profession. He would head missions promoting British publishing in central Europe or throughout the Indian subcontinent. 
At sixty-five Deutsch had no thought of retirement but he realized, albeit reluctantly, that the company could not continue solely under his leadership for ever. In 1984 he received an approach from T. G. (Tom) Rosenthal ('b'. 1935), the former chairman of William Heinemann Ltd, to take over Andre Deutsch Ltd. Somewhat unwisely Deutsch tried to conclude a deal with Rosenthal whereby he would still retain a large measure of control of the company. After protracted negotiations conducted for Deutsch by Lord Goodman, Rosenthal acquired 50.1 per cent of the company, with the two men as joint chairmen and joint managing directors. An unhappy time ensued for Deutsch who was reluctant to cede any form of authority to the younger man. He lingered on with an office and various titles until he was seventy-two, when in considerable bitterness he retired completely from active involvement in the company. In 1989 he was awarded the CBE for his contribution to publishing. In 1991 he became a director of Libra, an imprint in his native Budapest. 
Deutsch was a popular member of the Garrick Club and had a wide circle of friends who enjoyed his lively talk with its insights into politics and people uttered in what always remained a distinctly Hungarian accent. His boyish good looks never deserted him even in old age. Until he became crippled by the debilitating illness Crohn's disease, he was a keen skier, going to Davos every year. 
On one of these holidays when he was still young Deutsch met Gwen, an English woman ten years his senior and the wife of Francis Winham. There was instant rapport; the two of them formed an attachment that proved lifelong. Gwen survived the death of her husband by many years but she and Deutsch never married and always had separate residences. It was, however, recognized among their circle that they were a devoted couple. Deutsch died of heart failure at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital on 11 April 2000 aged eighty-two and was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 60541


Ehrlich, Georg (1897-1966), sculptor and graphic artist, was born on 22 February 1897 in Vienna, the eldest of the three children of Kurt Ehrlich of Breslau, the representative of a German coalmining company, and his wife, Rosa, who was Viennese. Kurt Ehrlich was a businessman by necessity but, like his son, a musician by inclination. Georg was allowed to leave his 'Gymnasium' in Vienna at the age of fifteen and enrol in the Vienna Kunstgewerbeschule. After only three years there he was called up to the Austrian army and saw service on the Russian and Italian fronts with the rank of lieutenant until the end of the war. 
During his short time at the Kunstgewerbeschule Ehrlich managed to master the techniques of etching and lithography. In 1920, in the economic misery which followed Austria's defeat, he moved to Munich and until 1925 produced many prints in those media. Despite hyperinflation they sold well to collectors and museums. The prints were shown with, and stand comparison with, the more demonstrative works of Ernst Barlach, Oskar Kokoschka, and others. They project, however, a huge sadness quite different from the bitter protest and denunciation which characterized post-war art in German-speaking countries. In Ehrlich's vision humanity is helpless. His bodies serve as frail supports for the encephalitic heads from which the soul looks out from great melancholy eyes. In real life such eyes belonged to a certain friend, the well-known actress Elizabeth Bergner, whom he first portrayed in 1921. Ehrlich included himself in some prints, satirizing his small stature and pronounced features. The writer on art Erica Tietze-Conrat, who was an intimate friend, suggested that his vision of victimized humanity was less related to post-war suffering than to his own history as the son of a frustrated and angry father. 
Ehrlich returned to Vienna in 1924 and began to devote himself to sculpture. He was by no means an Orthodox Jew. Already in his graphic work he had mingled 'Old' and 'New Testament' and Apocryphal themes. His sculpture shows the same sense of the numinous. In it, mankind is seldom seen to be in charge of its own destiny but seems more often to be listening and waiting, sometimes despairingly. This tendency did not show itself immediately or consistently. His first prominent commission in Vienna, 'Girl Carrying her Little Brother' (1933, Osterreichische Galerie, Vienna), was in a Germanic tradition of realist public sculpture. In a series of heads of boys and men in the 1930s, the clean-cut features and cropped hair show a confident classicizing tendency, but in 'Two Sisters' (1932, Museum der Stadt Wien) there is conventual submission and abnegation of the flesh. Ehrlich's concern for form was as great as any modernist's, as he searched for the most classical form in which to convey his subjects' interiority. Between 1928 and 1937 he exhibited in ten cities. His Viennese career was cut short by the Anschluss in March 1938, which made it dangerous for him to remain in Austria. At this time he was already in London, and his wife, Bettina Bauer (died 1985), whom he had married on 27 November 1930, joined him in July of that year and brought many of his works with her. 
Ehrlich made a success in London. His first exhibition in Britain was there in 1939. As early as 1944 he was commissioned by the city of Coventry to make a memorial to the victims of air raids; his figure 'Pax' (1944-5) is in the city's Garden of Rest. Like other refugee artists of quality he did not fit the stereotypes of academic or modernist which competed for attention on the British post-war scene. But the distinction of his work earned him supporters in both camps, and in the world of music. He was an associate of the Royal Academy and member of the Royal Society of British Arts, and a member of the London Group, but his works were also exhibited by the Arts Council and represented in important public collections. The number of his public commissions belies the scant attention he received from critics and publicists fixated on modernism. The Ehrlichs rapidly committed themselves to Britain and Georg became a British subject in 1947. His beautiful and talented wife must have greatly helped their integration. Bettina, as she signed herself, was a painter and illustrator who also became expert in the casting and patination of her husband's bronzes. 
Although his work never looked English, Ehrlich responded to the mood of post-war Britain. The contemporary angst had its reflection in his increasingly etiolated, mannerist figures, such as 'Recumbent Boy' (original plaster, Museum and Art Gallery, Letchworth, Hertfordshire) which he showed at the Festival of Britain in 1951. Their melancholy grace was offset by the animal sculptures which became a feature of his London period. (Some of these are in the Tate collection.) Whether or not he intended these to appeal to British collectors, they are rooted in his childhood, when he would trudge some distance to draw the horses at a cab stand -- his 'Tired Horse' (1961, Bruton Gallery, Bruton, Somerset, in 1979) revives such a memory. Years later he remarked that in order to represent a horse one had for the time to 'be' a horse. Indeed an element of self-portraiture runs through his whole work and becomes palpable in the last 'Head of a Horse' (Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh) he made in 1963-4. Other bronze portraits of mainly musical celebrities include 'Benjamin Britten' (1950-52, priv. coll.). 
Georg Ehrlich died on 1 July 1966 at Lucerne, Switzerland, from the heart condition which had troubled him since 1951, and he was buried in Vienna in a grave donated by the city. His widow continued to live in London and carefully to supervise the casting of his plaster and Plasticine originals until her death in 1985; there was then no one left to represent him in London, since his long-term dealers, the O'Hana Gallery, had closed. Bettina Ehrlich had therefore provided that all the originals and casts should be returned to Vienna. 


@@@@@


doc= 60543


Feibusch, Hans Nathan (1898-1998), mural painter, was born in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, on 15 August 1898, the elder son of assimilated Jewish parents, Carl Feibusch (died 1929), dental surgeon, and his wife, Marianne, 'nee' Ickelheimer, an amateur painter. He received a classical education and saw military service on the Russian front (1916-18). Following the war he briefly pursued medical studies, but then turned to painting and studied in Munich and Berlin. After a period travelling in Italy (1921-3) and further study in Paris, where he joined the studio of Andre Lhote, he settled in Frankfurt in 1925 to pursue an artistic career and was awarded (in December 1930) the German state prize for painters from the Prussian Academy of Arts for 'The Fishmonger' (1930). Consequent upon the persecution of Jews, he emigrated to England in 1933, was elected a member of the London Group (in 1934), and exhibited regularly at the Reid and Lefevre Gallery in London. On 3 July 1935 he married Sidonie Charlotte Cramer (1888-1963), daughter of David Gestetner, manufacturer of duplicators, and divorced wife of Max Cramer. There were no children of the marriage. 
With the onset of war Feibusch spent some years in Cheltenham, joining actively in firefighting and first-aid work (he swore the oath of allegiance to the crown on 9 May 1940), and continued to paint -- exhibiting at the Royal Academy summer exhibition in 1944 (the first of many occasions) -- and began an association with the Church of England that was to dominate his life for the next thirty or so years. The catalyst for this association was Feibusch's first public mural, a commission from Edward D. Mills in 1937 for 'The Footwashing' at the New Methodist Hall in Colliers Wood, London. Feibusch's paintings, in the strongest of which the figures, instead of occupying a perspectival third dimension, seem context-free and appear to float across the two-dimensional area of the wall, appealed greatly to modernist architects; and both Frankland Dark and E. Maxwell Fry commented favourably on work he accomplished in private houses. 
The mural at Colliers Wood was widely acclaimed in the press and when the bishop of Chichester, George Bell, sought an artist to assist in 'the adornment and beautifying' (Foster, 'The Goring judgement', 255) of places of worship, Feibusch was the recommended artist. A meeting between the bishop and the painter took place in Brighton on new year's day 1940 and led to Feibusch's first commission in an Anglican church -- a nativity cycle at St Wilfrid's, Brighton. Following completion, and with the support of Bell (someone whom Feibusch, in old age, was to insist was the finest man he had ever known), other commissions followed -- for an extensive narrative, 'Pilgrim's Progress', at St Elisabeth's, Eastbourne, and for two murals at the Festival Church of St John, Waterloo (1950-51). This last, commissioned by Thomas Ford, who was war damage surveyor in the diocese of Southwark, together with a substantial body of writing about the art of mural painting -- notably 'Mural Painting' (1946) -- led to additional work in the Southwark diocese and, despite doubts in some quarters about employing a former German national and a Jew, to an assured reception in Anglican circles. 
Commissions followed across the country -- at Coventry, Wellingborough, and Preston (Lancashire) to the north; Goring by Sea (opposition from traditionalists at diocesan advisory committee being resolved by George Bell presiding in his own consistory court), Paulsgrove, Christchurch, and Exeter in the south and west; and in London at St Ethelburga, Bishopsgate (a triptych), and at St Alban the Martyr, Holborn. It was at this last that Feibusch worshipped for some years (he was baptized and confirmed into the Church of England in 1965), painted his largest mural, 'Trinity in Glory' (1966), together with fourteen stations of the cross, and, later, produced a bronze figure of Christ for the outer wall of the church. In all he worked in thirty Anglican churches (twenty-eight as a muralist, two -- including Ely Cathedral -- as sculptor only) and produced what is probably the largest body of work in his particular metier by any artist in the history of the Church of England. 
A deep passion for his art, sensitivity to architectural space (much of his work was on panel but he always worked on site), and skilful interpretation of a client's commission did not restrict Feibusch to Anglican subjects, and he achieved notable work at Portmeirion (for Clough Williams-Ellis), at Dudley town hall, and at Newport (south Wales) where, assisted by Phyllis Bray -- who also worked with him on many church murals -- he completed twelve large panels in the civic centre depicting the history of the town. In later life he completed five portraits of 'Old Testament' figures at Stern Hall, Seymour Place, London. These last, in concert with the approach of the fiftieth anniversary of the Second World War, marked a watershed in his association with Anglicanism and, although in 1985 he was awarded an honorary doctorate at Lambeth Palace, his mind turned increasingly to the past. In his final decade he renounced Christianity and prepared a sequence of gouaches that depict the agony of separation. The experience of exile was a powerful force throughout his life and many of his murals and canvases (for he painted mythological subjects and landscapes as well as biblical events) explore an aspiration for union -- his most prolific religious subject, for example, being the ascension. 
In 1989 Feibusch was awarded the German grand cross of merit, and a few years later he arranged to gift the contents of his studio (some 464 works in all) to Pallant House Gallery, Chichester. He died on 18 July 1998 at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, and was buried according to the rite of the Jewish Reform synagogue at Golders Green Jewish cemetery, on 21 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 60548


Gabo, Sir Naum (1890?-1977), sculptor, was born on 5 August, probably in 1890 and also probably in Klimovichi, Mogilev, in provincial south-west Russia (now in Belorussia), the seventh of the eight children of Boris Grigoryevich Pevzner ('c'.1850- 'c'.1929), the owner of a foundry in nearby Bryansk which produced alloys and machinery, and his wife, Fanny Borisovna, 'nee' Ozerskaya ('c'.1855- 'c'.1930). His parents, who were both Jewish, may have amended his year of birth in order that he might later avoid military service. The privileges which accompanied the flourishing of the Pevzner business meant that, when he was aged about eight, the entire family was able to join the father in the industrial town of Bryansk, outside the pale of settlement to which Russian Jews were normally confined. His father seems to have preserved a sense of his Jewish roots and religion in private, but Neyemiya Pevzner had a Russian Orthodox nanny and was baptized, a common practice among assimilated families. 
Pevzner seems to have been a rebellious youth. He was expelled from two local schools, and then was sent to Tomsk in Siberia, where his eldest brother, Mark, was studying. Between 1907 and 1910 he attended the 'Gymnasium' in Kursk, south-east of Bryansk, where his principal love was literature. In his teens he developed a strong commitment to radical politics, especially after the failed 1905 revolution. He was particularly attracted to Peter Kropotkin's 'Mutual Aid' (1902), a key text of communist anarchism. His interest in art was inspired by his elder brother Antoine Pevsner (Natan Pevzner), then an art student in Kiev, and his early drawings were mainly influenced by the work of the Russian symbolist painter Mikhail Vrubel. 
Pevzner was under strong family pressure to pursue a career in medicine and in 1910 he enrolled at Munich University, where he attended courses in anatomy, physics, and chemistry. Although he remained fascinated with science, in 1912 he changed his registration to philosophy, and began to study logic and the ideas of Kant. He also started following courses in civil engineering at the Technische Hochschule in Munich (though he may not have been officially enrolled) and studying art history at the university, notably with Heinrich Wolfflin, under whose guidance he visited Italy in the summer of 1913. He also discovered avant-garde art and theory. He read Wilhelm Worringer's 'Abstraktion und Einfuhlung' (1908) and Kandinsky's 'Uber das Geistige in der Kunst' (1912), and had opportunities to view the latest art in Munich, home of the Blaue Reiter group, and in Paris, which he visited in 1912 and 1913 to stay with Antoine. 
The outbreak of the First World War compelled Pevzner to leave Germany without graduating. He and his younger brother Alexei settled in Christiania, where they were subsequently joined by Antoine. In these relatively tranquil circumstances he began experimenting with figurative sculptures which were constructed by joining together flat planar elements (initially of cardboard, later of wood and metal) so that form is permeated by space (such as 'Constructed Head No. 1', 'c'.1916-17, Stadelsches Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt am Main), in contrast to the solid volumes produced by the traditional methods of carving and modelling. His early works reflected the artistic examples of cubism and Russian icon painting, but also ideas of open-work structure and the separation of material strength from mass which were implicit in modern engineering structures. As a sign of his new sense of identity as a sculptor, he coined the pseudonym Gabo, to distinguish himself from his artist brother Antoine. 
The brothers returned to Russia in the spring of 1917, after the February revolution. They settled in Moscow, and Gabo, like many avant-garde artists, was seized by enthusiasm for the new political order. In August 1920 he organized a small group exhibition in a bandstand on Tverskoy bulvar, which included more permanent realizations of the sculptures which he had begun to develop in Norway, such as the 'Head No. 2' (iron, 'c'.1916-20, priv. coll.). To accompany the show he wrote 'The Realistic Manifesto', a polemical justification of his art, which was printed in the form of a poster and pasted up all over Moscow. He argued that the cubists and futurists had laid the foundations for a new art but had failed to convey the essence of the 'new age', whereas his works offered a distillation of the modern scientific world-view: 'With a plumb line in the hand, with eyes as precise as a ruler, with a spirit as taut as a compass, we build them in the same way as the universe builds its own creations, as the engineer his bridges, as the mathematician his formulae of the orbits. ('Gabo', 1957, 151)' Gabo proclaimed that art should be based on 'kinetic rhythms' rather than static form. As an experiment in this direction, he produced 'Kinetic Construction: Standing Wave' (1920, Tate collection), comprising a thin metal rod which is caused to vibrate by a motor, and through its oscillations describes a virtual volume or wave form in space. He also declared that art should be placed in the 'squares and streets', communicating progressive values to a mass audience. This attitude underlay a subsequent series of highly architectonic constructions, built up from geometrical elements, which he hoped would eventually be enlarged to a monumental scale and sited in the modern urban environment (for example, 'Column', 'c'.1923, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York). 
All Gabo's subsequent work was affected by the idealistic ethos of revolutionary Russia, and by the experimentation with purely abstract styles which he had encountered in the work of Russian avant-garde artists such as Kazimir Malevich and Vladimir Tatlin. By 1922, however, he was becoming disillusioned with the increasingly authoritarian character of the Soviet regime, the government's growing preference for realism in art, the erosion of avant-garde influence over artistic affairs, and the trend towards practical design, at the expense of art, among hardline Marxist artists such as Aleksandr Rodchenko. Gabo had been involved in artistic administration, and his contacts enabled him to leave Russia for Berlin in the spring of 1922, to help organize the 'Erste Russische Kunstausstellung' (first Russian art exhibition) which opened that October. He settled in Berlin, where he encountered a sympathetic circle of artists and critics, and had ready access to modern materials such as glass, plastic, and metals, which had been hard to obtain in Moscow. He also met Elisabeth Richter ('c'.1900-1929), the estranged wife of the artist Hans Richter, with whom he lived until her tragic death in childbirth in 1929. 
In the West Gabo became a leading representative of constructivism. The term suggested an art in tune with social, political, and scientific progress, as expressed by precise impersonal techniques, and geometric forms and materials more redolent of engineering structures, machinery, or scientific laboratories than the traditional artist's studio. By 1924 his work had been widely reproduced in avant-garde journals, and he had exhibited at the Galerie Percier in Paris alongside his brother Antoine, who had moved to Paris in 1923. In 1928 Gabo wrote an article for 'Bauhaus' magazine denouncing the growing assimilation and vulgarization of constructivism by the worlds of fashion and design. His first one-man show, at the Kestner-Gesellschaft in Hanover in 1930, displayed the extensive body of sculpture which he produced in the 1920s, including 'Construction in Space with Balance on Two Points' ('c'.1925, Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut) and 'Construction in Space: Soaring' ('c'.1929-30, reassembled 1985, Leeds City Art Gallery). 
Gabo's ambitions extended beyond the traditional sculptural object. In 1927, assisted by Antoine, he created the highly successful set and costumes for Serge Diaghilev's production of the ballet 'La chatte'. The design was notable for its purely abstract forms and its use of transparent, reflective plastics, the visual impact of which was enhanced by dark backdrops and strong lighting. In 1931 he submitted an architectural design to the competition in Moscow for a new Palace of the Soviets (Shchusev Architectural Museum, Moscow). This reflected his long-standing interest in architecture, but also his continuing commitment to the Soviet experiment and his desire at this stage to establish an artistic reputation in his homeland. 
After the Nazis came to power in 1933, Gabo decided that it was imperative for him to leave Germany, and he subsequently spent three years in Paris, in conditions of profound poverty and depression, during which time he produced very little work. His career and spirits revived when he moved to London in the spring of 1936. He soon met and married Miriam Franklin, 'nee' Israels (1907-1993), with whom he lived very happily for the rest of his life. Moreover, England was currently a principal centre of the modern movement in art and design. Gabo encountered other emigres from Germany and also became good friends with the critic Herbert Read, abstract artists such as Ben Nicholson and Barbara Hepworth, and the architect Leslie Martin. In England he was able to exhibit and sell a significant number of sculptures, and with Nicholson and Martin he embarked upon the creation of 'Circle', a book-length celebration of the international 'constructive spirit' which underpinned progressive architecture, painting, and sculpture, and foreshadowed the enlightened cultural values of society in the future. His opening essay, 'The constructive idea in art', indicated his prestigious position within the 'Circle' grouping. He asserted the fundamental affinity between art and science, as explorations of the 'hidden forces of nature'. In 'Sculpture: carving and construction in space', which introduced the sculpture section for which he was responsible, he emphasized his fundamental aim of heightening the viewer's sensation of space: 'Our task is to penetrate deeper into its substance and bring it closer to our consciousness; so that the sensation of space will become for us a more elementary and everyday emotion the same as the sensation of light or the sensation of sound. (Martin, Nicholson, and Gabo, 107)' Gabo's English constructions, such as 'Spheric Theme' (1937-8, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York) and 'Construction in Space: Crystalline Centre' (1938, Tate collection), revealed a new transparency and curvilinearity. Both effects depended upon his discovery and aesthetic exploitation of the recently marketed type of plastic known in Britain as perspex, which was less brittle and so more easily malleable than its predecessors. 
In 1938 Gabo spent six months in the United States. Thereafter he was constantly thinking about moving across the Atlantic, to escape a war which was first imminent and then actual, but he ultimately stayed in England until November 1946. He spent the years of the Second World War in the relatively peaceful surroundings of Carbis Bay, Cornwall, in close proximity to Nicholson, Hepworth, the critic Adrian Stokes, and the studio potter Bernard Leach. Younger artists such as Peter Lanyon and John Wells were drawn to this grouping, which formed the basis of the post-war St Ives school. Gabo was frequently tormented by events in the wider world, especially during the German invasion of western Russia where he had grown up. He wrote several articles, kept a diary, produced an interesting group of paintings (for example, 'Construction in Depths', 1944, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York), and in 1944-5 devoted considerable energy to designing a new car for the Jowett company, a project which eventually collapsed. His major sculptural innovation, announced by 'Linear Construction in Space No. 1' (1942-3, Kettle's Yard, Cambridge), was the introduction of closely spaced threads of nylon filament (another brand-new form of plastic) which he wound around a framework to create the illusion of curving planes permeated by space. The technique of stringing, recurrent in his subsequent work (such as 'Linear Construction in Space No. 4', 1958-9, Art Institute of Chicago), was probably inspired by the mathematical models which he had encountered as a student in Munich, and in the Science Museum in London. 
Gabo's career in the United States was never quite as successful as he had hoped, partly because the pristine forms and optimistic message of constructivism lost some of their resonance in the gloomy aftermath of the war. He and Miriam settled in Woodbury, Connecticut, and moved to nearby Middlebury in 1953. He exhibited and sold works, lectured widely, and executed a commission for a large-scale stairwell sculpture in the Baltimore Museum of Art (1950-51). His greatest public project stemmed, however, from his first return visit to Europe in 1954, when he was commissioned to produce an outdoor sculpture for Marcel Breuer's austere Bijenkorf department store in Rotterdam. The 85 foot construction was unveiled in 1957. The soaring verticality of the form provided an effective and accessible visual metaphor for the rebirth of Rotterdam, destroyed by Nazi bombing, while the materials and structure evoked the cranes which were so vital to the economic life of the city, and which littered the docks just a few minutes' walk away. The spatial openness of Gabo's design produced a structure which was relatively lightweight in relation to its spatial volume, while the twist of the planes through 90 degrees served to prevent any dangerous build-up of wind pressure. 
Gabo's fame was at its height in the years that followed. A major monograph appeared in 1957, illustrating his work to date and reprinting some of his major theoretical texts. In 1959 he delivered the prestigious A. W. Mellon lectures at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC, which were subsequently published as 'Of Divers Arts' (1962). A string of prizes and official honours culminated in Gabo becoming KBE in 1971. Major retrospectives of his work were mounted in both Europe and the United States. Whereas he had been a relatively marginal figure during his initial ten years in the United States, which coincided with the heyday of abstract expressionism, his critical reputation from the 1960s onward benefited from the emergence of kinetic art and a more geometric idiom of abstract art, as well as from the increasing interest in the Russian avant-garde, of which he was one of the few surviving witnesses. 
Gabo's late constructions were frequently large, and employed as material various kinds of metal, in the form of both sheets and linear springs (for example, 'Vertical Construction No. 2', 1965-6, Julia A. Whitney Foundation, Connecticut). The boom in the market for contemporary art produced a degree of financial security which enabled Gabo to use these more lasting materials and to employ studio assistants from the early 1960s onward. Assistance was essential for executing the commissions for public sculptures he regularly began to receive. The most impressive of these was the fountain, unveiled in 1976, installed in the grounds of St Thomas's Hospital, London, directly across the Thames from the houses of parliament. The form was adapted from 'Torsion' ('c'.1929, Berlinische Galerie, Berlin), but the incorporation of a rotating movement and of linear jets of water, evoking diaphanous planes curving through space, served to dematerialize the steel structure. 
When presenting a group of small works to the Tate Gallery in 1977, Gabo explained his continuing affection for the country he had left thirty years earlier: 'I have lived in England through the most tragic years of her history and the most glorious period in the life of her people and I have learned to know and to love that country. 
I have found a spirit of humanity in England which I carry with me in spite of my having to take citizenship in another country due to circumstances -- but I never, in my heart, lost my attachment to England. 
I have acquired more personal friends in England than anywhere and any time in the wandering years of my life. (Gabo to Lord Bullock, 14 April 1977, New Haven, Connecticut, Yale University, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Gabo MSS)' Gabo's health slowly declined, and in his final years he was mainly confined to working on wood engravings, a medium he had first taken up in 1950. On 23 August 1977 he died in Waterbury Hospital, Waterbury, Connecticut. Following cremation, his ashes were scattered in front of his studio in Middlebury. He was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 60550


Keane, Mary Nesta (1904-1996), novelist and playwright, was born on 20 July 1904 at Kilnamora, co. Kildare, Ireland, into an Anglo-Irish family, the third of the five children of Walter Clarmont Skrine, governor of Mauritius, originally from a Somerset family, and his wife, the poet 
Mary Nesta Skrine, always known as Molly, spent her first five years in co. Kildare. The family then moved to Ballyrankin, co. Wexford, where she had a lonely and unhappy childhood. She was educated privately and patchily, briefly attending the French School in Bray, co. Wicklow. While she was at school, members of the IRA set fire to the family home. In the main she was left to the dubious care of a string of somewhat eccentric governesses, but she made splendid use of some of the more memorable oddities of these ladies in her later fiction. Her first fictional work, a light-hearted novel amusingly entitled 'The Knight of the Cheerful Countenance', was started when she was seventeen 'for pin money' to increase her meagre dress allowance, and she was surprised and gratified when it was published by Mills and Boon in 1926. She wrote it under the pseudonym M. J. Farrell, a name she selected from above a country public house as she was riding home from hunting. She used a pseudonym to avoid the scorn of her Anglo-Irish gentry friends, who, she believed, would have despised such arty pretensions in one of their own class. She retained the name for all her novels and plays until the surprise appearance of her most celebrated novel, 'Good Behaviour', in 1981. 
In the 1920s and 1930s M. J. Farrell published a succession of novels, including 'Young Entry' (1928), 'Taking Chances' (1929), 'Mad Puppetstown' (1931), 'Conversation Piece' (1932), and 'Full House' (1935). They were warmly received, and Hugh Walpole called her 'one of the best half-dozen younger women writers now writing in England' (Devlin, 'The Rising Tide', vi), not realizing that her literary labours were being conducted on John Bull's other island. 'Devoted Ladies' (1934), about a lesbian relationship, and one of the most powerful and sexually potent of the M. J. Farrell works, moved Compton Mackenzie to dub it 'infernally good... a worldly wise, witty and remorselessly cruel book... certainly one of the most brilliant novels I have read in the last two years' (Devlin, 'Devoted Ladies', viii). 
As a novelist Farrell belongs in the long and distinguished line of 'big house' Anglo-Irish ascendancy writers, which dates from Maria Edgeworth and Lady Morgan, and includes among its modern exponents George Moore and Elizabeth Bowen (her contemporary and close friend) and, latterly, Caroline Blackwood, John Banville, and William Trevor. Like these writers, she sets her fiction in the large gentry houses which are just beginning to crumble, as their owners' prestige and finances dwindle in an emerging, bourgeois, Catholic Ireland. An important respect in which she differs from most of these other writers is her avoidance of political themes, as in 'The Rising Tide' (1937), which was set in 1900 during a period of home rule agitation. 
Farrell concentrates instead on the claustrophobia of personal relationships within closely knit family groups. She meticulously observes the well-furnished interiors of her chosen mansions, delighting in details of carpets, curtains, bedrooms, fireplaces, chandeliers, and also the ruinously dangerous intimacies of family life. Occasionally, as in early chapters of 'Devoted Ladies', she moved her scene to London's gossipy literary milieu, but the fiction comes into its own once she has transferred her characters, both the lusty and the effete, to an Irish gentry dwelling, and the windswept acres over which their horses and hounds pursue the fox with a vigour unparalleled outside the works of Somerville and Ross. Riding and hunting were Farrell's favourite pastimes, and her prose comes vividly to life when she describes a day's gallop. She is equally good, however, at describing the terror felt by small ascendancy children when they are first forced to mount their troublesome ponies. (Her brother, Walter Skrine, despite having been seriously injured in the First World War, rode in the Grand National.) 
On 20 October 1938 Molly Skrine married Robert Lumley (Bobby) Keane (1909/10-1946), a gentleman farmer, with whom she lived for five years before their marriage -- unconventional in this as in much else. They had two daughters, Sally and Virginia. In the same year as her marriage she had a great success with her first play, 'Spring Meeting' (1938); she was assisted by her close friend John Perry, whom she had met while staying at Woodrooff, his parents' house. The play was staged at the Ambassadors Theatre, and was directed, as were her other stage works, by John Gielgud. It gave the actress Margaret Rutherford her first starring role, as Bijou Furze, a formidable and eccentric elderly spinster who has a secret gambling habit. Sybil Thorndike and Lewis Casson had leading roles in another successful comedy, 'Treasure Hunt', at the Apollo in 1949. Molly's light-hearted plays won popular and critical approval, and James Agate said he 'would back this impish writer to hold her own against Noel Coward himself' (Devlin, 'The Rising Tide', i). 
Bobby Keane's early death in 1946 meant that the family had to abandon their beautiful home, Belleville, in the Blackwater valley. The failure of her play 'Dazzling Prospects' (1961) was another blow. It was put on at the Globe Theatre with Margaret Rutherford in the lead, and under the aegis of Molly's great friend the impresario Binkie Beaumont. But the play was wrong for the time, with very different, realistic works such as John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' taking over from frivolous comedy. M. J. Farrell fell silent for the subsequent two decades. 
Molly Keane set about the difficult business of bringing up her two daughters in reduced circumstances, but never lost touch with either her Anglo-Irish friends or her large circle of literary acquaintances in London. She moved to England for five years but returned to Ireland when she bought a house at Ardmore, co. Waterford. Here she entertained the actress Peggy Ashcroft who, bedridden with influenza and needing something to read, asked her hostess whether she had written anything interesting lately. Keane had in fact submitted 'Good Behaviour' to her old friend William Collins, who had published many of her M. J. Farrell novels, but Collins thought it far too dark and rejected it. Ashcroft thought the book a triumph, however, and sent it to her friend Ian Parsons of Chatto and Windus, who liked it but could not persuade Chatto to take it. 'Good Behaviour' was eventually published by Andre Deutsch in 1981. It was a wickedly funny book in which Keane came into her own as a brilliant observer of family relationships and sexual conduct. Its finest achievement is its gawky and overgrown heroine, Aroon St Charles, who is far too dim to understand her cruel mother, homosexual brother, or lecherous father, but nevertheless triumphs over them all in the end, becoming in Keane's skilful depiction a terrifying epitome of menacing, unloved ugliness. It was shortlisted for the Booker prize and televised by the BBC in 1982, and a new readership acclaimed this 'unknown' Irish writer. All of the M. J. Farrell novels were reissued by Virago. Inspired by the novel's great success, Keane went on to publish two more lively novels, 'Time after Time' (1983) and 'Loving and Giving' (1988). Her cookery book, 'Nursery Cooking', was published in 1985. With an attractive pointed face and clear blue eyes, she had a sharp sense of humour. In her final years she was incapacitated by heart trouble, and she died on 22 April 1996 after a fall in her home at Ardmore. 


@@@@@


doc= 60553


Goehr, Walter (1903-1960), composer and conductor, was born on 28 May 1903 in Berlin, the elder of the two sons of Julius Goehr (1872-1948), factory owner, and his wife, Thekla Mendelsohn (died 1931). His parents were both Jewish. His early musical talent showed itself in the fact that, even preceding his formal education in the composition class of Arnold Schoenberg at the Berlin Hochschule fur Musik (1921-4), he had already worked as a conductor of operetta in Berlin theatres. His compositions were performed in Germany until he left that country in 1932, and he was director of music in the theatre of Erwin Piscator. His compositions included a symphony (performed in Kiel), a radio opera, 'Malpopita' (which was in fact the first ever written for the medium), and 'Amerikanisches Songbuch', 'Pep', in collaboration with Lion Feuchtwanger (which was performed at the Baden-Baden Music Festival), chamber music, and songs. Although his student works reflect the influence of his teacher, Schoenberg, he gradually moved into the kind of projects associated with Paul Hindemith, Hanns Eisler, and Kurt Weill. He mainly worked in the theatre, and for the influential Berlin Radio. On 5 August 1930 he married pianist and photographer Laelia Rivlin ('b'. 1908), from whom he was divorced in 1953, having had a son, the composer Alexander Goehr. 
Goehr lost his job at Berlin Radio in 1932 because of his Jewish origins, but at that moment he was invited to London to work as music director for the Gramophone Company (later EMI), and he emigrated with his wife and newly born son. At the Gramophone Company he was responsible for the preparation of the musical materials for recordings, he assisted conductors and artists, and he accompanied (often unacknowledged on the record labels) singers, among them Gigli and John McCormack. He assisted Stravinsky at the first recording of 'Les noces', and the story (possibly apocryphal) is told that, because Stravinsky was unable to get one of the takes right, after he had left London the cast was reassembled, and Goehr re-recorded it. Among his own acknowledged recordings of the pre-1939 period were the first performance on record of Bizet's symphony, Tchaikovsky's first piano concerto with Egon Petri, and Rachmaninoff's second piano concerto with Benno Moiseiwitsch. He also contributed to the then revolutionary recorded history of music with the first ever recording of a work by Edgard Varese (his 'Integrales'). 
In the late 1930s Goehr appeared frequently on BBC broadcasts with his own Orchestra Raymonde. This consisted of some of London's finest players (including Alfredo Campoli, Reginald Kell, and Arthur Cleghorn). Using an innovatory chamber orchestra influenced by Schoenberg, Hindemith, and Stravinsky, he created a repertory of arrangements ranging from Haydn and Mozart to Mussorgsky, Bizet, and even Duke Ellington. It was probably the success of this venture that obtained for him his regular work during the Second World War, writing and conducting much of the music used in wartime radio programmes, such as 'Marching On' and 'Shadow of the Swastika'. The BBC team who made these programmes, directed by Lawrence Gilliam, was to become the features department after the war, and Goehr wrote music for and conducted a great number of their later programmes, including those written by Louis Macneice, Wyndham Lewis, and others. In addition, he worked on a number of British films, including 'Colonel Blimp' (1943), 'A Matter of Life and Death' (1946, as music director), and David Lean's 'Great Expectations' (1946, as composer). During the war he used the English-sounding pseudonym George Walter. 
In the later war years and in the immediate post-war years Goehr achieved considerable success as a conductor of modern and old music. The Walter Goehr concerts at the Wigmore Hall included works by Schoenberg, Bartok, and Stravinsky, as well as the first performances of Britten's 'Serenade' (1943, with Peter Pears and Dennis Brain) and Tippett's 'Concerto for Double String Orchestra'. At the Central Hall, Westminster, he introduced London to Tippett's 'A Child of our Time' (1944) and to the Monteverdi 'Vespers' of 1610. The choir was from Morley College, and it was Goehr's work with Tippett there that led to their close collaboration over a number of years, culminating in the dedication to Goehr of the 'Ritual Dances' from 'A Midsummer Marriage'. In 1946 Goehr returned to the BBC as conductor of the Theatre Orchestra, remaining there until 1949. 
The last decade of Goehr's life was characterized, on the one hand, by an expansion of his activity as a symphonic conductor and recording artist, and on the other by his pioneering work as an editor of performing editions of works by Monteverdi. After the performance of the 1610 'Vespers' at the Royal Festival Hall in London as part of the (1951) Festival of Britain, he continued frequently to perform the 'Vespers' in his own version, and it was owing to these performances that the work became widely popular. His edition of 'L'incoronazione di Poppaea' was performed at the Hamburg State Opera and elsewhere. 
As a symphonic conductor working in Britain, Europe, and South America, Goehr was known for his remarkable ability to make unusual programmes, juxtaposing old and new, and for his advocacy of contemporary music, giving first British performances to works by Mahler, Schoenberg, Webern, Messaien, and Hindemith, as well as Tippett and Britten, and for his often provocative editions and performances of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century works by Gabrieli, Purcell, Monteverdi, Handel, and Bach. At the same time he recorded a wide repertory of works for the American Concert Hall label, associated in Europe with Jeunesses Musicales, winning the grand prix du disque. In addition to his activities as a practising musician, he was a thought-provoking teacher, with a unique insight (for his time) into analytic techniques and their application to performance practice. Goehr was married for a second time on 22 November 1957; his wife was Jean Morrison ('b'. 1927), a secretary and publisher. He died in the city hall, Sheffield, on 4 December 1960, having finished conducting a performance of Handel's 'Messiah'. He was buried at Paddington new cemetery, Mill Hill, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 60554


Sutton, John (1919-1992), geologist, was born on 8 July 1919 at 100 Esmond Road, Acton, Middlesex, the son of Gerald John Sutton, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Kathleen Alice, 'nee' Richard, schoolteacher. His father was an engineer and inventor in the Victorian tradition, who was credited with the development of the gas water-heater and the motor lawnmower, and was one of the team of engineers assembled by Churchill during the Second World War with a general brief to invent unusual warlike devices. His mother was the daughter of a railway engineer and bridge builder in the Burmese government service. She was one of the first women to qualify for a classics degree at Oxford, but as women could not then be admitted she had to wait some years before she could graduate. Meanwhile she taught classics in girls' schools. She was appointed MBE in 1919 for wartime committee service. After attending Gunnersbury preparatory school, Middlesex, and the King's School, Worcester, Sutton went up to Imperial College, London, in 1937 to study general science, and later geology, but his degree was interrupted by war service. This took the form of the rather unexciting supervision of radar stations on the east coast, but he seized the opportunity to take up bird-watching, and to develop a general enthusiasm for nature which never left him. 
After the war Sutton returned to Imperial College, graduating in 1946. He then joined the staff as a postgraduate researcher. There he met a fellow geology postgraduate, Janet Vida Watson (1923-1985), daughter of David Meredith Seares Watson, professor of zoology. Sutton and Watson were given adjacent fieldwork areas in the northern highlands of Scotland. They forged a partnership which was to last for the whole of their careers. On 13 June 1949 they married at the register office in Hampstead; they had two daughters, both of whom died at birth. Sutton and Watson formed a brilliant team, their strength being in their difference, not their similarity. Sutton was the extrovert, the broad thinker, the ideas man. Watson was the careful fieldworker, the painstaking recorder of detail, and it was she who wrote the greater part of their joint papers, in which every sentence was carefully weighed and composed. This was a formidable combination. 
The earliest Precambrian rocks had long been recognized as a difficult area. In all later geological series, from the Cambrian to the present, relationships can be established partly by fossils and partly by sedimentary sequences. But in the earliest rocks there are no fossils, and sedimentary relations are seldom seen. The rocks are mainly gneisses, altered from their original states by the processes of metamorphism. The contribution of Sutton and Watson was to show that relationships in the Precambrian are to be established in terms of metamorphic events, not stratigraphic sequences. They identified an older metamorphic episode, the Scourian, later shown to be about 2600 million years old, and a later, the Laxfordian, about 1700 million years old. This discovery opened up a new way of looking at Precambrian complexes, and a new technique for deciphering their geology. The methods which they pioneered were applied by others to basement rocks in many parts of the world. 
The whole of Sutton's working life was spent at Imperial College, where he was appointed lecturer in the geology department in 1948, prior to completing his postgraduate research. He was promoted to reader in 1956, to professor of geology in 1958, and to head of department in 1964. He served a three-year period as dean of the Royal School of Mines in 1965-8 and again in 1974-7, and he left the geology department on his appointment as pro-rector in 1980. The rector at that time was Sir Brian Flowers, and he and Sutton formed a powerful administrative team. On his retirement in 1983 at the age of sixty-four he was confirmed as emeritus professor and fellow of Imperial College. He had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1966 (vice-president, 1975-7). 
One of Sutton's great virtues was his infectious enthusiasm, which inspired all he met, and he was inevitably drawn into committee work, administration, and science policy debates. He was president of the Geologists' Association 1966-8, and after serving for many years as external examiner he was a member of the council of the University of Rhodesia/Zimbabwe from 1976 to 1983. He gave a long period of service from 1964 to 1985 to the scholarships committee of the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851, and he was a trustee of the Natural History Museum 1976-81. He was the first chairman of the Imperial College Centre for Environmental Technology, a cross-departmental research facility of which he was joint founder in 1977, and was president of the Remote Sensing Society 1977-84. From 1976 to 1979 he served as a council member of the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), and he was involved in the fundamental changes which were made to the status of the geological survey, which for a hundred years had reported directly to a government minister, but which was now made subordinate to the NERC. The direct grant previously enjoyed by the survey was replaced at that time by the customer-contractor principle set out in the Rothschild Report of 1971. 
Towards the end of his career Sutton made an important contribution when he was appointed by the Royal Society to develop a renewed relationship with the scientific community in China. This started with the visit of a party of six fellows to Beijing (Peking) in 1973; there were several other visits over the next few years, and student exchanges were followed by the establishment of joint research programmes. These efforts culminated in 1985 with the great Tibet geotraverse, in which a party of twenty-five geologists from many countries undertook an arduous ten-week traverse of the Tibet Himalayas, covering a distance of 600 miles, usually at over 10,000 feet above sea level. 
Sutton's retirement was marred by the death in March 1985 of his first wife, Janet Watson. On 21 August 1985 he married (Millicent) Betty Middleton-Sandford ('b'. 1932), artist, daughter of James Middleton Honeychurch, master tailor. They enjoyed a period of country living in Cornwall and then Dorset, but this was cut short by illness, and Sutton died of cancer on 6 September 1992 at the Weymouth and District Hospital, Weymouth, Dorset. He was buried on 15 September 1992 at Martinstown parish church, a few miles west of Dorchester. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 60571


Herman, Josef (1911-2000), artist, was born on 3 January 1911 in Warsaw, Poland, the eldest of the three children of David Herman (died 1942), a partner in a shoe factory, and his wife, Sarah Krukman (1893?-1942). He was brought up in great poverty, mostly on the streets of the Jewish quarter, for his illiterate father was persuaded to make his mark on a document which gave his absconding partner the right to sell their shared shoe factory and flee to America. David Herman sank into deep depression, incapable even of feeding himself, and his young wife, Sarah, was forced to take control of the household, fetching in other people's washing and cleaning their houses. Eventually, David managed to pull himself together sufficiently to take up cobbling, but he remained a broken man. As a consequence of this early experience, however successful he was in later years, Josef Herman would always worry about money. 
Herman attended a school in Warsaw until he was thirteen. He had already engaged in a long series of temporary jobs, the first of which was as a seller of soda water in a local cinema. As a child he adopted the habit of rising early, at 4 a.m. every day, in order to have some time to himself in the single crowded room where the family slept, before the bustle of the day began. It was a habit he maintained all his life, whatever time he went to bed, and helps to account for his prodigious output of drawings and paintings. At this time he also made the acquaintance of a wandering artist, Master Xavery Rex, and a Dr Saltzman, both of whom settled in their street. From one he learned the magic of art, from the other the lesson of true humanity. 
Not until he was sixteen did Herman settle in a job, as apprentice typesetter to the one-time anarchist and printer Felix Yacubowitch. For the next three years he studied his trade until he fell ill with lead poisoning. Disbarred from printing on medical grounds, he became a freelance graphic designer, and enrolled for an eighteen-month stint at the Warsaw School of Art and Decoration (1930-32). In 1932 Herman held his first exhibition of pictures, in a frame-maker's shop, and began to enjoy a slight reputation as an artist. He joined the Phrygian Bonnet, a group of socially aware artists who painted the peasants of the Carpathian mountains in an expressionist manner. Although a lifelong and committed man of the left, Herman belonged to no political party, but the authorities considered all artists Bolsheviks. Warsaw was unwelcoming and antisemitic. In 1938 Herman left Poland for Belgium. He was never to see his family or his homeland again. 
In Brussels, Herman enrolled at the Brussels Academy of Fine Arts and fell under the formative influence of Constant Permeke (1886-1952), a painter of peasants in a weighty, earthy style. The Nazi invasion of Europe cut short his stay. Herman fled through France to La Rochelle, where he was mistaken for a Polish airman because of his black leather coat and beret. He was put on a ship to England, arriving in Liverpool in June 1940. From there he was sent, speaking no English, to the Polish consulate in Glasgow. 
Wartime Glasgow was surprisingly lively; Herman was befriended by the sculptor Benno Schotz, and renewed his acquaintance with the painter Jankel Adler. He met J. D. Fergusson, got to know Joan Eardley, then a student at Glasgow School of Art, and designed sets and costumes for Margaret Morris's Celtic Ballet company. In 1942 he learned through the Red Cross that his family had been destroyed in the Nazi holocaust; he had previously begun a series of drawings of Jewish life in Poland and transmuted this tragedy into a melancholy but powerful celebration of Jewish themes and memories, a kind of visual autobiography. Later, in 1953, he helped to found the 'Jewish Quarterly'. In 1942 he met and married Catriona MacLeod (died 'c'.1990), a whisky heiress and also an artist. In 1943 the newly-weds moved to London, and Herman held his first exhibition there, at the Reid and Lefevre Gallery, shared with another unknown, L. S. Lowry. 
As yet, Herman had not discovered his mature voice as an artist. He achieved this when first visiting the Welsh mining village of Ystradgynlais in the summer of 1944. There he experienced a key moment of recognition when he saw a group of miners returning from work briefly outlined on a bridge against a copper-coloured sky. That image stayed with him and provided a subject. For the next eleven years Herman lived in Ystradgynlais and painted and drew the miners. He was swiftly accepted into the community and nicknamed Joe Bach, and the work he subsequently produced made his name as a distinct artistic force in Britain. 
Herman did not paint the miners at work in the pit -- as Henry Moore had done -- but captured them in the canteen or walking home, exhausted after their labours. More often than not, they are anonymous, and represent the universal rather than the particular: they stand for the dignity of labour, of the working man. There are portraits of individual miners, such as Mike, but these are portraits first, miners second. Herman was a subtle and perceptive portraitist -- see, for instance, his portrait of Arnold Wesker in the National Portrait Gallery -- but he rarely accepted commissions. For a decade the miner was his principal subject, but by no means his only one. His range was always far wider than commonly thought. Apart from fishermen and peasants at work, he also drew and painted ballet dancers and sportsmen (playing football, tennis, or snooker), while a chief preoccupation for many years was with the female nude. In later life Herman was just as likely to paint a single tree or bird, or a refulgent vase of flowers. 
Although his reputation grew rapidly in the 1950s, not everything was well with Herman. His wife suffered a mental breakdown at the birth of a stillborn child, and Herman's own health suffered from the damp Welsh climate. Foreign travel was advised: over the next decade Herman visited Israel, France, Italy, and Spain. Early in 1955 and back in London, Herman met Dr Eleanor Marie (Nini) Ettlinger ('b'. 1925), who became his model and soon his mistress. That year he had a joint exhibition with L. S. Lowry and Nehemiah Azaz at the Wakefield City Art Gallery. There were retrospectives in 1956 at the Whitechapel Gallery in London, then in Glasgow in 1975, and at Camden Arts Centre in London in 1980. 
In 1960 Herman divorced Catriona MacLeod, and the following year, on 11 March, married Nini Ettlinger. A son had been born to the couple in 1957, and they soon decided to forsake London for Suffolk. But disaster pursued them. In the mid-1960s Herman found he could not work and suffered from severe depression. In 1966 the Hermans' infant daughter died. Herman became suicidal and was given electroconvulsive therapy and drug treatment, recovering only gradually. He moved back to London on his own, and it was not until 1975 that the family was reunited. 
Herman was really happy only when he was working. Admittedly his habit of early rising allowed him a head start on most people ('six masterpieces before breakfast, my dear!' he would boast), but his industry rarely flagged. He drew in pencil and ink, worked rapidly in watercolour and mixed media, and painted more slowly in oils. He read widely, particularly relishing the autobiographies of artists, and wrote voluminously himself. Mostly his writing took the journal form. His first book, entitled 'Related Twilights' (1975), was subtitled 'Notes from an artist's diary', and is a vivid evocation of people, places, and art. Herman was also famous for his internationally acclaimed collection of African miniature sculptures, an enthusiasm that grew from his friendship with Jacob Epstein. 
Herman received various honours, including an OBE in 1981, and was elected a Royal Academician in 1990. A generous and charming man, he was much loved by a wide circle of friends. Habitually dressed in brown cords, topped with a white lab coat when in the studio, he was a man of few worldly needs. In later years he mostly occupied a cosy bed-sitting room situated handily at the top of steep steps leading down to the picturesque studio full of his own work and his African sculpture. His profoundly humanistic vision has an inspiring boldness and monumental grandeur that will survive. He died at his home, 120 Edith Road, London, on 19 February 2000, and was cremated on 23 February at Golders Green. His works are held in numerous British collections, including the Art Gallery and Museum, Glasgow; the Glyn Vivian Art Gallery, Swansea; the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff; The Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh; the Tate collection and the British Museum, London; Birmingham City Art Gallery; Leeds City Art Gallery; the City Art Gallery, Bristol; and Aberdeen Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60584


Hutton, Kurt (1893-1960), photojournalist, was born in Strasbourg, Alsace (then Germany), on 11 August 1893, the son of J. Heinrich Hubschmann (died 'c'.1908), an authority on the Armenian language and professor of comparative philology at Strasbourg University, and his wife, Anna Meyer (died 'c'.1933), a dressmaker and distant relative of Aby S. Warburg of the international banking family. Anna Hubschmann was Jewish but her son did not realize this until years later, when the Nazis stamped his passport with a 'J'. Indeed, his schooling was at the Protestant 'Gymnasium' in Strasbourg (1902-11); he went on to study in Heidelberg, probably at the university there. In 1911 he attended Queen's College, Oxford, for one or perhaps two years but did not graduate: he wrote in 1947 of 'half hearted studies of law interrupted by the War' (Hutton, introduction). He also spoke of a failed career in law and banking, perhaps in connection with his mother's relations. 
During the First World War Hubschmann was a cavalry officer, and was awarded the Iron Cross, second class, for carrying dispatches. Early in 1918 he contracted tuberculosis and was invalided out of the army, and spent the next two years in a sanatorium at St Moritz in Switzerland. As a boy he had used a quarter-plate camera; while in the sanatorium he experimented with a stereo-camera. He had been a keen tennis and hockey player and at St Moritz began to ski. His skiing companions included Margareta Malvina Rosena Anna Ratchitzky (1899-1962), a dressmaker, and her friend's sister, Frau Gertrude Englehardt; Margareta (known as Gretl) became his wife about 1921, and Gertrude later became his business partner in a photographic studio. 
About 1921 Hubschmann had started his own portrait studio but, within two years, he realized that it was beyond his business ability. Accordingly, he went to work in a large fashionable studio while studying, it is said, with the well-known photographer Germaine Krull. By 1926 he and Gertrude Englehardt had founded the Atelier Englehardt und Hubschmann in the Berlin suburb of Dahlem; from this period only family portraits have survived. Hubschmann became dissatisfied with the big studio camera for formal portraiture and began experimenting with the new revolutionary miniature cameras, the Leica and the Contax. 
Success still eluded Hubschmann until Simon Gutmann, the legendary head of the Dephot agency, persuaded him to do a photo-story on a children's festival in nearby Zehlendorf: the photographs were published in the popular weekly 'Die Woche' in 1929. Hubschmann became a successful photojournalist working not only for Dephot but for other agencies such as Weltrundschau and Mauritius. His stories appeared in many German magazines including the 'Munchner Illustrierte Presse', run by the brilliant Stefan Lorant. 
When the Nazis came to power Hubschmann, with his family, and Lorant left Germany in 1933 for England. In 1934 Lorant founded the British 'Weekly Illustrated', and he employed Hubschmann, thus guaranteeing him regular work. (Lorant left the 'Weekly Illustrated' soon after it was launched and Tom Hopkinson became editor.) At least eighty of Hubschmann's photo-stories for the publication have been identified between 1934 and 1938. 
Edward Hulton founded the 'Picture Post' in October 1938 with Lorant as editor and Hopkinson as his assistant; Hubschmann became one of its regular freelance photographers. In June 1940 he was interned as a German alien in the Isle of Man, but when released in June 1941 he continued working for 'Picture Post', now as a staff photographer. His son Peter became a captain in the army recce corps and changed his name to Hutten in the belief that this was the spelling of the name of the famous cricketer. Kurt, though always called Hubsch by his friends, used the same name but spelt it correctly as 'Hutton'; however, when he officially changed it in 1947 it was to his son's spelling of 'Hutten' (though he never used that spelling professionally). Hutton photographed for 'Picture Post' until 1951, when following a heart attack he and Gretl moved from their rented house at 81 Brooklands Rise in Hampstead Garden Suburb, Middlesex, to Aldeburgh in Suffolk. 
Hutton still did occasional stories for 'Picture Post' with his son's friend Ronald Blythe, later famous as the author of 'Akenfield' (1969). He continued to photograph the early Aldeburgh festivals, which he had covered since 1947, for his own enjoyment; Benjamin Britten admired his photography, finding that his unobtrusive presence and almost silent Leica never disrupted rehearsals. These swansong photographs, now in the Britten-Pears Library, are in constant demand worldwide for music programmes and magazines; his 'Picture Post' photographs are in the Hulton-Getty Library, while much of his earlier work for the 'Weekly Illustrated' is held by Popperfoto. Ironically, after failing as a studio portrait photographer in Berlin, his informal British portraits are among his best-known today, some of which are in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery, London. 
Hutton died on 14 March 1960 at his home, 36 Crag Path, Aldeburgh, and was buried in Aldeburgh parish churchyard. Gretl Hutton died of cancer in 1962. Their son Peter emigrated with his family to Australia; some of his father's photographs were still in his possession in the 1990s. 


@@@@@


doc= 60590


Jooss, Kurt (1901-1979), choreographer and teacher of dance, was born on 12 January 1901, in Wasseralfingen, a suburb of Stuttgart, Germany. His father owned a farm, but as a child Jooss felt vague inclinations toward several arts. While studying at the Stuttgart Academy of Music in 1918, he encountered the great modern dance teacher and theorist Rudolf Laban, and from then on he devoted himself to the art of dance. He worked with Laban in Mannheim, Stuttgart, and Hamburg from 1919 until 1924, when in Hamburg he met Sigurd Leeder, another disciple of Laban. Jooss and Leeder began to collaborate on a series of dance concerts featuring only themselves, 'Zwei Tanzer'. But a knee injury to Jooss prevented him from emerging as a star dancer. 
In 1924 Hanns Niedecken-Gebhardt, artistic director of the Munster Opera, invited Jooss to form a new company, the Neue Tanzbuhne, with members of the recently disbanded Tanzbuhne Laban. In Munster, Jooss received acclaim for his choreographic skill in providing bold, innovative dances to support modernist stage works by the composers Egon Wellesz, Paul Hindemith, and Ernst Toch; his dance concerts moved away from Laban's expressionism toward a satiric-grotesque commentary on the encoding of social identity in movement. In 1926 Jooss and Leeder travelled to Vienna and Paris to study ballet, which Jooss soon considered an outmoded and inert art. Nevertheless, for the rest of his career he presented his aesthetic under the concept of a 'new ballet', rather than as a category of German 'Ausdruckstanz' ('expressive dance', in which movement was meant to signify the 'inner' emotional condition of the dancer or choreographer). In the following year the city of Essen invited Jooss to establish a dance school closely affiliated with the Essen Municipal Opera, and there, at the Folkwangschule, he choreographed perhaps his greatest dances, including 'Pavane auf den Tod einer Infantin' (1929), 'Der verlorene Sohn' (1931), 'Grossstadt von Heute' (1932), and 'Ein Ball in Alt-Wien' (1932). 
The success of Jooss's dances owed much to his close collaboration with the designer Hein Heckroth, the composer-arranger Fritz Cohen, and the Estonian dancer Aino Simola (1901-1971), whom Jooss had met through their work with Laban. Jooss and Simola married in 1929, and she became his chief partner in all his enterprises until her death. She gave birth to their daughter Anna in March 1931, but a subsequent illness compelled her to give up her performing career. Jooss, meanwhile, sought to intensify the right of modern dance to incorporate theatrical effects ('Tanztheater') by collaborating with Arturo Toscanini in the 1930 Bayreuth production of Wagner's 'Tannhauser' in 1931 and by acting in productions of George Kaiser's 'Europa' and Shakespeare's 'Midsummer Night's Dream'. In 1932 Jooss created his most famous ballet, 'The Green Table', in which expressionist use of masks, brilliantly exaggerated movement, and violent scenic effects produced a powerful satire on bureaucracy, diplomatic gesturing, and political hypocrisy. But the tremendous international success of this piece failed to resolve differences between Jooss and the city of Essen in the funding of the Folkwangschule. Jooss therefore established the Ballets Jooss as a private institution that did not rely on public funds. The Nazis, however, began attacking Jooss for protecting and supporting Jews within his company. Throughout 1933 the Ballets Jooss toured Holland, Belgium, France, and Switzerland; in June the company gave its first performances in London, at the Savoy Theatre. 
Unable to return to Germany without facing persecution, the Ballets Jooss toured constantly (1934-8) in northern and eastern Europe, the United States, and eventually South America. But Jooss found his strongest support in England; there in April 1934, Leonard and Dorothy Elmhirst financed the founding of the Jooss Leeder School of Dance at Dartington Hall, Devon, which in 1935 additionally became the headquarters of the Ballets Jooss. Jooss's works of the mid- to late 1930s, such as 'The Prodigal Son' (1933), 'Persephone' (1934), 'Ballade' (1935), 'The Mirror' (1935), 'Seven Heroes' (1937), and 'Chronica' (1939), show his expressionism evolving from grotesque social critique to more abstract, symbolic-allegorical images that blended historical detail with dreamlike moods. The war stranded the Ballets Jooss in New York, while Jooss himself in 1940 was interned in London for six months as an 'enemy alien'. In the following year he and Leeder moved their headquarters to Cambridge, England. In 1942 the Sadler's Wells Opera company commissioned him to direct highly successful productions of Mozart's 'The Magic Flute' and 'The Marriage of Figaro', and in July of that year his daughter Christina was born. By January 1946 he was in British uniform to guide the Ballets Jooss on a tour of European cities occupied by the British army, and in 1947 he received British citizenship. But financial difficulties continued to plague the Ballets Jooss, which dissolved in 1948, when Jooss went to Chile for eight months to teach at a school established there by former members of the company. Upon his return to England early in 1949, he received an invitation from the city of Essen to revive the dance section of the Folkwangschule. From then until his death his career unfolded entirely in Germany, where he enjoyed increasing glory for his achievements as a master choreographer and teacher of German modern dance. His most distinguished student at the Folkwangschule was the great choreographer Pina Bausch. He died in a car accident in Heilbronn on 22 May 1979. 
Jooss introduced Europe to a unique perception of modern dance. He rejected the expressionist focus on movement as the projection of individual personality; instead, he saw dance as an image of modern social reality or communal interaction, in which movement exposed the essence of social identities and relations. He taught that choreographic inspiration should derive from exaggerating the observation of movement within a particular social milieu, rather than from perfecting a set of movement tropes peculiar only to dance or to the 'inner' life of a dancer. His idea of 'Tanztheater' required modern dance to abandon the quest for purity and autonomy and to absorb the benefits of theatricality (masks, props, captivating costumes, powerful lighting effects), as well as the fascination of gestures 'taken from life itself'. But his influence in England was much less than that of his teacher, Rudolf Laban, who migrated there in 1937 and succeeded in showing how movement theory could be applied outside dance, for example to worker efficiency and improved social interaction and group performance. This limited impact was due partly to the need of the Ballets Jooss to tour extensively outside England and partly to Jooss's rural background, which inspired him to pursue dance education and aesthetic perfection in a pastoral or manor environment rather than in the big-city culture where modern dance otherwise flourished. 


@@@@@


doc= 60591


Junge, Alfred August (1886-1964), film production designer, was born on 29 January 1886, in Gorlitz, Silesia, the only child of August Junge (died 1897), a house painter, and his wife, Emma Hulda (1858-1943), a seamstress. When he was eleven his father died, and at fourteen he left school to be apprenticed to a local house painter. While attending evening classes he found he had a talent for design and two years later he joined an art club, where he studied life drawing. Stagestruck, at the age of eighteen he started working at the local Gorlitz Stadttheater, trying his hand at everything from acting to special lighting effects. After further art studies in Germany and Italy he began to work as a scenic artist and designer at various provincial theatres in Germany and Switzerland, finally ending up with the Berlin Staatsoper and the Berlin Staatstheater, until the First World War intervened. Junge served in the German army until he was invalided out in 1917. On 13 November 1918 he married Elsbeth (Else) Gebhardt (1886-1964), the daughter of a cabinet-maker from Frankfurt an der Oder, whom he had met when she was a flower girl in Berlin in 1912. The couple settled in an apartment on Bismarckstrasse in Berlin-Hermsdorf, their home until 1932. By 1922 they had two sons, Helmut (1921-1989), who became an architect in America, and Ewald (1922-2000), who had a varied career, encompassing arts journalism (including work in the 1950s for the BBC German Service and as an arts correspondent for 'The Times'), classical music recording, and numismatics. 
About 1920 Junge entered the film industry, working as an art director at the famous Universum Film studios in Berlin alongside some of the leading creative talents of the era, notably director E. A. Dupont. After the great success of 'Variete' in 1926, Dupont was courted by British International Pictures (BIP), and in 1928 Junge accompanied him to Elstree, where he designed two elaborate Dupont productions, 'Moulin Rouge' and 'Piccadilly'. The team remained at BIP until 1930. Junge then returned briefly to Germany, with a stopover in France to work on Alexander Korda's 'Marius' (1931), the first film of the classic Marcel Pagnol trilogy. But it was England that was to be Junge's home base for the rest of his career. In 1932, on the strength of his experience at Universum Film and his much-admired work at BIP, he was brought to England once again, by producer Michael Balcon, on a five-year contract to head the new Gaumont-British art department at the Lime Grove studio in Shepherd's Bush in west London, where he was immediately put in charge of designing an ambitious Hollywood-style production programme. At Gaumont-British, Junge really came into his own with his invaluable organizational skills, Prussian sense of discipline and efficiency, and technical expertise, overseeing an extensive production schedule and deploying a whole army of draughtsmen and technicians. Junge was almost single-handedly responsible for bringing professional management and modern organization to British cinema design and he also supervised the studio's pioneering design apprenticeship programme, training and influencing many of Britain's future top film designers, including Michael Relph, Peter Proud, and Elliot Scott. 
As Britain's first real supervising art director or 'production designer', as the role came to be described, Junge worked on an amazing range and number of films during his six years at Shepherd's Bush: Jessie Matthews musicals such as 'Evergreen' (1934) and 'It's Love Again' (1936), George Arliss character vehicles such as 'The Iron Duke' (1935), Aldwych farces, Jack Hulbert comedies, and classic Hitchcock thrillers such as 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (1935) and 'Young and Innocent' (1937). After his stint at Gaumont-British, Junge was summoned to be supervising art director for MGM's new British operations at Denham, where he created the quaint English public school atmosphere of the nostalgic 'Goodbye, Mr Chips' (1939). 
During the 1940 invasion scare Junge was sent as an enemy alien to Huyton near Liverpool, where he was interned from May to July 1940. (Junge had applied for British citizenship in 1938, but had to wait to become a British citizen until just after the end of the Second World War.) He was soon released and back at work, this time with visionary director Michael Powell, who naturally turned to Junge to head the art department for the new production unit, the Archers, that he was assembling with Emeric Pressburger at Denham. Junge rose magnificently to the challenge of their first Technicolor production, the beautifully crafted 'The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp' (1943). The Powell-Pressburger films, among the most memorable of the 1940s, marked an outpouring of Junge's creative spirit. The poetic and quirky 'A Canterbury Tale' (1944) was followed by the Scottish romance 'I Know Where I'm Going!' (1945; Junge's own personal favourite, shot partly on the Isle of Mull), and the striking fantasy, set during the war, 'A Matter of Life and Death' (1946), with its monumental 'stairway to heaven' and its inspired artistic conceit of a black and white heaven contrasting with the earthly pleasures of Technicolor. Junge's rich use of colour reached its height in the extravagant exoticism of 'Black Narcissus' (1947), which won him an Academy award for design and the personal accolade of an autographed photo from its star, Deborah Kerr, inscribed 'To Alfred Junge, of all art directors the most brilliant'. 
Junge was in great demand after his Oscar, and MGM, which was resuming its British operations at Borehamwood, Elstree, made him the enticing offer of a lucrative seven-year contract as supervising art director. He accepted, heading the MGM British art department from 1947 to 1955, realizing a series of historical spectacles ('Ivanhoe', 1952; 'Knights of the Round Table', 1953) in the colour and widescreen processes of the 1950s, as well as working with a variety of Hollywood stalwarts such as John Ford ('Mogambo', 1953) and George Cukor ('Edward, my Son', 1949). By now himself a legend in the British film industry, Junge belonged to several professional organizations, notably the Society of British Film Art Directors and Designers (of which he was a founder member), the British Film Academy, and the British Kinematograph Society, and he published articles about film design in the British journals 'The Artist', 'Film & TV Technician', and 'British Kinematography'. After his MGM contract expired Junge went freelance. His last film work was helping to select Italian locations for David O. Selznick's 'A Farewell to Arms'; he left early into this fraught production, exasperated by Selznick's incessant memo-writing. 
Junge retired in 1957, at the age of seventy-one. Very much a family man, he spent his final years pursuing his main hobbies, photography and gardening. In 1948, with the money from his MGM contract, he had bought a magnificent rambling house designed by Giles Gilbert Scott, Greystanes, on a hilltop in Hendon, in north London. After his retirement Junge built a smaller house, Sunset Lodge, on a small parcel of his former domain, where he tended a lovely rose garden. But the golden years at Sunset Lodge proved to be short. A longtime sufferer from diabetes, the portly Junge also began to have heart problems. A first stroke in 1962 was followed by another in early 1964, and Junge went to a clinic at Bad Kissingen, West Germany, to recover. He died there suddenly of a stroke on 16 July 1964, less than six weeks after the death of his beloved wife, Else, in Hendon; both were cremated and were buried at Paddington new cemetery, Mill Hill, Middlesex. At his death Junge left more than 1000 set designs, mainly from his British period. These form the basis of four major Junge collections now in public archives at the British Film Institute, London; the Cinematheque Francaise, Paris; the Stiftung Deutsche Kinemathek, Berlin; and the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, at the University of Texas at Austin, USA. 


@@@@@


doc= 60598


Korn, Arthur (1891-1978), architect and planner, was born in Breslau, Lower Silesia, Germany, on 4 June 1891, the son of Moritz Korn, a machine tool dealer, and his wife, Martha Ebstein. Following studies at the Luisenstadtisches Gymnasium in Berlin, Korn attended a carpentry trades school ('c'.1908-1909), and later completed his professional studies at the Royal Art and Trade School in Berlin (1909-11). Subsequently he worked as an architectural assistant and, for a short time, in the city planning office of greater Berlin, where he came under the influence of Raymond Unwin's recently translated 'Town Planning in Practice' (1909). 
Following war service as a volunteer, Korn went into practice with Eric Mendelsohn in Berlin; although the association was short-lived, Korn recalled it as critically formative: 'I owe all my further development to Mendelsohn' (Korn, '55 years', 264). From 1919 to 1922 he worked solo, subsequently forming a partnership with Siegfried Weitzmann, with whom he built a number of houses, shops, offices, and industrial buildings in Berlin and elsewhere. During the 1920s Korn was actively associated with German modernist architectural groups such as the Novembergruppe and the Ring. Photographs of Korn and Weitzmann's Villa Goldstein in Berlin were published in Walter Gropius's visual anthology of the new architecture, 'Internationale Architektur' (1924); Korn himself published a seminal survey, 'Glas im Bau und als Gebrauchsgegenstand' (1929), which drew attention to the potential of the new architecture and new materials. 
In 1929 Korn's interest in town planning was sharpened by a trip to the USSR as a consultant, during which he made contacts with Soviet modernist architects and planners. In the same year he co-founded the Collective for Socialist Building, and made proposals for the future development of Berlin, which were exhibited in 1930. After Hitler's accession to power and the incorporation of the Bund Deutscher Architekten (BDA) in the Reichskulturkammer, Korn was forbidden to practise in Germany. He emigrated to Yugoslavia, where he worked as an independent architect and planner in Zagreb between 1935 and 1937. 
Korn first visited England in 1930 and again in 1934, as a delegate of the Congres Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne, and in 1937 he settled in Britain. Here, too, he associated himself actively with modernist tendencies: he joined the Modern Architectural Research (MARS) Group; he worked as an assistant to F. R. S. Yorke and E. Maxwell Fry; and he was a consultant for Jack Pritchard's Isokon Furniture Company, for which he proposed new developments on the eve of war. As chair of the MARS Group's town planning subcommittee from 1938, Korn was instrumental -- in collaboration with Fry, Eugene Kent, Godfrey Samuel, and others -- in the development of the MARS plan for London (published in 1942) which drew, in part, on the proposals he had made for Berlin in 1929-30: the plan envisaged a radical reconfiguration of the city, organized around evenly distributed neighbourhood units, linked by a rationalized and integrated transport system. It was chiefly through his ideas about town planning, promulgated through his writing and particularly through his teaching, that Korn would be influential in Britain in the first two decades after the Second World War. 
Interned as an enemy alien during the early part of the war, from 1939 to 1940, Korn's career took a new turn after his release when, from 1941, he began to teach. He taught architecture and planning first at the Oxford School of Architecture (1941-5) -- now part of Oxford Brookes University -- and subsequently, until his retirement, at the Architectural Association in London (1945-65). In 1953 he codified some of his ideas on town planning in a book, 'History Builds the Town'. Former students and colleagues respected him not only for his firsthand association with the rise of European modernist architectural design and planning but for his infectious enthusiasm as a teacher: 'What was wonderful about Arthur was that he showed us how town planning could make the impossible possible' said Leslie Ginsburg, a former Architectural Association student and friend of Korn. Korn not only had a 'most un-English' enthusiasm for architecture in general but, as the title of his book suggests, he sought to locate his planning precepts in a historical continuum, enthusing about the lessons to be drawn from historic English type forms (such as those of the Cambridge quads and formal London squares) as much as from recent examples. Nevertheless, he insisted that his students should not treat such lessons as mere formulae. As Ginsburg observed: 'Korn's ebullient but sharply perceptive methods of teaching shook us out of the complacent feeling that once we had carried out the planning 'motions' all would be well... he insisted that it was our duty to aim high, to design for the best. (Sharp and others, 11/3)' Before he settled in Britain Korn had married Elizabeth von Friedlaender, a painter and teacher. On 21 March 1942 he married Emanuela Georgina Krizan ('b'. 1899/1900), daughter of Franz Krizan, a chemist. He nursed her devotedly in her final years. Korn had two daughters. Following his retirement, Korn settled in Austria in 1969; he died at Klosterneuberg, Austria, on 14 November 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 60601


Laban, Rudolf Jean-Baptiste Attila (1879-1958), dancer and dance theoretician, who developed a comprehensive system of movement notation, was born on 15 December 1879 at Donaulande 12, Bratislava, in the Austro-Hungarian empire, the first among the four children of Field Marshal Rudolf von Laban and his wife, Marie Bridling. 
Laban's parents were both Hungarian, but his father's family came from the south of France, and his mother's family was from Yorkshire. His father was an army officer whose final command was as governor of the provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As he grew up Rudolf often accompanied his parents on their travels. This early exposure to differing cultures, work patterns, and indigenous dance had a strong influence on Laban's later creative work. 
Although he became a military cadet, Laban opted instead to study painting. This particularly displeased his father, who had expected his son to follow him in a respectable military career; however, he capitulated, providing his son with a small stipend. In 1900 Laban met and married an art student, Martha Fricke. The two moved to Munich where Laban began his first formal art studies. Here he became aware of the idea that the practice of art involved the spirit as well as the intellect. 
In 1900 the young Labans moved to Paris to study painting and architecture at the Ecole des Beaux Arts. Laban became fascinated with theatre, with its architecture, design, decor, and costumes. These interests led to experiments in form and colour, which engendered his later study of spatial 'forms' and movement 'colour' or quality. During these heady Parisian days he also began his investigations into the development of a dance script. In addition he created his first dance-dramas and dance choruses. While in Paris, Laban discovered Rosicrucianism. Its practices underlined his growing conviction that the body holds truths to which one can sensitize oneself. Rosicrucian subjects appeared in his later choreography and his high regard for such semi-mystical ideas as the golden mean fed into his fascination with harmony in movement. 
The Labans had two children, but disaster struck soon after Martha's second pregnancy. In 1907 she died; the children were looked after by Martha's mother. Laban, devastated, succumbed to the first of many bouts of depression. He returned to his parental home in Vienna. Rejuvenation came in 1910, when Laban met and married Maja Lederer, a singer; they were to have five children. The newly-weds moved to Munich, a city teeming with new ideas about art. Here Laban encountered the pioneering thinking of the painter Kandinsky, the educator Steiner, the composer Schoenberg, the intellectuals Wolfskehl and George, the theosophist Blavatsky, and the 'Korperkultur' movement of Mensendieck and Bode. 
Perennially in debt, Laban worked as a freelance illustrator. He created costumes and arranged lavish entertainments for the 'Fasching' carnivals, public festivals. Soon he became known for his ability as a director of movement. At the end of the 1912 carnival season, Laban, whose health was never very vigorous, retired to the Weisser Hirsch sanatorium outside Dresden. There began his lifelong search for a basic theory of human movement. And there he met and entered into a liaison with Suzanne Perrottet, a disciple of Emile Jaques-Dalcroze, the originator of eurhythmics. Their affair continued for many years with the tacit consent of Maja, resulting in a 'menage a trois'. In 1917 both Maja and Suzanne bore his children: Roland Laban and Allar Perrottet. 
In 1912-13 Laban definitively turned his attention to dance. He formed a small group of student followers to further his experiments with its rhythmic and dramatic content. Summer 1913 proved a turning point in the history of dance. Laban founded a summer school at Monte Verita, Ascona, in the Swiss province of Ticino. An alternative-living colony already existed at the Mountain of Truth, embracing vegetarianism, nudism, psychoanalysis, and a relaxed attitude to sex. The choreographer and dancer Mary Wigman (Marie Wiegmann) attended that first summer school. Her relationship with Laban remained forever problematic. She was fascinated and in love with him, found his work inspiring, attributed much of her knowledge to his teaching, and nursed her resentment of his casual sexual encounters with more than a few other women. Later she blamed him for not sufficiently respecting her gifts. 
At Monte Verita Laban trained his group using 'swinging scales', further developed his ideas of body-mind oneness, and created his first theatre dance works. During the following busy season Wigman caused a sensation in her solo debut, dancing the 'Hexentanz' ('Witch Dance'). She established a pattern 'vis-a-vis' Laban that continued with others throughout his life. He would think through a problem, develop its framework, and then depend on one of his followers to embellish it and give it practical application. He served the role of prime mover; Wigman applied his ideas into the theatre. 
A second summer at Monte Verita began against the gathering international storm that resulted in the First World War. By the end of July all the students had fled, leaving 'the Master' and Wigman time for the intensive work that was involved in developing Laban's framework for human movement. During 1914-19, having sought refuge in Zurich, Laban produced leaps forward in his theoretical development; however, the time was financially, domestically, and healthwise a nadir for Laban. He was constantly in debt, concerned about looming conscription, fighting for papers to allow him to stay in Switzerland, and overwhelmed by the domestic responsibilities of sustaining his wife, his lover, his six children, his mother, and his sister. 
In Zurich Laban founded a new freemason lodge, deepening his experience of mysticism. Here also, as he became acquainted with the work of Carl Jung, Laban increasingly believed there existed a direct relationship between psychic function and the four motion factors of time, weight, space, and flow. He also further developed his emerging system of dance notation. He continued his search for basic ways of defining and ordering human expression through movement, developing his theories of choreutics and eukinetics. The former is the study of spatial forms, exercises based on scales. Eukinetics encompasses the study of the rhythm and dynamics of movement. Much of Laban's training method centred on swinging exercises and movement sequences built from reaching from one point in space to another. This led to his development of a spatial model, the icosahedron. 
Disaster struck again in 1918-19. Maja and the children left Laban, his affair with Suzanne waned, and he became a victim of the influenza epidemic. All his work fell apart as he moved from hospital to sanatorium, desperately ill and indigent. When sufficiently recovered, Laban moved to Nuremberg with his newest assistant, Dussia Bereska. He turned his mind to one of the recurring themes in his life: dance as a celebratory and spiritual experience for the non-professional. He organized classes particularly for the youth left disaffected in the aftermath of the war. 
The stay in Nuremberg was short-lived. In April 1920 Laban once again uprooted, this time to Stuttgart, where he had finally found a publisher for his first written 'magnum opus', 'Die Welt des Tanzers' ('The dancer's world'). The book was received as a work of genius, gaining Laban much-needed recognition and even more needed funds. Here a young music and drama student, Khadven Joos (Kurt Jooss), became interested in Laban's work; this was the beginning of the long-term collaboration of the two men. 
In 1921 the Mannheim National Theatre invited Laban to become guest choreographer, and there he presented his first major choreographic effort, 'Die Geblendeten' ('The deluded'), with his own group. They went on to perform in Stuttgart to rave reviews. In the succeeding five years Laban's fame spread. Laban schools were founded in Basel, Stuttgart, Hamburg, Prague, Budapest, Zagreb, Rome, Vienna, and Paris, each under the direction of one of his students. This was a high point in his career as a mesmerizing performer, a charismatic teacher, and an inventive choreographer. He interested himself in both dance as a celebratory community activity and dance as art. He founded the first of his renowned movement choirs in 1922. 
Laban moved to Hamburg with his newest 'amor' Dussia Bareska, with whom he conceived a child. In 1923 he redesigned and established his own performance venue and founded two professional performing groups: Kammertanz and Tanzbuhne. Kammertanz gave regular performances in his theatre; Tanzbuhne undertook a highly praised tour which had an enormous impact on European dance. Plagued by financial worries, the company was stranded and forced to disband in Zagreb before completing the planned itinerary. 
In summer 1926 Laban made his only journey to the New World, on a lecture-tour throughout the United States and Mexico. Laban was not enraptured with what he found. What he deemed 'American zeal' rather overwhelmed him. Meanwhile Laban had established a choreographic institute in Wurzburg with the help of Bareska and his latest collaborator/lover, Gertrud Loeszer. In addition to the institute a group, Kammertanzbuhne Laban-Bareska, toured successfully. In Nuremberg on 15 December, Laban's birthday, he leapt off the stage at a performance of 'Don Juan', but the mattresses that should have caught him were not in place. He sustained an injury that permanently ended his performing career. 
During this period Laban continued his passionate work of developing a system of 'written dance'. In 1928 the system, variously called Kinetography Laban and Labanotation, was published by Universal Edition in a journal, 'Schrifttanz'. Of Laban's many contributions to the world of dance, this system of movement notation is one of the most important. In the years since his death, with the continuing development by his colleagues Albrecht Knust and Ann Hutchinson, it has become an important tool in the documentation and preservation of dance all over the world. 
The first public exposure of the notation system had come the year before, at the Laban-organized First Dancers' Congress in Magdeburg; there it was welcomed as an important contribution by a wide-ranging group of dancers. In 1928 the choreographic institute moved to Berlin, remaining there for two years, and attaining the peak of its success. In 1930 Laban accepted the important post of ballet master of Berlin's Unter den Linden Opera House. He had also been engaged, in 1929, to direct the Viennese 'Festzug der Gewerbe' (Festival Procession of Crafts and Industries) and organized a moving and triumphal procession of some 10,000 participants. And in May 1930 he served as guest choreographer to the Bayreuth Wagner festival. 
When his one-year contract in Berlin was extended for another three years, and Bayreuth invited him back, Laban applied for German citizenship. The rise of Nazism had begun. Questions linger of whether Laban's motive was the temporary embracing of National Socialist ideas or was simply that he wished to keep his employment. In spite of his successes at the opera house, it became clear by 1934 that he could no longer hold the post, as his German citizenship had not yet come through. Consequently he took on the directorship of the Deutsche Tanzbuhne. He organized a dance festival in December 1934. Over the next two years Laban continued teaching and directing the Tanzbuhne, finally gaining his German naturalization. In summer 1935 his autobiographical 'Ein Leben fur Tanz' ('A life for dance') was published. 
In anticipation of the 1936 Olympics the Meisterwerkstatten fur Tanz was created with Laban as director. He organized a gigantic performance with 1000 participants. Goebbels, head of the propaganda ministry, attended the final rehearsal. Goebbels's fateful words marked the beginning of the end of Laban's German career: 'I do not like it. That is because it is dressed up in our clothes and has nothing whatever to do with us' (Preston-Dunlop, 'Rudolf Laban', 196). The performance was forbidden and thereafter Laban was hounded by investigations, castigated for having been a freemason, unveiled as not being a member of the Nazi party, and discovered to be living with a Jewish woman. Sick and disheartened, with no possibility of earning a living, Laban left for Paris, where Jooss found him in a state of mental and physical collapse. Jooss invited Laban to come to England. 
For the next years Laban lived at Dartington Hall as a guest of Jooss's hosts, the Elmhirsts. Since he was a German alien, the government permitted him to stay only if he agreed not to seek employment either paid or unpaid. In any event his ill health forbade his working. A former student, 
During the difficult war years Ullman, an inspiring teacher of dance in education, acted as Laban's spokeswoman. He planned what she so beautifully taught. In 1940 the government ordered them, as aliens, to leave the nurturing environment of Dartington, which was close to the naval base at Dartmouth. In 1942 they established themselves in Manchester where Lisa, with the support of the Elmhirsts, opened a school. Laban returned to lecturing and writing. The school flourished. Much later, in 1953, it moved to more spacious quarters in Addlestone, Surrey. Laban movement training, as conceived by Laban and taught by Ullman, became a pedagogical tool used in schools throughout Britain. After Laban's death Ullman devoted herself to translating and editing his writings. She became a naturalized British citizen in 1947. Ullman died in Chertsey, Surrey, on 25 January 1985. 
The eminent industrialist Frederick Lawrence heard of Laban's work and became convinced that the training might have a practical application in the factory. Thus began a whole new area of exploration. Along with Lawrence, Laban developed ways of retraining employees for unaccustomed kinds of work, most notably preparing women to take over the work of men. Laban was permitted at last to earn his own way in Britain and to contribute to the war effort. His collaboration with Lawrence resulted in the publication of 'Effort' (1947), a small book describing how to graph natural effort patterns in order to match innate patterns with needed work skills. 
Never happy being too far from theatre and movement as art, Laban also revived his interest in movement training for actors, which culminated in the publication in 1950 of his 'Mastery of Movement on the Stage'. In his final ten years Laban began to work on his newest area of interest: how movement could be used therapeutically. He engaged in research into personality, stress, and intervention techniques, a study which occupied him until his death on 1 July 1958 in Weybridge, where he was buried. 
Rudolf Laban, charismatic teacher, brilliant dreamer, philosopher, dancer, choreographer, author, and experimenter, was a man with a rare combination of personal magnetism and genius. His work ranged from the methodical to the fantastic, from the disciplined to the wildly imaginative. His contribution has permanently changed what we see as the place of movement in our lives. 


@@@@@


doc= 60609


Man, Felix Hans (1893-1985), photographer and art collector, was born on 30 November 1893 in Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany, as Hans Felix Sigismund Baumann, one of the five children of Karl Sigismund Ludwig Baumann (1853-1914) and his wife, Johanne Jacobine Helene Hofmann (1863-1915). His father, a banker like his grandfather, had been born in Riga, now in Latvia but then in imperial Russia. His father's usual language was German, and when this was banned he moved to southern Germany. In Riga he had been music critic for the 'Rigaer Tageblatt' so Felix enjoyed a musical background. Years later this was to show in memorable reportage of performances by Stravinsky in 1929, Furtwangler in 1930, and Toscanini at Bayreuth in 1930. 
Baumann always remembered his first experience of photography as a small boy when the flash powder failed to ignite for his school photograph. At the age of eleven he owned a box camera and to economize on pocket money he learned to develop and print his own films. Dissatisfied with his photography and encouraged by his school drawing-masters he started to etch, draw, and paint. Except for a few snapshots taken in the First World War trenches, graphic art was to dominate his artistic life until he took up the camera again in 1927 or 1928. He changed his name about this time to avoid confusion with another photographer also called Hans Baumann. 
In 1912 Baumann married Gertrude Jeckeln (1896-1966). After the First World War he restarted his art studies in Munich. His autobiography is silent about the early 1920s, but in an interview he revealed that during the inflation period he had lived on his own smallholding growing vegetables. Dr Nachum Gidal, a photojournalist who had worked alongside him, recalled that Baumann had worked in a printing factory making lithographic plates which explains his complete command of the technical and artistic aspects of lithography, on which he became a world authority. 
From 1927 Man was drawing illustrations for Ullstein's daily newspaper, 'BZ am Mittag'. As it was published at midday, illustrations had to be prepared overnight. Man returned to photography to ensure speed and accuracy in his drawings, but soon realized that photographs alone earned him more money. He began contributing to more Ullstein papers, including 'Tempo' and 'Morgenpost'. In 1929 he met Simon Gutmann, the charismatic owner of the photographic agency Dephot (Deutscher PhotoDienst). Gutmann was one of the first to understand the nature of the 'picture story' which was to revolutionize magazines worldwide. Man became Gutmann's chief photographer, a pioneering photojournalist: he, with others from this talented agency, provided hundreds of photo-stories for Ullstein's 'Berliner Illustrierte Zeitung' and many other publications during 1929-33. Through Dephot Man formed a long-lasting friendship with Stefan Lorant, a Hungarian Jew like Gutmann, who became editor of the 'Munchener Illustrierte Presse'. 
In 1933 Man was working in Canada on a story for the 'Berliner Illustrierte Zeitung' when the Nazis took over the Jewish-owned Ullstein Press; Lorant, already once imprisoned by the Nazis, left for England. Although not Jewish himself, Man did not relish becoming a compulsory member of the Nazi party and he too emigrated to England. Lorant persuaded the mighty Odhams Press to launch 'Weekly Illustrated' and Man to photograph for it. Lorant found it impossible to work with the management and resigned after three months leaving the young assistant editor, Tom Hopkinson, in charge. Man left soon after to join the 'Daily Mirror', becoming one of the photographers producing picture stories under the name Lensman. 
The dramatic change in Man's career came in 1938 when Lorant persuaded Hulton Press to start 'Picture Post'. Man became a major contributor remaining even after Lorant, apprehensive of a Nazi invasion of Britain, left for America in 1940. Again the assistant editor took over; again he was Tom Hopkinson. Man was interned briefly in the Isle of Man in the early days of the Second World War and became a naturalized British subject in 1948. He estimated that over the years he produced between 150 and 200 picture stories. The exact number for 'Weekly Illustrated' and 'Picture Post' is difficult to ascertain as for years no photographer credits were ever printed and there is limited access to other sources such as publishers' payment records. An extensive but still only partial list appears in a National Book League and Goethe Institute booklet published in 1977. 
Man held very strong views on how his pictures should be used, causing periodic disputes with managements. Between 1945 and 1948 he took few photographs, concentrating on his collection of artists' lithography. He wrote books and articles on lithography as well as editing the 'Europaeische Graphik', Munich, from 1963 to 1975. The climax of his collecting career came in 1971 when the Victoria and Albert Museum staged the exhibition 'Homage to Senefelder' entirely from his collection (it is now in the National Gallery of Australia, Canberra). He married his long-term companion, the German-born Lieselotte Henderson-Begg, late in life, in 1973; there were no children of the marriage. He died on 30 January 1985 in Westminster Hospital, London, and was cremated at Golders Green. He was survived by his wife. Many of his photographs can be found in the Hulton Getty collection, among the 'Picture Post' material. 


@@@@@


doc= 60612


Meidner, Ludwig Baruch (1884-1966), painter and graphic artist, was born on 18 April 1884 in Bernstadt, Silesia, one of four children of Gustav Georg Meidner ('b'. 'c'.1818), a textile merchant, and his wife, Rosa Glogauer (died 1942). Meidner grew up in a Jewish family who owned a textile shop. In 1901 he started training as a bricklayer in preparation for the study of architecture. Two years later he began studying drawing at the Konigliche Kunst- und Gewerbeschule in Breslau, Silesia. In 1905 he left the school and moved to Berlin; from there he went to Paris in 1906 to take painting lessons at the renowned academies Julian and Cormon. He became close friends with Amadeo Modigliani, whom he later commemorated in an article ('The young Modigliani: some memories', 'Burlington Magazine', 82, 1943, 87-91). In 1907 he returned to Berlin, where he lived, with some intervals of absence, until 1935. In the years from 1907 he produced many works on paper for his finances hardly allowed him to paint in oil, a situation which changed in 1911 when he received a scholarship, largely owing to a testimonial from Max Beckmann. In 1912 he co-founded the group Die Pathetiker, which dissolved after its only exhibition at Der Sturm Gallery, Berlin, in the same year. About this time his style became more expressive and he produced urban landscapes such as 'Apokalyptische Landschaft (Beim Bahnhof Halensee)' (1913; Los Angeles County Museum of Art), in which people run in several directions, houses seem to hang on to one another, and clouds scud across the sky, echoing the cubists' agitation of form and the futurists' dynamism. These works established Meidner's reputation as a central figure within the expressionist movement. Additionally he produced self-portraits, a genre which ran through his entire output, giving him the reputation of being the most frequently portrayed twentieth century artist. 
From 1916 to 1918 Meidner served in the infantry and as a French interpreter in prisoner-of-war camps in Merzdorf, near Cottbus, Germany. Concurrently he wrote expressionist prose, including 'Septemberschrei' (1920). In February 1918 he had his first solo exhibition at the Paul Cassirer Gallery, Berlin, which then went to the Kestner Society, Hanover. A year later he co-founded the Novembergruppe. From 1919 his expressionistic style became more relaxed and baroque, while Jewish and 'Bible' themes replaced his earlier urban landscapes. At this time Meidner converted to Orthodox Judaism. From 1924 to 1926 he taught at the studios for painting and sculpture in Berlin-Charlottenburg, where he met his future wife, the painter and graphic artist Else Meyer (1901-1987), whom he married in 1927 and with whom he had his only child, David ('b'. 1929). After the Nazis' rise to power Meidner was condemned as a degenerate artist and forbidden to work or exhibit because of his earlier expressionist style and his adherence to Judaism. The only employment he could find was at a Jewish institution, the Gymnasium Jawneh in Cologne, Germany, where he taught drawing between 1935 and 1938. Many of his works were confiscated from museums, such as the Nationalgalerie Berlin, and included in the Munich Degenerate Art Exhibition of 1937. 
Because of these events, in August 1939 Meidner and his family left Germany for Britain with the help of Augustus John and Thomas Tufton, who acted as personal guarantors. Meidner went to London, where he lived throughout his time in Britain except for his internment as an enemy alien on the Isle of Man between June 1940 and January 1942. Strangely enough this was his happiest time in exile as he was stationed with other kindred German artists. In Britain he had little artistic recognition and, as a result, became impoverished; the only gallery to mount an exhibition of his (and his wife's) work was the Ben Uri Gallery, London, in 1949. Despite the paucity of artistic acceptance he produced numerous works, including charcoal, chalk, and watercolour series, ranging from political themes, such as 'Massacres in Poland' (1942-5, Stadtarchiv Darmstadt, Germany), to burlesque prints, for example, 'Cafes, Theater, Variete (und Comics)' (1951; priv. coll.). These series reflect the influence of William Blake, who, as Meidner felt, was a kindred spirit in visionary painting and writing. 
Since he never felt at home in Britain Meidner returned to Germany, without his wife, in 1953. For the first two years he lived in a Jewish old people's home in Frankfurt and then in Marxheim (near Hofheim). He stayed there until 1963, when the town of Darmstadt provided him with a studio flat at the same time as holding a large retrospective of his work. He died on 14 May 1966, of a heart attack in Darmstadt (where he was buried at the Jewish cemetery), and so he could only briefly experience recognition as one of the most important German artists of the twentieth century. He received decorations such as the Grosses Bundesverdienstkreuz of the Federal Republic of Germany in 1964, and had national and international exhibitions, including the 1991 retrospective at the Institut Mathildenhohe Darmstadt, where thirty-five oils and numerous works on paper were shown. Besides his main archive, held at the Stadtarchiv Darmstadt, his works appear in the collections of, among others, the Stadtische Kunstsammlungen in Darmstadt, the Marvin and Janet Fishman collection in Milkwaukee, USA, and the Deutsches Literaturarchiv in Marbach, Germany. 


@@@@@


doc= 60622


Pommer, Erich (1889-1966), film producer, was born in Hildesheim, Germany, on 20 July 1889, the sixth of seven children born to Gustav Pommer (1852-1937), a textile merchant, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Jacobsohn (1853-1912). After nine years in Gottingen, the family moved in 1905 to Berlin, where Pommer worked as a clothing store apprentice. Already enthusiastic about cinema, he joined the Berlin office of the French company Gaumont in 1907, before becoming director of its Vienna branch three years later. In 1912 he filled the same post at Gaumont's rival Eclair, where he initiated the construction of film studios and began his career as a producer. Pommer married Gertrud Levy (1886-1960), a book-keeper, in Berlin on 27 December 1913. Eight months later he began fighting the French on the western front; wounded in action, he was awarded the Iron Cross, but continued his war work supervising film newsreels and propaganda shorts. 
In 1915 Pommer co-founded Decla-Film-Gesellschaft Holz and Co., based in Berlin, later merged with Meinert-Film (1919) and Bioskop (1920). At first the company's films featured popular genre material for the home market. Later, Pommer eyed the wider world, by facilitating ambitious product such as the expressionist classic 'Das Kabinet des Dr. Caligari' (1920) and the early films of Fritz Lang. His budgets and artistic success grew once Decla-Bioskop became absorbed in 1921 into Germany's major film conglomerate, Universum Film AG (Ufa). Pommer joined the company's executive board, established a gifted creative team, and began promoting prestige projects aimed at international distribution. In Britain, he first made his mark as the producer of Lang's crime epic 'Dr. Mabuse, der Spieler' (1922), and shared the applause along with Lang at its London industry premiere in March 1923. Other films that spread his fame included F. W. Murnau's powerful chamber drama 'Der letzte Mann' (1924), featuring Emil Jannings, E. A. Dupont's 'Variete' (1925), and Lang's 'Die Nibelungen' (1924) and 'Metropolis' (1927) -- the last costly enough to lose Pommer his contract and temporarily imperil Ufa's existence. 
After moving briefly to Hollywood, Pommer was invited back to Ufa late in 1927, where he applied Hollywood's streamlined studio methods to more solidly commercial product -- still Pommer's concern five years later when he crystallized the goals of any film as 'entertainment, recreation, oblivion' ('Picturegoer Xmas Album 1932', 62). Keen to foster pan-European cinema, he met the challenges of sound head on, promoting the brief fashion for multilingual production and achieving Germany's first international talkie success with the bilingual 'The Blue Angel' (1930). Operating his own unit with a regular creative team, Pommer found particular success in the new genre of sound film operetta, reaching a peak with the trilingual 'Der Kongress tanzt' (1931), featuring his most popular star, the English-born Lilian Harvey. His British reputation, cemented with regular visits to London, continued to expand; in 1931 the film critic C. A. Lejeune judged him 'probably the supreme artist of the German cinema' ('The Observer', 24 May 1931, 10). 
Though he was known as a spokesman for an international cinema, at the heart of Pommer's thinking lay a dichotomy. An international film, Pommer wrote in 1928, required a story with universal appeal; at the same time he believed that a film would lose its truthfulness and 'solid foundation' if not 'deeply rooted in its national soil' ('Kinematograph Weekly', 8 Nov 1928, 41). But as Pommer's career continued, buffeted by economics, politics, and another world war, an appropriate balance between the international and the domestic became increasingly difficult to strike. Immediately following 'Der Kongress tanzt', in 1932 he struck a co-production deal with an eager Gaumont-British Picture Corporation to make four English-language adaptations of his present production portfolio, mostly fanciful musical comedies. 'Too much German and not enough Anglo', complained one film critic, faced with the unsuccessful 'Happy Ever After' ('Daily Mirror', 18 Nov 1932, 16). Only the futuristic spectacle 'F.P.1' (1933) made any impression at the box-office. The Gaumont-British producer Michael Balcon, more sceptical than his bosses, reluctantly oversaw the British participation, though Pommer's method of unit production was a probable influence on Balcon's later regime at Ealing studios. 
Pommer's German career was abruptly curtailed in 1933 when Hitler's racial policies forced him, being Jewish, to work elsewhere, initially in France, then America. In 1935 he accepted an offer to make films in Britain for Alexander Korda. Pendennis Productions, formed with Korda, strode into life with the nationalistic 'Fire over England' (1936), based on A. E. W. Mason's novel set in the period of the Spanish Armada, but laced the film with a contemporary message about Britain's need to prepare for war. Strikingly designed, with notable performances from Flora Robson (Elizabeth I) and Raymond Massey (Philip II of Spain), the film received a warm home reception, though its faulty dramatic thrust and lack of what the trade newspaper 'Variety' termed 'Main Street appeal' led to weaker fortunes in America. 'Farewell Again' (1937) also waved the British flag, conjuring easy drama and tears from the officers and crew of a British troopship summoned back into service shortly after its first journey home in five years. Critical reaction was positive, but 'Variety' underlined the absence of American 'marquee values' in a film dominated by British stalwarts of cinema and stage. Both films, ironically, were directed by Americans. 
Possibly scenting Korda's financial ills, Pommer established a new outfit in February 1937 with the actor Charles Laughton, supported financially by John Maxwell's Associated British Picture Corporation. The company's name, Mayflower Pictures, was picked partially in the hope of increasing the films' standing in America, though subjects remained resolutely British, sourced from established middle-brow writers. Rashly perhaps, Pommer relished Laughton as an English equivalent of Germany's Emil Jannings, another actor with an onerous temperament and a physical presence challenging to bring under control. Mayflower's debut film 'Vessel of Wrath' (1938), based on a slim story by W. Somerset Maugham, offered a flawed but lively bundle of comedy, sentiment, and drama, dominated by Laughton's unbuttoned performance as a drink-loving beachcomber in the Dutch East Indies. When the planned director, the American scriptwriter Bartlett Cormack, proved unequal to the task, Pommer himself stepped into the breach; he survived modestly well, though it was not an experiment he repeated. Laughton's virtuoso but grandstanding skills also dominated 'St Martin's Lane' (1938), a trivial drama about London street entertainers, most notable for the picturesque realism of its settings and the emerging star lustre of Vivien Leigh, cast as the one entertainer who progresses from rags to riches. Pommer and Laughton moved further away from the freshness of 'Vessel of Wrath' with 'Jamaica Inn' (1939), a lowering adaptation of Daphne du Maurier's melodramatic novel about Cornish cut-throats and a degenerate Regency squire, enlivened by Maureen O'Hara's participation, but directed by Alfred Hitchcock with a heavy hand. 
The declining success of Mayflower's films, the team's growing artistic conflicts, and Maxwell's withdrawal of financial support combined to hasten the company's demise. Laughton and O'Hara relocated to RKO in Hollywood, moving straight into 'The Hunchback of Notre Dame' (1939). Pommer himself berthed at RKO for a frustrating two years, after his German passport made it inadvisable for him to return to England from a New York trip following the onset of war. Two productions emerged in 1940, one featuring Laughton ('They Knew What They Wanted'), another O'Hara ('Dance, Girl, Dance'), before Pommer's contract was terminated in 1941 on the convenient grounds of ill health. 
Pommer's career thereafter was fitful and always buffeted, as before, by the volatile world situation. An American citizen since 1944, he returned to Europe in 1946 to work for the American military government for Germany, charged with supervising studio reconstruction and the issue of production licences in the zone under America's control. Viewed with suspicion by many in Germany's industry, he resigned his position in 1949. After an unsuccessful attempt at independent operation in America, he started producing through Intercontinental-Film in Munich in 1951. Bureaucratic problems and mounting physical ailments, the legacies of diabetes, colon cancer, and heart trouble, brought his career to a close after the production of 'Kinder, Mutter und ein General' (1955), an anti-war drama that found official German disapproval, critical success, and limited home distribution. Following a leg amputation in America, Pommer remained in the country, winding down his film interests and settling in California. His wife, Gertrud, died on 29 July 1960; Pommer himself died on 8 May 1966 at the Motion Picture Hospital, Woodland Hills, Los Angeles. Their son, Hans-Eckhardt Hermann (John) Pommer ('b'. 1916), worked in the American film and television industry as an assistant director, production manager, and production executive from 1934 to 1979. 
Compared to his lustrous work in Germany between 1919 and 1933, the later stages of Erich Pommer's producing career must be counted a disappointment, though his failures were never all of his own making. From his beginnings in Germany, working for Gaumont and Eclair, he energetically and tenaciously championed cinema as an international force, and it was his misfortune to ply his trade and prowess in a world so fiercely disrupted by war and its aftermath. Though the artistic strength of Pommer's British films gradually declined, the years with Korda and Laughton remained his most productive since leaving Germany in 1933. It was just bad luck that Mayflower Pictures sailed at the wrong time in history, and perhaps with an inappropriate crew. 


@@@@@


doc= 60625


Reinhardt, Max (1873-1943), theatre director and manager, was born Max Goldmann on 9 September 1873 in Baden, near Vienna, of Jewish parents, the eldest of six children of Wilhelm Goldmann (1846-1906), shopkeeper, and his wife, Rosa Weingraf (1851-1924). After attending Realschule and Burgerschule in Vienna he began acting under the name of Max Reinhardt in 1890, and from 1894 to 1903 performed at the Deutsches Theater, Berlin. In 1901 he founded a cabaret, later to become the Kleines Theater, Berlin, where he devoted himself more and more to directing plays. His first major breakthrough occurred in 1905 at the Neues Theater in Berlin with a spectacular staging of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', in which a revolving stage was used for the first time in modern theatre as an integral part of the production. 
Reinhardt went on to become arguably the most prolific and versatile director of twentieth-century theatre. He brought freshness and excitement to classics that had previously been routinely offered in wooden productions, notably Shakespeare, Goethe, medieval drama, and Greek tragedy; for example, he staged Sophocles' 'Oedipus Rex' in a circus arena. He also daringly presented controversial modern works, such as Wilde's 'Salome', Ibsen's 'Ghosts', the banned 'Spring's Awakening' by Wedekind, plays by Gorky and Strindberg, and he later provided opportunities for staging expressionist works in his 'Young Germany' seasons at the Deutsches Theater, Berlin. 
After achieving international fame Reinhardt accepted an invitation in 1911 to premiere Karl Vollmoeller's 'The Miracle', a mimed religious drama, at Olympia, London. This vast spectacle was a huge success and was subsequently frequently revived; eventually in 1924-5 it was taken on tour across the United States, with Lady Diana Cooper in the lead role. From 1915 to 1918 Reinhardt became the controversial director of the Berlin Volksbuhne, saving it from closure. In 1919 he opened his so-called 'Theatre of Five Thousand', a huge arena seating 3200, which, however, soon proved uneconomic. A more successful venture was the founding in 1920 of the Salzburg Festival, at which Reinhardt's production of Hugo von Hofmannsthal's adaptation of the English morality play 'Everyman' continues to be performed to this day. In the same year Reinhardt moved back to Vienna, where he refurbished the Theater in der Josefstadt and established himself in a luxury residence at Schloss Leopoldskron, Salzburg. In 1927-8 his ensemble performed in New York, and he lectured at Columbia University: 'On the actor'. In 1932 his production of Offenbach's 'La belle Helene' was performed in London and Manchester. 
With Hitler's accession to power in 1933, Reinhardt was forced to hand over his theatres 'to the German people'. Goebbels offered to confer on Reinhardt the status of 'honorary Aryan'. Reinhardt declined, courageously writing a critical open letter to Goering and Goebbels. He now had to spend more of his time abroad, in June 1933 staging his favourite play, 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', with a largely amateur cast on a broad hillside in South Park, Headington, Oxford ('lovely to the eye,... partaken... fully of the nature of a dream', reported 'The Times' (Styan, 60)). In 1935 he directed for Warner Brothers his sugary film version of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', with Olivia de Havilland playing Hermia, Mickey Rooney Puck, and James Cagney Bottom. In 1934 he ended his failed marriage (begun in 1910) to the actress Else Heims, with whom he had had two sons, and was at last free to marry his partner and frequent leading lady, Helene Thimig. 
In 1937 Reinhardt moved to the United States, and his Austrian property was confiscated by the Nazis the following year. In Hollywood in 1938 he founded the Max Reinhardt Workshop for Stage, Screen and Radio, the last of several institutions created by Reinhardt for the training of the actor. In 1940 he became a United States citizen and continued to direct plays until the last year of his life. He died of a stroke on 31 October 1943 in the Gladstone Hotel in New York, and was buried at Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, on 3 November. 
In terms of theatrical style Reinhardt was not particularly innovative, and this, coupled with the fact that he wrote little about his own work, has meant that his importance has been underestimated. Reinhardt's achievement lay not only in the colossal range of his work but above all in the beauty of his stagings and the care that went into them. He nurtured the talents of virtually all the leading German-speaking actors of the day. He gave opportunities to scenic designers to transform the stage into a work of art. He paid attention to detail, working with extras on crowd scenes with hitherto unheard-of solicitude. He was equally skilled at creating pieces for a tiny intimate theatre as mounting a colossal spectacle with hundreds of extras. By offering a fresh reading of great poetic dramas such as those of Greek tragedy or Goethe's 'Faust', he not only established these once more as viable pieces of modern repertory; he also demonstrated to young playwrights the possibility of creating significant drama that went beyond the limits of naturalism and encouraged them in their efforts by enabling the staging of experimental works. The style that emerged from all this has been described as 'impressionistic realism', a style that was unashamedly theatrical in a way that was not possible in naturalism but which, in the search for beauty, eschewed the distorted excesses of expressionism. At a time when most European theatre was being constrained by a misguided pursuit of total realism or being emasculated by commercial pressures to offer mindless entertainment, Reinhardt restored to the stage a respect for quality in acting, design, and writing that has laid the foundations for all that is best in theatre today. As the critic Herbert Ihering summed it up: 'The revolution in theatre was no other than this: that for the first time theatre sought to be an art. Art, measured not against life, but according to its own laws, like painting, music, or poetry' (Ihering, 'Das neue Theater', 'Die neue Rundschau', 1921, 423-4). 


@@@@@


doc= 60628


Schach, Max (1886-1957), film producer, was born on 2 May 1886 in Zenta, Hungary (now Senta, Serbia). Brought up in Vienna, he first worked as a journalist for Berlin newspapers, serving for twelve years as the literary and drama critic of the 'Berliner Tageblatt'. In 1918 he took his first steps as a film producer in Berlin, collaborating with his wife, Beate 'nee' Ehrenfeld (1887/8-1962), a scriptwriter, and the director Karl Grune (born Berthold Grunwald, of Hungarian descent), who became entwined with the couple both professionally and personally for the rest of their lives. In the 1920s Schach worked for Germany's leading film conglomerate Universum Film AG (Ufa) as script editor and manager of its European division. But his most notable contributions to German cinema were made elsewhere. Teamed with Grune at Stern-Film, he produced Grune's innovatory street drama 'Die Strasse' (1923); working on more commercial lines, they made the lavish historical spectacle 'Waterloo' (1928) for Munchner Lichtspielkunst AG (Emelka). In 1931 Schach became Emelka's general director, with Grune as director of productions; but their technical renewal of facilities and expanded production programme came too late to save the company from impending bankruptcy. Emelka's studio was sold in September 1932 to a new company, Bavaria Film. Both Schach and Grune lost their positions. 
Hitler's ascent to power in 1933 increased the necessity for Schach, his wife, and Grune, who were all Jews, to explore new pastures. After a period in Paris, Schach moved to Britain just as the film industry sought to expand its horizons in the wake of the international success of Alexander Korda's 'The Private Life of Henry VIII' (1933). Much less a public figure than the flamboyant Korda, the diminutive, energetic, chain-smoking Schach quickly established himself as a significant presence in the British industry, though his fortunes were brief and decidedly mixed. His principal company, Capitol Film Productions, later reconfigured as the Capital Film Corporation, was incorporated on 12 July 1934; by October, Grune was directing its debut venture, 'Abdul the Damned', mounted in partnership with British International Pictures. Centred on the Young Turk Revolution of 1908 and the deposition of the Ottoman Empire's despotic Sultan Abdul Hamid II, this patchy drama of power, lust, and paranoia set the template for numerous other Schach productions. Strong visual design, a common strength, was tethered to a dishevelled script, one which raised a parallel with the dictatorship of Adolf Hitler only to mute it through frivolous treatment. Dominated by the charismatic presence of the Austrian actor Fritz Kortner, 'Abdul' further established the strong European stamp of Schach's material and creative personnel, though he also hired Hollywood directors and actors in an ambitious search for international appeal. 
The most significant legacy of 'Abdul' for Schach, and the British film industry as a whole, lay in its manner of financing. A loan of $15,000 was arranged from the Westminster Bank by the brokerage firm Glanville, Enthoven and Co., the amounts underwritten by marine insurance firms in the City -- all parties for whom film financing appeared a glamorous pathway to riches, though loan repayments entirely depended on a film production's profits. After July 1935, similar arrangements, but for larger sums, were funnelled through the newly created Aldgate Trustees, a finance source for other British producers, though Schach remained its chief beneficiary. Cushioned by the City's largesse, Schach cultivated every accoutrement of the successful producer: plush London offices at 293 Regent Street; an impressive desk, far bigger than himself; and lavish spending on talent and property. Purchase of rights to Leoncavallo's opera 'Pagliacci', separately negotiated with some twenty countries, approached $20,000, a small amount compared with the fee of $60,000 paid with the film's star, the tenor Richard Tauber. Satellite companies soon joined the Capital Film Corporation, each eligible for its own loans. Heralded by the logo of a flaming torch, Capitol's output included Grune's picturesque French Revolution melodrama 'The Marriage of Corbal' (1936); 'When Knights Were Bold' (1936), an imperfect but popular showcase for the comedian Jack Buchanan; and a lower-browed Tauber vehicle, the operetta-style 'Land Without Music' (1936). In the same frantic year, Trafalgar Films, bearing a logo featuring HMS 'Victory', generated Grune's 'Pagliacci' (a commercial failure); the rarefied melodrama 'Dreaming Lips', featuring Elisabeth Bergner; and Schach's one major box-office success, 'Love from a Stranger', a sturdy thriller about a tormented wife, featuring two Hollywood imports, Basil Rathbone and Ann Harding. Cecil Films concentrated on home-grown fare, including several vehicles for the team responsible for the Aldwych Theatre farces: Tom Walls, Ralph Lynn, and the playwright Ben Travers. A renting producer, lacking studio space of his own, Schach relied heavily on the facilities of others, at Elstree or Korda's dream factory at Denham. 
Schach's spending and financing habits, similarly pursued by Korda and others, played a notable part in the eventual withdrawal of City finance and the industry's destabilization. By the end of 1937, Capitol's unpaid loans stood at $1,210,000. Schach's bubble had burst, pricked by weak overall box-office takings, inadequate foreign distribution, and mounting industry and City disquiet at the Aldgate Trustees' activities. Earlier in the year, F. D. Klingender and Stuart Legg's book 'Money Behind the Screen', expanded from an investigative report published in the magazine 'World Film News', had laid bare the suspect financial structures on which the British film industry relied. Korda's substantial borrowings from the Prudential Assurance Company were highlighted, though it was Schach's career and companies that ground to a halt in April 1938 after eighteen films, with only one ancillary company, Grafton Films, soldiering on to make the successful version of A. J. Cronin's novel 'The Stars Look Down' (1939), a project originally launched by Grune. 
As Schach's flow of films stopped, the lawsuits started, culminating on 1 May 1939 with a bumper case brought by Westminster Bank against thirty-five insurance companies, where both sides blamed the other for insufficient oversight of loans to the Schach companies totalling $1,500,000. Prosecuting, Stafford Cripps, QC, also singled out the companies' 'quite incompetent and inefficient management' ('The Times', 2 May 1939, 5). The defendants, in turn, entered a counterclaim against Westminster Bank, but after a week of inflammatory revelations the case was settled out of court. 
Schach himself, his industry connections severed, remained aloof from the court case; neither side called him as a witness. He tried to keep busy. Following the collapse of his Capitol empire, he had come close to establishing a commercial radio station in Ostend; after the war, plans were laid for a return to film-making with the director and exhibitor George Hoellering. By the time Schach was naturalized as a British citizen on 11 February 1952, official documents described him as a 'film producer and adviser', living in Boscombe, Bournemouth, at the Cliff End Hotel. But financial misfortune continued to dog him; in 1956, now separated from his wife, who had long maintained an intimate relationship with Grune, Schach was moving between London hotels and facing bankruptcy. He died on 3 August 1957 at 35 Cheyne Place, London, of a coronary occlusion caused by atheroma. In the months following, Beate Schach's background relationship with the now retired Grune came to the fore: the pair, both residents of the Cliff End Hotel, married in Bournemouth on 22 January 1958. When Grune died at the hotel on 2 October 1962, Beate took her own life the following day -- the last twist in an intense triangular relationship almost worthy of one of the intimate German 'Kammerspiel' films of the 1920s. 
At his death, one year after Korda's, Schach had long been a forgotten figure, though his misfortunes stuck with film scholars and historians. He was castigated for contributing 'nothing to the industry' (Low, 207), and was sweepingly labelled 'the most universally disliked producer ever to work in British films' (Kulik, 146). Some at least of his Capitol employees were warmed by his enthusiasm, humour, and quirks. His publicity team called him 'the pocket battleship of British films', fitting enough for a mogul 4 feet 11 inches tall in his shoes who sat at his imposing desk like a 'perky griffin' (the description of the journalist Hilde Marchant), masterminding his raft of productions. In bulk they have not survived the years that well. Korda's product, at its best, was well-balanced and robustly imaginative; Schach's remained off-kilter, with design, material, and players usually imperfectly aligned, except for the powerful melodrama of 'Love from a Stranger', directed by Rowland V. Lee. 
Other factors worked against Schach. At a time when Britain's film unions mounted vocal complaints against the numbers of foreign technicians employed in the studios, Schach and his product drew particular ire, some coloured with anti-Semitism. 'The Marriage of Corbal' inspired Graham Greene, writing in 'The Spectator' (5 June 1936), to a particularly ferocious rant at this 'alien invasion'; other commentators found Schach and Korda easy targets in a period of industry turmoil. Time may not erase the inbuilt flaws in Schach's own films, but a more temperate assessment of his activities may yet emerge as historians consider other ingredients in the film industry's collapse -- from Hollywood's crushing market dominance to the panicking of naive investors, so easily charmed by the griffin at his desk. 


@@@@@


doc= 60630


Schwitters, Kurt (1887-1948), artist and poet, was born on 20 June 1887 in Veilchenstrasse, Hanover, Germany, the son of Eduard Schwitters (died 1931) and his wife, Henriette (died 1945); his parents had a women's outfitting shop in Theaterplatz, Hanover. 
Although Kurt Schwitters was born in Germany, his last years were spent in Britain after he fled first from cultural anathema in Germany and then from the German invasion of Norway. In Britain Schwitters found a refuge, where he could work undisturbed and little recognized as one of the most influential figures in twentieth-century European art. The unpretentious lifestyle of his last years was characteristic of his independence of mind. He was in contact with many avant-garde groups during his life yet he carefully maintained an independent standpoint, creating his own one-man movement which he called Merz, a syllable of the name 'Kommerzbank', observed on a fragment of discarded and torn paper which he incorporated into a collage. Characteristically he worked with the discarded ephemera of daily life, collecting and assembling pieces of many materials into objects of beauty which now hang in many of the world's major museums. 
A frail child, Schwitters grew up in the family home at 5 Waldhausenstrasse in the south part of Hanover, where he attended the 'Realgymnasium' I. During a prolonged illness at the age of fourteen he wrote poetry and music, and in 1906 he began to paint. Subsequently he had a thorough art education at the Kunstgewerbeschule in Hanover and the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste in Dresden. He married Helma Fischer (died 1945) in Hanover in 1915; they had a son, Ernst Schwitters. Engaged in war service between March and June 1917, Schwitters was soon declared unfit and sent to work as a draughtsman in a factory near Hanover. Henceforth he complemented his naturally inventive creativity with a draughtsman's disciplined precision. He perfected a collage technique which he described in 1919: 'Merz-pictures are abstract works of art. What the word Merz essentially denotes is the combining of all conceivable materials for artistic purposes and the equal technical evaluation of the individual materials. Merz-painting makes use not just of paint, canvas, brush and palette but of all materials perceptible to the eye, and of all requisite implements. At the same time it is unimportant whether or not the material was already formed for some purpose or other. A perambulator wheel, wire netting, string and cotton wool are factors having equal rights with paint. The artist creates through choice, distribution, and disassociation of the materials. (Schmalenbach, 94)' On the other hand his work as a draughtsman in a factory made him aware of machinery and this precision is evident in his typographic designs.The slaughter and suffering of war had shaken profoundly Schwitters's faith in the loyalties and cultural norms of his generation. Despairing soldiers returned to a defeated country on the brink of revolution. By 1917 Schwitters was committed to rebellious experiment in art, rejecting any return to the patronage and values of the age which plunged Europe into the First World War. The Russian revolutions of 1917 had demanded an art which was partisan, political, and public. But the failed revolution in Germany arose from dismay, poverty, and destruction. Political artists became ferocious social critics, particularly in Cologne and Berlin. There the Dada movement, an anarchic reversal of conventional values, attacked the very concept of art. Dada recognized no authority and made a method out of contradiction. Schwitters devised his own response, Merz, in the winter of 1918-19. 
Schwitters maintained his independence by contacting many avant-garde groups throughout the 1920s, balancing them to establish a position of his own yet still remain visible as an artist. Dada was one such formation, as was De Stijl, the Dutch-based group of artists and designers which included Piet Mondrian, Theo van Doesburg, and others. Schwitters was attracted also to the new Bauhaus by its design principles, and to international constructivism from Germany and Russia. He exhibited at Der Sturm in Berlin, an expressionist stronghold. Through the activities of the Provinzialmuseum and the Kestner Gesellschaft in Hanover, he also knew of the peripatetic Russian artist and designer El Lissitzky, who was to have a profound effect on his typographic designs. In 1924 he formed his own publicity company, the Merzwerbezentrale, characterized by designs which were practical, effective, intelligent, and legible. 
Typographic work was perhaps the least part of Merz, however. Schwitters made more and more collages from scraps of paper, photographs, and the detritus and ephemera of his surroundings. Fragments of the printed page introduced dramatic juxtapositions of scale, font, and colour to produce new effects, later to be used in design projects. But in his collages he specialized in fragmentation: his pieces of paper, wood, buttons, and cloth were rarely whole and their messages were never complete. With these fragments of daily life he turned discarded rubbish into harmonious, suggestive, and overtly beautiful compositions. 
In Schwitters's hands collage ranged from formal compositions of proportion and colour, to visual juxtapositions with new meanings, like the contrast of elements in a poetic metaphor. In fact Schwitters remained active as an innovative poet throughout his career. His performances were often witty and outrageous; frequently they contained no words. One poem evoked a long-postponed sneeze and ended with the breaking of a plate. His most celebrated long poem was a wordless phonetic incantation, the 'Ursonata', declaimed by Schwitters on many occasions. Merz activities in Hanover grew to embrace a tall construction at his home. He called it the Merzbau, an accumulation which grew through the ceiling and into the room above. It incorporated display cases of objects assembled together and even housed a live guinea-pig. 
With the rise of Hitler and national socialism in Germany, Schwitters became insecure. In 1937 four of his works were included in the Entartete Kunst ('Degenerate art') exhibition held in Munich. Thirteen other works were removed from German museums. He travelled abroad, settling in a self-imposed exile at Lysaker, near Oslo. Here he began another Merzbau. He never returned to Germany and when German forces attacked Norway he fled, arriving in Edinburgh in 1940, to spend the last seven and a half years of his life in Britain. 
Schwitters was arrested and interned as an enemy alien at various places until he entered the detention camp in Hutchinson Square at Douglas on the Isle of Man. Such an experience was unintelligible to refugees antagonistic to Hitler, for whom Schwitters certainly had not the slightest sympathy. But at Douglas, without credit to British organizers, the camp contained so many professors, athletes, musicians, philosophers, and artists that it made a kind of university-in-exile. The Amadeus Quartet met there and an extensive programme of lectures was arranged. Schwitters performed his poems and painted portraits. Parts of the 'Ursonata' were used as greetings between initiate inmates at the camp. The apocalyptic German painter Ludwig Meidner was also there, as was Fred Uhlman, the novelist and collector of African carvings, whose portrait by Schwitters is in the Hatton Gallery at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
On his release Schwitters moved to London, where he was received by the critic Herbert Read and the artists Ben Nicholson and Barbara Hepworth. Here he heard of the death of his wife Helma in Hanover and the destruction of the Merzbau there. In 1945 he moved to Ambleside in the Lake District to live in peaceful seclusion with his friend Edith Thomas. At Little Langdale he began a last large construction in a stone barn, now known as the Elterwater Merzbarn. He cemented to the wall material and objects from the area to form the basis of a deep relief construction; a ceramic egg, part of a watering can, and a piece of string were caught up in a curving and colourful form suggestive of rebirth and growth in the landscape. But Schwitters died on 8 January 1948 in the hospital at Kendal without completing the project. He was buried on the 10th in Ambleside churchyard. The Abbot Hall Art Gallery at Kendal has several of his British works and in July 1965 the Merzbarn wall was moved to the Hatton Gallery at the University of Newcastle. 
Schwitters is increasingly recognized as a profound influence in post-war attitudes to art. Every art movement involving the assemblage of discarded and used material probably owes a debt to him. Photographs which show him in his last years happy and relaxed, far from the international contacts which made him so influential, are deceptive, for he had in his pocket a cheque from the Museum of Modern Art in New York. He also wanted to found a new international periodical called 'Pin' with the Dadaist Raoul Hausmann, then living in Limoges, and simultaneously he was working on a Merzbau construction which could have been the most ambitious of them all. 


@@@@@


doc= 60638


Stampfl, Franz (1913-1995), athletics coach, was born in Vienna on 18 November 1913. Little is known of his early life. He was a student at the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste, Vienna, in the 1930s but also keen on skiing and athletics. Although something of an all-rounder, his speciality was throwing the javelin. He later claimed to have taken part in the 1936 Berlin Olympics. He left Austria for London when it appeared that a Nazi take-over of the country was imminent. Once there he joined the South London Harriers athletic club, where he both competed and began coaching; he subsequently coached in Northern Ireland. At the outbreak of war in 1939 he tried to join the British forces but instead found himself interned as an enemy alien. He was sent to Canada and was on the liner 'Arandora Star' when it was torpedoed in the Atlantic on 2 July 1940. Six hundred and eighty-two people died but Stampfl was one of the survivors picked up after several hours in the icy waters off the northern coast of Ireland. He was then sent to Australia on the 'Dunera'. He later recalled the brutal treatment which was a feature of the internment camps. 
In 1946 Stampfl returned to London and established himself as a freelance athletics coach, charging 6died or 1's'. for evening sessions at the duke of York's barracks on the King's Road in Chelsea. It was there that he met some of the leading British athletes of the time, most notably the middle-distance trio Roger Bannister, Christopher Brasher, and Christopher Chataway. 
By the early 1950s sport in general and athletics in particular had become one of the sites where cold-war rivalries were most publicly played out. It was well known that the superiority of Eastern European runners such as Emil Zatopek and Vladimir Kuts was based on ferocious training sessions of up to six hours daily. Many British athletes, particularly those educated at public school and Oxbridge, remained sceptical about training and coaches -- tending to rely on privileged access to facilities, natural ability, and an aristocratic tradition of effortless superiority to see them through. Stampfl spoke directly to these part-time athletes when he said that training periods of between an hour and an hour and a half a day all the year round could still produce world-beating athletes. This was to be achieved by exercising the mind as well as the body. Good training was necessary because it bred confidence, and the development of a powerful mental state was an important part of training. As for the physical side, the aim was the scientific one of finding the level of efficiency of an athlete, and this was best achieved when a specific effort was repeated over and over again. Gradual extensions of the intensity of that effort would enable the body successively to adapt. Stampfl's system was known as interval training, which for a middle-distance specialist might involve, in an evening, ten fast laps of 400 yards with a two-minute jogging rest period in between, or four or five half-miles again with only a short breathing space between each. This was at a time when there were influential critics of 'excessive' training within the British athletics establishment, especially when practised by runners from less privileged backgrounds, such as Jim Peters and Gordon Pirie. 
By the autumn of 1953 Bannister, Brasher, and Chataway were training with Stampfl two or three nights a week, and often eating with him afterwards. Chataway later thought that more than Stampfl's athletic knowledge it was his vivid conversation and effervescent personality that drew them to him. Training might be both boring and painful but Stampfl's enthusiasm could make it seem not only worthwhile but certain to produce records and victories. Stampfl helped Bannister become the first man to run a mile in under four minutes (in Oxford on 6 May 1954). He also helped Chataway achieve a world record and Brasher to win an Olympic gold medal. 
In 1955 Stampfl took up a full-time coaching post at the University of Melbourne funded jointly by the Victoria Amateur Athletic Association, the National Fitness Council, and the university, in an attempt to improve Australian standards for the 1956 Olympics. Brasher, Chataway, and Derek Johnson went out early to Melbourne in part to benefit from his advice and support. Not everyone was pleased with his appointment and at times an unedifying rivalry developed between Stampfl and Percy Cerutty and their celebrated milers Merv Lincoln and Herb Elliott. Stampfl also coached Ralph Doubell, who won the 800 metres at the Mexico City Olympics in 1968, as well as runners Ron Clarke and Peter Bourke, long jumper Allan Crawley, triple jumper Phil May, and shot putter Gael Mulhall. Stampfl remained a successful and influential coach and authority on athletics. His book 'Franz Stampfl on Running' (1955) was translated into several languages and sold 500,000 copies in Europe and 100,000 in the Soviet Union. His fame allowed him to conduct fitness groups for businessmen, write newspaper columns, and comment on track and field for radio and television. 
In 1986 Stampfl was seriously injured in a car accident and spent the remainder of his life in a wheelchair, though he continued to help those athletes who consulted him. He died at his home in Melbourne on 19 March 1995, leaving a widow, Patricia, and a son. At his funeral Ralph Doubell said: 'At University, Franz became not only my coach but my mentor, guardian and guide. At times the relationship was almost psychic. In a race I could feel his thinking about what I should do next, when to make my move.... It may be difficult for people outside the sporting arena to understand the bond between athlete and coach, but there is something there that transcends even family relationships. (Phillips, 75)' 



@@@@@


doc= 60642


Nu, U (1907-1995), prime minister of Burma, was born on 25 May 1907 in Wakema, Myaungmya, Burma, the elder son of U San Htun, merchant, and his wife, Daw Saw Khin. His parents were prosperous traders, selling monks' robes from a drapery store in the Wakema bazaar. According to Burmese tradition, Saturday-born first children were supposed to be quarrelsome, and to induce quarrelsomeness between their parents. Hence he was given the name Nu (Gentle) and was nominally sold to his aunt Daw Gyi and her husband, U Shwe Gon, well-to-do landowners who lived with his parents. Like all Burmese names Nu's was attended by several honorific titles. He was known as Maung Nu as a youth and young man and as U Nu thereafter. He was given a special title of Thakin Nu, as were all the members of the Dobama Asi-ayone (Our Burma Association). It was usual for the members of associations to take a personal title from their membership but Nu never took on this modest claim to fame, although he was known by others as Thakin Nu for most of his adult life. 
Nu was educated first at the Wakema Anglo-Vernacular Government School, but he left in 1920 following the school strike called in response to the promotion to university status of Rangoon College. He then attended the new national school in Wakema and, from 1922, Myoma national high school, Rangoon. He had a wayward adolescence, frequently embarrassing his parents by his excessive drinking, and contracting venereal disease from one of many encounters with prostitutes. At the age of eighteen he resolved to follow a Buddhist way of life, and gave up alcohol as a token of his commitment. In the same year, 1925, he entered the University of Rangoon. Graduating in 1929, he became superintendent of a national school at Pantanaw, of which the headmaster was U Thant, later to be secretary-general of the United Nations. In 1931 he eloped with and married Ma Mya Yi, daughter of U Aung Nyein, a wealthy rice miller and president of the Pantanaw national school committee. Following his marriage (to which his parents-in-law became reconciled) Nu taught in Thongwa before returning in 1934 to Rangoon, where he worked for a Burmese-language newspaper and enrolled as a law student at the University of Rangoon. 
In his second spell as a university student Nu was actively involved in the Rangoon University Students' Union, and became a close colleague of Aung San, editor of 'Oway', the students' paper. In 1936 Nu wrote an article in 'Oway' which was highly critical of the university's British principal, D. J. Sloss, and for this he was expelled. For several weeks the university students went on strike. Nu was allowed to return, though he left the university without completing his course. The victory of Nu and the students' union marked a new impetus both in student affairs and in opposition to British rule. His subsequent activities in the Dobama Asi-ayone and as organizer of the Nagani (Red Dragon) book club, disseminating nationalist literature, led the government to imprison him in 1940, along with many of his closest colleagues. He was then released by the British authorities in a vain attempt to send him as an emissary to China's Kuomintang leaders. 
This was the situation when the Japanese invaded Burma in December 1941. They set up a Burmese government with Ba Maw as leader. Nu initially remained outside the government, but in August 1943 he joined it as foreign minister, although, as he said himself, he was a 'Minister without a Ministry'. He made several visits overseas as a minister and lieutenant for Ba Maw. All this came to an end when the British expelled the Japanese in mid-1945. Nu used his new-found freedom to write a serious study of the effects of Japanese rule in Burma. This first appeared in the Burmese language but J. S. Furnivall, a retired Burma civil servant, assisted Nu in producing an English-language version of his study which eventually appeared under the title 'Burma under the Japanese: Pictures and Portraits' (1954). The book was frank about the relationship between the Burmese and their Japanese masters. 
When the war ended, Nu retired into private life: however, his move away from politics did not last long. In 1946 he was elected vice-president of the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (AFPFL), into which Aung San had brought most of the nationalist elements in Burma. In June 1947 Nu was elected to the nominally non-party role of speaker of the constituent assembly formed to draft a constitution, following the London agreement of January 1947 between Aung San and Clement Attlee. Although the returning British were in a strong position with their military forces, Aung San was able to rival their strength: the AFPFL had emerged as the strongest political movement in Burma, although Ba Maw tried to come forward with a rival organization, financed by the money he had amassed under the Japanese. On the fringe of both these leading organizations there were quasi-military elements only loosely controlled by the rival leaders. Certain of Ba Maw's lieutenants tried to enhance the power of their boss by building up his military power. This rivalry ended in July 1947 when Ba Maw's thugs burst into the secretariat (the political and administrative centre for Burma) and gunned down Aung San and his cabinet. Ba Maw hoped to cause chaos in Aung San's political machine. Fortunately for him, Nu was not present at the ill-fated cabinet meeting and in any case was too popular to be disposed of summarily. The governor, Sir Hubert Rance, was not prepared to see his new political reforms disposed of, and he sent for Nu to ask him to become prime minister. If Rance and Nu had not acted so quickly, there is no doubt that something like civil war would have consumed central Burma. As it was, their action pre-empted opposition. 
Nu was able to take advantage of Aung San's charisma to push ahead with political reform. In September 1947 the new constitution was agreed, and in October, Nu signed the treaty of Burmese independence, in London, leading to independence on 4 January 1948 (a date set following Nu's consultations with astrologers). By then Nu had achieved useful administrative changes, although the army (Aung San's principal legacy) was out of control. For several months the rebellious soldiers were almost into the suburbs of Rangoon, but Nu, who had no experience of this kind of politics, was able to return most of the country to something like normal life. He followed Aung San's style by setting up five- and ten-year plans designed to bring about a more stable society. The first ten years of his administration were to be the most successful, and he was able to introduce some of his most cherished objectives. 
The army leaders, notably the commander-in-chief General Ne Win, were jealous of Nu's success, and in September 1958 (following a split in the AFPFL and a deteriorating security situation) Nu was persuaded to relinquish power to a caretaker government led by Ne Win, which would restore stability and prepare the country for elections in 1960. However, the military junta followed much the same directions as Nu and his friends. They had promised to get away from the office and lead the country from the field: but this did not happen. Indeed, military rule brought in even more bureaucratic methods. By the time of the 1960 elections it was clear that military rule had little if anything to add to the regular methods of government -- that is, a bureaucracy with a veneer of parliamentary control -- and the people began to look back to the parliamentary period with nostalgia. Nu returned to power following the elections in February 1960, supported by some of his faithful allies and by a new face on the scene -- Aung San Suu Kyi, daughter of Aung San. The army gave way to Nu with ill grace, and despite his renewed popularity he could not feel that he was altogether secure. In March 1962 he was again ousted by Ne Win and the army. Nu had attempted to change the government's policy towards the hill peoples: he endeavoured to bring their leaders back into government, thus challenging one of the main parts of the army's programme. He had also, shortly before the coup, announced a series of nationalization measures. 
Following the March 1962 coup many of Nu's lieutenants were gaoled and in some cases executed. Nu himself was not treated so severely, though he was placed under house arrest. In 1967 he was permitted to leave Burma for health reasons. Until 1972 he lived in Thailand, from where he organized opposition to the military government in Burma; he then abandoned politics and went to live quietly in a Buddhist monastery in India. He returned from exile in 1980, at the invitation of Ne Win. He spent the following years translating Buddhist texts. Following the fall of Ne Win in 1988 he formed the Alliance for Peace and Democracy, and declared himself the legitimate prime minister. However, he failed to gain much popular support, and in September 1988 another military junta seized power. Nu was again placed under house arrest, until April 1992. After his release he campaigned on behalf of Aung San Suu Kyi, who he now realized was recognized as the leader of the pro-democracy movement in Burma. 
Nu died in Rangoon on 14 February 1995. He was survived by three daughters and two sons, his wife having predeceased him. When U Thant had died, students at Rangoon University had demonstrated their fervent support for his work, causing the university to be closed once again. After Nu's death the army took precautions to avoid a similar demonstration and his funeral therefore was on a limited scale. 


@@@@@


doc= 60643


Woodcock, George (1912-1995), writer and journal editor, was born at Grace Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, on 8 May 1912, the only child of (Samuel) Arthur Woodcock (died 1926), railway clerk, and his wife, Margaret Gertrude, 'nee' Lewis (died 1940). His parents had moved to Canada a few years previously in search of a better life, and his father at one point worked as a silver prospector, but they returned to England when George was only a few months old. There, partly through family connections, his father obtained a post with Great Western Railways. He was educated at Sir William Borlase's School in Marlow, Buckinghamshire, where his parents lived. He was unable to go on to university because of family poverty following his father's early death, and for eleven years (from 1929 to 1940) he too worked as a railway clerk for Great Western Railways in London. At the same time he began to make his name as a writer in small circulation magazines and he joined the literary bohemia of pre-war London; he also became involved in left-wing politics, moving from socialism to pacifism and also to anarchism. 
During the Second World War Woodcock was a conscientious objector and worked on the land. At the same time he made his name as an editor, producing sixteen issues of his own magazine, 'Now', from 1940 to 1947. From 1942 he worked with the Freedom Press, the main British publisher of anarchist material, producing many articles and several pamphlets. In 1945, when three of the editors of its paper 'War Commentary' were imprisoned for anti-war activity, he helped to keep the paper going while they were in prison and he founded the Freedom Defence Committee on behalf of dissenters who were too unpopular for anyone else. From 1943 he lived with Ingeborg Hedwig Elisabeth Roskelly, an artist, daughter of Otto Linzer, a ministry of finance inspector in Germany, and wife of Frederick Roskelly, an English journalist. She had left Germany in 1936. Following a divorce in which Woodcock was named as co-respondent, he and Ingeborg married on 20 January 1949. 
After the war Woodcock began to produce successful general books, and he was on the verge of becoming an established author in England when in 1949 he returned with his wife to Canada. He spent the rest of his life there, though he frequently visited Britain and had most of his later books published in London. He and Ingeborg settled in British Columbia and had a hard struggle at first; he earned initially a precarious and eventually a prosperous living as a writer and broadcaster. From 1954 to 1956 he taught English at the University of Washington (until excluded from the United States because of his political views). He then taught English at the University of British Columbia from 1956 to 1963, becoming associate professor. Thereafter he preferred independent to academic status, though he retained a connection with the University of British Columbia and from 1966 to 1967 was a full-time lecturer in Asian studies. He became a leading advocate of and authority on Canadian literature, and was the founding editor of the prestigious academic quarterly 'Canadian Literature' from 1959 to 1977. He and his wife spent much time travelling all over the world; they were also involved in relief work in India and Tibet, and established a fund for impoverished writers in Canada. In later years Woodcock developed a keen interest in Tibetan Buddhism, and on several occasions met the Dalai Lama. 
Woodcock was the author or editor of well over 150 books over a period of sixty years. He produced biographical studies of H. W. Bates (1969), Aphra Behn (1948), Gabriel Dumont (1975), Mahatma Gandhi (1972), William Godwin (1948), Aldous Huxley (1972), Peter Kropotkin (1950), Wyndham Lewis (1971), Malcolm Lowry (1971), Hugh MacLellan (1969), Thomas Merton (1978), George Orwell (1966), P. J. Proudhon (1956), Herbert Read (1972), Mordecai Richler (1971), and Oscar Wilde (1950). He produced several works of literary criticism and edited several political and literary classics. He also produced many books of travel and anthropology, and on history and politics, several collections of essays, and entries in many reference books. Above all he wrote two standard books, 'Anarchism: a History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements' (1962) and 'Canada and the Canadians' (1970). The former became one of the most widely read and influential studies of the subject, and appeared in many editions and translations. He later added, as a companion volume, the anthology 'Anarchist Reader' (1977). The two books established his permanent reputation, though they were both the object of much controversy. Towards the end of his life he provided the introductions for a new collection of the main writings of Peter Kropotkin in eleven volumes. However, he thought of himself primarily as a poet, and his poems were published over a period of sixty-two years and collected in several volumes. Towards the end of his life he produced three volumes of readable but unreliable autobiography -- 'Letter to the Past' (1982), 'Beyond the Blue Mountains' (1987), and 'Walking through the Valley' (1994) -- and he became the subject of several studies himself. 
Woodcock received many honours and awards, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 1968 and a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1971. He refused the honours offered by governments, preferring the respect of his peers. After suffering from heart disease for nearly thirty years, he died at his home, 6429 McCleery Street, Vancouver, on 28 January 1995. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 60644


Cushing, George Frederick (1923-1996), Hungarian scholar, was born in Holway Road, Sheringham, Norfolk, on 17 February 1923, the son of George Irvine James Cushing, United Methodist minister, and his wife, Mary Emily, 'nee' Hutchinson. He was educated as a foundation scholar at Nottingham high school, before going in January 1942 to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he was awarded a major scholarship to read classics, but his university studies were interrupted in June 1942 when he joined military intelligence. He served in Egypt, Syria, and the Lebanon, where he acquired fluency in Turkish and a working knowledge of Arabic and Kurdish. In later life he rarely discussed his wartime career, other than to complain of malaria and camels. In 1943 he was sent to learn Hungarian at the School of Slavonic and East European Studies, University of London, but on completion of the course he returned to active service in the Middle East. In 1946 he resumed his studies at Cambridge, before graduating with an upper second in classics in 1947. 
In May 1947 Cushing was appointed assistant lecturer in Hungarian language and literature at the School of Slavonic and East European Studies, where he remained for the rest of his academic career. In October 1947 he enrolled as a PhD student at the Eotvos College, Budapest, witnessing at first hand the final stages of the communist takeover of Hungary. His teachers at the college included the eminent Hungarian linguist Dezso Pais and the literary historian Janos Horvath. He was expelled from Hungary in 1949 and his notes were confiscated (but he had made duplicates). He returned to the School of Slavonic and East European Studies and completed in 1952 at the University of London his PhD thesis, 'Szechenyi, Kossuth and national classicism in Hungarian literature'. He was appointed to a full lectureship in 1950, a readership in 1967, and a personal chair in 1978. He was head of the school's department of east European languages and literature in 1976-9 and 1983-6, and served as acting director of the school in 1979-80. He retired in 1986, after which he was made an emeritus professor. 
Cushing's principal contribution to Hungarian literature was as a translator. His translations include Gyula Illyes's 'People of the Puszta' (1967; originally 'Pusztak nepe') and his biography of Petofi (1973), a collection of studies by Endre Ady ('The Explosive Country', 1977), a selection of short stories by Zsigmond Moricz ('Seven Pennies', 1988), Geza Gardonyi's 'Eclipse of the Crescent Moon' (1991, originally 'Egri csillagok'), and Margit Kaffka's 'Colours and Years' (1999, originally 'Szinek es evek'). Cushing's literary translations were marked by a lucidity of style and a precision of vocabulary. His work of translation extended, however, well beyond literature. His long contribution to Doreen Warriner's 'Contrasts in Emerging Societies' (1965) brought together travelogues, memoirs, political speeches, statistics, and reports on society, education, and the economy in nineteenth-century Hungary. In 1975 he translated and adapted from the Hungarian Peter Hajdu's 'Finno-Ugrian Languages and Peoples' (originally 'Finnugor nepek es nyelvek'), which cemented a long-held interest in Hungarian linguistics and, in particular, the early history of the Hungarian language. 
Cushing published extensively in academic journals on aspects of Hungarian literature and language. These included several contributions to the 'Slavonic and East European Review', most notably his 'Books and readers in eighteenth-century Hungary' (1969) and 'The desiderative in Hungarian' (1963), which analysed one set of suffixes in Hungarian syntax, and in the journal 'Folklore' a study of the bear in Ob-Ugrian legend (1977). Although for a long time unable to visit Hungary, he was from the 1970s onwards frequently invited to publish and lecture there, surprising audiences with his absolute mastery of the Hungarian language and its idioms. He was awarded several distinctions, including the Petofi medal for literature (1973), the Ady medal for literature (1978), and the republic of Hungary's order of merit medium cross (1993). 
Cushing was, according to another distinguished Hungarian scholar, Laszlo Peter, 'the scholar who in his time did more for Hungarian studies outside Hungary than anyone else' ('The Independent', 29 April 1996). Clubbable and a skilled raconteur, witty and hugely informed, he was also retiring and discreet. True to the family tradition, he remained a strong Methodist throughout his life, and was an elder of Chislehurst Methodist Church, where he also played the organ with considerable accomplishment. He served on a number of committees ranging from Bromley education committee to the Methodist International Committee. He was after his retirement president of the British-Hungarian Fellowship in London. After joining the School of Slavonic and East European Studies he lived mostly in Kent, first in Sevenoaks and then in Chislehurst. He died at St Christopher's Hospice at 51 Lawrie Park Road, Sydenham, on 12 April 1996, of prostate cancer after a long illness. A funeral followed by a service of thanksgiving was held at Chislehurst Methodist Church on 25 April 1996, after which he was cremated. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 60645


Blackwood, Lady Caroline Maureen Hamilton-Temple- (1931-1996), novelist, was born on 16 July 1931, at 4 Hans Crescent, Knightsbridge, London, the eldest of three children of Basil Sheridan Hamilton-Temple-Blackwood, fourth marquess of Dufferin and Ava (1909-1945), and his wife, Maureen Constance Guinness (1907-1998), socialite and one of the 'fabulous Guinness girls' of the 1920s. Caroline was the great-granddaughter of Edward Cecil Guinness, first earl of Iveagh (1847-1927), and of Frederick Hamilton-Temple-Blackwood, first marquess of Dufferin and Ava (1826-1902), governor-general of Canada and viceroy of India. She was scantily educated at Rockport Preparatory School for Boys, Brillantmont School, Lausanne, and Downham School for Girls, Essex, and had an unhappy childhood at the family seat at Clandeboye in Ulster. After a finishing school in Oxford, she came out as a debutante in 1949 at a ball held at Londonderry House. As a teenager she was plump, ungainly, and lacking in confidence; her stockings were always falling down. However, she had huge avid blue eyes and wonderful blonde hair, and after losing weight developed into a captivating beauty and a sensational debutante. 
Blackwood then took a secretarial job with the Hulton Press, and was given small reporting assignments by Claud Cockburn. Ann Fleming introduced Blackwood to the painter Lucian Michael Freud (1922-2011), with whom she eloped to Paris in 1952. There she met Picasso, and did not wash for three days after he drew on her hands and fingernails. After their marriage on 9 December 1953 she became a striking figure in London's 'haute boheme': the Gargoyle Club and Colony Room replaced Belgravia drawing-rooms as her haunts. She sat for several of Freud's finest portraits, notably 'Girl in Bed', which testify to her outstanding allure. Cyril Connolly's attentions to Blackwood became so unequivocal that Freud ambushed him in Soho and kicked his shins. She was impressed by the ruthless vision of Freud and of Francis Bacon, and her later fiction was a literary version of their view of humanity. 
After her marriage had disintegrated Blackwood moved in 1957 to New York, where she studied acting at the Stella Adler school. She had relationships with the editor of the 'London Magazine' Alan Ross (1922-2001) and with the Anglo-American screenwriter Ivan Moffat (1918-2002). She also went to Hollywood, appeared in an Italian film, and had a small part in the television series 'Have Gun Will Travel' in the 1950s. Her marriage to Freud was dissolved in Mexico in 1958. Meeting her that year Christopher Isherwood noted, 'Caroline was round eyed as usual, either dumb or scared'. As a dinner guest he thought her 'a frost' (Isherwood, 'Diaries', 1.768, 814). On 15 August 1959, in Yonkers, she married Israel Citkowitz (1909-1974), a composer with a creative block. They had three daughters (although a deathbed admission revealed that Ivan Moffat was the father of Ivana). 
In the early 1960s Blackwood began contributing to 'Encounter', the 'London Magazine', and other periodicals on such subjects as beatniks, Ulster sectarianism, women's lib theatre, and New York free schools. Although these articles were elegant, minutely observed, and sometimes wickedly funny, they had, according to Isherwood, a persistent flaw: 'She is only capable of thinking negatively. Confronted by a phenomenon, she asks herself: what is wrong with it?' (Isherwood, 'Diaries', 803). During the mid-1960s she had an affair with Robert Benjamin (Bob) Silvers ('b'. 1929), founder and co-editor of the 'New York Review of Books' (1963). Although her marriage to Citkowitz was sundered, he continued to live near her and served as her gentle nanny-duenna until his death. 
After returning to London, in April 1970 Blackwood began a relationship with the manic-depressive American poet Robert Traill Spence Lowell (1917-1977), who was then a visiting professor at All Souls College, Oxford. Their son was born on 28 September 1971, and after obtaining divorces from their spouses in Santo Domingo, they married on 21 October 1972 and lived in London, in Milgate, Kent, and later in Castletown, co. Kildare. The sequence of poems in Lowell's 'The Dolphin' (1973) provides a disrupted narrative of his involvement with Blackwood and the birth of their son. She was distressed and confused in her reactions to Lowell's manic episodes. She felt useless during his attacks, and afraid of their effects on her children. Her anxieties, alcohol-related illnesses, and late-night tirades exacerbated his condition. The turmoil and tension of their relationship were aggravated by the chaos of their domestic arrangements. During 1976-7 the marriage disintegrated. Lowell died clutching a Freud portrait of Blackwood, in the back seat of a New York taxi, on his way to resume life with his second wife, Elizabeth Hardwick. 
Despite their marital anguish, Lowell was crucial to Blackwood's development as a novelist. He encouraged her, as Caroline Blackwood, to assemble her first book, a collection of stories and reportage, with a title from an Ulster protestant marching song, 'For All that I Found there' (1973), and a coruscating memoir of her daughter's treatment in a burns unit. Blackwood's first novel, 'The Stepdaughter' (1976), is a concise, gripping monologue by a rich, self-pitying woman deserted by her husband in a luxurious New York apartment and tormented by her fat, stodgy stepdaughter. Like much of Blackwood's fictional writing, it has a claustrophobic emotional intensity as it demonstrates how a selfish woman's emotional state distorts her perception and treatment of other people. 'The Stepdaughter', which won the David Higham prize for the best first novel of the year, has Blackwood's hallmark: exactitude, wit, and sensitivity as well as the relentless tone of resentment characteristic of her narratives. Its female fury is chilling. 
The tone in much of Blackwood's fiction was that of a prodigious and observant child: knowing, unhappy, and helpless in the power of cruel, devious, or emotionally suffocating adults. This temper was particularly conspicuous in her second novel, 'Great Granny Webster' (1977), which was partly based on her own miserable childhood. She depicted an austere and loveless old woman's destructive impact on her daughter and granddaughter. The cumulative effect is of blistering resentment, grief, and despair that nothing can palliate. It impressed Philip Larkin and was also short-listed for the Booker prize. 
As a result of the punitive taxation levied by the Callaghan government Blackwood left England in 1977 and took an apartment in the great Georgian house of Castletown in co. Kildare, which was convenient for Guinness family parties. One of her last serious relationships was with the poet and fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, Andrew Harvey ('b'. 1951). The death of her eldest daughter Natalya in 1978 further demoralized her; her love of children had impressed Elizabeth Bishop, but she was sometimes a difficult mother. 
In 1980 Blackwood wrote a study of the relations between the duchess of Windsor and her cunning lawyer, Maitre Suzanne Blum. This malicious, macabre, zestful, and muddled book proved impossible to publish during Blum's lifetime and was eventually issued as 'The Last of the Duchess' (1995). Blackwood's third novel, a misanthropic psychological thriller, 'The Fate of Mary Rose' (1981), describes the effect on a Kent village of the rape and murder of a ten-year-old girl, Maureen. Narrated by a selfish historian whose obsessions destroy his domestic life, it is a pitiless investigation of neurosis, cruelty, and panic. 'Good Night Sweet Ladies' (1983) is a collection of five short stories. 'Olga' is perhaps the most intensely personal; but Blackwood's depiction of annihilating egotists who are variously bullying, reclusive, vain, or self-deceiving is so implacable and gruesome that the reader can feel as overwhelmed as Lowell did by her late-night tirades. The stories' power and emotional precision are, however, undeniable. Her final novel, 'Corrigan' (1984), was least successful. It depicted the effects on a depressed widow of a charming, energetic but sinister cripple who erupts into her life. 
Blackwood's later books were based on interviews and vignettes. 'On the Perimeter: Caroline Blackwood at Greenham Common' (1984) contained her observations of the peace women's encampment outside an American air base in Berkshire. She also published a personal account of hunting and hunt saboteurs, 'In the Pink' (1987). In this reflective yet ghoulish book she deployed her powers at depicting obsessive personalities of both fox-hunters and animal rights activists. Together with Anna Haycraft (Alice Thomas Ellis) she compiled a cookbook for the expeditious 'Darling, you shouldn't have Gone to so much Trouble' (1980). Its recipes by, among others, Tallulah Bankhead, Quentin Crisp, and Roald Dahl, were described by Anita Brookner as ''cuisine grosseur' with a vengeance' (Brookner, 1282). 
James Lees-Milne found Blackwood 'a difficult girl' in 1980: 'Chain-smoking, churchyard cough, beautiful blue staring eyes, raddled complexion' (Lees-Milne, 101). She returned to the USA in 1987, settling at Sag Harbor, Long Island. Although her powers were depleted by alcoholism, her occasional writings -- such as a vivid memoir of Princess Margaret and Francis Bacon ('New York Review of Books', 24 Sept 1992) -- remained exceptional. She died of cancer on 14 February 1996, at the Mayfair Hotel, Park Avenue and East 65th Street, New York. Her mordant humour was never quelled. On her deathbed Anna Haycraft brought some holy water from Lourdes which was accidentally splashed on her bed-sheets. 'I might have caught my death,' Blackwood muttered ('The Independent'). Before her death she had been working on a novel about a transsexual. 


@@@@@


doc= 60646


Cook, Robert William Arthur (1931-1994), writer, was born on 12 June 1931 at 8 Montague Place, London, the elder of two sons of Arthur Cook (died 'c'.1973), a company director, and Pamela Florence Pollock, of American-Jewish extraction (she was previously married to an Anglo-German with whom she had three sons). Cook's paternal great-grandfather took part in the charge of the light brigade, of which he was a survivor. Cook had an unhappy childhood, hating his mother and despising his father. His uncle John, seemingly the only adult who showed him any affection, was killed in the engine room of a torpedoed ship in April 1941 when Cook was nine. 
Cook attended St Peter's Court before going to Eton College in 1944. He disliked Eton, though he later conceded it was 'an excellent preparation for vice of any kind' ('The Times'), and at sixteen he refused to stay any longer. He was subsequently sent to Turret Court, an establishment for difficult public-school boys. In 1949-51 he did two years' national service with the 7th Royal Tank regiment, and became a lance-corporal. On 15 September 1959 he married Dora Sherwood. He thereafter spent time in Italy, Spain, and America, but in 1960 was back in London and involved with organized crime. His Etonian manner was a useful asset to the Charles da Silva gang, who practised 'long-firming', the running of a bogus, fraudulent company to obtain goods on credit before disappearing. They also sold non-existent property. 
Throughout the early sixties Cook lived between a fast Chelsea set and the underworld, a crossover which gave rise to his first novel, 'The Crust on its Uppers' (1962). Eric Partridge is said to have recognized this as the greatest source of slang for a quarter of a century (Meades, 440). Its terminology includes Cook's division of the world into 'morries' (sharp operators, people in the know, one's friends) and 'slag' (the rest). Cook's examination of upper-middle-class decay proceeded further with subsequent novels such as 'The Legacy of the Stiff Upper Lip' (1965). He lived hard in the early sixties, and was remembered by one witness as the man who 'behaved badly before anyone else did' (quotedibid., 441). Divorced from Dora Sherwood, Cook married Eugene Eva Marie Grossman on 12 October 1963. 
Cook was in rural Italy during the late 1960s and spent a couple of years working as a London minicab driver at the start of the 1970s. By 1971 his marriage to his second wife was over, and he became involved with Sandra Valerie Haggerty. The breakup of this relationship in 1973 precipitated a new stage of his life. He moved to France and settled in Le Puech, where he spent the next eighteen years. Meanwhile the success of the American mass-market novelist Robin Cook meant that Cook needed a pseudonym: he adopted the name Derek Raymond, taken from two men he particularly respected, Derek Head and John Raymond, the latter the book reviewer and critic. 
In 1983 Cook published under his pseudonym 'He Died with his Eyes Open', the first of his infamous 'Factory' novels ('factory' being slang for a police station). Narrated by an unnamed policeman with a penchant for soliloquy, the Derek Raymond books were far darker, more Gothic explorations of evil and violence than the Robin Cook titles. 'I was Dora Suarez' (1990), about a murdered prostitute, was widely reported to have caused a publishing editor to be physically sick while reading it. 
The sensibility of the 'Factory' series is essentially poetic in its saturated, Jacobean treatment of psychic dereliction. The 'Factory' novels have at least as much to do with Cook's personal demons as with life on the street, and they feature a synthetic argot, the language of an underworld which has never quite existed. They attracted comparisons with Donne and Beckett, and were variously described as 'the best British crime novels of the 1980s' and 'the naffest pieces of crime fiction ever written' (quoted in 'The Times'). Nevertheless, their sheer extremity and excess gave them a certain cachet. 
In 1992 Cook published his autobiography, 'The Hidden Files'. This was reticent about his criminal career but dwelt on his childhood, on 'metaphysics', and on the rationale of the 'black novel': an arresting phrase in English, though relatively familiar in French as 'roman noir'. Cook was an atheist, but he described his probes into abjection and despair with almost religious intensity. 'I am often terrified by the work I do on the lost,' he writes in 'The Hidden Files': 'I do not mean the dead, so much as those whose misery, as formless as it is profound, is so great that they wish they were dead' (Raymond, 'The Hidden Files', 67). Writing of why the detective in 'Suarez' picks up a murdered woman's head and kisses it, he suggested, 'What is remarkable about 'I was Dora Suarez' has nothing to do with literature at all; what is remarkable about it is that in its own way... it struggles after the same message as Christ' (ibid., 98). 
Cook was well respected in France, where his work was filmed; 'He Died with his Eyes Open' was filmed as 'On ne meurt que deux fois' (1985), and 'The Devil's Home on Leave' as 'Les mois d'avril sont meurtriers' (1987). He became a cult celebrity during the early nineties and moved back to London, where he lived in a small flat in West Hampstead. Towards the end of his life he read with a literary circus of writers including Iain Sinclair, Christopher Petit, and Kathy Acker. He made a record with a band called Gallon Drunk, and featured with Iain Sinclair and others in Christopher Petit's 1992 Channel 4 film 'The Cardinal and the Corpse'. A tall, thin, cadaverous man with a patrician accent and a trademark beret, Cook became a Soho character. He was a heavy drinker with a taste for premium-strength lagers, and died from liver failure at his home, 106A Bathurst Gardens, Kensal Rise, London, on 30 July 1994. He was cremated at the north London crematorium, near Harlesden. 


@@@@@


doc= 60647


Daley, Harry (1901-1971), police officer and author, was born at 49 Stevens Street, Lowestoft, Suffolk, on 14 November 1901, the second son and fourth of the five children of Joseph Daley (died 1911), skipper of a fishing smack, and his wife, Emily Firman, a former parlourmaid. He was educated from the age of three at the local school and, despite considerable financial hardship and the long absences at sea of his bawdy, easy-going, and adored father, his childhood was exceptionally happy. In the great 'September gale' of 1911, however, Joseph Daley was one of the many fishermen lost at sea. Instead of going on to secondary school, Harry gave up his education to become a telegram boy. During the First World War, Zeppelin raids and rumours of a German invasion decided Daley's mother to move the family to the relative safety of Dorking, Surrey, where her eldest daughter was living. Here Daley got a job with a grocer, driving a pony and trap round the countryside collecting orders for goods. 
Daley was avid for culture and began buying the sort of eclectic volumes sold cheaply from the boxes that stood outside booksellers' shops. Weekends were spent visiting London to explore theatres, cinemas, galleries, and concert halls. At the age of twenty-four he decided, almost on a whim, to join the Metropolitan Police force. He was not the most likely recruit, since he was inclined to plumpness and described himself as 'well below average plain common sense; sexually both innocent and deplorable; honourable if not exactly honest; trusting; truthful; romantic and sentimental to the point of sloppiness' (Daley, 'This Small Cloud', 78). The selection committee nevertheless judged him 'a good type of chap -- just what we want', and he began training at Peel House in March 1925 (ibid., 77). Having passed his examinations, he was posted to 'T' division, based in Hammersmith, west London. His first beat was in Chiswick, but after a few months he was transferred to Hammersmith itself, a lively part of the capital where the police lived in comparative harmony with petty criminals, their relationship eased by small bribes. Daley, who was homosexual, and took no great pains to hide the fact, found himself attracted to the sharply dressed and cheeky young crooks who thronged the streets, and soon numbered several of them among his friends and lovers. When he was obliged to make arrests, most of these young men philosophically accepted it as a 'fair cop' and struck dramatic poses when their captor, a keen amateur photographer, snapped them as they were loaded into Black Marias. 
It was while on his Hammersmith beat in 1925 that Daley met J. R. Ackerley, a local resident whose pioneering play about homosexuality, 'The Prisoners of War', then running in London, had impressed him. The two men struck up a conversation, probably had a brief sexual relationship, and became lifelong friends. Ackerley introduced Daley to E. M. Forster, with whom he embarked on an important but troubled love affair. Although Forster was delighted to accompany Daley on his beat and be introduced to his working-class associates, he was appalled by the policeman's recklessness and constitutional lack of discretion -- Daley described 'safety first' as a 'contemptible slogan' (Daley, 'This Small Cloud', 6). The relationship foundered in 1932, but it had given Daley an entree into the literary world, where he was painted by Duncan Grant and entertained people with his stories. Recognizing a skilled raconteur, Ackerley, then working as an assistant talks producer at the BBC, persuaded Daley to make some radio broadcasts about his life. 'Not a happy one?' was broadcast on the Home Service on 25 March 1929 and subsequently published in 'The Listener', as were several other talks on the police, his Lowestoft childhood, and other subjects. Daley sometimes spoke as an official representative of the Metropolitan Police, but it was thought politic for other talks, such as an enthusiastic account of criminal activity at London street markets, to be broadcast and published under the pseudonyms of Joe Daley and Harry Firman. 
In 1935 Daley was transferred to Vine Street, but he preferred the suburbs to Soho, and was much happier when he was sent to Wandsworth early in the Second World War. 'Wandsworth was full of lively, good-looking people who thought nothing of telling a policeman to get stuffed', he recalled. 'It was a marvellous place and I couldn't see myself making many arrests' (Daley, 'This Small Cloud', 183). After the war he reluctantly took a temporary staff job, running a police recruitment centre in Beak Street, but he longed to get back to the streets. On 21 May 1950 he left the police to join the merchant navy as a master-at-arms. He was forty-nine. His new career was cut short by the onset of diabetes, which led to periods of depression. In 1957 he retired to Dorking, living at 78 Pixham Lane with his younger brother David. 
During the 1940s Daley had tried writing short stories, and submitted them to Ackerley, who had become the literary editor of 'The Listener'. None was ever published, partly because they were, characteristically, 'rather near the knuckle' ('Letters', 63). After his retirement, on Ackerley's advice, Daley began writing a book of reminiscences. This was partly a therapeutic exercise: he had always been quick to take offence, even when none was intended, but as he wrote the book, he realized that he had in fact had a generally happy and fortunate life. 'This Small Cloud' -- the title refers to his homosexuality -- was highly indiscreet about his own life and work, but he did not mention any of the famous people with whom he had been involved. This remarkable book is not only funny, touching, and self-deprecatory, but is an important social document. It was published posthumously in 1987, with an afterword by Clive Emsley, historian of the police. It was the only piece of writing that Daley did not destroy before his death, which occurred at Dorking General Hospital on 12 March 1971 as a result of his diabetes. Following cremation at Surrey and Sussex crematorium, Worth, his ashes were scattered at Box Hill, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 60651


Milne, Alan Alexander (1882-1956), writer, was born on 18 January 1882 at Henley House, Mortimer Road, Kilburn, in north London, the third son of John Vine Milne (1845-1932) and his wife, (Sarah) Maria (1840-1922), the daughter of Peter Heginbotham. J. V. Milne, who had been born in Jamaica, ran a private school, remarkable for having (briefly) H. G. Wells as a science master and Alfred Harmsworth, later Lord Northcliffe, as a pupil. Both were to have some influence on young Milne, but his father was his most important influence. Much praised and cherished as a child, A. A. Milne grew no protective coating and always found it hard to accept any form of criticism. At Henley House School, he said, 'it was natural to be interested; it was easy to be clever' (A. A. Milne, 43). The clever boy won a scholarship at the early age of eleven and joined his devoted brother, Kenneth, at Westminster School. 
Milne became a public-school man and had the sort of life readers might assume from his books and plays, but his background was neither upper-class, Anglican, nor entirely English, and certainly not conventional. It is ironic that A. A. Milne should have been described by a fierce critic as 'metaphorically locked in the nursery'. His own ideal of childhood had little to do with nannies and nursery tea and much to do with adventuring. As small boys he and his brothers were given an unusual degree of freedom for Victorian children. 'Almost as babies', Milne recalled, 'we were allowed to go walks', and, later, bicycle rides, 'by ourselves anywhere, in London or in the country' (A. A. Milne, 39). His father encouraged sympathy for the underdog, the idea that brains count more than money, the value of fresh air and manual work, and the distrust of class distinctions. The son was always an 'incurable dissident' (P. Fitzgerald, 'The Knox Brothers', 1977, 182), but also, as Frank Swinnerton would put it, someone who 'stands for virtue', not 'the prevailing social codes', but for real goodness (F. Swinnerton, 'Swinnerton: an Autobiography', 1937, 323). 
It was while at Westminster School that A. A. Milne developed his lifelong love of cricket, of Jane Austen, and of writing light verse, but it was his mathematics that won him a minor scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1900. It was at Trinity that Milne stopped being a mathematician and became a writer. He edited 'Granta' and wrote a great deal of it himself. J. V. Milne wanted his son to become a schoolmaster, and eventually to take over his school. Milne was determined to earn his living as a writer. He was both modest and ambitious. It was 'Granta''s well-established links with 'Punch' that encouraged him. No art is so difficult as that of being funny, but it was an art that came naturally to A. A. Milne. His first piece was published in 'Punch' in 1904. In February 1906, he started work as assistant editor, and in 1910 the 'Daily Graphic' painted a vivid picture of families up and down the land tearing 'Punch' apart in eagerness 'to read of Dahlia and Simpson and the captivating Myra... very up-to-date young men and women', known as the Rabbits (Thwaite, 142). 'Everyone loves A.A.M.', 'The Observer' said. The 'Times Literary Supplement' commented that with Milne it was 'more than usually futile to try to explain what makes him so funny' (Thwaite, 158). 
In 1913 the 'Daily Citizen' described Milne, accurately according to his niece: 'He is shy but confident, nervous but by no means silent... He is tall, lean, and athletic. His face is brown, his hair light, his eyes blue. Like nearly all men of great humorous gifts, he is exceedingly sensitive and intuitive... Few men know their limitations better than he does. He knows precisely what is within his powers... conversing with him it is necessary to keep one's wits extremely active. (Thwaite, 142)' On 4 June 1913 Milne married Dorothy (always known as Daphne; 1889-1971), the daughter of Martin de Selincourt, who became chairman of both Swan and Edgar and the 'Geographical Magazine'. It was an interesting, clever family, but she herself was characterized by more brightness than depth. The marriage survived, but for long periods they led rather separate lives. 
In 1915 Milne, in spite of strong pacifist convictions, eventually volunteered and was commissioned into the Warwickshire regiment. He became a signals officer and years later wrote: 'I never, as they say, fired a shot in anger' (A. A. Milne, 'Behind the Lines', 1940, 90). It was when he was stationed on the Isle of Wight that he wrote his first play, 'The Two Wishes', which was the germ of his first children's book, 'Once on a Time' (1917). In July 1916 he was in France, on the Somme, in a 'nightmare of mental and moral degradation' (A. A. Milne, 211), about which he wrote very little. In November he left the front line, invalided out with trench fever. He spent the last part of the war in intelligence, but was glad he had known the real horror, as it gave him so much more right to speak out against it. His 'Peace with Honour' was a best-seller when it was published in 1934, but in 1940 he realized Hitler had to be opposed, and 'War with Honour' was the result. 
In the course of a long writing life, A. A. Milne established three distinct reputations: as an essayist and light verse writer, as a playwright, and as the author of four famous children's books. His 'Punch' pieces sold in huge quantities when they were collected and appeared between hard covers. His plays were extremely successful -- in 1924 he was earning $2000 a year from the amateur rights alone. Some of the titles survive: 'Mr Pim Passes by' (1919), 'The Dover Road' (1921), 'The Truth about Blayds' (1921). But even his most consistently popular play, 'Toad of Toad Hall' (1929, his version of a book he loved, 'The Wind in the Willows' by Kenneth Grahame), is now rarely performed. 
Although Milne found in plays the most exciting form of writing, books were more straightforward. Milne's most successful piece of adult fiction was a detective story, 'The Red House Mystery' (1922). It was much admired and much translated. His other novels were 'Two People' (1931), 'Four Days' Wonder' (1933), and 'Chloe Marr' (1946). His American publisher hoped for another detective story after the first, but Milne had other things on his mind. In the summer of 1920 his son, Christopher Robin, known as Billy ['see below'], was born and a year later a teddy bear from Harrods joined the family. It was natural that he would write about them. A great many of the poems which made up the first of Milne's four famous children's books were written on a wet holiday in Wales in 1923. 'When we were Very Young' was published in 1924. It was a huge success and was acclaimed in 'The Times' as 'the greatest children's book since 'Alice'' (Thwaite, 286). In 1933 Compton Mackenzie saw it above all as a social document. 'It is not extravagant to surmise that a distant posterity may find in that volume of children's verse a key with which to unlock the present more easily than with any contemporary novel, poem or play' (Thwaite, 266). Yet without E. H. Shepard's illustrations, which contribute so much to the charm of the book, most of the poems have not dated. Many of them appeal as much to children today as they did when they were written. Milne's technical skill is both admirable and delightful in poems such as 'The Dormouse and the Doctor', 'The King's Breakfast', and 'Disobedience' ('James James Morrison Morrison'). 
At Christmas 1925 Milne was asked to write a story for the London 'Evening News'. He decided to write down a bedtime story he had told his son about his bear, which had now acquired the name Winnie-the-Pooh, Winnie after a black Canadian bear in the zoo and Pooh for more mysterious reasons. The story became the first chapter of 'Winnie-the-Pooh' (1926). Christopher Robin himself was at the centre of the stories and most of the other characters (Piglet, Eeyore, Kanga, and Roo) came from his toy cupboard. Tigger would join them in the second book. Only Owl and Rabbit (and his friends and relations) were not toys. 
The Milnes had bought Cotchford Farm, near Hartfield, Sussex, on the edge of Ashdown Forest, in 1925 and the combination of toy animals and real forest was irresistible. A second book of children's poems, 'Now we are Six', followed in 1927 and further adventures in the forest, 'The House at Pooh Corner', in 1928. They sold and continue to sell in millions, their popularity apparently increased, not diminished, by Walt Disney's films, videos, and marketing. The Pooh books have now been translated into more than thirty languages, including Latin, Japanese, Catalan, Serbo-Croat, and Russian. Oslo and Warsaw both have streets named after Pooh. 
In 1952 Milne wrote the following rather sad lines: '
If a writer, why not write 

On whatever comes in sight? 

So -- the Children's Books: a short 

Intermezzo of a sort: 

When I wrote them little thinking 

All my years of pen-and-inking 

Would be almost lost among 

Those four trifles for the young. 

' In 'It's Too Late Now', his autobiography (1939), Milne gives only a few pages to the children's books. But when his last book, 'Year in, Year out', appeared in 1952, a fan letter from a young journalist prompted him to show that he had come round to accepting Pooh almost as if he were 'the creation of one of my own favourite authors' (Thwaite, 479). A. A. Milne died, after a long illness, at his home, Cotchford Farm, on 31 January 1956, and was cremated at Downs crematorium, Brighton, on 3 February; he was survived by his wife and son. His characters survive not only in the books and films, on greetings cards, mugs, and so on, but also in the English language. It is taken for granted that people know what is meant by 'an Eeyore-like tone' or 'behaving exactly like Tigger'. 

Christopher Robin Milne (1920-1996), writer and bookseller, the son of A. A. Milne and his wife, Dorothy de Selincourt, was born on 21 August 1920 at 11 Mallord Street, Chelsea, London. At the time of his birth J. M. Barrie, mentor and friend, had written, 'May Billy be an everlasting joy to you' (Thwaite, 215). As it turned out he was not, but the fault was hardly his own. As a child he was extremely close to his father and 'quite liked... being famous', as he wrote himself in 1973 (C. Milne, 'Enchanted Places', 92). In 1931 he had been named by the American 'Parents' Magazine' as one of the most famous children in the world. But the pleasure of it turned sour. A columnist in 'The Observer' suggested that Christopher Milne had spent 'over forty years trying to get off his knees from saying his prayers'. Certainly he had been teased during his time at Stowe School (1934-9), and as a young man it had seemed to him that his father had got where he was 'by climbing upon my infant shoulders, that he had filched from me my good name and had left me with nothing but the empty fame of being his son' (C. Milne, 'Enchanted Places', 165). But the impression the papers gave at his death that the father had ruined the son's life was far from true. In 'The Path through the Trees' (1979) he summed up his own life as a happy one. 
Christopher Milne went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1939. His course of study was interrupted by his war service with the Royal Engineers, but he returned in 1946, and in 1947 took a degree in English. On 24 July 1948 he married his cousin, Lesley de Selincourt, and the wedding represented the first meeting in more than twenty-five years between the parents of the bride and the groom, as a result of a long-standing estrangement between Dorothy Milne and her brother, Aubrey de Selincourt. Christopher Milne's parents did not wholly approve of the match, but a courtship of shared walks and the 'discovery that though we were both solitaries, we liked being solitary in each other's company' (C. Milne, 'Path', 135) developed into a supportive and loving marriage. In 1951 they left London to start the Harbour Bookshop in Dartmouth, and Milne's determination to lead an independent life enabled him to come more fully to terms with his situation. The bookshop was a success, and in 'The Path through the Trees' he wrote of the way in which he and his wife had learned the business as they worked. 
Milne's autobiographical writing had begun, however, soon after his mother's death, with the best-selling 'The Enchanted Places' (1974). He was in many ways very like his father; he was also an extremely good writer. Sadly he never found another subject as interesting to his readers as his own childhood. His only child, Clare, to whom he was devoted, was born severely disabled with cerebral palsy, and he set up a trust fund for her with his share of the Pooh money. Money had never interested him. He lived simply and gave much away. He died at Torbay Hospital, Devon, on 20 April 1996, survived by his wife and daughter; his cremation was followed by a service at the Quaker meeting-house, Totnes. 


@@@@@


doc= 60652


Mitford, Jessica Lucy Freeman- (1917-1996), writer and journalist, was born on 11 September 1917 at Asthall Manor, Oxfordshire, the fifth of six daughters and sixth of seven children of David Bertram Ogilvy Freeman-Mitford, second Baron Redesdale of the second creation (1878-1958), soldier and landowner, and his wife Sydney (1880-1963), daughter of Thomas Gibson Bowles, magazine proprietor (the founder of 'Vanity Fair' and 'The Lady') and MP. Although she lived for much of her adult life as a self-proclaimed communist in California, she never lost the voice and mannerisms of her privileged English background. Her sympathies were always with the outsider and the underdog, but she disliked earnestness and displays of emotion, preferring jokes and teasing. Her childhood was spent at Swinbrook, also in Oxfordshire, in a large and ugly house built by her father, with occasional visits to London where he kept an establishment in Rutland Gate. Her own memoir, 'Hons and Rebels' (1960), and the novel by her elder sister Nancy Mitford, 'The Pursuit of Love' (1945), depicted the family life of the Mitfords as a series of comic but unnerving episodes, dominated by their father's frequent fits of rage and irrational prejudices, which led him to attack: 'not only Huns, Frogs, Americans, blacks, and all other foreigners, but also other people's children, the majority of my older sister's acquaintances, almost all young men -- in fact the whole teeming population of the earth's surface, except for some, though not all, of our relations and a very few tweeded, redfaced country neighbours. ('Daily Telegraph', 25 July 1996)' As a child, Jessica (or Decca, as she was usually called by friends and family) longed to go to school; but her parents, following upper-class conventions of the time, saw no need for girls to be educated outside the home. 
The restrictions of her upbringing produced in Jessica Mitford unusual determination and independence of mind. By the time she was twelve she had opened a 'running away account' at Drummonds Bank; by the time she was eighteen she had decided she was a Marxist and had taken out a subscription to the communist newspaper the 'Daily Worker'. While she was an admirer of Joseph Stalin, her sister Unity Mitford had become a devotee of Adolf Hitler and the Nazis; their political posturings may have started as a game but soon grew deeply serious. Although her sister Nancy had socialist sympathies for a time, both their parents, their brother Tom, and their sister Diana ['see 'Mosley, Diana (1910-2003)] as well as Unity supported fascism. 
In 1937 Jessica Mitford met and fell in love with her second cousin Esmond Marcus David Romilly (1918-1941), younger son of Colonel Bertram Henry Samuel Romilly, and a nephew of Winston Churchill. Romilly was also in open rebellion against his background. After running away from school and founding a subversive magazine he had joined the International Brigades and fought for the republicans against Franco in the Spanish Civil War. When he returned to Spain, Jessica Mitford laid a false trail for her parents and went with him, and despite every effort by her family to dissuade her they were married by the British consul in Bayonne, France, on 18 May 1937. She never saw her father again. On their return to England they joined the Labour Party and moved to Bermondsey in the East End of London; they had a daughter, Julia, who died of measles at the age of four months. At first, like many of their left-wing contemporaries, the Romillys regarded the prospect of war between Britain and Germany as irrelevant to the revolutionary struggle and left for the United States in February 1939. When the Second World War began in September, they were further confused by the fact that since the Nazi-Soviet pact the previous month Russia and Germany were allies; but Germany's attack on Russia in 1941, as Jessica Mitford put it, 'changed everything overnight' ('A Fine Old Conflict', 29). Leaving his wife and baby daughter (Anne) Constancia (born in 1941 and named after a heroine of the Spanish Civil War) living in Virginia with friends, Esmond Romilly joined the Canadian air force. He was killed during a bombing raid on Hamburg in November 1941. 
According to her own account of her political life, 'A Fine Old Conflict' (1977), Jessica Mitford joined the Communist Party in America after her first husband's death. She moved to Washington, DC, and found work with the office of price administration, where she met Robert Edward Treuhaft (1912-2001), a Harvard-educated lawyer of Hungarian-Jewish extraction, son of Albin Treuhaft, of New York. They married on 8 June 1943, and Jessica Mitford took American citizenship in 1944. Despite their very different backgrounds, Bob Treuhaft and Decca Mitford had the same political opinions and the same subversive sense of humour. They settled in Oakland, California, near San Francisco and close to the Berkeley campus of the University of California, where their agreeable but modest suburban house became a haven for the next four decades for radicals and protesters and campaigners against racial and social injustice. They had two sons: Nicholas, born in 1944, and Benjamin, born in 1947. In 1955 Nicholas was killed in a traffic accident. Jessica Mitford preferred never to mention the loss of two of her children. 
Although she worked hard for the Communist Party during the 1940s and 1950s, attending meetings and study groups and campaigning with particular courage and conviction against racial discrimination, Jessica Mitford was too anarchic and individualistic by nature to take kindly to party discipline. She always liked breaking rules and had an instinctive distaste for jargon; in 1956, after her sister Nancy Mitford had invented U (for upper class) and non-U language, Jessica promptly produced a parallel investigation 'into current L (or Left Wing Usage)' (Mitford, 'A Fine Old Conflict', 254). In 1958 she and her husband both resigned from the party, feeling that they could pursue their ideals more effectively outside. Later, she admitted that the party had made mistakes but she would never attack it or the former Soviet Union directly, nor would she apologize for her own allegiance to it. 
Jessica Mitford's book about her background and how she escaped from it, published in 1960 as 'Hons and Rebels' in the UK and as 'Daughters and Rebels' in the USA, began in 1957 as a short introduction to a proposed collection (never published) of her first husband's letters. It was written, she explained, as 'a thoroughly collective endeavour' ('A Fine Old Conflict', 222): a group of friends, as well as Bob Treuhaft, formed a book committee to advise and encourage her. It was initially turned down by several American publishers, but it was widely praised when it came out in 1960 as an affectionate, if mocking, picture of her eccentric family, although her estranged sister Lady Mosley described it in print as 'supremely unpleasant' (ibid., 230). Jessica Mitford was more concerned about the reaction of her former Communist Party colleagues; to her slight surprise, they were in favour. Even so, she acknowledged that she would probably not have become a writer had she stayed in the party, 'since members were somewhat circumscribed by Party discipline in their choice of occupations' (ibid., 231). The good reception of this first book launched Jessica Mitford on her successful career as a writer and journalist. At Bob Treuhaft's instigation and with his collaboration, she wrote a macabre and satirical expose of the funeral business, 'The American Way of Death' (1963), which became a best-seller and established her as a witty and effective critic of her adopted society. Subsequent books included 'The Trial of Dr Spock' (1969), 'The American Prison Business' (1975), and a collection of her journalism, 'Poison Penmanship: the Gentle Art of Muckraking' (1979). 
From the late 1950s Jessica Mitford made regular visits to England, where she would rent a London base and entertain her left-wing friends and selected relations -- the breach with her sister Lady Mosley was never healed -- over martinis and Bob Treuhaft's speciality, Boston baked beans. She would then repair to Chatsworth to visit her sister Deborah (Debo), the duchess of Devonshire. But if she retained many ties with and much affection for England, there was never any doubt that California was her home. With her pretty round face, large, deceptively innocent blue eyes, and precise, slightly languid voice she continued to reveal her origins, but her tough professionalism and her unwavering support for radical causes set her apart from the society she had left behind. In 1984 she published 'Faces of Philip', a memoir of her old friend the writer and critic Philip Toynbee, followed in 1984 by a short life of Grace Darling and in 1992 by 'The American Way of Birth'. She became much in demand as a lecturer at American colleges, where she would always encourage the young to stir up trouble, and she also turned out to be a natural television performer, with her quick wit and deadpan humour. 
When she became ill, Jessica Mitford was working on a new edition of 'The American Way of Death', an irony that did not escape her. She died of cancer in Oakland, California, on 23 July 1996, and was cremated in San Francisco, her ashes being scattered at sea. She was survived by her husband Bob Treuhaft, her daughter Constancia, and her son Benjamin. Her new edition of 'The American Way of Death' was completed by her husband and published in 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 60653


Ramsay, Margaret Francesca (1908-1991), play agent, was born on 27 May 1908 in Bank Street, Molong, New South Wales, Australia, the first of the two children of John Charles (Jack) Venniker (1869-1958), doctor and army officer, and Annie Rhoda, 'nee' Adams (1882-1963), known as Nancy, who were on a trip abroad when Peggy was born. Her parents were both English but had emigrated to South Africa, where Jack converted from Judaism to Christianity and changed his surname from Velenski. Peggy's brother, Tony (1921-1989), became a popular radio doctor in South Africa. Peggy attended the Collegiate School, Port Elizabeth, Girton School, Johannesburg, and Rhodes University, Grahamstown, where she studied zoology, botany, English, and psychology but left within a year without completing her BSc. Nine months later, on 29 September 1927, she married -- disastrously -- the university's senior lecturer in psychology, (Charles) Norman Matheson Ramsay ('b'. 1891), and the following year they left for England. The marriage collapsed as soon as they arrived and Peggy Ramsay had to start a new life from scratch. 
It was like the story-books Ramsay had avidly devoured in the Great Karoo: she took singing lessons, joined a touring opera company, and then turned to acting. She had many affairs, and in the cast of one production she met matinee idol William Roderick, who later lived with her and took care of all her domestic arrangements for the final three decades of her life. She stumbled on the path that would ultimately lead her to becoming Britain's most powerful play agent when, in 1945, she became the director Hugh Hunt's right-hand woman at the newly created Bristol Old Vic Theatre. She helped him in many tasks, including that of choosing the repertory, and so began her move away from performing towards being a 'backstage' influence. In the early 1950s, with two others, she briefly ran the west London Q Theatre, one of the capital's leading little theatres, and there developed her interest in new plays while demonstrating a rare ability to judge a script on the page. 
Disillusioned with acting, Ramsay was reading plays for several theatre managers, and when it became apparent to friends that she had recommended a number of West End successes but without receiving any commission, they offered to set her up in her own play agency. After an initial refusal, she agreed and by the end of 1953 had founded Margaret Ramsay Ltd in a converted brothel in Goodwin's Court, one of the oldest alleyways in the city of Westminster, off St Martin's Lane. Her immediate problem was to find clients; she represented playwrights she knew from her play-reading days and took on the then little known Romanian-French absurdist Eugene Ionesco when he left his previous agent. She built a reputation for herself quickly because of her unconventional and uncompromising behaviour. (She was known to shock many a prospective client by pointing to the chaise longue on which they were sitting and declaiming, 'That's where Ionesco fucked me.') 
Writers and their art came first, before managers, directors, actors, and even the writers' partners and families. Although Ramsay enjoyed the cut-and-thrust of negotiating and the gamble of the box office, the business side of the firm was secondary. She would turn work down for clients -- often without recourse to the playwrights themselves -- if she felt it was not right for them. Developing talent was what ignited her, and she was a practical yet hard taskmistress. The first writer to come to prominence through her 'tough love' was Robert Bolt, whom she first met when he was a teacher writing radio dramas. She tackled the structural shortcomings of his writing and after several efforts which she rejected she secured an Oxford Playhouse production of one of his plays. This was followed by his triumphant West End debut, 'Flowering Cherry' (1957). Ironically, the commercial success of this and subsequent of his plays such as 'A Man for All Seasons' (1960) secured the future of the agency, allowing Ramsay's anti-materialistic approach to flourish and make its unique contribution to British playwriting. 
Ramsay was a confidante of the director Peter Hall from the mid-1950s when he was running the Arts Theatre and sought her advice about the author of 'Waiting for Godot', the English-language premiere of which he was about to direct, through his creation of the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) to his stewardship of the National Theatre (NT) which he invited her -- unsuccessfully -- to join as his literary manager. Her clients John Whiting and David Rudkin featured in the early RSC repertory and Howard Brenton, David Hare, Edward Bond, Alan Ayckbourn, and Stephen Poliakoff were prominent at the NT, a list that reveals her catholic taste which could embrace John Arden as well as Willy Russell. She enjoyed a close and long association with Britain's main new writing theatre, the Royal Court, which promoted numerous clients of hers, such as Ann Jellicoe, Christopher Hampton, and Caryl Churchill. In commercial theatre she found a kindred spirit in the producer Michael Codron; among her clients whose work he presented were John Mortimer, Henry Livings, Frank Marcus, Charles Wood, James Saunders, David Mercer, and Joe Orton, who, through his infamous death at the hand of his male lover, was the most notorious of her proteges. Ramsay figures in the film based on Orton's diaries, 'Prick up your Ears' (1987), played by Vanessa Redgrave, and in 1999 she was brought to life by Maureen Lipman in the play 'Peggy for you', written by her client Alan Plater. Several of her authors used aspects of her personality in the make-up of their own fictional characters, most notably Marion in Ayckbourn's 'Absurd Person Singular' (1972), Valentina Nrovka in Hare's 'The Bay at Nice' (1986), and Nancy Fraser in Peter Nichols's 'A Piece of my Mind' (1987). In recognition of the wider impact of her writers, the British Film Institute in 1984 gave her an award for her contribution to the film and television industries. 
A swift and cutting intelligence combined with excoriating candour, legendary indiscretion, and a swooping voice that could deliver wisdom and profanity in equal measure made Ramsay's presence as formidable as it was alluring. She 'was' the firm, and, battling through Alzheimer's disease, she went to work every day until shortly before her death at a central London hospital on 4 September 1991 at the age of eighty-three. She was cremated at Golders Green on 10 September. 
Ramsay's executors used her wealth to establish the Peggy Ramsay Foundation to nurture new playwriting. With Ramsay gone, the agency merged with another and finally moved out of Goodwin's Court, nearly forty years after this idiosyncratic, indefatigable lady with piercing, hawk-like eyes, a gangling, lolloping walk, and a fondness for flowing hats had taken a gamble there that turned her dilapidated offices festooned with posters of clients' successes into one of the most influential addresses in the British theatrical landscape. 


@@@@@


doc= 60655


Canville, Richard de (d. 1191), soldier, was the son of Richard de Canville (d. 1176) and his second wife, Millicent, widow of Robert Marmion (died 1143/4), and came of a family originating at Canville-les-Deux-Eglises near Yvetot in upper Normandy. In England their most substantial landholding comprised nine knights' fees in the counties of Leicester, Northampton, and Warwick, in 1166 held from the honour of Mowbray by Walter de Canville, who was believed to be a cousin of Richard the elder. The latter also acquired lands in Essex, Warwickshire, and Somerset, and in addition obtained the manor of Stanton Harcourt in Oxfordshire as part of the marriage portion of his second wife, Millicent, a cousin of Adeliza of Louvain (died 1151), second wife of Henry I. He served as a leading member of the household of King Stephen and later of Henry II, by whom he was rewarded with the custody of valuable estates at Little Stretton in Leicestershire and Sutton in Northamptonshire. He accounted as sheriff of Berkshire in 1156, and in 1176 was sent as an envoy to Sicily over the marriage of Henry II's daughter Joan. He died in Apulia that same year, having earlier made numerous gifts to the religious, including the Cistercian abbey of Combe in Warwickshire, which he founded in 1150. He was succeeded in the bulk of his estate by his eldest son, Gerard de Canville, his son of his first marriage, to Alice. 
Richard de Canville the younger (died 1191), who followed his father into the service of Henry II, appears to have inherited his father's land at Stretton and his mother's interest in the manor of Stanton Harcourt. In 1189 he attended the coronation of Richard I, and was appointed one of the commanders of Richard's crusading fleet. He embarked in the spring of 1190 and negotiated a truce at Lisbon with the king of Portugal, before arriving with his ships at Marseilles, where he was joined by King Richard. At Messina in Sicily he was one of the sureties for a truce between Richard and King Tancred, and in the summer of 1191 was appointed joint governor of Cyprus, with Robert of Thornham (died 1211). However, he fell ill soon afterwards, and having rejoined the king at Acre in the Holy Land, died there in June 1191. By his marriage to Hawise, daughter of Walter Fitzwilliam, he acquired the barony of Whalton in Northumberland, but in 1188, in an exchange agreed with his sister-in-law Constance and her husband, Ralph de Crammaville, resigned his rights at Whalton in exchange for land in Leicestershire. His estates at Little Stretton and Stanton Harcourt passed after his death to his daughter Isabella, married to Robert de Harcourt. 


@@@@@


doc= 60657


Baines, Sir Frank (1877-1933), architect and architectural preservationist, was born at 1 Maria Terrace, Stepney, Middlesex, on 7 December 1877, the fourth child of Samuel Baines (1840-1913), coppersmith, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Coates. Though Baines habitually stated that he was educated privately, he probably attended the Trafalgar Square special board school, and certainly studied at the People's Palace School, Mile End, where he was awarded the governors' prize for freehand drawing and mathematics in his final year. While at the school he came under the influence of Toynbee Hall teachers such as Arthur Pillans Laurie and C. R. Ashbee. With his elder brother, Hubert (1874-1953), Baines was a member of the boys' club formed by these and other teachers. On leaving school in 1892, and like his brother before him, Frank was apprenticed to Ashbee, who at that time was in practice at Essex House, Mile End Road. Hubert was a particular favourite of Ashbee, but Frank seems not to feature in his records. 
In 1895, and having misrepresented his age, Baines was appointed to the office of works as a junior draughtsman at 15's'. a week. Following encouragement from his superiors, he applied for and was promoted assistant architect, second class, in 1911. Thereafter, his rise was meteoric, and in 1920 he was appointed, on an annual salary of $1500, as director of works and chief architect -- with responsibility for royal palaces, the Palace of Westminster, public and historic buildings, and ancient monuments. Prior to 1914 Baines was employed mostly on work relating to historic monuments, in which he had gained a reputation for the stabilizing and preservation -- not restoration -- of the nation's patrimony. He was appointed MVO for his work at Caernarvon Castle in connection with the investiture of the prince of Wales in July 1911. Other work undertaken from 1912 included projects at Buckingham, Hampton Court, and Eltham palaces, and at the medieval religious abbeys of Tintern, Byland, Rievaulx, Jedburgh, Melrose, and Dryburgh. In June 1914 he issued a report on the decayed condition of the timber hammerbeam roof of Westminster Hall at the Palace of Westminster. The roof, which was constructed when the hall was remodelled in the late fourteenth century, is the largest surviving medieval hammerbeam structure in northern Europe. Baines had examined the timbers in 1913 when he found the wood decayed by beetle larvae and the structure significantly weakened. Drawing on his experience at Eltham Palace (1912-13), Baines proposed the insertion of steel reinforcements within the timbers which, invisible from the ground, would allow as much of the medieval material as possible to remain in place. Work to insert 350 tons of steel into the roof began in the early 1920s and was concluded by late 1922. The saving of the roof brought immediate and international recognition and its completion was marked by a private visit by George V and a state ceremony on 17 July 1923. 
Baines was attached to the Ministry of Munitions during the First World War. His career as an architect progressed rapidly in the war years and saw him take on responsibility for building projects costing up to $80 million. His principal works were the construction of prefabricated factories and houses for munitions workers, both of which were undertaken with great skill and speed. Baines's greenfield site housing projects -- of which Well Hall, Eltham (1915), and Roe Green, Kingsbury (1917-19), were the prime examples -- were executed in an arts and crafts style, in which he had been taught by Ashbee and which he made his own. Both estates, built to accommodate workers at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, and Hendon's Aircraft Manufacturing Company (Airco) respectively, were planned within three days, with construction beginning at Eltham no more than a week later. Baines's preference for low density plotting and for the domesticated arts and crafts style meant that, despite their rapid execution, both estates had the appearance of established villages in south Suffolk or north Essex. Well Hall has since drawn particular praise as a 'tour de force of picturesque design' (Pevsner, 306) and Baines's influence ensured the continuation of the arts and crafts style in council housing well into the mid-twentieth century. At the Sunray estate, Herne Hill (1920-21), he also demonstrated his ability to build without his earlier flamboyance in a project commended for its careful plotting and rapid completion. Baines also had control of rebuilding after the chemical works explosion at Silvertown, east London, in January 1917, and with Sir Lionel Earle, permanent secretary at the office of works, he was responsible -- in the wake of Zeppelin and Gotha raids -- for transforming the closed Strand underground station into a store for the national art collection in 1918. In the following April he was sent to Belgium to advise on post-war stabilization and reconstruction. Appointed a CBE in 1916, he was made a knight bachelor for his war work in 1918. 
In the summer of 1920 Baines provoked controversy with his proposal for a national war memorial at Hyde Park Corner, London, which took the form of a colossal Egyptian pylon flanked by two temples. Baines intended his design's scale and simplicity to convey and commemorate the imperial sacrifice, but it prompted widespread protest for its size, incompatibility with surrounding buildings, and imitation of a style favoured by the 'despotic' pharaohs ('The Times', 16 July 1920). Within a week the proposal was declared to be 'quite dead' in a Commons debate (ibid., 21 July 1920). Baines's last and greatest architectural project, costing $1 million, was for two blocks of offices on opposite sides of Horseferry Road, Millbank, Westminster -- complemented by the remodelling of Lambeth Bridge. Nobel House was built between 1927 and 1929 for Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) while Thames House (1929-30) was for government, serving as the headquarters of the home intelligence service, MI5, between 1934 and 1939 and again from 1994. Baines's involvement with Nobel House prompted questions in parliament concerning the acceptability for a senior civil servant to work simultaneously for a private company, and led to his retirement from the office of works in September 1927. Appointed CVO in 1923, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects two years later; on his retirement from the office of works he was awarded a second knighthood (KCVO), the personal award at a private investiture of George V, with whom he was on close terms. 
From the mid-1920s Baines turned his attention to the preservation of English vernacular buildings, with a particular focus on the cottages that had been central to his earlier estate commissions. In an article in 'The Times' (7 April 1925) he celebrated the adaptability and variation of England's 'real folk architecture' which he feared was under threat from uniform design and 'the demands of modern progress' (). Baines also initiated the Fund for the Preservation of Ancient Cottages, which held its first annual meeting at the Royal Society of Arts in February 1929. At that time, a preservation order could not be made on an inhabited house. With the aid of G. K. Menzies, secretary to the RSA, and with the support of Ramsay Macdonald and Stanley Baldwin, Baines sought reform to enable inhabited homes to be protected. This was fully accomplished only with the advent of listed buildings and conservation areas in the 'Town and Country Planning Act' (1947). In 1929 Baines was a member of the editorial board -- with Arnold Bennett, Aldous and Julian Huxley, H. G. Wells, and others -- of the short-lived periodical 'The Realist: a Journal of Scientific Humanism'. For the first edition he contributed an essay, 'Architecture and Sculpture: an Intimate Relation', in which he argued that good architecture was a fusion of all the arts: 'Architecture, more than any other craft, needs the stimulus of public opinion, based on knowledge and sympathetic interest, to keep it healthily active and sane... No other craft is so primarily, so vitally, so intrinsically, the concern of us all. (vol. 1, April 1929, 128)' Baines appears to have been secretive, not to say duplicitous, in his private life. On 13 June 1914 he married, at Southwark register office, Rhoda Eleanor Oldham (1889-1963), who was recorded as a housemaid in Chigwell, Essex, in the 1911 census. The marriage was contracted under the name Francis Lloyd Baynes -- with the original 'i' of Baines crossed out and a 'y' substituted -- and with the husband's occupation given as 'commercial traveller in motor oils etc'; a few days previously, Baines, under his real name and profession, had attended the royal levee at Buckingham Palace. The couple's son, born in September 1915, was registered as Francis Trevean Baynes; his father's name on the birth certificate was given as at his marriage, though his profession was now 'civil engineer'. Baines's double life also shaped his living arrangements. As Francis Baynes he was resident with his wife at Grafton Mansions, Venn Street, Clapham, while from 1908 or 1909 the senior civil servant -- always Frank Baines -- lived at Loughton, Essex, where from about 1915 he was resident at Hillside, The Uplands. Here he designed three houses, for himself, his brother, and his sisters to whom he was always close. From the 1920s Baines was also resident at St Keverne, Cornwall. As a child his son used the name Baynes. At Oundle School he did not know the sons of his uncle, Hubert, who were schoolfellows, or that his father was a knight. The son was unsure how much, if anything, his mother knew of her husband's public career. Sir Frank Baines died from heart failure and degeneration on 24 December 1933 at his home on Trenoweth, St Keverne, Cornwall. He was buried at St Keverne, and was survived by his wife. She subsequently adopted her husband's birth name and title, and moved to Coggeshall, Essex, where -- as Lady Baines, a doyenne of the establishment -- she died in 1963. Their son, who achieved note as a writer, was also a sailor and businessman in India, and died in October 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 60658


Aickman, Robert Fordyce (1914-1981), writer and campaigner for inland waterways, was born on 27 June 1914 at 77 Fellows Road, Hampstead, London, the only child of William Arthur Aickman (died 1941), an architect, and his wife, Mabel Violet ('c'.1890-1943), daughter of Richard Marsh, born Bernard Heldmann, the prolific Victorian author of popular fiction. Robert Aickman's father was a man of unknown origin and age, though he was perhaps in his mid-fifties when his son was born, and the surname is believed to be Scottish. His mother's family was originally German, deriving from a certain Heldmann who had fled from Bavaria to Nottingham in 1848 and made a fortune from textiles. Richard Marsh met William Arthur Aickman in the gentlemen's lavatory of a grand hotel in Edwardian Eastbourne, and was soon to encourage his marriage to his younger daughter, thirty years William Arthur Aickman's junior. The marriage, and Aickman's childhood, was predictably unhappy, though the family lived in a substantial house, Langton Lodge, at Stanmore, Middlesex. Aickman attended Highgate School and began to be interested in writing there, but he did not then go up to Oxford or Cambridge, as might have been hoped. He entered a period of youthful drifting, writing some theatre reviews for the periodical 'The Nineteenth Century and After', but eventually finding himself alone at Langton Lodge after his mother left his father, who then fell terminally ill and ended his life in a nursing home. 
Aickman was eventually rescued from the severe depression this isolation caused when he began to attend the queue for tickets at London's Covent Garden Opera, and acquired a series of female friends and lovers. The outbreak of the Second World War brought this lifestyle to an end, but he declared himself a conscientious objector and won total exemption from war service. On 5 September 1941 he married (Edith) Ray Gregorson (1913/14-1983), a secretary whom he had met through the opera queue, but more from sympathy than love. They set up a literary agency together, and moved to 11 Gower Street in Bloomsbury, which was to be Aickman's home for much of his life. They divorced in 1957, and she later became an Anglican nun. 
In 1946 Robert and Ray Aickman, with Tom (L. T. C.) Rolt and Rolt's wife, Angela, set up the Inland Waterways Association, to preserve and enhance the canals of Britain, which were at that time in such a state of neglect as seemed likely to end in their ultimate disappearance. Aickman was chairman and Rolt secretary, and the organization quickly gained momentum and influence, becoming in many ways a model for the many campaigning pressure groups of post-war Britain. Aickman remained active and superbly energetic in the waterways campaign until 1964, and although his autocratic style of leadership provoked much dissension, it is nevertheless agreed that the salvation of Britain's canals owes more to him than to any other person. 
In 1951 Aickman and Elizabeth Jane Howard published 'We are for the Dark', a volume of six ghost stories, where each contributed three, but did not identify who had written which. Aickman was eventually to publish eleven more volumes of what he called 'strange stories', and he succeeded in giving new life to what had been classically an Edwardian genre. Barry Humphries describes his quality: 'To all his uncanny tales he brings his peculiar erudition; his elegant elliptical style. Some of his most disturbing stories are not without flashes of humour and a sly, morbid eroticism. Above all, he can evoke in a few lines of concentrated prose the tenebrous and oppressive atmosphere of a very bad and inescapable dream. (Humphries, 10)' Between 1964 and 1972 Aickman edited the first eight volumes of 'The Fontana Book of Great Ghost Stories', to all but the sixth of which he contributed learned and stimulating introductions. His other published works included two fantasy novels and two volumes of autobiography, and many stories and plays remained unpublished. He was an inveterate leader and joiner of organizations relating to his interests in transport, theatre, orchestral music, opera, and ballet. 
Aickman was a shy man, who blossomed in public life: constitutionally solitary, he derived lifelong solace from relationships with women. He died at the Homeopathic Hospital, Camden, London, on 26 February 1981, of cancer, showing great courage in the face of death, and was cremated at Putney Vale. At odds with the modern world, he left a permanent mark on it through his two disparate but oddly linked fields of endeavour. 


@@@@@


doc= 60659


Capetanakis, Demetrios (1912-1944), poet and literary critic, was born in Smyrna (now Izmir in Turkey) on 22 January 1912, the son of Apostolos Capetanakis, a medical doctor from Zagora in Pelion, who settled in Athens in 1922. Demetrios was educated at Athens University, where he studied political science and economics. In Greece he published several philosophical works, including ''Apo ton agona ton psychikos monou'' ('The struggle of the solitary soul', 1934) and ''Mythologia tou oraiou'' ('The mythology of beauty', 1937). He studied at Heidelberg University (1934-6) under Karl Jaspers, where he obtained the degree of DPhil, writing a dissertation entitled 'Liebe und Zeit' ('Love and time'). In Germany he came under the influence of the writings of the German poet Stefan George. He later rejected George's influence, saying in his essay on George that in his attitudes he 'was one of those who prepared the way for the Nazis' (Lehmann, 'Demetrios Capetanakis', 89). 
In 1939, with a British Council scholarship, Capetanakis arrived in England, where he spent the remainder of his brief life. At Cambridge he was a pupil of Dadie Rylands at King's College. It was there that he met John Lehmann, the editor of 'New Writing' and of 'Penguin New Writing', who became a close friend. While he said of Lehmann, 'away from you I am just nothing' (Wright, 129) and 'all I have created up to now was the work of both of us' (ibid., 128), it seems unlikely that he and Lehmann were lovers. Much of his writing appeared in Lehmann's periodicals, in the wartime evolution of which he was very active, contributing essays, poems, and translations of Greek poetry. 
Capetanakis was fluent in French and German and had written in both languages. On his arrival in England he began to write in English. Capetanakis wrote major essays on Rimbaud, Dostoyevsky, and Proust, as well as briefer pieces on Thomas Gray and Horace Walpole, Charlotte Bronte, 'A view of English poetry', and 'Notes on some contemporary writers'. The ideas in these essays may well derive from his time with the existentialist Karl Jaspers: 'Silence is what surrounds our lives' (Lehmann, 'Demetrios Capetanakis', 136); 'It is only when we dare to face unreality, nothingness, that we become real' (ibid., 131). 
It is in his dozen or so poems in English that Capetanakis shows himself to be remarkable -- not merely because they are written by someone who had studied English for only a few months before coming to England, but because of their power, directness, and economy. They are reminiscent of Emily Dickinson, whom Capetanakis was precocious in admiring. In his essay on Dostoyevsky he spoke of 'two kinds of writers: those whose world is protected by a hedge... and those whose world is not protected by anything against the powers of nothingness' (Lehmann, 'Demetrios Capetanakis', 104). His poems are clearly the work of a writer who does not see his world as 'protected'. His poem 'Abel' expresses starkly the ambiguous relation of victim and perpetrator that we have to evil: '
The ageless ambiguity of things 

Which makes our life mean death, our love be hate. 

My blood that streams across the bedroom sings: 

'I am my brother opening the gate!' 

' Edith Sitwell, who championed Capetanakis's poetry, said of this poem that in it 'the central problem of humanity is finding words' (ibid., 38). 
Capetanakis had a profound effect on those who knew him. William Plomer wrote: 'Of his physical presence the chief feature was his dark eyes, glowing with intelligence and feeling. He was slight in build and had delicate, nervous hands... the whole face was harmonious... it had a kind of radiance, an effect of luminosity. (Lehmann, 'Demetrios Capetanakis', 183)' John Lehmann said, 'he entered into your mind and heart with an uncanny power of imaginative understanding' (Lehmann, 'I am my Brother', 119). 
Capetanakis left Cambridge in 1941 to join the press office of the Greek embassy in London; but before that he showed signs of the leukaemia which eventually killed him, though it was not then correctly diagnosed. Shortly after arriving in London, he found himself in hospital; but he rallied sufficiently to continue his activities, and looked forward to a long period of literary work. By autumn 1942 he was ill again, and was sent to Devon to rest. In 1943 he was invited to the Cadbury's Manor Farm in Birmingham to assist in training members of the Friends' Ambulance Unit who would be working in Greece at its liberation. He returned to London, but his apparent recovery did not continue. He had fits of dizziness and was finally admitted to the Westminster Hospital in London, where he died on 9 March 1944. 
Capetanakis's funeral was held at the Greek cathedral in Bayswater and he was interred in the Greek enclosure at Norwood cemetery. His passing was commemorated in a volume edited and published in 1947 by John Lehmann, 'Demetrios Capetanakis: a Greek Poet in England', bringing together his writings in English along with recollections by friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 60660


Corsellis, Timothy John Manley (1921-1941), poet, was born on 27 January 1921 at Hazelwood, North Park, Eltham, London, the son of Douglas Henry Corsellis, analytical chemist and barrister, and Helen Mary Corsellis, 'nee' Bendall. His father had served as a captain in the machine-gun corps during the First World War. Corsellis entered Winchester College in 1934 and some of his early poems appeared in 'The Wykhamist Literary Supplement'. It was at Winchester that he formed the most influential friendship of his brief life, that with the poet Nigel Weir. A few months his senior, Weir was a linguist and naturalist whose open-faced idealism drew a questioning response from the younger boy. They fenced in the school gym, discussed their work, and gradually took up contrasting positions over the looming disaster of war which would destroy them both. Weir joined the celebrated Oxford University air squadron which his father had founded, and was awarded a half-blue for fencing; Corsellis became a member of ARP (air-raid precautions) and toiled in the East End of London. His 'Dawn after a Raid' vividly describes the confusion of homeliness and horror that was the blitz. A series of fine nature poems at this time included 'The Thrush', in which he confesses to Weir, 'I stopped his song'. On 8 August 1940 Weir shot down three German planes during the battle of Britain and won the DFC. He was killed flying in November, and his death left Corsellis isolated. 'In memoriam N.W.' thrusts aside the conventions of their uneasy relationship: it is an anti-war hero poem which sees Weir '
Moving among the Spitfires... And I pitied the German sons 

And I pitied his troubled soul. 
(Corsellis, 'In memoriam N.W.', 'Poems')' Corsellis's poetry reflects the nadir of the Second World War when the thoughts of so many people, especially the young, ran contrary to the official rhetoric. Reels of grinning soldiers in the news-cinema made him ask, 'Where are you going to, laughing men? For a holiday on the sea?' And when he himself joined the RAF he was crushed by the sordidness and inertia of the barracks; his poem 'Drill' perfectly encapsulating this common experience. He had little or no contact with other writers but a meeting with Stephen Spender resulted in an astute and moving appraisal of an established figure. '
I had expected an overwhelming greatness. 

Now I see you much as I am. 

You sit with a disturbance in your mind. 
(Corsellis, 'Stephen Spender', 'Poems')' Corsellis was a war poet who closely examined the ennui, boredom, and casual cruelty of his day. There are none of the literary references in his work which one might expect from such a young writer. In September 1939 Nigel Weir could write: '
There is a death, Elizabeth, 

for which we all must wait; 

and men and war can do no more 

than try to change the date. 

' Corsellis's fatalism was of a different kind. In no more than a handful of remarkable poems he was able to express certain attitudes towards the conflict which were common, though incoherent, during its darkest months. He is an uncomfortable realist who until he is able to make 'cartwheels in the sky' is plunged into all kinds of meanness. 'The sacrifice is greater than I ever expected.' 
After training as a leading aircraftsman, Corsellis became a second officer in the Air Transport Auxiliary. This was a civilian organization connected to the Ministry of Aircraft Production. The twenty-year-old Corsellis was piloting a Magister aircraft L8268 on a ferrying flight from Luton to Carlisle on 10 October 1941 when it stalled in a turn and hit a tree near Annan, Dumfriesshire, and he was killed. 
As with so many servicemen poets of the period, Timothy Corsellis first had his work published by the admirable Keidrich Rhys, himself serving as a gunner in the Royal Artillery. It belongs to the group of air force poets who include Henry Treece, John Pudney, and Vernon Watkins, while remaining distinctive and troubling. An edition of his collected poems has never been published. Corsellis's originality lies in his ability to reveal youthful disappointment with what was offered him. Barely grown up, and lacking his friend Weir's strong sense of cause, he wrote poetry that is a severe indictment of the grim world into which the war cast him. '
Sometimes we pray to be hardened and callous, 

But God turns a deaf ear, 

And we know hate and sorrow -- intimately, 

And we do not mind dying tomorrow. 
(Corsellis, 'Dawn after the Raid', 'Poems')' 



@@@@@


doc= 60661


Dehn, Paul Edward (1912-1976), writer and film critic, was born on 5 November 1912 at 13 Belfield Road, Didsbury, Manchester, the elder son and eldest of the three children of Frederick Edward Dehn (1881/2-1947), cotton merchant, and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Susman (1880-1976). His parents were British of German Jewish descent. His godfather was James Agate, the drama critic, a close friend of his father. Known as Fritz (his original name before Anglicization), Dehn's father was very musical and was remembered by Agate for his panache and high spirits, along with a tendency to launch out into political tirades in inappropriate places. Dehn's siblings were Olive Dehn ['see below'] and Eric Dehn (1916-2009), a schoolteacher. 
Dehn was educated at Shrewsbury School (1925-30), for which he retained an affection, and at Brasenose College, Oxford (1930-34). After a brief spell on the 'Birmingham Post', in 1936 he joined the 'Sunday Referee' as a film critic and columnist. At the start of the Second World War he went into intelligence, and is said to have worked for a while as personal assistant to General Gubbins. His talent as a linguist resulted in his being transferred to the Special Operations Executive (SOE) at Beaulieu, where his task -- along with Kim Philby -- was to teach propaganda (including 'black') warfare. He delighted everyone with his entertaining manner and piano playing, and could put on a 'good nightclub act'. He is also recorded as having been a 'serious thinker', with a warm and romantic nature, not to mention an outstanding instructor. In America it was said that listening to him was more exciting than reading a spy novel. The story goes that once he lay in his bath learning by heart how to deliver a lecture in Polish to Polish students. The talk went off perfectly, but the students were perplexed when he was unable to answer their questions. 
In the winter of 1942 Dehn was posted as chief instructor to Camp X at Oshawa, Ontario, Canada. Then in the summer of 1943 he went to the United States to read propaganda warfare to members of the office of strategic services. After the German surrender he went to Norway on an interrogation mission; he also compiled an agent's handbook. It was in 1944 that he met James Michael (Jimmy) Bernard ('b'. 1925), later to become a well-known composer of film music, and they lived together until Dehn's death. After leaving the army as a major he worked as a film critic of considerable distinction on the 'Sunday Chronicle', then on the 'News Chronicle', and from 1960 to 1963 on the 'Daily Herald'. He contributed lyrics to many of the very successful theatre revues of the early 1950s: 'The Lyric Revue', 'The Globe Revue', 'Penny Plain', 'At the Lyric', and so on. In 1952 he wrote a masque for Shrewsbury School's 400th anniversary and a verse commentary for an award-winning film on the Thames, 'Waters of Time'. In the same year both he and James Bernard were awarded Hollywood Oscars as joint authors for the film 'Seven Days to Noon'. An adaptation of Wilde's 'A Woman of No Importance' ran at the Savoy in 1953, and in 1954 Lennox Berkeley's opera 'A Dinner Engagement', for which Paul had written the libretto, was presented at the Aldeburgh festival and later ran at Sadler's Wells. He was also a critic on the BBC, and in 1956 president of the Critics' Council. Meanwhile he had published two books of poetry, 'The Day's Alarm' (1949) and 'The Romantic Landscape' (1952), which included one of his best poems, 'The Sunken Cathedral'. 'For Love and Money' (1956) was a miscellaneous collection of articles, essays, poems, and light verse, mostly already published in 'Punch', 'The Listener', 'The Observer', and elsewhere. 
In 1958 Dehn received the British Film Academy award for the script of 'Orders to Kill'. His collaboration with Terence Rattigan in 'Joie de vivre' (1960), a musical version of 'French without Tears', was not a success, but the musical version of Vanbrugh's 'Virtue in Danger' (1963, with James Bernard), for which he wrote the book and lyrics, was better received. In 1967 he wrote the librettos for William Walton's 'The Bear' and Lennox Berkeley's 'The Castaway'. After giving up film criticism, he concentrated on screenplays, for which he gained a brilliant reputation. These included 'Goldfinger' (1964, as co-author), 'The Spy who Came in from the Cold' (1966), 'The Deadly Affair' (1966), Zeffirelli's version of 'The Taming of the Shrew' (1967), three of the 'Planet of the Apes' films (1969, 1971, 1972), and most notably 'Murder on the Orient Express' (1974). This last received an Oscar nomination, and Agatha Christie declared that it was the best film adaptation of any of her books. There were two more books of poems: 'Quake, Quake, Quake' (1961), written with ghoulish wit, and with drawings to match by Edward Gorey; and 'The Fern on the Rock' (1965). 
It is not surprising that with all this tremendous literary activity friends were periodically told that 'Paul is in purdah'. Nevertheless there were many lavish dinner parties at 19 Bramerton Street, Chelsea, where he and Bernard lived for twenty-five years. A menu book was kept so that guests would not have the same dishes twice. Colour schemes were mostly strong, and in a corner there might be a large pot of flowering orchids. Paintings by Ivon Hitchens and Keith Vaughan were special features. Among the most famous of Dehn's and Bernard's friends were Terence Rattigan, John Gielgud, Lennox and Freda Berkeley, Michael Redgrave, William Walton, and Arthur Marshall. Dehn's earnings were of course considerable at times, but taxation in the 1950s was punitive. In one year Dehn wrote to 'The Times' gently pointing out that he had had to pay $80,000 in tax. Slightly built, good-looking with pale skin and long black eyelashes, a splendid host, witty and affectionate, Paul Dehn in obituaries was chiefly remembered as a superb writer of screenplays and lyricist; his work in the Special Operations Executive during the Second World War was virtually overlooked. Dehn would give ornithology as his hobby. He was a heavy smoker and developed lung cancer, from which he suffered for nearly two years. In the last year of his life he and Bernard moved to 18 Tite Street, Chelsea, London, where he died on 30 September 1976. He bequeathed his body to the Westminster Hospital for cancer research. 
Dehn's sister (the second of the three siblings), Olive Marie Dehn (1914-2007), poet and children's writer, was born on 29 September 1914, also at 13 Belfield Road, Didsbury. Her contrariness developed early: at the age of four she proclaimed that she actually liked corners when told to stand in one. She was educated at a girls' school in Seaford, Sussex, an unhappy experience. By the age of eighteen she was already contributing to 'Punch' and 'Country Life'. In 1933, while staying in Germany with relatives, she wrote a satirical poem, 'Goebelchen (a Half-Aryan Ballad)', for 'Punch'. She was promptly arrested and deported from the country under armed guard. Back in England she became an established writer, with stories for the BBC radio programme 'Children's Hour', poetry illustrated by E. H. Shepard, children's plays, and a notably successful book for children, 'The Basement Bogle' (1935). On 5 June 1937 she married the actor (Peter) David Markham (1913-1983); they had four daughters. During the Second World War her husband, a libertarian anarchist and pacifist, was sentenced to twelve months' hard labour as a conscientious objector. Olive Dehn shared his political beliefs, and like him joined the Committee of 100 soon after it was founded in 1960. She was also arrested with him in Moscow in 1974 and deported when, as founding members of the Campaign Against the Abuse of Psychiatry, they campaigned for the release of Soviet dissidents. She thus had the unusual distinction of having been deported by both the Nazis and the KGB. After the Second World War she and her husband had bought Lear Cottage, near Coleman's Hatch in Ashdown Forest, Sussex. There, in a clearing in the forest, they farmed organically, becoming largely self-sufficient, raising sheep, pigs, geese, and hens, growing a wide variety of fruit and vegetables, and taking pride in the prizes awarded for their animals and produce. Dehn continued to write, though she published less frequently. Her children's book 'The Pike Dream' (1958), illustrated by her eldest daughter, Sonia, was a particular success, as was 'Spectacles for the Mole' (1968). Her last children's story was 'Goodbye Day' (1980). She continued to write poetry, and in 2006 published 'Out of My Mind: Poems, 1929-1995'. She died in Wych Cross, Sussex, on 21 March 2007, and was survived by her four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 60662


Devas, Nicolette (1911-1987), author and artist, was born on 1 February 1911 in London. She was the eldest of the four children of Francis Macnamara (1884-1946), an Irish eccentric, poet, and landowner, of Ennistymon House, co. Clare, and his wife, Mary Yvonne Majolier (1886-1973), who was of French and Anglo-Irish extraction. Her youngest sister became Caitlin Thomas (1913-1994) upon her marriage to Dylan Thomas (1914-1953). When Nicolette was five Macnamara, committed to his freethinking ideas, deserted his family, who then for several years moved as refugees from one household to another. But primarily the lives of the Macnamaras became united with the large and unorthodox household of the painter Augustus John and his mistress Dorelia McNeil. In 1917 they were sharing the same house as the John family, Alderney Manor in Dorset. Then followed years of wandering from one place to another, and for a few years with grandmother Majolier in France. In 1923 Yvonne Majolier bought the family a home of their own, New Inn House at Blashford on the borders of the New Forest, only 7 miles from where the John family settled at Fryern Court near Fordingbridge in Hampshire. Later Nicolette was to give an account of her extraordinary childhood in her classic biography, 'Two Flamboyant Fathers' (1966). This highly unconventional upbringing meant that she had almost no formal education and could not read until she was twelve. However, she learned other things: an appreciation of painting and a great love of the outdoor world, which led to an intimate knowledge of natural history. She had a particular interest in and love of birds, an interest which was to develop throughout her life. For a short time she attended schools in France, first the 'lycee' in Cannes, then in Paris, where she began her art training. 
At the age of sixteen Nicolette went to the Slade School of Fine Art, where she studied under Henry Tonks but refused to conform to his stringent ideas on art. She became part of a group of students which included William Coldstream, Rodrigo Moynihan, Elinor Bellingham-Smith, and Rupert Norman Shephard (1909-1992), who was later to become her second husband. At the Slade she met, and married on 25 June 1931, the portrait painter (Thomas) Anthony Devas (1911-1958). She was now on the way to making a successful career as a painter herself, exhibiting her work at the New English Art Club, the Royal Academy, and the London Group, and at a one-woman show at the Storran Gallery. But the outbreak of war in 1939, and her family of three children, made the pursuit of her career increasingly difficult. She also found it almost impossible for two artists to work happily under the same roof, so it was a sensible decision to turn her creative energies to writing. She published four successful novels, 'Bonfire' (1958), 'Nightwatch' (1961), 'Black Eggs' (1970), and 'Pegeen Crybaby' (1986; illustrated by Shephard), and also a life of her mother's family, 'Susanna's Nightingales' (1978). 'Bonfire' was read for the publishers by C. Day Lewis, who wrote, 'The untidiest, worst spelt manuscript I have ever read. PUBLISH'. It was also reviewed in the 'Daily Telegraph' by John Betjeman, who called it 'a refreshing and bold experiment'. 
Throughout her life Nicolette Devas never lost her love of nature, and ornithology became a major interest and study. For some years she worked in the Natural History Museum sorting birds' eggs and studying British and exotic birds in their cases. She became friends with the ornithologist James Fisher, and painted pictures of birds in the London Zoo. 
Anthony Devas died in 1958; seven years later, on 24 April 1965, Nicolette Devas married the artist Rupert Shephard, her friend from her Slade days. He was a widower, and the two families (Rupert Shephard also had three children) joined up in a large house at 68 Limerston Street in Chelsea. This house became a centre for the meeting of artists and writers. Nicolette Devas had a great gift for friendship and conversation, and all her life she was an exceptionally beautiful and attractive woman, and was always ready to help and encourage any friend who might be going through a difficult time. She was an active member of the International Association of Poets, Playwrights, Editors, Essayists, and Novelists (PEN) and for many years she served on the executive committee, and travelled abroad to many international PEN conferences. 
Nicolette Devas's last years were clouded by Alzheimer's disease. She died in London on 10 May 1987. A memorial service was held for her on 18 May at Chelsea Old Church, London, and she was buried on the 19th at the church of St Mary and All Saints at Ellingham, near Ringwood in Hampshire. Shortly after her death a very successful one-woman show of her work was held at the gallery of Sally Hunter Fine Art (July 1987). 


@@@@@


doc= 60663


Fothergill, (Arthur) Brian (1921-1990), biographer, was born on 3 April 1921 at 3 Park Avenue, Lytham St Annes, the youngest of three children of John Smirthwaite Fothergill (1887-1938) and his wife, Kathleen Anderson, 'nee' Entwisle (1895-1957), daughter of Anderson Entwisle of Milnshaw, Lytham St Annes. The Fothergills were a wealthy, landowning family with property in Westmorland and John Smirthwaite Fothergill was able to live near Kendal on family income. 
Brian Fothergill (seldom referred to as Arthur) was educated at Wycliffe College, Stonehouse, Gloucestershire, from 1931 to 1937, and at King's College, London, from 1939 to 1942. He had decided to become an Anglican priest and therefore did not sit his final degree examinations but left as an associate of King's College. He then took a pre-ordination course at Westcott House, Cambridge, from 1942 to 1944 and probably qualified for the priesthood; however, in 1944 he joined the army intelligence corps. He served in India and Malaya, where he met several people who were to become his lifelong friends, including Kenneth Williams, Stanley Baxter, and John Schlesinger. The experiences of army life apparently overturned his career plans and he never went back to the idea of becoming a priest. The army also gave him the opportunity to refine his beliefs and soon after he was demobbed in 1947 he was received into the Roman Catholic church. 
Fothergill began work as a schoolteacher, with his longest spell as assistant master at St Philip's School in South Kensington, London, from 1949 to 1956. Despite struggling on for nine years, teaching never gave him any satisfaction and in 1957 he decided to devote all his time to writing. It was probably his mother's death which enabled him to break away from teaching. His father had been killed in 1938 by a train and in 1941 his mother married J. M. Somervell of Kendal. The Somervells owned K Shoes and it was said that Fothergill's mother first married into one of the oldest families in Westmorland and then into one of the richest. In 1957 Fothergill would have inherited a secure income for the rest of his life. 
Nevertheless, Fothergill had trouble settling to a regular routine. The root of his problem was his homosexuality, which led to his constantly moving home -- from Earls Court, to St John's Wood, to Chelsea in London; then to Brighton -- and it was not until about 1970 when he bought a house in Islington, London, and met Owen Gordon, a clerk with the St John Ambulance Brigade, that he was able to enjoy a long-term relationship. 
Fothergill's first book, a biography of the brother of Charles Edward Stuart (Bonnie Prince Charlie), was almost written before he left teaching and was published in 1958 as 'The Cardinal King'. It was followed by six other biographies, all published by Faber and Faber. His biographies were usually about people on the margins of history with odd characteristics; some were downright eccentrics. All his work was meticulously researched, and if his subject was already written about, Fothergill usually managed to present new evidence and to rescue the person's reputation from obloquy. The most striking example of such rehabilitation was his treatment of Sir William Hamilton, previously known for little other than his willingness to live as Nelson's cuckold; Fothergill showed Hamilton to have been an outstanding diplomat, soldier, scholar, and epitome of an eighteenth-century man of taste. 
Fothergill received the PEN Silver Pen award for 'Sir William Hamilton' and the Heinemann award for literature for 'Sir William Hamilton' and 'Beckford of Fonthill'. Critical acclaim was given to all his books, although they were not best-sellers, as he himself was well aware. He once told his publisher that sales of 'The Mitred Earl' might have doubled had it been called 'The Belted Bishop'. He was elected a fellow of both the Society of Antiquaries and the Royal Society of Literature in 1970, and in the Royal Society of Literature he went on to become a member of the council in 1977, the vice-president in 1986, and chairman from 1986 to 1989. In 1980 he edited the society's annual 'Essays by Divers Hands'. 
Fothergill was a tall man who paid attention to his clothes and his appearance, although without regard to contemporary fashion. Towards the end of his life his health deteriorated quickly. He contracted tuberculosis and then had a heart bypass before being diagnosed with cancer. During these illnesses he was nursed by Owen Gordon and spent much of his time reconsidering his religious beliefs. Just before he died he gave up Catholicism and returned to the Church of England. 
Brian Fothergill died on 6 August 1990 at Homerton Hospital in Hackney, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 60664


Charteris, Hugo Francis Guy (1922-1970), novelist, was born on 11 December 1922, at 26 Catherine Street, Victoria, London, the son of the Hon. Guy Lawrence Charteris (1886-1967) and his first wife, Frances Lucy Tennant (1887-1925), granddaughter of Sir Charles Tennant. As an adolescent he spent many holidays with his aunt, the countess of Plymouth. He left Eton College in 1941 to join the Scots Guards and was twice wounded on war service, receiving the MC. While public relations officer for south-east Asia command in Malaya and Java (1945-7), he edited an English-language newspaper and wrote short stories. After leaving the army he read English at Trinity College, Oxford, for a few frustrating terms (1947-8). In 1948 he married Virginia Mary ('b'. 1922), daughter of Colin Gurdon Forbes Adam and granddaughter of the third Baron Wenlock. They had two sons (of whom the elder drowned in 1951) and three daughters. He was enabled to marry by his then brother-in-law Viscount Rothermere, for whom he worked dishearteningly on the 'Hull Evening News' and as sub-editor on the 'Daily Mail' before being sent to Paris as second correspondent, chiefly writing feature articles for the 'Continental Daily Mail'. In Paris he became interested in Jungian psychology through Charles Janson, who had married the duke of Sutherland's heir (herself afterwards countess of Sutherland in her own right). On abandoning full-time journalism in 1951 Charteris settled in a house on the Sutherland estates, hoping to live by a novelist's earnings. He was sustained by commissions from Malcolm Muggeridge of 'Punch' and afterwards by contributing feature articles in the 'Telegraph' newspapers. He also earned fees in the early 1960s as a children's photographer and translated an anthropological text on voodoo. 
With the support of Rosamond Lehmann, Charteris published 'A Share of the World' in 1952, hailed by Francis Wyndham as 'the most impressive first novel that has appeared since the war' ('Times Literary Supplement', 6 Aug 1954, xlvii). Its protagonist, emotionally crippled by war memories, develops a paranoiac obsession symbolized by a crafty butler employed by his fiancee's family. The lively 'Marching with April' (1956) concerns a melancholic former prisoner of war and Jungian analysand (inspired by Charles Janson) who is bequeathed a highlands estate under a will vetoing its sale and desiring him to relinquish psychological cults. 'Picnic at Porokorro' (1958) depicts expatriates caught in an African colonial diamond town threatened by native independence. In 'The Lifeline' (1961) the fantasies of an exuberant poseur are challenged by the parochial mediocrity of highlands society. 'Pictures on the Wall' (1963) explores the dilemma of the warden of a detention centre for juvenile offenders ensnared by domesticity and excessive conscientiousness (based on a man whom Charteris had interviewed for the 'Daily Telegraph'). 
Charteris depicted aristocratic fortitude in its more ruthless manifestations, and mined the lives of his relations for material. The family in his first novel was hurtfully based on his parents-in-law and in several novels his father's bumbling is affectionately portrayed. Charteris believed that his brother-in-law Ian Fleming had plagiarized his ideas, and wrote a novel about Fleming entitled 'The Explorers' which was suppressed by Charteris's sister Anne Fleming. 'The Coat' (1966), in which an Eton boy wanders Liverpool in the blitz with a quarter of a million pounds' worth of diamonds belonging to an avaricious nobleman sewn into the lining of his coat, contains merciless portraits of another brother-in-law, the third earl of Dudley and his countess, Laura Charteris, whose eyes are described as 'brimming with a look that was 'hot', 'ruthless' and 'deprived' like the eyes of a big animal in a circus stranded on some big coloured box till the ringmaster snaps his whip' (p. 32). 'The Tide is Right', Charteris's powerful account of jealousy in a Scottish landed family, was withdrawn in 1957 after legal threats and published in Illinois only in 1991. Sir Oswald Mosley, who was related by marriage to his wife's family, launched (but later abandoned) a libel action over the tragic fascist portrayed in 'The River Watcher' (1965). The former Congo mercenary in that novel was in part based on Mosley's son Nicholas, afterwards third Baron Ravensdale, with whom Charteris had a long friendship. 
Charteris's patrician values were tempered with Jungian ideas. The epigraphs for 'Marching with April' -- 'In destroying the true world we also destroyed the apparent world' (Nietzsche) -- and for 'The Indian Summer of Gabriel Murray' (1968) -- 'An honest admission of modernity means voluntarily declaring oneself bankrupt' (Jung) -- show his spiritual estrangement. In books like 'The Lifeline' he superbly evoked Scottish landscape. Charteris's central characters were religious-minded people who lacked a religion: they could not be reconciled to their environment without losing their sanity or self-respect. His psychological analysis was often brilliant; a versatile raconteur and mimic, he used these gifts to array a diverse range of authentic minor or comic characters. His prose was elegant and nervous, combining the allusive, elliptical witticisms of a Nabokov with the ominous unease of a Camus; occasionally its concision made his meaning a mystery for readers. Even when his characters failed to communicate with each other, their jaded society talk was supercharged with 'rudeness [that] was deliberate, murderous yet frantic' (Charteris, 'Indian Summer', 130). In addition to two children's books, Charteris wrote for television after 1965. His contributions to a BBC series about a flat-share, 'Take Three Girls' (1969-71), were his most popular work. His television masterpiece, 'The Toggle', was a mordant portrayal of the helpless isolation of a schoolboy controlled by adults who are cold, harsh, selfish, and amorous. 
In youth Charteris had a Byronic beauty and in middle age was gauntly handsome. He died of cancer on 20 December 1970 at his home, The Grange, Elvington, Yorkshire, and was buried in St Helen's churchyard, Skipwith, near Selby, Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 60666


Griffiths, Drew (1947-1984), playwright and theatre director, was born on 17 January 1947 at 25 Caroline Street, Irlam, Urmston, Lancashire, the only child of Leonard Griffiths (1906-1973) and his wife, Mona, 'nee' Smith (1910-1973). While Methodism was the paternal tradition, Griffiths was brought up within the Church of England. In early adulthood he became an atheist, convinced that no God would tolerate so much human suffering, yet he always retained a sense of the spiritual and the transcendent. In 1953 the family moved a short distance to run the Coach and Horses pub in Liverpool Street, Cadishead. Mona drank to excess and Leonard had little time for his son, who hated pub life and often escaped to the back room to talk with his maternal aunt, Ruby Smythe; she became a substitute parent and his constant mainstay. Leaving Urmston grammar school at eighteen, Griffiths took up office work and then became letters editor for 'Reveille' in Dundee. His first work in the theatre was as a student assistant stage manager at Dundee Repertory, which funded his first two years at the Birmingham School for Speech Training and Dramatic Art, where he assumed a comic 'refined' Manchester accent. He subsequently took a postgraduate course in acting at Manchester Polytechnic's Stables Theatre. 
In 1973 Griffiths moved to London, where he set up a home in Balham with Alan Pope, Gordon MacDonald -- friends from Birmingham -- and Philip Howells. In the following year they helped to found the Gay Sweatshop theatre company, intended as a showcase for drama which grew out of their sense of alienation as a result of being both homosexual and working-class. It was run as a collective, and Griffiths was involved in all its activities: writing, acting, and directing. His two principal plays were 'Mister X' (1975), written with Roger Baker, and 'As Time Goes by' (1977), written with Noel Greig. The former grew out of improvisations in the Balham household and provided Griffiths with a platform from which to express his rage about homophobia, self-oppression, and his childhood (he was apparently subjected to aversion therapy at fourteen). The latter depicted three critical moments in the fashioning of a politicized gay identity -- England at the time of Oscar Wilde's trial for homosexuality in 1896; Berlin under the Nazis in 1929; and New York on the eve of the Stonewall riots in 1969. Frankly populist, these early shows gained from Griffiths's common touch as a performer -- a commitment to both show business aesthetics (which he thought inseparable from the gay sensibility) and intense emotional honesty. 'As Time Goes by', however, was evidence of his historical understanding and dramaturgical craftsmanship, and he was responsible for guiding the company into a new and more literary direction. Griffiths was also instrumental in getting women to join Sweatshop in 1975, although this lasted only a year; he was saddened when the collective divided into two separate companies in 1976. 
Running a homosexual theatre company in the mid-1970s was a reckless enterprise for these working-class actors and directors since there was a risk they would not be offered other work. Yet, despite an inner fragility, Griffiths liked risk: he was a heavy drinker and smoker, treated shoplifting as a minor hobby, and aggressively affected a theatrically glamorous off-stage appearance that sometimes provoked hostile reactions. During a nine-month tour of 'As Time Goes by' (August 1977 to May 1978), he contracted hepatitis B in Ireland. He was sent back to England and hospitalized, and in his absence the men's company underwent a crisis, largely the result of exhaustion, which led to a split. Griffiths felt that had he remained with the company he might have prevented this. 
Meanwhile, Griffiths and Greig set about developing the material about Edward Carpenter they had used in 'As Time Goes by' for a new play. Their ideas differed radically, however, and it was Greig who finally wrote 'The Dear Love of Comrades' (1979). Griffiths's driving Blakean perspective on the project seems to have been one part of a rapidly developing psychosis, possibly the result of his post-viral condition. He went haywire at an open-microphone show at London's Drill Hall theatre, began buying clothes obsessively, and travelled to the Sorbonne to become a beggar. He appeared to be in his own world, a place of euphoria and excitement, and he became angry when friends tried to intervene. His behaviour became so erratic that he was eventually expelled from the collective and felt thoroughly betrayed. 
A slight, quietly spoken man, plagued by self-doubt, Griffiths always seemed vulnerable, but he gradually recovered, found acting work elsewhere, and then resumed a media career that had begun in Birmingham. His writing for radio and television, sparse in style and based on closely observed dialogue, is less well known and influential than his theatre work, but arguably as successful in absolute terms, and it constitutes a second career. 'Something for the Boys' (Scottish Television) was set in a gay club during the Second World War and the radio play 'South of the River' (Capital Playhouse series, 1981), was about an attempt, foiled by homophobia, to hold a weekly gay disco in a Balham pub. Griffiths had also worked (at loggerheads) with Greig on 'Only Connect', a play about Carpenter for a BBC Pebble Mill series, 'The Other Side' (1979). The stress of writing a daily soap opera, 'Nicola Johnson', for Capital Radio during 1983 may have contributed to Griffiths's second illness, which came on swiftly. He was admitted to hospital after jumping from a moving train. Hating the medication he was offered, he simulated recovery in order to get discharged. He forced MacDonald, his sole remaining flatmate, to leave by placing a knife in his bed, became sexually rampant, and grew obsessed by the occult. After he set the flat on fire, friends unsuccessfully attempted to get him assigned to a psychiatric social worker; then, in desperation, they tried to get him sectioned. This too failed. He stopped paying rent, burned furniture in the garden, drank all day, and hardly slept. 
Griffiths was murdered on 18 June 1984 at 140 Lyham Road, Brixton, London, after taking home a man he had picked up on a drinking spree in the Elephant and Castle. He had been seen flashing large wads of money about, and when he was eventually found, naked and stabbed through the heart, the cash was gone. Shortly before his death he told people he was writing a play about a rent boy who gets murdered. He was also talking about Jean Genet and William Burrough's 'Naked Lunch', remarking that the greatest orgasm comes with dying. In retrospect it might be thought that in his self-destructive behaviour he was looking for his 'angel of death'. His funeral at Putney Vale crematorium on 23 July 1984 was for its time a remarkable affair, an emphatic demonstration of lesbian and gay pride and community, and a celebration of Griffiths's contribution to bringing these things about. He was recalled as compassionate, easy-going, and caring, as someone loved by all who met him, even though he could never bring himself to believe this. 
Griffiths established Gay Sweatshop as the prime artistic expression of a politicized lesbian and gay identity. His personal and creative life reflects poignantly the larger social process, and to some extent the social pressures upon him -- particularly the pressures of homophobia. In a short period Drew Griffiths produced a body of work -- as writer, actor, and director -- that was marked by an intense honesty and considerable bravery. 


@@@@@


doc= 60667


MacInnes, Colin (1914-1976), novelist and essayist, was the second child and younger son (a daughter died in infancy) of the novelist Angela Margaret Thirkell (1890-1961) and her first husband, James Campbell McInnes (1874-1945), the baritone lieder singer. He was born at 20 The Grove, The Boltons, London, on 20 August 1914, changing the spelling of his name to MacInnes when he became a professional writer. Through descent from a Wesleyan minister, the Revd George Browne Macdonald (1805-1868), his maternal great-grandfather was the painter Sir Edward Burne-Jones (1833-1898), and Rudyard Kipling and Stanley Baldwin were his grandmother's cousins. Often mistakenly thought to be Australian, for he was brought up in Melbourne, on his mother's side he was entirely British. 
When MacInnes was only three his parents divorced, and in 1918 his mother married George Thirkell, an Australian engineer. In 1919 he and his elder brother, Graham, sailed with their mother and stepfather to Australia. The boys adopted the name Thirkell and were enrolled in the Scotch College at Melbourne. When MacInnes was fourteen his mother's second marriage collapsed, and she departed for England with Lance, her son with George Thirkell, leaving her two eldest boys to finish their schooling in Australia. 
MacInnes freely admitted that he never loved his mother, nor she him, and that there was no human contact whatsoever with his stepfather. Yet despite these privations MacInnes always claimed to have enjoyed a happy childhood, relishing Australia, his school and schoolfriends, and the holidays spent on sheep stations and fruit farms in the Australian bush. 
In 1931 MacInnes paid visits to France and Germany and, declining the opportunity to attend university in Australia, he remained on the continent, taking a job in Belgium with the Imperial Continental Gas Company, an incongruous choice of occupation which nevertheless he endured for five years. Having had no contact with his father since he was an infant, in 1934 he again met up with James McInnes, and both Colin and his elder brother reverted to their original surname, Colin later adapting the spelling to MacInnes. 
Eventually determined on a career as an artist, in 1937 MacInnes became a student at the Chelsea Polytechnic, transferring the following year to the Euston Road School of Drawing and Painting. His studies were disrupted, however, by the outbreak of the Second World War. In 1940 he joined the Wiltshire regiment, being posted a year later to the intelligence corps, with whom he spent two years in Gibraltar before being employed in Germany with the rank of sergeant interrogating spies and Nazi sympathizers. By the end of the war he had decided his future lay as a writer rather than a painter; in an attempt to combine both interests, in 1947 he joined 'The Observer' as art critic, employment that was abruptly terminated after only six months. 
MacInnes had a mercurial temperament. He functioned best alone, and he wisely got down to work on his first novel, 'To the Victors the Spoils', a semi-autobiographical account of his work in the intelligence corps. Published in 1950, it was nominated Book of the Month by the 'Daily Graphic'. His second novel, 'June in her Spring', published two years later, remained his own favourite among his novels but was largely ignored when it came out, for it dealt to some extent with homosexuality, in 1952 still a taboo subject. 
In searching for his own authentic voice MacInnes was doubly handicapped: he strongly disliked his mother as a person and despised her as a novelist. The feeling was mutual, and although Angela Thirkell died a wealthy woman she cut MacInnes out of her will. He found her work 'able in execution' but in content 'totally revolting', and was aghast whenever referred to as Angela Thirkell's son. He once admitted that he found her death a liberation, and that some of the themes he had chosen to write about recommended themselves precisely because they were ones that would disgust her. 
Those themes were the very stuff of MacInnes's contemporary London: drugs, prostitution, race riots, and the teenage revolution, all of which feature in the trilogy of London novels for which he is best remembered, 'City of Spades' (1957), 'Absolute Beginners' (1959), and 'Mr Love and Justice' (1960). In the events about which he wrote, MacInnes more or less took an active part. In 1955 he was arrested in an East End gambling club, and subsequently acquitted on a drugs charge; three years later, having failed to pay any income tax for several years, he was declared bankrupt; by 1961 he was a self-proclaimed 'anarchist sympathizer'; and in 1966 he was recognized as propagandist for the British Black Power leader Michael X. On a British Council tour of Africa in 1971 his behaviour was so outrageous that the tour had to be abandoned. 
MacInnes contributed to a wide variety of periodicals, including 'The Spectator', 'New Society', 'Encounter', the 'New Statesman', 'Queen', and 'Gay News', for whom he wrote perceptively and at length about Arthur Rimbaud. MacInnes was almost entirely self-educated, and in his essays he adopted a light and entertaining style that belied considerable erudition. Some of his aphorisms rivalled those of Oscar Wilde: 'If chastity were not considered a virtue it would be quite attractive'; 'Only the rich can afford to be mean'. 
In 1969 MacInnes published the first of two historical novels, 'Westward to Laughter', a satire on R. L. Stevenson's 'Treasure Island'. A second historical novel, 'Three Years to Play', appeared the following year, but although written with verve and authenticity neither of these books achieved the popular success of the three 'London novels'. These remain important source material for MacInnes's own times, and were rediscovered by a young readership in the mid-1980s, resulting in the generally ill-received film adaptation of 'Absolute Beginners' (1986). In 1973 he published an extended essay on bisexuality, 'Loving them both', and in 1974 his last novel, 'Out of the Garden', a questionable impression of England in decline. In 1976 cancer of the oesophagus was diagnosed, and very shortly before he died MacInnes wrote an unsentimental article for 'New Society' about his decision to undergo surgery. Only sixty-one, he died on 22 April 1976 at his home, 74 Marine Parade, Hythe, Kent, of a massive haemorrhage, and was buried at sea off Folkestone a week later. He was predominantly homosexual and never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 60668


Maugham, Robert Cecil Romer, second Viscount Maugham (1916-1981), novelist and playwright, who wrote under the name Robin Maugham, was born at 4 Collingham Gardens, Kensington, London on 17 May 1916. He was the fourth and youngest child, and the only son, of Frederic Herbert Maugham, first Viscount Maugham (1866-1958), lord chancellor in 1938-9, and Helen Mary (1872-1950), daughter of a lord justice of appeal, Sir Robert Romer (1840-1918). Maugham was educated, not very happily, at Eton College, but enjoyed his time at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he wrote a thriller for the Amateur Dramatic Company and was converted to a kind of sentimental socialism. He graduated with a second in law in 1938, with the intention, at his father's insistence, of becoming a barrister. 
The outbreak of war provided a temporary excuse to dodge an unwelcome future, and Maugham enlisted in the Inns of Court regiment, being commissioned in 1940 in the 4th County of London yeomanry. While fighting in the western desert, Maugham was mentioned in dispatches and suffered a head wound which may have been the cause of his erratic conduct in later life. He reached the rank of captain, and in 1944 was invalided out of the army. He put his army experiences to literary use in his first novel, 'Come to Dust' (1945), warmly praised by Graham Greene, and in his play 'Enemy!' (1969). 
In 1945 Maugham was called to the bar but never practised. It had always been apparent that he had more in common with his cosmopolitan uncle, the novelist and playwright W. Somerset Maugham, than with his legal relatives. Although he produced some thirty works altogether, he had unfortunately inherited an emotional sterility similar to his uncle's without the equivalent compensating literary talent. It was early in his career, in 1948, that Maugham conceived the idea for his slim novella 'The Servant', so successfully adapted for the cinema in 1965 by Harold Pinter that it is the work, inconsequential in its origins, by which he is best remembered. It was, however, almost a collaboration between uncle and nephew, Somerset Maugham going over every line in minutest detail. 
Although much of Robin Maugham's autobiographical writing was embroidered, his non-fiction was superior to his fiction. In 1961 'The Slaves of Timbuktu' was given a dramatic edge with the purchase by Maugham of an African slave to prove the truth of his researches. 'Somerset and All the Maughams' (1966), enthusiastically welcomed by such distinguished critics as Cyril Connolly and Norman Shrapnel, provided an essentially affectionate portrait of his sardonic uncle, whose stutter he loved to mimic. But there was a strange ambiguity about his fiction. Many of Maugham's books, 'The Second Window' (1968), for example, 'The Sign' (1974), or 'Lovers in Exile' (1977), were compulsively readable and yet instantly forgettable. Maugham was a financially successful but basically facile writer, whose neurotic personality prevented him from working alone and whose insecurity when he failed to inherit anything from his uncle drove him to pursue quick financial returns rather than literary integrity. Some of his novels were actually ghosted. 
Maugham was a brave man who survived being buried in a terrifying earthquake in Morocco, at Agadir. He could be violent, snobbish, and cruel, but he endeared himself to close friends as a kind and extravagant host and a brilliant raconteur. Unashamedly homosexual, he had a taste for the louche life, much of it enjoyed at his villa on Ibiza, and some of it reflected in the sexual adventures in exotic locations experienced by the inhabitants of his novels. 
Maugham made his final home in Clifton Road, Brighton, and at sixty-four he was still a comparatively young man, although prematurely aged through increasingly heavy drinking bouts allied to diabetes, when he died at the Royal Sussex County Hospital, Brighton, on 13 March 1981. He was buried with his parents at Hartfield in Sussex. He was unmarried, and the title became extinct. After his death it was thought that his private journals might be published, but, unable to find a suitable publisher, his executors stored the diaries. Towards the end of 1991 all but six volumes were mysteriously stolen, with suggested motives ranging from curiosity about the activities of those described to a suggestion that the thieves had believed them to contain coded references to Maugham's supposed work for British intelligence. The case remains unsolved. 


@@@@@


doc= 60669


Roughton, Roger Edmund Heude (1916-1941), writer and journal editor, was born on 17 September 1916 at The Croft, Storrs Park, Undermillbeck, Lancashire, the only child of Thomas Heude Roughton and his wife, Helen Litler, 'nee' Johnson. Roughton's father, whom he never knew, was a serviceman based in Barrow, killed in the First World War. He had set up a trust fund for his son who, at six, went to a preparatory school at Heddon Court from which he regularly ran away, although as a pupil he was capable enough to win a scholarship to Eton College. His mother, who had (traumatically for Roughton) remarried in 1923, left her second husband, a physician, when their daughter, Charlotte, was three weeks old. Social and financial problems inevitably followed. Roughton's mother decided he should go to Uppingham, his father's old school, instead of Eton. 
Roughton left school (where he had been bullied) at sixteen, and met David Gascoyne, his junior by one month, during the winter of 1933-4 in the famous left-wing Parton Street Bookshop in Holborn, London, where they were introduced by the proprietor David Archer. Shortly afterwards, Gascoyne visited Roughton in Hampstead where he was living with his half-sister, and his mother, with whom relations were strained. Eventually Roughton moved to share Gascoyne's small flat in Southwark. Later, he took rooms above the Arts Cafe in Parton Street, coming under the political influence of his friend A. L. (Bert) Lloyd, staunch communist and authority on folk music. 
In the summer of 1935 Roughton left for the USA with John Davenport; both were friends of Dylan Thomas. They visited New York and Staten Island, and drove to California, where Roughton found work as a Hollywood extra. Towards the end of 1935, now a Communist Party member, he travelled to the USSR. By the time he started reviewing for the 'Daily Worker' in January 1936, Roughton had had poems published in 'The Bookman', 'The Listener', and the anthology 'Poems of Tomorrow' (1935). From April, his prose and poetry appeared in 'The Criterion', 'The Programme', and 'Poetry' (Chicago), from which he received the 1937 Harriet Monro lyric prize. 'He does at least think of poetry as something to be spoken,' wrote W. H. Auden. 
Julian Symons described Roughton as 'an aesthetic-looking young man with some literary tact and taste'. By 1936 he had access to his trust fund which helped finance his magazine 'Contemporary Poetry and Prose', published from May of that year until autumn 1937 from the Arts Cafe. There were ten numbers, 1-8 appeared monthly, 9-10 quarterly. The 'surrealist double number' (May 1936), issued to coincide with the June opening of the International Surrealist Exhibition in London (Roughton submitted several objects), contained translations from Andre Breton, Paul Eluard, Rene Char, Alfred Jarry, and Benjamin Peret, and poems by Gascoyne, Roughton, Humphrey Jennings, and Kenneth Allott. The 'Picasso Poems Number' (nos. 4 and 5) preceded the magazine's 'Declaration on Spain' of November 1936, signed by the English Surrealist Group, of which Roughton was a member from 1936 to 1938, and calling for 'Arms for the People of Spain!' However, Roughton claimed in no. 8 that his publication was 'in no way an official surrealist magazine'. Despite his commitment, he was unable to strike a literary and political balance; he had become disillusioned. In no. 10 there was a terse announcement: 'The Editor is going abroad for some time'. In his 'Auden and after' (1942), dedicated to Roughton's memory, Francis Scarfe wrote approvingly of his magazine: 'Perhaps the most international review produced in the 'thirties, with the exception of 'transition''. Roughton also issued two separate publications: '1/20', poems by E. E. Cummings (whom he had met in America), and 'Remove your Hat' (an unexpurgated version of the previously censored 'A Bunch of Carrots'), comprising translations by Gascoyne and Jennings from Peret. 
Roughton travelled to France, Munich, and Czechoslovakia (driving a yellow Cord), returned to England, then left for Ireland in July 1939. On 22 April 1941 he gassed himself at his 70 Wellington Road home in Dublin; the Nazi-Soviet pact was an influential factor upon his state of mind. A distressed Dylan Thomas wrote with affection of Roughton to Davenport later that month: '[He was] always about somewhere with his little eyes and his cigarette, calm and treble in the middle of the crumbling system; [...] perhaps driving a Bugatti with the radio full on'. Gascoyne's 'Elegy', written that year, celebrates their friendship, and the unforgettable loss. Roughton's last prose piece, 'The Human House', was published posthumously by Cyril Connolly in 'Horizon' (July 1941). The writer Charlotte Hough once described her half-brother to Gascoyne as 'just like Spandrell in Aldous Huxley's 'Point Counter Point'' (private information). Roughton's suicide helped fix his place in twentieth-century English literature, frozen for all time into the reality -- and the myth -- of the writing and politics of the 1930s. 


@@@@@


doc= 60670


Rumbold, Richard William John Nugent (1913-1961), author, was born on 24 June 1913, probably at Dowth Hall, co. Meath, Ireland, second of the three children of Charles Edmund Arden Law Rumbold (1872-1943), sometime captain 2nd dragoon guards, and Anne Christian (1881-1928), daughter of the Hon. Richard Anthony Nugent and his wife, Henrietta Gradwell. An elder brother died at birth and he had a sister, Rosemary, three years younger. His mother was from an ancient Norman-Irish family, the earls of Westmeath. His father was English, wealthy, descended from the famous nabob Sir Thomas Rumbold, governor of Madras; also from the Ardens, relatives of Shakespeare. Rumbold's autobiographical book 'My Father's Son' (1947), with fictional names and under the pseudonym Richard Lumford, was a brave and cathartic account of his wretched childhood, and revealed him as a gifted writer dominated by a bullying father. This work also included an account of the suicide of his mother. It was reissued in 1958 under his own name, with an introduction by Harold Nicolson, his long-suffering mentor and constant support. His second cousin William Plomer was to confirm that the description of the father was no exaggeration: 'only a Balzac or a Dickens could dream up such a character'. Rumbold was handsome and physically well built, with blue eyes. His father attacked him constantly for 'effeminancy', and regarded intellectuals as 'half-baked'. Just as the father was constantly on the move from house to house, so Rumbold was sent to a number of schools, in England, France, and Germany. For a while, to 'knock out the softness', he was a cadet on a naval training ship, an unhappy experience. However, he passed into Christ Church, Oxford, where he revived and ran a literary club, arranging talks by such personalities as Lord Alfred Douglas, Frieda Lawrence, W. B. Yeats, and Charles Morgan; many of these speakers became loyal friends. Rumbold had been brought up a Roman Catholic, but by this time he was becoming disillusioned with Catholic dogma. In 1933 he published a novel, 'Little Victims', which he dedicated to Richard Aldington. This bitter, ill-judged, obviously autobiographical book was a 'succes de scandale', lashing out at the church, his parents, public-school homosexuality, and Oxford aesthetes. He was refused the sacrament by the university chaplain, Ronald Knox. Furious, he decided to abjure Roman Catholicism. Very soon afterwards he spat blood and tuberculosis was diagnosed. He left Oxford without taking a degree in 1934. 
Rumbold travelled a great deal and on a cruise met a well-off American, Hilda Byrne Young, who for much of his life acted as a doting substitute mother, amazingly tolerant of his homosexuality and sometimes treated as a servant. On Harold Nicolson's suggestion that he should interest himself in other people's problems, he visited the London docklands and Welsh coalmines, and became genuinely obsessed with a desire to help the underdog. When war came he joined up as a private in the Royal Army Service Corps, but soon transferred to the Royal Air Force. He was exhilarated by the experience of his training as a pilot, not only the flying but the sense of comradeship. His lyrical descriptions are outstanding in 'My Father's Son'. Later, bombing raids upset his conscience, and he applied to become a fighter pilot. Some foolhardy escapades ended with flying under the Menai Bridge, for which he was court-martialled. Once more he spat blood. 
Desperate for literary recognition, brooding over imagined slights, deeply serious, longing for the true love he could never achieve, Rumbold first began treatment for schizophrenia in Switzerland and then began visits to a psychiatrist, Denis Carroll, who encouraged him to write his autobiography. He wrote articles, and edited a somewhat skimpy collection of Flaubert's letters in 1950. He took up riding a motorcycle, at tremendous speeds. His ecstatic discovery of flying led to a biography of Saint-Exupery, 'The Winged Life' (1953), written in collaboration with Lady Margaret Stewart. Hilda Young accompanied him to Ceylon, where he hoped to find 'sensual liberation and spiritual reconciliation'. His interest in Buddhism took him to Japan, where he was a part-time postulant in a Zen monastery. Back in England, after an operation, his obvious inner turmoil increased, to the concern of many devoted friends, partly as a result of a further disaster in his family, the death of his sister. Rumbold went to Sicily, accompanied by Hilda Young, and by Archibald Colquhoun, the translator of 'The Leopard', who himself had recently returned to the Roman Catholic faith. Rumbold still regarded the church as the enemy of freedom and pleasure, especially for its stance on homosexuality, but reluctantly agreed to attend mass daily; Harold Nicolson maintained that he was refused confession and communion, the priests presumably having been told by Colquhoun of the original interdict. All the time he was desperately working on two books. 
On 10 March 1961, at a hotel in Palermo, while Hilda Young was typing in another room, Rumbold fell from a window, possibly accidentally, and was killed. He was permitted a Roman Catholic funeral in the graveyard of the Anglican church of Watton-on-Stone in Hertfordshire, the village where his ancestor Sir Thomas Rumbold had built his splendid house. One recalls Rumbold's own description of Saint-Exupery: 'He remained to the end an idealist, an anguished idealist, ceaselessly searching for a faith for his idealism, and for inner peace'. Extracts from his diaries, with some meditations on Zen, were movingly -- and to some extent discreetly -- edited by William Plomer in 'A Message in Code' (1964). 


@@@@@


doc= 60671


Stewart, Desmond Stirling (1924-1981), writer, was born on 20 April 1924 at Colis Farm, Leavesden, Hertfordshire, the first of four children of Roy Mackenzie Stewart (1889-1964), a neurologist, and Agnes Maud Stirling (1900-1994), daughter of Thomas William Stirling, naval officer and pioneer of fruit growing in British Columbia, Canada, and Marie Mabel, 'nee' Connolly. Stewart was educated at Haileybury College, where he was a scholar (1938-41), and read classics at Trinity College, Oxford, from 1942 to 1944 and from 1947 to 1948 as a scholar. His BLitt was on Swinburne's 'Atalanta in Calydon'. A pacifist, he did hospital work during the Second World War. 
In autumn 1948 Stewart took up a teaching post at the College of Arts, Baghdad, Iraq. He favoured the Arab cause and was popular with his Iraqi students. His first publication was a lively translation of Plato's 'Symposium' (1950); then followed three novels set in Iraq, each of which was perceptive and entertaining. Outstanding among the three was 'The Unsuitable Englishman' (1954), a satire on the British attitude to the Iraqis. In between came 'The Memoirs of Alcibiades' (1952), a fictional autobiography. In 1956 he co-authored 'New Babylon: a Portrait of Iraq' with John Haylock, with whom he set up house in Juniyyah, Lebanon, in October 1956. The British embassy in Baghdad was suspicious of his pro-Arab stance and his friendship with Sir Oswald and Lady Mosley, and the contracts of both authors were not renewed because of 'New Babylon'. Popular with most Iraqis, this candid book infuriated the establishment. From 1955 to 1956 Stewart gave occasional English lessons to Lieutenant-Colonel Abdul-Karim Kassin, who, in July 1958, overthrew the monarchy and formed a republic. 
In 1958 Stewart wrote 'Turmoil in Beirut' and moved to Cairo, a city he loved, and about which he wrote 'Cairo' (1965) and 'Great Cairo' (1968). 'Boy with a Hoop', his biography of the Lebanese industrialist Emile Bustani, came out in 1967. From this time until his death his output was prolific, his energy remarkable, his scholarship impeccable. He wrote five books on the Arab world and Islam for Time-Life Books, New York, and one ('The Pyramids and the Sphinx', 1971) for Newsweek Book Division. In 1974 he wrote a biography of Theodor Herzl and 'The Middle East: Temple of Janus' (1971), an exhaustive account of the modern history of that region. He translated two Egyptian novels: 'Egyptian Earth' by A. R. Sharkawi (1962) and 'The Man who Lost his Shadow' by Fathy Ghanem (1966). Stewart was an admirer of President Gamal Abdul Nasser, who once granted him a long interview, and he set out the aspirations of the Nasserist revolutionary programme in 'Young Egypt' (1958). His trilogy 'A Sequence of Roles' (1965-8), about a Scottish family's connections with Egypt, was poorly received. His biography of T. E. Lawrence (1977) postulated the mythomaniac traits in Lawrence's character. 
Stewart was tall, with slate-coloured eyes and fairish brown hair, which he wore short. Francis King always referred to him as 'life-enhancing'. Stewart acquired a fluency in Arabic, and studied Islam seriously, but he remained a devout Christian. Amusing, he had a mischievous wit which could be provocative. He was as much at home with an Egyptian paratrooper as he was with Diana Mosley. 
In 1967 Stewart bought a house together with his adored widowed mother in the Greek village of Myrtou, in northern Cyprus. When in England he lived in the house at Wells next the Sea, Norfolk, which he had inherited from his paternal uncle. Myrtou's occupation by the Turkish army in 1974 meant that he could only alternate between Egypt and Norfolk. In 1981, while in Cairo, he contracted hepatitis. He was ill for some weeks and died in London at Charing Cross Hospital of liver failure on 12 June 1981. His devoted Egyptian friend Hassan Haggag was at his deathbed along with his mother. Stewart was unmarried. He was buried in the churchyard of St Nicholas at Wells next the Sea. His two posthumous books, 'The Foreigner' (1981), a life of Christ, and 'The Palestinians' (1982), were both edited by Alan Neame, poet and writer, an Oxford contemporary of Stewart's and lifelong friend. 


@@@@@


doc= 60672


Tambimuttu, Meary James Thurairajah (1915-1983), writer and journal editor, was born on 15 August 1915 at Atchuveli in the Jaffna peninsula of Ceylon (Sri Lanka), second child of the five sons and one daughter of Henry Tambithurai Tambimuttu (1887-1971), of the Government Printing Press, Colombo, and his first wife, Mary Ponnammah Santiapillai. The scholar Ananda Coomaraswamy was his uncle and he claimed descent from the kings of Jaffna. Mary James, as he was originally named, attended St Mary's Convent and the Catholic St Joseph's College, Trincomalee, where he was educated in English. After further schooling at St Joseph's College, Colombo, he won an exhibition in botany to Ceylon University College but left before completing his degree, taking up employment in the Ratnapura Kachcheri and public works department, Colombo. By the time he left Ceylon, Tambimuttu's literary ambitions were clear: he had issued three volumes of poetry -- the first set and printed by himself -- composed several songs, and produced a jazz musical. 
Tambimuttu arrived in England in January 1938, known only for a popular record sold in Woolworths. His confidence, generosity, strikingly handsome appearance, and literary intuition gained him immediate entry to London's bohemian set. Following a discussion with Dylan Thomas and Keidrych Rhys, he and Anthony Dickins, a young musician and writer, issued a prospectus offering subscription to 'Poetry', a magazine whose first number appeared in February 1939. After the second number Dickins's close involvement ceased, the title became 'Poetry (London)', and Tambi, as he was always known, asserted his chaotic yet inspired style of editorship. 

'Poetry (London)', whose first number declared that 'every man has poetry within him', introduced many important new writers, while gaining the support of established figures. George Barker, Louis MacNeice, Lawrence Durrell, and Dylan Thomas, among the first published, became regular contributors. Editorial roles given to Tambimuttu by T. S. Eliot for 'Poetry in Wartime' (1942) and Reginald Moore for 'Selected Writing One' (1942) encouraged the publisher Nicholson and Watson to sponsor 'Poetry (London)' and an additional series of books, 'Editions Poetry London', which promoted both authors and artists. Paired collaborations for the series included Kathleen Raine and Barbara Hepworth; David Gascoyne and Graham Sutherland; and Nicholas Moore and Lucian Freud, while Henry Moore's acclaimed 'Shelter Sketch Book' appeared in 1945. Tambimuttu's encouragement of Keith Douglas led to the publication of 'Alamein to Zem Zem' (1946), and, eventually, to a posthumous edition of his collected poems. In 1947 Richard March became Tambimuttu's principal financial backer and early in 1949, after an acrimonious dispute, assumed control of an operation which had issued some fourteen numbers of 'Poetry (London)', six pamphlets, and over fifty books. 
Tambimuttu's devotion to poetry was matched by his passion for the area in London he named Fitzrovia. His extraordinary dynamism beguiled those whom he led from pub to pub through London's nocturnal streets (spending money borrowed for more strictly literary purposes). Hard living eventually took its toll on happiness, security, and companionship; a marriage on 2 March 1940 to Jacqueline Stanley lasted little more than a year before the couple separated (an annulment being granted in 1947). Tambimuttu sailed for Ceylon, arriving back on 7 December 1949. After a year of writing and broadcasting (a skill learned with the BBC in London) he travelled to Bombay, where he met Safia Tyabjee, whom he married on 15 July 1951. They embarked for New York in 1952, arriving in November with $600 and no return ticket. 
The stories which Tambimuttu contributed to the 'New Yorker' and 'The Reporter' were tenderly written and more accessible than the long poems he had published in London: 'Out of this War' (1941) and 'Natarajah' (1949). His small income was supplemented by lectures given at institutions such as the Poetry Center and New York University. In 1956, backed by a wealthy patron, he started 'Poetry London (New York)', awarding himself $80 a week. Despite initial success, only four numbers appeared, the last in 1960. Times again became difficult, and Safia returned to India in May 1958, a prelude to divorce. Another marriage, in 1961, to Esta Smith ('b'. 25 Oct 1937), resulted in the birth in 1962 of his only daughter, Shakuntala. After the collapse of this marriage, Tambimuttu joined Timothy Leary at his League for Spiritual Discovery until 1968. His failure in that year to obtain a post running the Poetry Room at Harvard resulted in a period of restlessness, during part of which he stayed at Shakespeare & Co. in Paris. 
Tambimuttu finally settled in London, where moments of success and vision punctuated an otherwise precarious existence. The Lyrebird Press was launched on 21 June 1972, with Katharine Falley Bennett, while other ventures included a limited edition of Indian love poems illustrated by John Piper (1977), two issues of 'Poetry London/Apple Magazine' (1979 and 1983), originally to have been backed by the Beatles, and a handmade anthology delivered to Buckingham Palace as a wedding gift for Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer. In 1982 he visited India and Sri Lanka, meeting Indira Gandhi, who supported his foundation of the Indian Arts Council in London, and J. R. Jayawardene, with whom he discussed publishing a library of Sri Lankan classics (as part of the programme of the Sri Lankan Arts Council for which he had made initial plans). 
On 22 June 1983 Tambimuttu died of heart failure in University College Hospital, London, where he had been taken after a serious fall in his office in Bloomsbury's October Gallery. He was cremated on 30 June and his remains sent to his childhood home. A memorial concert at the Bhavan Centre in London was held on 17 March 1984. A portrait by Augustus John is reproduced in 'Out of this War'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60676


Dunbar, Andrea (1961-1990), playwright, was born on 22 May 1961 at 23 Oliver Street, East Bowling, Bradford, the third of the eight children of John Brian Dunbar (1936-1989), a wool warehouseman, and his wife, Alma ('b'. 1935), a worsted twister, daughter of John Chippendale of Bradford and his wife, Millicent. Both Andrea's grandfathers were woolcombers and both her parents were textile workers at the time of their marriage in 1958. However, with the decline of the textile industry her father found alternative employment as a demolition worker until an injury left him partially disabled. His consequent feckless drinking, and foul-mouthed and sometimes violently abusive behaviour towards his wife and children at their council-house home on Bradford's notorious Buttershaw estate, has been identified as the dramatic centre of Andrea's childhood. 
Andrea Dunbar was educated at Horton Bank Top junior school from 1966 to 1972 and Buttershaw high school from 1972 to 1977. She showed little interest in school until her repeated failure to bring the required ingredients to her domestic science lessons resulted in an imposition, which turned into a spontaneously hilarious, pertinently intelligent two-page essay questioning the relevance to her family situation of the confection of a raspberry pavlova. Sympathetic teachers recognized, in her talent for observation of the foibles of human behaviour, her potential as a writer: she was encouraged to develop a taped dialogue for submission as coursework for CSE English. She later confessed that at that time she read little other than horror comics, and learned to write dramatic dialogue by copying out the Victorian melodrama 'Maria Marten, or, Murder in the Red Barn', the story of a rich seducer and an innocent country lass. Her education was interrupted when she became pregnant at fourteen and lost the baby she was carrying following a car crash. She subsequently returned to school to develop her burgeoning interest in drama, leaving with three CSEs at sixteen with no particular plans or aspirations for her future, and obtaining employment French combing at Bowling Mills in Bradford. 
In 1980 Dunbar entered the script of her first play, 'The Arbor' -- written when she was a fifteen-year-old schoolgirl in green biro on pages torn from a school exercise book -- in a national competition for young writers. Her work impressed Max Stafford-Clark, director of London's Royal Court Theatre, and the play was produced at the Theatre Upstairs before transfer to the main stage, where it followed Richard Eyre's celebrated production of 'Hamlet'. 'For most of the Royal Court audience', one sympathetic critic observed, 'the language and substance of the play were as remote as a piece of anthropology' (Ritchie). Revolving around the pregnancy and subsequent miscarriage of the central character, the semi-autobiographical play was set against a background of domestic violence, boredom, poverty, and overcrowding in Brafferton Arbor, the crescent on the Bradford council estate where Andrea had spent her childhood and adolescence. Its success resulted in the commissioning of a second play, 'Rita, Sue and Bob too', a ribald comedy-drama in which a pair of teenage schoolgirls living on a run-down Bradford council estate are seduced by an older married man for whom they work as babysitters. Opening at the Royal Court in 1982, it was awarded the George Devine award for promising young playwrights and subsequently adapted for the cinema in 1986. A third play, 'Shirley', centring upon the infidelity of the play's eponymous heroine while her long-standing boyfriend serves a short prison sentence, opened at the Theatre Upstairs in 1985 and was acclaimed by the critic Michael Billington as 'a short, sharp, brutally funny slice of Bradford life' ('Andrea Dunbar a tribute', Bradford Libraries and Information Services). 
Dunbar's three plays about contemporary working-class urban life were widely praised for their earthy realism and sharp wit. The playwright Shelagh Delaney pronounced her 'the genius from the slums' ('Mail on Sunday', quoted in 'Bradford Telegraph and Argus', 21 Dec 1990), while the drama critic Benedict Nightingale dubbed Dunbar 'the bard of the West Riding council-estate jungle' and hailed her achievement in 'steeping herself in a distinctive geographical, social and human area', making it 'unmistakably her own' (B. Nightingale, 'New Statesman', undated, 'Andrea Dunbar a tribute', Bradford Libraries and Information Services). The tabloid press sensationally represented her work as 'Thatcher's Britain with its Knickers Down' ('The Guardian', 30 Aug 2000). However, her writing was as devoid of political and social comment as it was of moralizing and self-pity. She simply recorded her raw experiences of social and cultural deprivation in the depressed environment of the council estate which she knew best in the 1980s, revealing an acute ear for idiom, a firm grasp of a dramatic narrative, an impressive capacity for total recall, and an ability to import humour into the direst of circumstances. 
Dunbar's personal life was certainly tumultuous and ultimately tragic. After the trauma of her initial teenage pregnancy and miscarriage she never married, but had three more children by different fathers between 1979 and 1983, seeking refuge from the first of these partners, an Asian taxi driver, in an eighteen-month sojourn in a refuge for battered women at Keighley. Moreover, the release of the film version of 'Rita, Sue and Bob too' created a furore in her native Bradford, where 'all hell broke loose... at news of the contents of the film' ('Bradford Telegraph and Argus', 21 Dec 1990). Dunbar recognized that the film 'probably upset councillors who would like to show a fairytale side of Bradford and ignore the darker elements of it, the Tourist Office who also shut their eyes to the rundown parts and even some residents on the Buttershaw estate itself. ('Bradford Telegraph and Argus', 11 Sept 1987)' The film also received some hostile reviews. The 'Yorkshire Post' critic pronounced it 'without doubt the crudest film I have ever seen' (9 Sept 1987), while the 'Daily Express' complained of ninety minutes of 'unmitigated abusive gloom... filmed with an inexperienced cast and an appalling script' (quoted in 'Sunday Times', 6 Sept 1987). Her unofficial agent, Rob Ritchie, commented: 'I think the film was the point at which whatever dreams she might have had about being a writer collapsed. It unleashed all those problems for her family and the community that she was living in' ('The Guardian', 30 Aug 2000). However, Dunbar insisted on riding out the storm of controversy by remaining close to her roots in Bradford with the children she adored, even after arousing further controversy when she was fined by Bradford magistrates for claiming social security without declaring her royalty payments. 
Grotesquely caricatured in appearance by some journalists as 'boot-faced' with 'black teeth' and hard-bitten fingernails ('Mail on Sunday'), others commented more sympathetically on Dunbar's watchful eyes, strong chin, and brilliant smile. She was usually photographed informally, sometimes at her local enjoying a pint of ale or in the bleaker surroundings of the desolate Buttershaw estate with its boarded-up windows, graffiti-vandalized walls, and tangled, overgrown gardens. Beneath a belligerent facade she displayed a disarming modesty, shyness, and sensitivity, but also an impermeable stoicism and dour stubbornness. A heavy drinker and smoker, and a victim of both domestic violence and sexual harassment, she suffered a brain haemorrhage and collapsed while drinking alone in her local public house on the afternoon of 20 December 1990 and was rushed to the Bradford Royal Infirmary, where she died at the age of twenty-nine. She professed no religious faith, but a neighbour on the Buttershaw estate, the Revd Arthur Tuffee, a Baptist minister, conducted her funeral service at Scholemoor Crematorium, Bradford, on 28 December 1990, describing her as a 'happy-go-lucky character, who spoke up for the poor and disadvantaged' ('Yorkshire Post', 29 Dec 1990). New facilities for creative writers were established at Bradford Central Library as a living memorial to her in 1997, and the actor and playwright Robin Soans wrote a new play, 'A State Affair', a sequel to 'The Arbor', after revisiting the Buttershaw estate with Max Stafford-Clark in July 2000, which was premiered in Liverpool in October 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 60678


Goodbody, Mary Ann (1946-1975), theatre director, was born at 12 Clifton Hill, London, on 25 June 1946, the daughter of Douglas Maurice Goodbody, a barrister, and his wife, Marcelle Yvonne Rubin, 'nee' Raphael. She attended the Francis Holland School in London and Roedean School before studying for a degree at the University of Sussex (1964-7). A university production that she devised and directed of Dostoyevsky's 'Notes from the Underground' won her a prize at the national student drama festival and brought her to the attention of the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) director John Barton. In 1967 she joined the RSC as Barton's personal assistant. By 1969 she had worked her way up to assistant director. On 9 September 1967 she married Edward Geoffrey Buscombe ('b'. 1941/2), from whom she was later separated. 
Buzz Goodbody's growing commitment to feminism meant that in 1970 she became involved in founding one of the first feminist theatre companies to emerge in the wake of the second women's liberation movement: the Women's Street Theatre Group. Her feminist leanings and left-wing politics -- she was an outspoken, self-declared socialist-Marxist -- fed into her work at the RSC. In 1970 she took on responsibility for Theatreground, the educational, touring section of the Shakespeare company. Her abridged touring version of 'King John' adopted a political, cartoon style that antagonized traditional critics such as John Russell Brown, while others, such as Colin Chambers, argued that here 'was the flavour of Littlewood, the living newspaper, a fast-moving, fluent, cartoon-strip production' (Chambers, 28). Moreover, Chambers observed and speculated: '[Peter] Brook, who was an inspiration for Buzz Goodbody, was 'taken by the vigour' of 'John', which he found 'full of life, energetic, disrespectful'. What would the critics have said if his name had been on the programme instead of an unknown woman's?' (ibid., 29). After 'King John', Goodbody worked with another RSC director, Terry Hands, on a piece about the general strike of 1926, which was eventually shelved for a less than successful production of a drama from the 1590s, 'Arden of Faversham'. For the 1971 season at The Place, London, she directed a well-received production of Trevor Griffiths's 'Occupations', a contemporary political play about revolution. 
As the first woman director on the staff of the RSC, Goodbody had to contend with the male domination and bias of the company, which, by all accounts, proved a difficult professional and personal struggle, but one that she incorporated into her production work. 'As You Like It', her first mainstage production for the RSC (1973), with Eileen Atkins as Rosalind, was nicknamed the 'women's lib' production of the play. Analytical accounts of the success or otherwise of the production's feminism are mixed; critics are generally agreed on the contemporary rather than traditional feel that Goodbody brought to her treatment of Shakespeare's comedy. 
From 1973 to 1974 Goodbody was assistant to Trevor Nunn in his season of Roman plays. In 1974 she was appointed artistic director of the RSC's alternative experimental venue, the Other Place, which opened in Stratford upon Avon. For the Other Place, Goodbody directed a production of 'King Lear', which subsequently went to The Place, in London, and to New York, where it was presented at the Brooklyn Academy in 1975. In contrast to the more lavish RSC productions, Goodbody's 'King Lear' worked with a small budget of $150 (as compared, for example, with the $25,000 for the set of Nunn's Roman plays). Yet again Goodbody's feminism and politics gave direction to her work: a prologue politicized issues around poverty and old age; Lear's daughters were represented as strong women doing battle with a difficult father (the roles of the husbands were all cut). 
Goodbody's last production was 'Hamlet', which officially opened at the Other Place on 15 May 1975, with Ben Kingsley in the title role. Elsom describes how the production 'used the temporary shed of The Other Place to create the atmosphere of a totalitarian, military state' (Elsom, 175). On 12 April 1975, a month before the play's official opening, Buzz Goodbody committed suicide at her home, 125 Highbury Hill, Islington, London. Several critics echoed Elsom's view that her death had 'robbed the theatre of one of its most promising directors' (ibid.). While Colin Chambers positively argued for Goodbody as the 'catalyst for change in the RSC', explaining that 'she provided the all-important bridge between the RSC and the fringe' (Chambers, 7), Margaret Sheehy cautioned that, for several years after her suicide, the 'pervasive, guilt-ridden, tribal memory' of the event meant that the RSC hardly dared to risk more women directors for fear that they might 'crack under pressure' (Sheehy, 12). In her feminist classic 'Dusa, Fish, Stas and Vi' (1976), Pam Gems remembered Goodbody through the role of Fish, the activist who commits suicide. An annual Buzz Goodbody award for directing is made at the national student drama festival, the forum that had so effectively launched Goodbody's RSC career in 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 60681


Murnaghan, Sheelagh Mary (1924-1993), politician and barrister, was born in Dublin city on 26 May 1924, the eldest of six children. Her family background was Catholic and strongly nationalist; her grandfather George Murnaghan had been a nationalist MP until 1910. Murnaghan was educated by the Catholic Loreto sisters in Omagh, co. Tyrone, where her family resided. Murnaghan began an arts degree at the Queen's University of Belfast in 1942 but the following year changed to a law degree. She became president of the University Literary and Scientific Debating Society in 1947. She was awarded an LLB in 1947, and afterwards read for the bar. She was one of the first women barristers in the north of Ireland. She was also a keen sportswoman and played for the Irish international women's hockey team, touring with the team (which she captained in 1955-6 and 1957-8) in South Africa in 1950 and the United States in 1954. Her international hockey career ended in 1959. 
Murnaghan became a member of the Ulster Liberal Association in 1959. Shortly after joining the party she was selected as a Liberal candidate in her home constituency of South Belfast. However, she did not win a seat. In 1961 she was selected as a candidate for a Queen's University by-election. Her election campaign focused on the deficiencies of the Unionist government, and she won the seat, owing primarily to a large Unionist abstention and an increase in the non-Unionist vote. On taking her seat at Stormont in December 1961 she gained a reputation as a radical and active member of parliament. She retained the seat in the 1962 Northern Ireland general election, and was returned unopposed in 1965. Murnaghan was the only Liberal MP to sit in the Northern Ireland parliament in its lifetime, 1921-72. During her eight-year parliamentary career Murnaghan spoke on a diverse range of subjects and pushed for the introduction of Liberal policies through Stormont. There were three issues that were of particular concern and interest to her: the plight of travelling people, criminal law reform, and human rights. She raised issues about the provision of properly equipped campsites for travelling families, their harassment by local authorities, and their national insurance entitlements. Such concerns found few supporters. Her first private member's bill, the 'Homicide and Criminal Responsibility Bill', was introduced in 1963 and focused on making provision for homicides not then covered by the law, and also sought to abolish capital punishment. The bill was narrowly defeated (by twenty-three votes to nineteen) and the government introduced its own 'Criminal Justice Bill' in 1963, the major difference from Murnaghan's bill being the retention of the death penalty. 
Murnaghan made four attempts to have a human rights bill enacted, intended to counter racial, religious, and sexual discrimination. The first bill was introduced in June 1964. She believed that 'one cannot legislate unjust discrimination out of existence. One can, however, give a lead by making it perfectly clear to every citizen what he may or may not do' ('Hansard 5C', 56.1989). The bill was defeated on a second reading in the commons by twenty-three votes to seventeen on 16 June 1964. Her second human rights bill was also defeated on a second reading in February 1966. Arguing for support for this second bill Murnaghan stated 'It is utterly incredible that in a predominantly Christian community a man's religion should be weighed against him in the balance in his daily life' ('Hansard 5C', 62.685). A third attempt to have a human rights bill enacted was made in February 1967; this again failed, as did another attempt in December 1967. Opposition to the bills was based on the belief that adequate legislative provision against discrimination existed under the 'Government of Ireland Act' (1920). 
Attempts to introduce the bill for the fifth time failed with the abolition of the Queen's University seat. Murnaghan failed to win a seat for North Down in the 1969 general election. Events in Northern Ireland overtook her parliamentary attempts to legislate for reform. The civil rights marches and demands, and the outbreak of violence, were to alter the face of parliamentary politics in Northern Ireland. The introduction of direct rule in 1972 ended her political opportunities. Murnaghan was a member of the Community Relations Commission and supported many of the demands of the civil rights movement. She was chosen by the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, William Whitelaw, to be a member of his special advisory committee in 1972. Jeremy Thorpe was later to recall that one of the first remarks made to him by Murnaghan was 'In Northern Irish politics I don't know which is the greatest obstacle, to be a woman, a Catholic or a Liberal. I am all three' ('The Times', 22 Sept 1993). Sheelagh Murnaghan died, unmarried, on 14 September 1993 from lung cancer at Beaconsfield Marie Curie Centre, Kensington Road, Belfast. She was cremated at Roselawn crematorium in Belfast two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 60687


Haschenperg, Stephen von (fl. 1535-1547), military engineer, was a native of Moravia, who probably followed Mary of Hungary to the Netherlands when she became regent there for her brother, the emperor Charles V, in 1531. He is first recorded in an English context in 1535, when he offered his services to Thomas Cromwell as 'armourer and architect' ('pro armamentario et architecto'; TNA: PRO, SP 1/100, 60), having first approached the duke of Suffolk. He was not then employed, but cannot have been entirely rebuffed, for around 12 April 1539 he wrote again to Cromwell, from Deal in Kent, in terms suggesting both that he was an intelligence agent for the secretary, and also, since he claimed to be able to understand the speech of Polish sailors, that he knew eastern Europe and the Baltic. 
More certainly, however, the threat of foreign invasion in 1539 had by now led to Haschenperg's finding employment in England, at first on the south-east coast. In 1539-40 he undertook works at Sandgate and Camber castles, devising fortifications of considerable, indeed unnecessary, complexity. With their concentric defences and use of bastions they were among the earliest English fortifications to show a knowledge of Italian innovations in military design, though Haschenperg, who seems to have been a land surveyor by training, may not in fact have fully understood the significance of the models he imitated. Hence, for instance, his repeated tendency to leave dead ground in front of his defences. His technical weaknesses were not appreciated at first, however, and he was granted an annuity of $60 in 1539, raised to $75 in July 1540. Then in November 1540 he was sent to Calais, to survey its defences and prepare a plan for their strengthening. 
Having returned to England, Haschenperg went north shortly afterwards. At Berwick with the duke of Norfolk in January 1541, by June he was at Carlisle, where substantial works on the defences of both castle and city were in progress. Perhaps he was here executing works planned by others rather than a programme of his own devising, a possibility that could explain why he achieved more of lasting utility at Carlisle than elsewhere. Haschenperg was responsible for strengthening the castle so that it could carry more guns, for building an elaborate half-moon battery to protect its inner ward and bulwarks to act as outworks, and for at least beginning a citadel designed to command the city from its southern end. Nevertheless, he soon ran into difficulties, at least some of them apparently of his own making. He had begun his time at Carlisle with quarrels, with his colleague Thomas Gower, who was sent to Berwick, and with the captain of the castle, Sir Thomas Wentworth, who was ordered to 'use himself more temperately' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 16, no. 958). By the end of 1542 the progress of the works was giving rise to concern. The march warden and the bishop of Carlisle were ordered to inspect them, and in the following July Haschenperg was dismissed, on the grounds that he had 'behaved lewdly and spent great treasure to no purpose' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 18/1, no. 901). Perhaps his lack of qualifications had caught up with him, though he did not help his own cause by his disrespectful bearing towards the king's council. 
Haschenperg left England in 1543, subsequently forfeiting property at West Ham, Essex, and went to the Baltic; on his return in 1544 he persuaded Mary of Hungary to write to Henry VIII on his behalf. He himself then approached Henry's agent in Brussels with offers of intelligence concerning Scots who were recruiting soldiers in Denmark, but received a cool reception, as one who 'will pretend more knowledge than he hath indeed' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 19/2, no. 132). On 4 August 1545 he wrote to Henry from Lubeck, lamenting his loss of favour and offering to put a number of useful inventions at the king's disposal, for instance a method of making saltpetre; he also showed that he had at some point been at Nonsuch Palace, possibly to work on its water supply, while he referred to the evangelical princes of Germany in terms suggesting that he was himself of their religious persuasion. Later that year he returned to London, hoping to enlist the support of the duke of Suffolk, but his expedition was in vain -- the duke died that year -- and he returned to 'Oestlandt'. In January 1547 he was back in London, this time with his (unnamed) wife, trying to persuade the imperial ambassador to speak up for him. The latter was unenthusiastic, and seems to have been correct in believing that Haschenperg 'will only find a refusal here to his petition' ('CSP Spain', '1547-9', 1), for he makes no further appearance in English records, and it is not known when or where he died. 


