@@@@@


doc= 60692


Johnson, Joshua (1742-1802), merchant, was born in Maryland, America, on 25 June 1742, the son of Thomas Johnson (1702-1777) and his wife, Dorcas Sedgwick (1705-1770). His family originally came from Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, but his father resided principally in Calvert county on the Patuxent River, in the heart of the Maryland tobacco country. Joshua's eldest brother, Thomas (1732-1819), became a prosperous lawyer in Annapolis, acquired land thereabouts and to the west, and was from 1762 regularly elected to the provincial assembly from Anne Arundel county; he was also a leader of the independence movement in Maryland, becoming in time a delegate to the Continental Congress, revolutionary governor of the state (1777-9), and associate justice of the United States supreme court (1791-3). Of four other brothers who settled in the western parts of Maryland, two, James and Robert, became pioneers in the new iron industry there. Joshua remained in the older part of the colony, in Annapolis, as a small merchant trading to the West Indies and London. 
Dissatisfied with the slow progress of his business, in 1770 Johnson joined John Davidson (1738-1794), another Annapolis merchant, and Charles Wallace (1727-1812), also of Annapolis, a wealthy landowner, businessman, and public figure, to form the firm of Wallace, Davidson, and Johnson. Davidson was left in charge of the Annapolis end, while Johnson settled in London in 1771 as purchasing agent for the firm. In such activity he made the fullest possible use of the long-term credit available to the export trades, and thus alleviated the burden on his partners in Maryland who had to remit bills of exchange to pay for the goods he purchased. The firm was badly pressed by the crisis of 1772, provoked by the failure of Alexander Fordyce, during which it became very difficult in London to get bills discounted or credits extended. However, his partners in Maryland were in the end able to remit enough to keep him in business in London. As the crisis abated he persuaded them to let him expand his operations by adding the functions of a commission merchant, selling tobacco and performing other services for American correspondents. In 1774-5 this business brought him 4283 hogsheads of tobacco, primarily Maryland leaf, most often sold to firms exporting to the Netherlands and Germany. 
As the political relations between the colonies and the London government deteriorated, Johnson's family and partners were definitely on the 'patriot' or rebel side. Johnson considered himself one of the few American merchants in London who consistently defended the colonists' interest. He kept his partners informed of traders there planning to send tea to America, and thus helped provoke the burning of the 'Peggy Stewart' at Annapolis (in which his partner Wallace took a leading part), the Maryland equivalent of the Boston Tea Party. Even after the outbreak of fighting in America, Johnson remained active in London until Wallace, Davidson, and Johnson was wound up in 1777. The next year he withdrew to France, where he settled in Nantes as consul for the Continental Congress and Maryland commercial agent, while continuing substantial private trade. In 1781 he re-established his Maryland connections through the new firm of Wallace, Johnson, and Muir. After the recognition of American independence Johnson returned to London to represent his new firm, soon involved in transactions much more substantial but even more debt-encumbered than its pre-war predecessor. In August 1790 he was named the first United States consul in London. 
On 22 August 1785 Johnson married Catherine Newth or Nuth at the church of St Anne, Soho, London. All their eight children appear as legitimate in church records, though four were born before the aforementioned marriage date. This suggests that there may have been an earlier marriage outside the Church of England. Little about Catherine's family has as yet been established. She had a reputation for extreme extravagance and has been blamed in part for her husband's financial difficulties in the 1790s. He was in such straitened circumstances in 1797 that he could not immediately find the cash to pay the modest $500 dowry promised when his daughter Louisa married John Quincy Adams, the future president. That same year he and the rest of his family returned to America, where he settled in the District of Columbia. He was on familiar terms with the Washingtons and other leading personalities thereabouts, but his financial situation remained straitened. His last years were troubled with lawsuits with his former partners concerning his accounts, finally settled by arbitration in 1798. President Adams tried to help by naming him superintendent of stamps in 1800, a position he lost when Jefferson entered office in 1801. Johnson suffered severely from 'the gravel' (kidney stones), and he died on 21 April 1802 at the home of his brother Baker Johnson in Fredericktown, Maryland. He left his widow almost destitute. 
Johnson was later described by a nephew as 'a weak, vain man, fond of great people, and impoverished by an ambitious and extravagant wife' (Delaplaine, 351). From the marriage of his daughter Louisa to John Quincy Adams were descended many notable members of that distinguished family, including their son, Charles Francis, and grandsons Henry and Brooks Adams. 


@@@@@


doc= 60693


Armour, Jean (1765-1834), wife of Robert Burns and subject of poetry, was born in Mauchline, Ayrshire, on 25 February 1765, the second of the eleven children of James Armour and his wife, Mary Smith. The family lived in Mauchline's Cowgate. James Armour was a master mason whose work included Dumfries House and commissions for the duke of Argyll at Inveraray; a black marble punchbowl, worked by her father from the Inveraray project, was among Armour's wedding presents. Less is known about Armour's mother, aside from her reputation for liking music, and her encouragement of her daughter to practise singing and dancing. 
Armour's education was brief due to domestic demands. She attended the local school under Andrew Noble (later the session clerk who recorded her name, along with Burns's, for fornication). Her minister, William 'Daddy' Auld, also later chastized her, along with Burns. Armour met Robert Burns in Mauchline, probably early in 1784, soon after he came to the neighbouring parish of Mossgiel. As she recalled in 1827 to John McDiarmid, editor of the 'Dumfries Courier', on their first meeting Burns's dog had run over Armour's clothes, which were spread on the bleach-green: 'I scolded, and threw something at the animal. Burns said, 'Lassie, if you thought ought o' me, ye wadna hurt my dog!' -- I thought to myself -- 'I wadna think much o' you at ony rate!' I saw him afterwards at a dancing-room and we fell acquainted. (Westwood, 15)' Burns recalled John Blane speaking highly of Armour's voice and this attracted him strongly: later he praised her 'wood-note wild' to correspondents including George Thomson (2 July[?] 1793, 'Letters', 2.180). 
Against the orders of her parents Armour and Burns continued to meet. They became lovers by the end of 1785 and soon Jean was pregnant. Due to her parents' objection the couple could not perform a conventional marriage and instead signed a paper -- a certificate of marriage -- in March or April 1786 in the presence of witnesses. Armour's father had the paper mutilated, thus nullifying the union. Jean was sent during her confinement to Paisley, where she stayed with her uncle, Andrew Purdie. Meanwhile her father took out a warrant to have Burns imprisoned until he found security for Armour and her child; this precipitated Burns's move into hiding, 'wandering from one friend's house to another', as he explained to John Richmond (30 July 1786, 'Letters', 1.35). 
Armour returned to Mauchline in early summer 1786. There, on 18 June, she refused to account for herself in person to the kirk session, and instead sent a letter: 'I am heartily sorry that I have given and must give your Session trouble, on my account. I acknowledge that I am with child, and Robert Burns in Mossgiel is the father' (session minutes, Westwood, 18). Several weeks later Burns told John Richmond that he had 'waited on Armour since her return', though not 'from any the least view of reconciliation, but merely to ask for her health; and to you I will confess it, from a foolish hankering fondness'. He explained that he was prepared to accept William Auld's request to acknowledge paternity and so, in return, receive 'a Certificate as single man' (9 July 1786, 'Letters', 1.32). Burns would later express his low opinion of the Armours, particularly as their previously hostile attitude to him changed following the success of the Kilmarnock edition of his poems, published in July 1786. As he wrote to James Smith, 'If any thing had been wanting to disgust me completely at Armour's family, their mean, servile compliance would have done it' (11 June 1787, ibid. 1.95). 
On 3 September 1786 Armour gave birth to twins, Robert and Jean. In all she and Burns had nine children, three of whom survived infancy; in addition she raised Burns's daughter Elizabeth ('b'. 1791) from his affair with Anna Park. Of the twins Robert was sent to Mossgiel to be cared for by his father's family while Jean died in October 1787. By this time her mother was again pregnant, Armour and Burns having revived their relationship in the summer. In December Armour was once more called before the kirk session and went to stay with William Muir at Tarbolton Mill (Burns was in Edinburgh), returning to Mauchline in February 1788. Burns now took a room for himself and Armour in Mauchline's Backcauseway; he also visited Ellisland, on the River Nith, north of Dumfries, to plan for their future together there. On 3 March 1788 Armour bore him twin girls, who died a few days later. About this time the couple were married by a magistrate in a civil ceremony at the office of the Mauchline lawyer Gerald Hamilton, and the union was confirmed by the kirk session on 5 August 1788. In June Burns had moved to a farm at Ellisland and Armour joined him at the end of the year. 
Before their marriage Burns's letters suggest some unkindness to Armour, particularly in his correspondence to her rivals in love. In an infamous letter to Agnes Maclehose (23 February 1788) Burns referred to 'a certain woman. -- I am disgusted with her; I cannot endure her!... Here was tasteless insipidity, vulgarity of soul, and mercenary fawning' ('Letters', 1.194-5). Even less chivalrous is the often quoted letter to Robert Ainslie, in which Burns describes visiting Armour, reconciling her to her mother, and giving her a mahogany bed and a guinea; moreover, 'I have f -- d her till she rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory... I swore her, privately and solemnly, never to attempt to claim on me as a husband... She did all this like a good girl' (3 March 1788, ibid. 1.200). 
After their marriage, however, Burns's tone became uniformly affectionate, even when the union was not yet public. To James Smith he spoke of his 'clean-limbed, handsome, bewitching young hussy': 'my girl has been 'doubly' kinder to me than even the best of women... in similar circumstances' (28 April 1788, 'Letters', 1.218). Writing to his close companion Robert Ainslie he claimed that his marriage had given 'a stability to my mind & resolutions, unknown before; and the poor girl has the most sacred enthusiasm of attachment to me, and has not a wish but to gratify my every idea of her deportment' (26 May 1788, ibid. 1.223). To his patron Frances Anna Wallace (Mrs Dunlop) he praised Armour as a housewife and 'agreeable companion', noting that 'The Muses must not be offended when I tell them, the concerns of my wife & family will, in my mind, always take the Pas' (10 Aug 1788, ibid. 1.234). Burns later spoke of Jean's good health, describing her as one of the 'hale, sprightly damsels, that are bred among the Hay & Heather' (11 April 1791, ibid. 2.68), and, again to Dunlop, praised her as an enthusiastic mother 'determined to make me the Patriarchal leader of a band' (24 Sept 1792, ibid. 2.125). 
Burns's letters to Armour suggest their early, passionate attachment developed into a close, affectionate, and mutually nurturing relationship. On 14 October 1788 Burns wrote to inform her about the recent offer of a furnished house: 'I am extremely happy at the idea of your coming to Nithsdale, as it will save us from these cruel separations' ('Letters', 1.265). A month earlier he had shown an intimacy and lack of affectation that was unusual in his correspondence: 'My dear Love, I received your kind letter with a pleasure which no letter but one from you could have given me. -- I dreamed of you the whole night last.' Moreover, he made clear his regard for Armour's judgement on song: 'I had [a fine] Strathspey among my hands to m[ake verses to,] for Johnson's Collection' (12 Sept 1788, ibid. 1.254). As these remarks on her knowledge of song indicate, Armour acted on occasion as a sounding board for Burns's compositions, recalling airs for his use in writing new settings. 
Armour and Burns spent their final years together in Dumfries, moving there in late summer 1791, first to the Wee Vennel (now Bank Street) and, from May 1793, in Mill Hole Brae (now Burns Street). Burns's final letter to Jean, written from the Brow Well on 14 July 1796, showed the depth of his feeling for 'My dearest love' and sought to minimize his distress to spare her feelings: 'I delayed writing until I could tell you what effect sea-bathing was likely to produce... it has eased my pains, and I think has strengthened me; but my appetite is still extremely bad... I am very happy to hear by Miss Jessy Lewars that you are all well. My very best and kindest compliments to her, and to all the children. (16 July 1796, 'Letters', 2.329)' Two days later Burns wrote to her father of his fears for his 'poor girl, without a friend' (ibid., 2.330), who was shortly to give birth to their ninth child. Burns died at home on 21 July 1796 and their son, Maxwell, was born on 25 July, the day of Burns's funeral. 
At the time of her bereavement Armour was responsible for six children: Robert, Francis, William, Betty (Anna Park's child), James, and Maxwell, who died in 1799. She did not obtain money from Burns's estate until October. As the widow of an excise officer, Armour received a pension of $12 a year, and a benefactor took over her rent. A trust fund was established to provide for the family and to assist the children when they reached the age of twenty-one. Armour gave over Burns's papers to his biographer, James Currie, who also sought to benefit the family from the proceeds of his work. However, Armour has often been criticized for this action, or at least for not making sure that the papers were returned. 
In the decades following Burns's death Jean Armour was celebrated as a living link to the poet, her fame growing in parallel with the development of her husband's status. In this period, and now a grandmother, she sat for several portraits, including that by John Alexander Gilfillan (1822, Scot. NPG). She also drew the attention of writers when, in a well-known incident, she missed a visit from Dorothy and William Wordsworth, being at the coast with her children. Armour was of particular interest to writers from working-class backgrounds like James Hogg and Allan Cunningham. Hogg first encountered her in 1804 at St Michael's Church, Dumfries, while working at Mitchel Slacks farm. Looking back he recalled her as 'then smartly dressed, had fine eyes, and looked very well. She had several wooers.' In 1811 or 1812 Hogg met Jean again in Edinburgh and wrote later of having 'scarcely ever met a woman, either high or low who improved as much on acquaintance. She had a great deal of good sense and good nature' (Hogg, 246). 
In later life Armour suffered a series of strokes and was cared for by a granddaughter. She died at her home on Mill Hole Brae, Dumfries, on 26 March 1834 and was buried on 1 April next to her husband in the Burns mausoleum, St Michael's Church. Understandably, Jean Armour's life has been overshadowed by her husband's, but equally she would not be remembered without him. Burns celebrated his Mauchline Belle -- a 'delicious... armful' ('Letters', 1.63) -- in about a dozen songs, including 'I hae a wife o' my ain', 'My wife's the winsome wee thing', 'The Bonie lad that's far awa', and 'Of a' the airts the winds can blaw', which celebrates 'The Lassie I lo'e best'. Among the wider community she was also regarded with affection and respect, as shown in a description of her funeral: 'The attendance of invited mourners was... a handful, compared with the crowd... [of] men, women, and children... There were few persons within reach of the handspokes, on which the coffin was borne, that did not, after an old and affecting Scottish custom, show their respect... by assisting to carry her remains in their passage to their honoured resting place. ('Funeral of Mrs Burns')' Since her death Jean Armour has continued to attract affection and admiration, particularly in Ayrshire and Dumfriesshire. Recent commemorations have included the unveiling of statues in Mauchline (2002) and Dumfries (2004). In January 2009, on the 250th anniversary of the poet's birth, stained-glass windows of Armour and Burns were installed at St Michael's. Such commemorations demonstrate a continuing appreciation of her importance for her husband's life and work. It is an appreciation eloquently expressed by John De Lancey Ferguson, editor of the poet's correspondence, for whom Armour was 'the real heroine of Burns's life, for of all the women who, more or less, loved him, and whom he, more or less, loved, she alone had to live with him, and did so 'not weighing his merits, but pardoning his offences'. ('Letters', 2.343)' 



@@@@@


doc= 60695


Wilson, John (1758-1821), printer and publisher, was born at Kilmarnock on 26 March 1758, the second son of James Wilson and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Bankhead. Little is known of his childhood or education, but he established a book- and stationery shop at Kilmarnock in one of the buildings where Portland Street opened into The Cross. About 1780 he acquired the wooden press, the first of its kind in the county, which had been imported by a Mr McArthur some thirty years previously, and set up a printing works in the attic of the tenement on the left of the Star Inn Close as entered from Waterloo Street. Most of the work done on this press was jobbing work, such as bills, tradesmen's cards, and letterheads; in 1785, Wilson brought out an edition of Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. 
Wilson is chiefly remembered, however, as the first publisher of the poems of Robert Burns, in an edition known as the 'Kilmarnock Edition'. The subscription forms for the volume were printed by Wilson and were delivered to Burns on the evening of 14 September 1786. Burns had ninety-six copies of the notice printed, but only one example of this document has survived (Burns Museum, Alloway), and bears the signatures of sixteen subscribers. By advance subscription, Burns raised $64 4's'. -- more than enough to meet the costs of the paper, ink, and presswork, which totalled $35 17's'. Later, Burns claimed to have cleared $20 from the sale of his poems, but as all 612 copies were soon sold out, his profit was substantially more. 
By 13 July sufficient subscriptions had been promised for John Wilson to begin printing the book, although the typesetting must have been going on apace. The book, running to 240 pages, was printed, collated, and bound in blue paper wrappers ready for distribution by the end of that month. By the end of August, Wilson had only thirteen copies left. Of these, Burns kept three for his own use and the entire edition was sold out by September. On 6 October Burns settled the account with Wilson in full, and about two days later told Robert Aiken that he had offered Wilson a second edition, but that the printer had declined. Wilson estimated that the cost of 1000 copies would be $27 for the paper and $16 for the printing. He was prepared to go ahead if Burns put up the money for the paper, but the poet had already spent the profits from the first edition. It was Wilson's canniness which later compelled Burns to seek a national, rather than a local, publisher for his second edition, and without that, he might have been a mere nine-days wonder and Wilson himself would have long been forgotten. 
John Wilson and his younger brother Peter moved to Ayr, where they founded the 'Ayr Advertiser' in 1803. John Wilson prospered in the county town, and became a magistrate there. He died at Ayr on 6 May 1821, but his body was brought back to his native town and interred on 9 May in the burial-ground attached to the Old High Church, Kilmarnock. He was survived by his wife, who died at Kilmarnock in 1825. 
Of the printery which first gave the works of Burns to the world nothing now remains, although a plaque in the Burns precinct of Kilmarnock town centre was erected in 1976 to mark the spot. The wooden press passed eventually into the hands of Thomas M. Gemmell, who carried on the printing business. About 1858, the press, which had long been pensioned off, was cannibalized to produce an elaborate chair in preparation for the Burns centenary celebrations in the following January. Richly carved with a bust of the poet and characters from his best-known works, it is now preserved in the Burns Museum at Alloway. A half-length seated portrait of Wilson in old age is preserved in the Dick Institute, Kilmarnock, while a life-sized bronze statue of Burns and Wilson by Alexander Stoddart was erected at The Cross in 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 60696


Rochdale Pioneers (act. 1844), promoters of co-operation, began with a capital of $28, and tradition therefore holds that there were twenty-eight Rochdale Pioneers who, in 1844, founded the society that inspired the modern co-operative movement. No consensus exists, however, about the composition of the group and over forty men have been named as members in various previous accounts. If the true pioneers were those who contributed actively to the opening of the store in Toad Lane, thirty seems a fair enumeration. This judgement excludes at least eleven of those recorded among the earliest names in the society's membership list. 
Most pioneers were born in or around Rochdale, often of established local families. John Collier (1808-1883) was reputed to be the great-grandson of the individual of the same name known as Tim Bobbin, a dialect poet and humorist. Some, however, came from elsewhere in the north-west: John Bent ('c'.1820-1894) from Davyhulme, near Manchester; 


@@@@@


doc= 60698


Philip Henry Stanhope, fourth Earl Stanhope (1781-1855), politician, and his second wife, Catherine Lucy (1786-1843), daughter of Robert Smith, first Baron Carrington. His sister Catherine Lucy Wilhelmina, duchess of Cleveland (died 1901), was the mother of Archibald Philip Primrose, fifth earl of Rosebery, the prime minister. The father was the eldest son of Charles Stanhope, third Earl Stanhope, and was born on 4 December 1781. Lady Hester Stanhope, the confidante of Pitt the younger, was his half-sister and the Stanhopes were variously intertwined with the Pitts. He was estranged from his father, and reacted strongly against his radical education, but his career in the Commons was sustained by his father-in-law, Lord Carrington, and his connection with William Pitt gained him sinecures such as the surveyorship of the green wax. He was MP for Windsor (1806-7), Hull (1807-12), and Midhurst (1812-16). His father excluded him as far as possible from his inheritance and, after succeeding to the title in 1816, the fourth earl spent almost half of his time on the continent, especially in Germany. In 1829 he there met Kaspar Hauser, the 'child of Europe', whose identity and authenticity was one of the historical 'mysteries' of the nineteenth century. Stanhope was initially attracted to Hauser and believed him to be wrongly accused of deception. He in effect adopted the youth and, though he came to the view that Hauser was a pathological liar, defended him in pamphlets in German and English, mostly collected as 'Tracts Relating to Caspar Hauser' (1836). In politics the fourth earl was a maverick ultra-tory, who opposed Catholic emancipation and promoted political reform. He violently opposed the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' of 1834 and served notice on a tenant who became a poor-law guardian. In 1838 he became president of the London Central Anti-Poor Law Association. In the 1840s free trade replaced the poor law as Stanhope's 'bete noire' and in 1843 he founded the Society for the Protection of British Industry. Believing these ills were the result of a corrupt Commons, he advocated further parliamentary reform and moved close to the Chartists. After his wife's death in 1843 Stanhope ceased travelling and lived at the family seat, Chevening, Kent; there he died on 2 March 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 60699


Elssler, Fransiska (1810-1884), dancer, was born in a suburb of Vienna, Austria, on 23 June 1810, the seventh of the nine children of Johann Florian Elssler (1769-1843), valet and copyist to Haydn, and his wife, Theresia Prinster (1779-1832), an embroideress. Many stories circulated about her youth, the veracity of which cannot be established, among them that Fanny and her sister Therese were the natural daughters of Prince Esterhazy, in whose service their grandfather had worked, and that they had begun their studies at the scandal-ridden Kinderballet at the Theater an der Wien. Fanny's name appeared on the playbill of the Karntnertortheater on 20 April 1818, and she was also on stage at the same theatre on 10 June 1822, when her future rival Marie Taglioni made her debut. By 1825 the impresario Barbaja was sufficiently impressed with her progress to introduce the blue-eyed, auburn-haired dancer to audiences in Naples. There she had a liaison with the elderly Leopold, prince of Salerno, whose son, Franz Robert, she bore in 1827, thereby earning an annuity of 3000 ducats. 
Elssler rapidly became one of the stars of European ballet under the patronage of Friedrich von Gentz, a friend of Metternich. Her career was not impeded by a series of affairs with prominent men and the births of two further children; indeed, she had danced at the King's Theatre, London, in 'Flore et Zephyr' with Taglioni on 27 April 1833 while pregnant with her third child. She took up residence in London in 1834 with her sister Therese; Count D'Orsay squired them about the town. The two women made their debut in 'Faust' on 9 March 1834, but were soon engaged by Louis Veron of the Paris Opera, where Fanny first appeared in 'La tempete' on 15 September. Charles Maurice of 'Le Courrier' described her 'astonishing strength... rich 'pointes'... abundance of 'entrechats'... [and] much suppleness' (quoted in Guest, 'Fanny Elssler', 63). 
Elssler's position as a serious rival to Taglioni was established in 1836 when she enjoyed a sensational success in 'Le diable boiteux', introducing her celebrated dance, the chachuca. The performance earned her ecstatic reviews from Theophile Gautier, who described her somewhat hermaphrodite beauty and spectacular technique. In 'La tarentule' and 'La Gypsy' she revealed great pantomimic ability, although her appearance in Taglioni's favourite role, 'La sylphide', was less successful. Gautier compared the two dancers, finding Taglioni a Christian, religious dancer, appreciated by women, and Elssler a pagan dancer, full of the pleasures of life, and appealing most strongly to men. He did, however, suggest that she paint her nails a less vivid shade of pink. Both Elssler and Taglioni were in London for the brilliant season of the coronation year, 1838, and in 1840 Elssler danced at her own benefit before Queen Adelaide, Queen Victoria, Prince Albert, and Louis Napoleon. 
In 1840 Elssler set off on a tour of the United States, arranged by her current lover, the marquis de la Valette, and a future one, the American Henry Wikoff. She left her daughter, Therese, in the care of George and Harriet Grote, who had befriended her. Her tour, which included New York, Richmond, Charleston, and Boston, was a great success. The enthusiasm of her reception, and the size of the fees she commanded, caused her to overstay her leave of absence from the Paris Opera and embroiled her in a prolonged and acrimonious dispute: she never danced in Paris again. She remained in America with Wikoff until July 1842, when she returned to London and peremptorily removed her daughter from the Grotes (although she was soon to be abandoned with them again). Elssler broke off with Wikoff, claiming that he had stolen from her; rumour had it that he had also beaten her. She took up instead with the wealthy Count Samuel Klostrowicki, who offered her marriage, which she refused. Despite her two-year absence and the arrival of a new star, Fanny Cerito, Elssler was rapturously received on her return to the London stage, in 'Giselle' at Her Majesty's Theatre. 
Elssler spent some four years in Italy, where she danced one of her most celebrated roles, 'La Esmerelda', to great applause, and in 1848 went to Russia, where she was also triumphant, despite the initial hostility of the Russian ballet establishment. She announced her retirement at St Petersburg in 1850, and at her final performance of 'La Esmerelda' took forty-two curtain calls. 
With a collection of caged birds and her devoted cousin and companion, Katti Prinster, Elssler proceeded to enjoy her retirement, first in Hamburg and then in Vienna. The rift with the Grotes was eventually healed, and all were pleased with the marriage in 1859 of Elssler's daughter Therese, whose own daughter was named after her grandmother. The death of Therese in 1870, the suicide of Elssler's son in 1875, and the death of her sister Therese (who had become the morganatic wife of Prince Adalbert of Prussia) in 1878 saddened her last years. Elssler died at her home in Seilerstatte, Vienna, on 27 November 1884 and was buried in the Heitzing cemetery. 
According to her 'New York Times' obituary (28 November 1884), Elssler had been long forgotten by the time of her death; if this was ever so, her eclipse was soon over. A stream of biographies memorialized her life and talents, as did an operetta (1936), a ballet (1934), and a film by Paul Martin (1936). 


@@@@@


doc= 60700


Shelton, Jerome (c.1500-1555x60), property speculator and royal official, was a younger son of Nicholas Shelton (died 1515), resident in the parish of St Thomas of Acon, London, freeman and master of the Mercers' Company, and sheriff and alderman of London, and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Rawlins, a London mercer. Nicholas Shelton was a first-generation Londoner, a junior member of a prominent gentry family of Norfolk. At unknown dates, probably early in Jerome Shelton's career, he was admitted to the freedom of London in the right of his father, and admitted to membership of the Middle Temple. However, he does not appear to have carried on a settled trade, nor did he practise law. Instead, his career centred upon activities as a bondsman, moneylender, property speculator, and exchequer official. He was associated in many of his financial transactions with his three brothers from his father's second marriage, William, Thomas, and Robert, and, initially, his stepfather, Sir Humphrey Brown, serjeant-at-law and later a judge of common pleas. 
As early as 1534 Shelton was speculating in property, at Westminster, with his brother William. In 1538 he secured his co-appointment for life with Brown as steward of all the property of Waltham Abbey in Essex, Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, Berkshire, Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, and Surrey. This grant appears to have been sought as an investment in anticipation of the dissolution of the abbey, and in July 1540 Shelton and Brown surrendered their patent to the court of augmentations in return for a life pension of $20 p.a. In 1539 he leased land and secured an annuity of $26 13's'. 4died from the last prioress of St Helen's Priory outside Bishopsgate, London, the house in which his half-sister, Mary, was a nun; the grants were subsequently recognized by the crown. The Waltham Abbey enterprise ended in acrimony as Shelton and Brown fell out over the division of the pension and their 1546 administratorship of the sizeable estate of Shelton's uncle, William Rawlins, provost of Wells. 
In 1539 Shelton also sub-let the former monastic property of Flitcham, Norfolk, from a family associate, Sir William Hollis, lord mayor of London, for thirty years. His efforts at rack-renting the manor produced political strife in the county and in 1541 led to the mediation of the Shelton family patron, Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk. Shelton withdrew with financial loss, but he soon thereafter did acquire the office of a tellership of the exchequer, on 18 January 1542, through Howard's patronage as lord treasurer of England. He held this office until 1555 and engaged in the practice of using his cash reserves of crown money for private speculation in the London money and commodities markets. He also, more controversially, exploited his office to avoid paying his own tax assessments, and he used his legal right as an exchequer official to be sued only in the exchequer of pleas to force litigants to contest cases on unfavourable ground. During the 1540s his speculations in the popular market in the lead stripped from the monastic houses led to significant debts owed to the crown. When he vacated his tellership in 1555, he owed another $2590 on his accounts. Most of this sum was never recovered by the state, and the debt wiped out any gains he enjoyed elsewhere, impoverishing his estate. 
For much of his adult life Shelton resided in the parish of St Helen, London. His last years and death are obscure. Because he died intestate, his widow, identified only as Alice Hering, secured letters of administration on 28 February 1561. Already, on the preceding 28 May, the crown had excused her of all claims which it had on Shelton's estate. No record of children of the marriage has been located and the principal beneficiary of Shelton's tenure in the exchequer was a nephew, Humphrey Shelton, an Elizabethan officer of the receipt. Overall, Shelton's financial failures appear to have been the direct consequence of high-risk speculative investments, and loans. Ambitious, and one of the most litigious individuals of his generation, he alienated and exploited many members of his own immediate family, including his sister, Katherine Townshend. His career reveals the opportunities and liabilities of life as an unscrupulous mid-Tudor entrepreneur. Many individuals attempted to profit from the dissolution of the monasteries and a period of lax government administration. Shelton's misfortunes in this quest for material benefit can be attributed to his own overreaching ambition. 


@@@@@


doc= 60701


Gater, Sarah (bap. 1605, d. 1656), merchant, was baptized on 19 June 1605 in the parish of St Michael, Cornhill, London, the daughter of John Rogers (died 1615), a clothworker, of Whitechapel, and his wife, Elizabeth. Sarah's share of her father's estate was an annuity of $8 for twenty-one years. She married, on an unknown date, William Gater (died 1624), who had been admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1612, and graduated BA in 1616 and MA in 1619; he was ordained in 1616. Gater was lecturer at St Andrew Undershaft and a freeman of the Merchant Taylors' Company, by redemption dated 18 February 1623. The couple had one son, William, who died abroad in 1646. Widowed in her nineteenth year, Sarah Gater carried on a retail trade in her deceased husband's company until her own death. During her brief marriage she lived in Leadenhall Street in the parish of St Andrew Undershaft, but by at least 1630 she had moved to the parish of St Michael, Cornhill. There she established a modest residence and business, with several female servants, one or two apprentices, and, by the time of her death, one journeyman clothworker. Although never prosperous, she was a 'subsidyman', and was in 1642 rated at $10 as the contribution of one-twentieth of her estate for the parliamentary wartime assessment. At her death she owned her residence and held a lease of a garden situated in the parish of St Botolph without Bishopsgate. She appears to have outlived all five of her brothers, possibly as early as 1625, when she was appointed administrator for the estate of her deceased brother Peter; this act suggests her own leading role within her family at a youthful age. The first apprentice she took on in her own right as a widow was Gerrard Winstanley (1609-1676), bound on 25 March 1630, the future leader of the Diggers: Winstanley took his company freedom on 21 February 1638. 
Sarah Gater was an educated individual. Her will of 14 September 1654 demonstrated a keen interest in medicine and theology. She owned both books and manuscript 'notes' on physic and surgery (which she passed on in matriarchal succession to her widowed sister), although the only volume cited by name was an edition of the popular 'Herbal' by John Gerard. In addition to her own holdings in divinity, she acquired, and retained to her death, a large proportion of the library of her relative Henry Mason BD, rector of St Andrew Undershaft and prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral, possibly secured in 1641 when Mason departed London for his native Wigan. Before the civil war Gater was apparently an Anglican, probably influenced by Mason, in whose parish she had resided as a married teenager, from whom she received her treasured 'Bible', and with whom she remained close. He was an orthodox divine who owed his ecclesiastical preferment, and acknowledged an intellectual debt, to Bishop John King of London. 
Gater was buried on 16 April 1656 in the churchyard of St Michael, Cornhill. The cause of death was given as 'aged'. One overseer of her will was her 'dear cousin' the poet and religious biographer Izaak Walton, of Worston Place, Staffordshire. In the absence of business or personal papers, much of Gater's life remains obscure. None the less, she is of interest for maintaining a commercial concern over three decades, her learning, and her intersection with some of the most original intellects of the seventeenth century, figures as distinctive and contrasting as Winstanley and Walton. Surrounded by a number of female and male friends and relatives, and employing in her establishment kin of both sexes, she reveals the lifestyle and intellectual interests of a woman who achieved economic and domestic independence following the early separation by death from father, husband, and male siblings. 


@@@@@


doc= 60707


MacMunn, Charles Alexander (1852-1911), physician and spectroscopist, was born at Seafield House, Easkey, co. Sligo, Ireland, the son of James MacMunn, medical practitioner. MacMunn was educated at Dromore School and entered Trinity College, Dublin, in November 1867. He graduated BA in 1871, MB in 1872, and proceeded MD in 1875 and MA in 1884. After taking his primary medical degree in 1872 he went as an assistant to his cousin James MacMunn (LRCSI, 1822), in practice at 14 Waterloo Road, Wolverhampton. When James died aged sixty-two in November 1873 Charles took over the practice. On 20 January 1874 he married James's daughter, Laetitia, an artist; of their three sons, one, Lionel Alexander, entered medicine and practised as a physician in Birmingham and another, Norman MacMunn, became a teacher and educationist. After Laetitia's death, possibly about 1908, Charles married Beatrice, the sister of the channel-swimmer Matthew Webb (1848-1883). 
Busy as MacMunn was, he set up in the loft over his stables a laboratory partly equipped by grants from the Birmingham philosophical and royal societies and published 'The Spectroscope in Medicine' in 1880. Using a small direct vision spectroscope to replace the eyepiece of a microscope, he examined the absorption bands in spectra transmitted through living tissues, and when he found that the four absorption bands were sharpened by restricting the air supply (by pressing on the coverslip), he realized that the 'natural pigments' producing them played a vital role in cellular respiration. His accounts of 'histohaematins' (in tissues) and 'myohaematin' (in muscle) in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (1886) and 'Journal of Physiology' (1887) provided crucial information in deciding the century-old dispute as to whether combustion of foodstuffs occurred in the lungs or the tissues. But MacMunn's work was criticized by Felix Hoppe-Seyler of Freiburg, who abruptly closed the correspondence on the identity of muscle pigments in 'Zeitschrift fur physiologische Chemie' (1890), which he edited, when his assistant was not able to reproduce MacMunn's findings. The discovery lay fallow until David Keilin, using very similar techniques, showed in 1925 that myohaematin and histohaematin were in fact the cytochromes, which are an integral part of the respiratory chain within mitochondria, the location of internal cellular respiration. 
Hoppe-Seyler's autocratic behaviour, which led to neglect of MacMunn's discovery, may have arisen out of pique. When Hoppe-Seyler discovered the absorption spectrum of (reduced) haemoglobin he missed the altered spectrum of oxyhaemoglobin. Two years later George Gabriel Stokes, because of his interest in the nature of colours, correctly surmised the role of haemoglobin in oxygen transport when he showed that the change in colour from venous blue to arterial red blood was due to change in the absorption spectrum; a mathematician had stolen the thunder of a prime physiological chemist. 
So that he might not be disturbed while he was preoccupied with his spectroscopic studies MacMunn installed an observation pipe in the wall of his laboratory, and instructed his housekeeper to send callers away. But after the peremptory dismissal of his work his seclusion ended and he began to play an active part in the life of Wolverhampton, taking an especial interest in the volunteer movement before and after distinguished service in south Africa from 1899 to 1902, where Lord Roberts appointed him staff officer to accompany the royal hospitals commission; he was mentioned in dispatches and received the Victoria medal with three clasps. He was the first honorary pathologist to Wolverhampton Royal Hospital. 
MacMunn enjoyed conviviality, and excessive alcohol intake may have exacerbated the malaria he contracted during the South African War. His health deteriorated and he retired from practice in 1909. He died on 18 February 1911 at 5 Lonsdale Road, Wolverhampton, and after a military funeral service at St Peter's Church he was buried, on 22 February, at Penn Fields, Wolverhampton. He was survived by his second wife. His posthumous 'Spectral Analysis Applied to Biology and Medicine' (1914) referred but briefly to the neglected 'respiratory pigments'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60711


Richard Caddick (1748-1831) and 


@@@@@


doc= 60712


Magnus, Sir Philip Montefiore, second baronet (1906-1988), historian, was born at 8 Craven Hill Gardens, London, on 8 February 1906. He was the eldest child of the two sons and three daughters of Laurie Magnus (1872-1933), publisher and a director of Routledge, and his wife, Dora Marian Spielman (1882?-1972), eldest daughter of Sir Isidore Spielman and granddaughter of Sir Joseph Sebag-Montefiore. His grandfather was Sir Philip Magnus, first baronet (1842-1933), the educationist. The family was prominent in public and Jewish life in London. Magnus was educated at Westminster School and Wadham College, Oxford, graduating BA in 1928 with a second class in modern history. At Oxford, he was 'a popular figure, almost a dandy, given to wearing top hats' ('The Times', 22 Dec 1988). In 1928 he entered the civil service as an assistant principal in the office of works and then the Board of Education, but the death of first his father and then his grandfather meant that in 1933 he inherited the title from the latter. He resigned from the civil service and began literary work, in 1939 publishing a life of Edmund Burke. During the Second World War he served in the Royal Artillery and the intelligence corps, ending with the rank of major. On 14 July 1943 in Onibury parish church in an Anglican service he married Jewell Allcroft ('b'. 1907) of Stokesay Court, Onibury, Craven Arms, Shropshire, daughter of the late Herbert John Allcroft, gentleman, and his wife, Margaret Jane Russell (later Mrs John Rotton). They had no children. His wife's home became his own for the rest of his life. In 1951 by deed poll he added the name of Allcroft to his own and his domestic habits became those of an Anglican squire. 
After the war, Magnus returned to the civil service as a principal in the Ministry of Town and Country Planning, but again retired from it in 1951, in which year he published a life of Sir Walter Raleigh (rev. edns 1956, 1968). Magnus's success as a biographer began with his 'Gladstone' (1954). This was based on the huge collection of Gladstone papers at Hawarden, which he was the first to use extensively, as well as the collection in the British Museum. Magnus was the first to give details of Gladstone's 'rescue work' with prostitutes, which he charitably described as innocent. The biography was an important work in the rehabilitation of interest in the Victorians, and was written in a markedly different tone from that of Lytton Strachey's 'Eminent Victorians' (1918). Magnus took Gladstone seriously, but not very seriously, and his book was an effective combination of research and readability. Magnus did not have access to Gladstone's diaries and their ancillary papers, but he seemed to some a natural choice to be invited to edit them. However, Archbishop Fisher, who owned the diaries, was swayed by objections from A. Tilney Bassett, the Gladstones' archivist, who felt that Magnus's biography had been too flippant. 
On the strength of his 'Gladstone', which over the years sold almost 50,000 copies, and his biography of Kitchener (1958, selling 12,000 copies, revised edn 1968), Magnus was invited to give the prestigious Ford lectures at Oxford. He accepted, but, alarmed by A. L. Rowse, who warned him that he would be 'torn to pieces by third-rate dons', withdrew early in 1961 just as the titles of the lectures were due to be published. Instead, he published a life, 'Edward VII' (1964), a fine work of research in the Royal Archives and one of the best of royal lives. It set a new standard with a new tone -- scholarly and amusing but not republican -- for such works and sold well: over 20,000 copies. He was asked, but declined, to write a life of Wellington, the task then falling to Elizabeth Longford. Poor eyesight made the reading of Victorian handwriting difficult, and in his later years Magnus could hardly read or write at all. With Elizabeth Longford and Janet Adam Smith, Magnus was the best of those who write in the tricky area of the well-researched biography which bridges the popular and the academic. 
Magnus was an active Salopian, serving as a JP, county councillor, and alderman, and chairman of the planning committee, 1962-74, and of the records committee; he was chairman of the governors of Attingham College and was governor of Ludlow grammar school, 1952-77. Nationally, he was a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery, 1970-77, and was, his fellow trustee Elizabeth Longford recalled, 'a natural public servant' ('The Guardian', 23 Dec 1988). Magnus died from myocardial infarction at Stokesay Court on 21 December 1988, his wife surviving him. His body was cremated. The title passed to his nephew, Laurence Henry Philip Magnus ('b'. 1955). 


@@@@@


doc= 60713


Cromwell, Thomas (c.1540-1610/11), parliamentary diarist, was the third son of Gregory Cromwell, first Baron Cromwell (died 1551), and Elizabeth, sister of Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, and widow of Sir Anthony Oughtred. Thomas Cromwell, Henry VIII's minister, was his grandfather. He attended St John's College, Cambridge, and in August 1580 married Katherine, daughter of Thomas Gardner of Coxford. Cromwell sat in five of Elizabeth's parliaments, for Fowey (1571), Bodmin (1572), Preston (1584), and Grampound (1586 and 1589), seats often available to the well connected. He is best remembered for the diaries he kept for the sessions of 1572, 1576, 1581, and 1584, now in Trinity College, Dublin. These reveal a love for parliamentary process and the details of legislative business at a key time in the development of the English parliament. Where they can be checked against other sources, Cromwell's diaries are shown to be an accurate, if at times incomplete, record of bill proceedings, peppered with details of measures and often quite extensive reports of debates. In 1572 he took pains to report the Commons' actions against Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, and Mary, queen of Scots; the remaining diaries consist largely of bill proceedings. 
Cromwell was intimately acquainted with the workings of parliament. He was an active committee man, being named to almost a hundred committees considering a wide range of matters. In the last two weeks of March 1585, for example, he was appointed to the Commons' committees dealing with cloth making, malt, apprentices, church ministers, leases of land, copyhold lands in Ely, and a bill concerning a debtor. On occasion he notes that his afternoon committee work necessitated his absence from the floor of the house. He seems to have had a special interest in electoral returns, being entrusted with reporting the work of the relevant committees, and in legal matters. In 1585 Cromwell was one of three members chosen to argue before the lord chancellor, unsuccessfully, that members' privilege of freedom from arrest should extend to being unavailable to receive subpoenas. 
According to his own diaries, and the journal of Elizabeth's parliaments compiled from a number of original sources by Sir Simonds D'Ewes in the seventeenth century, Cromwell made several speeches to the house. In 1572 he spoke in favour of bringing minstrels under the terms of the vagabonds bill and, in 1581, on the subject of children born to foreigners. In 1587 Cromwell made a well-received motion thanking the queen for her response to the Commons' petition urging the execution of Mary Stuart. He was no sycophant, however. When a leading government minister urged caution after an MP moved that the whole house should attend the queen to request Norfolk's execution in 1572, Cromwell 'misliked to have any delay from so necessarie a motion' (Hartley, 1.314). He supported Paul Wentworth's 1581 motion for a public fast, a move considered by the queen to be a breach of her royal prerogative. Cromwell also objected to the queen's imprisonment of MPs in 1587 for promoting a radical alternative to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. 
Cromwell's will requested 'that noe pompe or sumptuousnes be used in about or by reason of my buriall, beinge not willinge to have vanities continued for me after my deathe whereto I have beene too much subiect in my lifetime'. He was one of those moderate puritan MPs with a compromising marriage, for his brother-in-law was a Jesuit priest. Nevertheless, his marriage to Katherine Gardner was evidently a happy one. His will repeatedly acknowledged his 'beloved' wife, and required his children's obedience to her if they hoped to receive their inheritances. Cromwell assisted the privy council on local matters in Norfolk, where he retired to property near King's Lynn. His land dealings and agricultural activities were complicated, troubled, and rather unsuccessful. This, he claimed in his will, was due to his preoccupation with the affairs of his brother and nephew, the second and third barons Cromwell. He died between February 1610 and April 1611. 


@@@@@


doc= 60715


Strickland, William (d. 1598), member of parliament, was the son of Roger Strickland and his wife, Mary Appleton. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Strickland of Westmorland, and had two sons and three daughters. Described as 'founder of the house of Strickland of Boynton' ('VCH Yorkshire, North Riding', 2.475), he or his heir, Walter, built Boynton Hall, near Bridlington, Yorkshire. Strickland steadily accumulated estates in Yorkshire, including the manors of Auburn, Coneysthorpe, Hildenley, and Wintringham, and lands in Bridlington and Easton. As a substantial country gentleman, described in 1564 as one of the 'favorers of Religion' (Bateson, 71), he was appointed to various commissions in the province of York (concerning sedition, recusancy, and heresy) and, in the East Riding, as justice of the peace (from 1559), a commissioner of sewers, and, in 1572, one of those responsible for raising cavalry and foot soldiers. 
Strickland also represented Scarborough in four Elizabethan parliaments. There is no surviving record of his activity there in 1559 or 1563-1566/7. In 1571, however, he was prominent as one of those seeking further reformation in the Elizabethan church. On 6 April, Strickland, described by an anonymous diarist as 'a grave and auncient man of greate zeale, and not perhapps (as hee himself thought) unlearned' (Hartley, 1.200), informed the house that a fellow member, Thomas Norton, held a newly published copy of the unadopted Edwardian revision of the canon law, the 'Reformatio legum', and required him to produce it. He also complained of shortcomings in the prayer book and the quality of the clergy. Norton duly produced the 'Reformatio legum', and a committee, including Strickland, was appointed to confer with the bishops about it. Next day he called upon Norton to deliver a series of reform measures, known as the ABC bills. On 14 April he introduced his own bill to reform the prayer book. He was resisted by members of the privy council, which summoned him to its presence during the Easter recess and sequestered him from parliament. On 20 April this provoked an animated Commons debate about the liberties of the house. Next day Strickland was restored to his place there and promptly named to the committee on the bill for coming to church. He was also appointed to committees for bills concerning priests in disguise, maintenance of navigation, corrupt presentations, and tillage. Strickland's role in this parliament has been a subject of extended historical debate. He was for long seen as a leading figure in a reforming protestant (or puritan) party which launched an organized parliamentary campaign in 1571. Although this is no longer accepted, he was clearly working with Norton, John Foxe (who wrote the preface for the new edition of the 'Reformatio'), and others to effect further reformation within the English church. 
Perhaps his experience in 1571, or simply advancing years, taught Strickland discretion. Whatever the explanation, his parliamentary performance in 1584-5 was circumspect, largely confined to membership of committees to scrutinize, amend, or add to a variety of bills: the observance of the sabbath; fraudulent conveyances; unlawful marriage licences; excessive fees in ecclesiastical courts; and continuance of statutes. However, while he may have been publicly cautious, with only one recorded -- and uncontroversial -- speech, he was still dedicated to religious reformation, as most of these bills indicate. Furthermore, the seemingly innocuous 'Continuance Bill', which extended the life of acts with a limited time-span, included the 'Maintenance of Navigation Act' and its controversial fish day clause. This statutory designation of Wednesday as a compulsory fish day smacked of Catholic practice and offended godly protestants. On 6 March, Strickland offered a proviso to the continuance of statutes committee, to which, five days later, he was appointed. When the 'Continuance Bill' came out of committee, the fish day clause had gone. One can only speculate on Strickland's precise role. It was his last parliament. He remained a dutiful Yorkshire country gentleman until his death in 1598. 


@@@@@


doc= 60716


Campbell, George Douglas, eighth duke of Argyll in the peerage of Scotland, and first duke of Argyll in the peerage of the United Kingdom (1823-1900), politician and scientist, was the second son of John Douglas Edward Henry Campbell (1777-1847) and his second wife, Joan, daughter and heir of John and Helen Glassel of Longniddry, East Lothian. He was born on 30 April 1823 at his parents' residence, Ardencaple Castle, Dunbartonshire, where he was brought up. His mother, who had been orphaned early and brought up by Anne Grant of Laggan, died in 1828, when he was five years old. His father became a recluse, but from 1831 George Campbell had a stepmother: his father's third wife, Anne, widow of Dr George Cunningham Menteath of Glasgow, who had been his mother's physician at the time of her death following childbirth. Anne died a Roman Catholic in 1874. 
George Campbell was not reared to be a duke, for he had an elder brother, John, and his father, an MP until 1822, would succeed to the title only if his married brother had no heir. George Campbell was educated by private tutors: initially Church of Scotland ministers, then J. S. Howson (1816-1885), later dean of Chester. A confident boy, his lonely education made him self-reliant and accustomed to forming his opinions in isolation and with little discussion, a disadvantage when he entered the collegiate world of cabinet-level politics. He was a poet and a competent artist. He was powerfully influenced in youth by his observation of highland wildlife and he early developed a lifelong interest in ornithology and geology. He briefly attended lectures, including those of James David Forbes (1809-1868), at Edinburgh University in 1841 until poor health prevented his continuing them. He was influenced by Forbes's theories of glaciation and perhaps also by his passion for controversy. 
In 1837 Campbell's elder brother died, and in 1839 his uncle, the sixth duke, died childless, his father thus becoming seventh duke of Argyll. George Campbell's status was thus transformed as he became marquess of Lorne and heir to the dukedom. The new duke, despite being perhaps the largest owner of church patronage in Scotland, sympathized with the claims of the Church of Scotland in the prolonged dispute over lay patronage which led to the Disruption of 1843. Lorne helped him prepare bills for the House of Lords on the subject and published anonymously 'Letter to the Peers from a Peer's Son' (1842) on the dispute, its authorship soon being generally known. Lorne's view was that Lord Aberdeen, dangerously influenced by John Hope, was failing to prevent unnecessary disruption. Lorne did not approve of the secession from the established church, of which he continued to be a member, but he believed Scotland had been poorly treated by parliament. His study of the matter is set out in 'Presbytery Examined: an Essay on the Ecclesiastical History of Scotland since the Reformation' (1848), which was reviewed by W. E. Gladstone in the 'Quarterly Review' (December 1848) sympathetically with respect to the abilities, though not the arguments, of its author. Lorne believed that the church establishment in Scotland was the best representation of Scottish character, an effective balance between legitimate religious freedom and the dangers of private judgement (though he was influenced in his social thought by the evangelical theology of Thomas Chalmers, the leader of the disrupters). He deplored the Disruption and the self-righteousness of those who individually claimed the direct sanction of God for their opinions. In the heated religious atmosphere of Scotland in the half century after 1840, this moderate position, consistently enunciated by the head of one of Scotland's foremost families, was of some importance. 
On 31 July 1844 Lorne married Lady Elizabeth (died 1878), eldest daughter of George Granville Leveson-Gower, second duke of Sutherland, and his wife, Harriet Elizabeth Georgiana Leveson-Gower, thus further uniting two of the largest landowning families in Scotland. His mother-in-law, Duchess Harriet, was mistress of the robes and a leading political hostess, and played an important part in managing Lorne's entry into public life. Among their twelve children was the philanthropist Lady Victoria Campbell. 
The eighth duke of Argyll, as Lorne became on his father's death on 25 April 1847, was as a youth a Pittite (from reading the younger Pitt's speeches in his father's library) and by the early 1840s saw himself as a follower of Sir Robert Peel. He was irritated by Lord John Russell and the whigs and thought their views on free trade feeble. Argyll quickly established himself in Westminster politics, and especially as an orator by his maiden speech in May 1848 supporting the removal of Jewish disabilities. With one of the great ducal names, and his strong voice and striking red hair, he was courted by each of the political parties. After a speech in the Lords in 1850, Lord Stanley noted that he was 'the youngest peer who takes part in public affairs: he has some talent, more confidence, a diminutive figure, an affected style of dress, with long red hair loose over his shoulders, and a deep sonorous voice, capable of great rhetorical power. There is nothing to prevent this young man rising to a very high position except his too visible arrogance and conceit.... Brougham... clapped him on the back, with a 'well crowed, little Highland cock!', which the Duke did not appear to like. ('Disraeli, Derby and the Conservative Party', 17-18)' By that year, at the age of twenty-seven, he was already well known, and in 1851 was elected FRS and chancellor of the University of St Andrews. His rise was confirmed in December 1852 when he became lord privy seal in Lord Aberdeen's coalition government, with the especial task of defending the government in the predominantly tory House of Lords, but with no departmental responsibilities. 
Argyll was thus in cabinet but not really in office, a position repeated for much of his political career. This was due partly to his weak health, partly to his always vehemently expressed opinions, which were comparable to those of Lord John Russell in their angularity. Colleagues were wary of Argyll, though admiring his ability and combativeness. Argyll served on the cabinet committee to assist Gladstone on aspects of the 1853 budget but otherwise played little direct part in the extensive reforms of the coalition cabinet. He reminded his colleagues of the ''drift' of circumstances' by which Britain was becoming the ally of Turkey in the Near East crisis; but as war approached he vigorously, if anonymously, defended the cabinet's position in 'The diplomatic history of the Eastern question', 'Edinburgh Review' (July 1854). When Aberdeen resigned, in January 1855, Argyll continued as lord privy seal in Palmerston's government, and did not resign from it with Gladstone and the Peelites in February 1855. He thus distanced himself from the Peelite group, with which he had become loosely associated. In December 1855 he transferred to the postmaster-generalship, a post he held until the government fell in February 1858. From June 1859, when Palmerston returned to office, until June 1866, when Russell's government resigned, Argyll was again lord privy seal; during 1860 he managed the Post Office while Lord Elgin was on a special mission to China. At the Post Office Argyll had the advantage of the support of Sir Rowland Hill; by his own admission he deferred on almost every occasion to Hill's energy and judgement in what was a period of considerable expansion of postal activities. 
Like the Sutherland family with which he was by marriage associated, Argyll was a strong sympathizer with the anti-slavery movement in the USA and a strong opponent of the Confederate secessionists. For several years before the civil war began he corresponded with anti-slavers, and he met Harriet Beecher Stowe during her London visits. In cabinet he was, with Lord John Russell, the strongest opponent of sympathy or assistance being given to the Confederacy, his position being publicly stated in a strong speech in Edinburgh on 1 April 1863. He consistently opposed the cabinet's willingness to allow the gunship 'Alabama' (built in England and sold to the Confederacy) to use British ports, arguing that she should have been detained and that manufacture of ironclad ships for sale to the South should have been prohibited. 
Argyll had long been interested in India and had on occasion spoken for the government in the Lords on that subject. He had published several articles in the 'Edinburgh Review' on the mutiny and its governmental aftermath (later collected as 'India under Dalhousie and Canning' 1865). When Gladstone formed his first government in December 1868, he appointed Argyll secretary of state for India. Argyll held the office -- his only major departmental post -- until the ministry resigned in February 1874. Argyll took office when the secretaryship had been strengthened in its authority by the quiet work of Sir Charles Wood and the imperial tone of Argyll's immediate predecessor, Lord Cranborne. Argyll's tone sounded similarly imperious and he soon had the reputation of being something of an autocrat, but while emphasizing the general authority of the home government over the viceroy and the Indian government, he was in practice ready to work towards agreements. Having been in Palmerston's cabinet during the Indian mutiny, he was reluctant to relinquish any imperial authority in India. He saw the advancement of Indians in the Indian Civil Service as destabilizing and in April 1869 he cancelled the plans for a scholarship scheme with the comment, 'it is one of our first duties towards the people of India to guard the safety of our own dominions. For this purpose, we must proceed gradually, employing only such Natives as we can trust' (dispatch, 8 April 1869, Williams, 311). But his view of security in India did not require territorial expansion into Persia or the north-west. His policy in the Persian Gulf was 'no interference where it can possibly be avoided', except to prevent piracy and protect trade (memorandum, 11 Dec 1868; ibid., 204). He therefore quashed the demands of those wanting a 'forward policy' towards Russian expansion in central Asia, and later coined the word 'Mervousness' to describe those fretting over the Russian advance towards the city of Merv. Argyll thus brought no especial reforming zeal to the India Office. From the government's viewpoint, a ministry often overstretched was happy to have one area of its responsibility quiescent, and no attempt was made to urge reform upon Argyll. 
Argyll was active in cabinet beyond his departmental brief. He expressed extensive reservations in 1869-70 about Gladstone's proposed legislation on Irish land. Though his departure to Inveraray to be with his sick wife removed him from London at the critical moment, he had some success in modifying the bill. He was also active in Scottish education, introducing a bill in February 1869 into the Lords, the predecessor of what became the important act of 1872 which he saw through the Lords. However, Argyll did not have the full trust of his prime minister, who saw him as gifted, but erratic. Thus, when the viceroy of India, Lord Mayo, was assassinated in February 1872, it was on Lord Granville, the foreign secretary, that Gladstone chiefly relied when discussing a successor; Lord Northbrook was appointed despite Argyll's prolonged objections. Argyll left office in February 1874 without regret: 'Politically, too, there are many compensations to me, as I am not a Radical, and many of the extreme joints of our tail had been wagging too much' (Argyll to Northbrook, 13 Feb 1874, 'Autobiography', 2.289). Despite this, Argyll soon found himself working with the radicals on the Eastern question and in opposing what he saw as the Conservative government's imperialistic initiatives. 
Argyll was, with Gladstone, the most prominent survivor of the cabinet which had fought the Crimean War for the integrity of the Ottoman empire. He believed that Russia in that war had received and had registered a strong caution. Argyll blamed the Porte for its failure to reform internally since 1856 and for its brutal suppression of dissident Christians in the Balkans. He was also confident that Russia, in supporting the cause of the Balkan Christians when the British government stood aside, would not go too far in her dismemberment of 'Turkey in Europe'. Argyll spoke vehemently in the Lords and on public platforms against the government's conduct of the Eastern question in 1876-8, and he also charged it with mishandling 'Afghan affairs' in 1879-80. He was an important representative of anti-Conservative opinion at court. In 1879 he published 'The Eastern Question' in two volumes, of which 'The Afghan Question from 1841 to 1878' (1879) was a substantial extract. Argyll was thus seen, slightly improbably, as a leading anti-Conservative critic when the government was defeated at the general election in 1880, even though he disapproved of the radicalism of Gladstone's Midlothian campaign and hoped Lord Granville would be the new prime minister. 
Argyll's title and estates made him the dominant personality in the western highlands. He owned about 175,000 acres. Though the family was traditionally whig in politics, and Argyll was often described as a whig, he had none of the English whigs' veneration for prescriptive rights. 'No delusion', he wrote, 'can be greater than the common popular superstition that the clansmen under the Celtic system enjoyed rights and sources of wealth which they lost when that system was superseded and eventually destroyed' ('Unseen Foundations', 265). For Argyll, the decisive moment in Scottish history was the change from clan-based customary society to a 'universal recognition of legally acknowledged rights', embodied in a strong law sustained by the monarchy (ibid., 272). His relationship with his tenantry was thus businesslike, rather than paternal, and this conditioned his view of land law generally, which, chiefly but not uniquely in relationship to Ireland, involved him in frequent political controversy, since many Liberals from the late 1860s took a more sympathetic view of customary rights. Even so, he wore full highland dress at dinner when in Scotland and liked to be referred to as the Mac-Cailein-Mor ('Son of the great Colin'), the traditional title of the head of the clan Campbell. 
Argyll was from the first a notably vigorous landowner. During his father's dukedom he took much responsibility for the estates, which had been badly mismanaged in the 1820s and 1830s, the sixth duke having lost about $2 million. He superintended the heavily encumbered Argyll estates' response to the great famine which began in 1846, in which year and afterwards he was with the duke of Sutherland an early and effective sponsor of assisted emigration (especially from the Ross of Mull and the island of Tiree which he owned) as an alternative to clearance by default. Eviction was used to encourage emigration in a process which became known as compulsory emigration. 'I wish', the duke wrote on 5 May 1851, 'to send out those whom we would be obliged to feed if they stayed at home; to get rid of that class is 'the object'' (Devine, 'Clanship', 190). The social costs were high, but the changes resulted in the long run in a more stable estate economy. The great Campbell diaspora in North America was in part the consequence of these efforts. Argyll calculated that between 1847 and 1897 he spent over $554,000 on the improvement of his estates ('Autobiography', 2.551). He described his policy in 'Essay on the Commercial Principles Applicable for the Hire of Land', a pamphlet for the Cobden Club (1877), and in 'Crofts and Farms in the Hebrides' (1883). A notable action was his gift in 1899 of the abbey church of Iona, with other ecclesiastical buildings on the island, to the Church of Scotland. 
Argyll played an important part in the public life of Scotland. He was chancellor of the University of St Andrews from 1851 until his death, and was rector of Glasgow University in 1854-6. In 1856 he became a knight of the Thistle. He was president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1860-64) and of the Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland (1862-6). His Liberal Unionism reflected an important tendency among the Scottish propertied classes. Even so, Argyll's influence in Scotland was less marked than might have been expected from his eminent position. He lacked Lord Rosebery's ability to associate the Scottish Liberal aristocracy with the wider culture of Scottish Liberalism and its nationalistic tendency. 
Argyll's English contacts quickly brought visitors to Argyll. In 1847 Queen Victoria appeared unexpectedly at Inveraray by yacht and a welcome had to be swiftly manufactured. Inveraray became something of a highland political and cultural centre, though never matching Dunrobin, the Sutherlands' great house. The Argylls had five sons and seven daughters, the duchess's poor health causing her to leave much of the upbringing to the father. When in England, where the chief family house was Argyll Lodge in west London, Argyll and his family were frequently in the company of Duchess Harriet, often weekending with the Sutherlands and the Gladstones at Cliveden, where high society engaged in theological debate. At Inveraray the duke began the day punctually, for he was fussy about time, with prayers and 'Bible' reading at the breakfast table. Close links with the court through Duchess Harriet were confirmed by the marriage of Argyll's eldest son, John Douglas Sutherland Campbell, Lord Lorne, to Victoria and Albert's daughter Princess Louise in March 1871. In 1879, when Lorne was governor-general of Canada, Argyll visited him there and also made a short visit to the USA. 
Argyll's life was disrupted in the later 1870s. On 12 October 1877 a fire at Inveraray Castle destroyed the centre of the house. Argyll had made few alterations to the castle (and later prevented the railway reaching the adjacent town), though he had earlier considered turning Roger Morris's Gothic castle into a Scottish-baronial extravaganza. Fortunately, he did not take advantage of the fire to do so, but employed Anthony Salvin to restore the building, though adding an extra floor and high-pitched conical roofs. He suffered a further blow on 25 May 1878 by the death of the duchess, at the dinner table in London when sitting next to Gladstone. On 17 August 1881 Argyll married again; his new wife was Amelia Maria, daughter of Thomas Legh Claughton, bishop of St Albans, and his wife, Julia Susanna; she was the widow of Colonel Archibald Henry Augustus Anson. She died at Inveraray on 4 January 1894 and was buried at Cannes next to her first husband. Argyll's third wife was Ina Erskine (died 1925), daughter of Archibald McNeill of Colonsay, whom he married on 30 July 1895. She was an extra lady of the bedchamber. Argyll's second and third marriages were childless. 
Argyll's second and third wives brought calm to balance the disconcerting effect of two of his children's marriages. Lorne's marriage to Princess Louise was a source of some awkwardness in Argyll's relations with the queen, as Lorne and Louise soon led partially separate lives, though never formally separating. Even more problematic was the impetuous marriage in 1881 of his fifth son, Lord Colin Campbell (1853-1895), city director and politician, who was Liberal MP for Argyll, to Gertrude Elizabeth ['see 'Campbell, Gertrude Elizabeth], daughter of Edmond Maghlin Blood. Argyll refused to recognize the engagement and handled the marriage unsympathetically. It ended in 1886 in the longest divorce case in English history, with both husband and wife petitioning the court. Argyll left the courtroom abruptly when his son was accused of having syphilis, but gave evidence for him on 6 December, clearly embarrassed and in a moral world he barely comprehended. Argyll's daughters fared more happily than those two of their brothers. Lady Edith (died 1913) married the duke of Northumberland; Lady Frances married Eustace Balfour, brother of the prime minister ['see 'Balfour, Lady Frances]; Lady Mary Emma (died 1947) married Edward Carr Glyn, bishop of Peterborough. 
Argyll had an abiding fascination with causation and morphology in nature, especially with respect to ornithology and geology, and in his later years he related his views to human society and government. His writings on science and society were characterized by a confidence which was impatient of understanding other opinions and arguments. His scientific writings, especially, became intemperate, relying increasingly on point scoring. On the island of Mull his tenant found fossilized leaves intercalated among basalt lava. Argyll announced the discovery -- one of considerable importance in the geological discoveries of the day -- to the British Association in 1850. Edward Forbes found the deposit to be of early Tertiary age. Argyll's paper to the Geological Society 'On Tertiary leaf-beds in the Isle of Mull' in 1851 made a considerable impact, and his description influenced subsequent work in Britain on Tertiary volcanic action. Argyll was a cataclysmal geologist, believing in a primeval convulsion, and he believed that local glaciers and floating ice accounted for geological markings, rather than a general glaciation submerging the mountainous areas of Britain. This position he defended in a long series of vehement papers against evolving contemporary geological opinion. Argyll has been termed a 'Christian Darwinist' (Moore, 306-7). He believed that there might have been several creations and, following Richard Owen, he focused on individual organisms, each of which he believed contained a 'plan' and through which the complexities of development could be examined and understood (ibid., 221-2). He believed in a special creation of the human body and soul and argued that palaeontological evidence conclusively denied 'any change whatever in the specific characters of Man since the oldest Human Being was born' and that 'all scientific evidence' favoured the derivation of mankind from a 'single pair' from which present-day humans had degenerated rather than progressively evolved (Argyll, 'Primeval Man', 1869, and 'Unity of Nature', 1884; cited in Moore, 231-2). Any progress that might be perceived was planned and directed by 'mind'. He thus denied a general and interrelated process of evolution, and clashed both with Darwin and with T. H. Huxley, emerging as one of the most combative of the defenders of the orthodoxies for the 1840s. 
Argyll made a substantial attempt to integrate his scientific and social thought. He believed in 'the great natural law, which in all societies, has recognised the security of individual possession as the test of national prosperity and independence, even as it is the foundation of their organic life' ('Unseen Foundations', 136). But this law could not be imposed, and must develop naturally, for the organic parts of society 'like the atoms in chemistry, are dynamic', each with its own function, fully pursuing that function only when untrammelled (ibid., 174). Consequently, he was a strong individualist, opposing the introduction of limited liability in 1856 and still defending his opposition in the 1890s, and also continuing to deplore -- as in his article 'Christian socialising', 'Nineteenth Century', 36 (1894) -- any national welfare system, even in the moderate form of the nineteenth-century workhouse network. He may be seen as one of the last leading remnants of Thomas Chalmers's moral individualism. 
Argyll's intellectual output -- unusual for a duke -- was one of the most thoroughgoing attempts of the second half of his century to defend a Christian (or at any rate deistic) individualist position. His 'Unseen Foundations of Society: an Examination of the Fallacies and Failure of Economic Science due to Neglected Elements' (1893) -- his most substantial theoretical work -- was a significant attempt to link his scientific position to social and political analysis, while denigrating the limitations of the Ricardian school of political economy, which limitations he also emphasized in 'Application of the Historical Method to Economic Science' (1894). 
Argyll became lord privy seal in Gladstone's second government, formed in April 1880. Though again associated with Liberalism during the Eastern question campaign, he approached most of the policies of the government with scepticism or hostility. He disliked the idea of evolution towards radicalism, and he quarrelled with its Irish policy on historical, political, and intellectual grounds (though, unusually among the landowners hostile to Liberal proposals, he owned no land in Ireland). Since Ireland was the predominant question of the government's early years, he was soon in conflict with it, first offering his resignation on 14 June 1880 on the proposal to give compensation to a tenant for disturbance. 
When in the autumn of 1880 Gladstone began planning the 'Land Act' of 1881, Argyll began a bombardment of correspondence, especially opposing a right of 'free sale' of land by tenants. Gladstone kept Argyll within the cabinet by encouraging him in this prolonged correspondence, but on 31 March 1881 Argyll resigned, making a statement of his reasons to the Lords on 8 April. He never again held office. Increasingly disabled by gout, which sometimes diminished, though it could not quell, his ability to write, he enjoyed emancipation from the restrictions of office and spoke and wrote much on public affairs. In 1884 he played some part as an intermediary between Gladstone and Salisbury after the Lords rejected the 'Representation of the People Bill', but he condemned the Liberal government's handling of Sudanese policy in 1884-5. In 1885-6 he was a vehement opponent of the Liberal cabinet's home-rule proposals, which he saw as an evil concession and a dangerous precedent, especially for Scotland. During that crisis he was sometimes thought of as a possible prime minister of a coalition government of tories and Liberal Unionists, and in July 1886 the queen considered, but quickly dropped, the notion of asking him to attempt to form a government. Argyll campaigned against home rule in print and on the platform. He developed his opinions on government and society in 'Scotland as it Was and as it Is' (2 vols., 1887), 'The New British Constitution and its Master Builders' (1888), and 'Irish Nationalism: an Appeal to History' (1893). Ironically, his intellectual position was not greatly different from Gladstone's: their quarrel was more about means than ends. 
Though in most respects estranged from the Liberal Party, Argyll's cautions about imperial expansion and his mistrust of Turkey -- repeated in 'Our Responsibilities for Turkey: Facts and Memories of Forty Years' (1896) -- maintained some links with that party in the 1890s, and he was associated with the protests against atrocities in Armenia in 1895-6. His Liberal Unionism was confined to Irish policy and opposition to government intervention. It was Salisbury, however, who granted him a further dukedom, also of Argyll, in 1892. 
In 1897 Argyll began his autobiography, reaching 1857 by his death. It is the best autobiography by a Victorian cabinet minister. He was unable to act as one of Gladstone's pallbearers in 1898, publicly explaining that this was not the consequence of their political differences ('The Times', 27 May 1898). He continued to paint, to write poems on theological and ornithological subjects -- his 'Burdens of Belief and other Poems' (1894) is characteristic of his later compositions -- and to study the habits of birds. One of his poems was included in the second series of Palgrave's 'Golden Treasury'. Argyll died at Inveraray Castle on 24 April 1900 and was buried in the family grave at Kilmun on the Holy Loch. His widow, the third duchess, who died on 24 December 1925, edited his autobiography and added a biography with a thorough bibliography (2 vols., 1906) to cover the rest of a complex and interesting life, which has, unfortunately, been little studied since. 


@@@@@


doc= 60731


Beecham, (Helen) Audrey (1915-1989), poet and eccentric, was born at Weaverham, Cheshire, on 21 July 1915, the eldest of five children and only daughter of Henry (Harry) Beecham (1888-1947) and his wife, Ethel Anne Baxter (died 1951). Her great-grandfather, Thomas Beecham, founded the family fortune with his celebrated pills; Sir Thomas Beecham, the conductor, was her uncle. Harry Beecham liked to style himself 'landed proprietor, Lympne Castle', but he soon ran through his share of the family fortune, and Audrey and her brothers were educated at various schools up and down the country. Finally she attended Wycombe Abbey School, from where in 1934 she won a scholarship in politics, philosophy, and economics to Somerville College, Oxford. She took a second-class degree in 1937. Having been brought up in comparative luxury, when she went to Oxford she was already used to riding horseback, driving cars, indulging her passion for dogs, and also to getting her own way. She was inevitably a rebellious and adventurous undergraduate, taking off in the long vacation of 1936 to run guns for the anarchists in the Spanish Civil War. Her experience there confirmed her in anarchism and anti-communism for the rest of her life. When she left Oxford in 1937 she lived briefly in Paris as one of the group surrounding Henry Miller, Anais Nin, and Lawrence Durrell. She quickly lost touch with Miller, but continued to admire Anais Nin for her beauty and sophistication, and corresponded with Durrell for many years. 
Audrey Beecham returned to Oxford and divided her time between Oxford's and London's bohemians. In Oxford she was a friend of 'Colonel' Kolkhorst and of Maurice Bowra, to whom she was briefly engaged. Though this engagement inevitably came to nothing they remained close friends, and Bowra left her his excellent cellar in his will. She was also one of the circle surrounding Enid Starkie and Dan Davin. Meanwhile, although from 1940 she was working somewhat desultorily as a senior research assistant at the Agricultural Economics Research Institute, she was often in London. There she began to cultivate a serious reputation for her poetry, encouraged by her uncle, Sir Thomas Beecham, and by M. J. T. Tambimuttu, the editor and patron of aspiring poets. Through him she met Antonia White, who became a close friend, Dylan Thomas, and Joe Ackerley. Her own published poetry, 'The Coast of Barbary' (1957) and 'Different Weather' (1979), was well received, and though traditional in form was praised by critics as various as John Wain, Edwin Muir, Kathleen Raine, and Al Alvarez for its authenticity and strength. 
Beecham became restless in her job in Oxford, and to the astonishment of many friends she applied in 1950 for the post of warden of Nightingale Hall, the women's residence at the University of Nottingham. She was appointed there in December 1950, also taking the post of lecturer in economic history. She had been received into the Church of England and remained a convinced high-Anglican for the rest of her life, although she never lost her fascination with witchcraft and folklore. She treasured her great-grandfather's shepherd's crook, elaborately carved with a lengthy rebus, and she believed herself capable of casting spells and affecting friends and enemies by them. She shocked several audiences by suggesting in lectures on her family history that old Thomas Beecham had murdered his first wife, and was astonished by their horrified reaction. When challenged by friends for supporting her application to Nottingham, Lord David Cecil remarked 'There's no martinet like a reformed rake'. But she was never a martinet, and she was much loved by her students and colleagues there until her retirement in 1980. She retained, however, many of her obsessions and eccentricities. Chief among these was her addiction to conspiracy theory. She was convinced that some of her Nottingham colleagues -- many of them well-known academics -- were 'moles'. Some of her suspicions were entirely unfounded, but others were justified, one at least dramatically. 
In 1980 Audrey Beecham returned to Oxford, to her house at 26 Park Town. Her last years were darkened by the chronic asthma which eventually killed her: unable to drive or cycle, she hated walking, and this curtailment of her activities depressed her. But she kept up her interest in her neighbours and friends. On one occasion she asked a friend to drive her to the shops, and on their return instructed her to drive slowly round the crescent of Park Town and look cautiously at the last house on the north side. 'What do you see?' she asked. The friend said it looked very much as if there were sandbags and a plastic curtain on the first-floor window. When they returned to her house, Audrey said that the inhabitants were Libyan trainee pilots and that she believed they were preparing for an attack on the house. She insisted on ringing the police, who took down details noncommittally. Three days later the local paper reported that the Libyan pilots had been expelled from the country, accused of sabotage at the Oxford airfield training centre. They had departed overnight from their Park Town hideout, an outcome that gave her much satisfaction. In spite of all this, she remained completely loyal to friends who had been at one time or another connected with the Communist Party, for loyalty and friendship were among her priorities, and in her last years, when she could seldom go out alone, she cherished their company and conversation. An earlier strain of pugnacity in her temper (she prided herself on her mastery of martial arts and on her claim to have knocked out Dylan Thomas cold when he made unwelcome advances to her) grew less as she aged, and though she remained easily irritated her humour and curiosity about life and people increased. She died at the Churchill Hospital in Oxford on 31 January 1989. 
Audrey Beecham was mischievous, but entirely without malice. Generous and affectionate, she retained a quality of innocence that was entirely disarming. She was devoted to horses and dogs (especially a generation of dachshunds who shared her house) and to children, with whose view of life she was always entirely in sympathy. Her many friends, colleagues, and students not only remembered her for her eccentricities but loved her for her charm and her warmly sympathetic spirit. 


@@@@@


doc= 60733


John [ii] Crace (1753-1819), who eventually became head of the family decorating business. With his second wife, Martha ('c'.1740-1770), the daughter of William Bent, whom he married in 1765, Edward had another son who died aged twenty-five in 1791. They lived at 40 Long Acre, Covent Garden, London. 
In 1768 Edward Crace made the transition from coach decorating to house decorating, establishing a business that was to continue until 1899, when it was dissolved by his great-great-grandson. Crace's first, and ultimately most important, commission was for the decoration and furnishing of the Pantheon on Oxford Road, London, begun in 1770 (dem.). It was likewise the first important commission for the architect, James Wyatt, who created a landmark in neo-classical architecture. Crace responded with painted arabesques and cameo decoration which Horace Walpole likened to the work of Raphael. 
George III was equally impressed by the scholarly quality of the scheme, and at some time in the 1770s he engaged Edward Crace, reputedly of a quiet and studious disposition, to be keeper of the collection of paintings in the various royal residences. This occupied Crace until his retirement in the 1790s. An undated manuscript catalogue by Crace for the pictures at Queen's House (now Buckingham Palace) and his published catalogue of the pictures at Kensington Palace, dated 1778, are in the Archive of Art and Design at the Victoria and Albert Museum. As well as cataloguing, Edward Crace's duties included cleaning, restoring, and varnishing the paintings of the Royal Collection. Towards the end of his life Crace became infirm and devoted much time to collecting prints and drawings. This collection was a source of delight to his grandson Frederick [i] Crace ['see 'Crace, Frederick (1779-1859)] when the latter came to visit and may have inspired his Crace Collection, now in the British Museum (print room) and British Library (map room) and the Guildhall Library, London. Edward Crace died on 7 December 1799 and was buried in Chiswick. 
John [ii] Crace was born on 1 November 1754 at Greenwich. He was apprenticed to his father on 26 November 1767, but owing to his elopement with his second cousin, Ann (1758-1778), the daughter of Edward Eastham of Long Acre, whom he married in January 1776, there was a complete break between father and eldest son for several years, and John [ii] Crace began his own decorating business in 1776. According to family tradition, Ann Eastham was an heiress, being the granddaughter of John Gregory (1694-1758), a wealthy builder and decorator of Half Moon Street, Piccadilly, and the son of Henry Gregory, surveyor to Westminster Abbey. However, she died on 12 May 1778, five days after the birth of their second child, and by the end of October that year, John [ii] Crace, now settled at 55 Great Queen Street, had married Catherine (1754-1809), the daughter of John Wigzell of Greenwich. The couple went on to have seven children, and their three sons all worked in the family decorating business, as did Catherine herself. On 2 March 1785 John [ii] Crace received the freedom of the Painter-Stainers' Company, and on 3 June 1789 he was admitted to the livery. A handful of bills dating from 1780 to 1804 (Archive of Art and Design, V&A) demonstrates the fairly routine house decorating sometimes carried out by John Crace. 
By 1801 John [ii] Crace had joined the circle of Sir John Soane in his capacity as painter to the board of works. He worked in conjunction with John Robins, an upholder (or interior decorator and upholsterer) and auctioneer, collaborating on a number of decorating and furnishing commissions, including 12 Lincoln's Inn Fields ('c'.1794), Pitzhanger Manor, Ealing ('c'.1802) -- Soane's town and country houses -- as well as at the Bank of England (1794). The major commissions of Crace's career, however, came from the future prince regent. These were at Carlton House ('c'.1785-1795) and the Royal Pavilion, Brighton ('c'.1801-1804), both in conjunction with his talented eldest son, Frederick [i] Crace, who acted as principal designer. The former was decorated in a sumptuous brand of neo-classicism inspired by French sources, while the latter was decorated in a bold scheme of chinoiserie, mostly superseded by the later chinoiserie decoration of Frederick [i] (1815- 'c'.1825). John [ii] Crace died at his home in Knightsbridge on 9 May 1819, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. He left a considerable collection of Chinese 'objets d'art' and topographical books on China, some of which were passed on to Frederick [i], and which must have inspired the father and son in their work at Brighton. 
To continue the family decorating business, a partnership was formed in 1806 between the brothers Frederick [i] Crace, Alfred Crace (1781-1847), and Henry Crace ('b'. 1790). They were assisted by a cousin, John [iii] Crace, the son of John [i] Crace, the coach-maker-turned-print dealer. (The younger John worked for the Crace decorating business during his entire career, eventually moving with Frederick [i] Crace to 14 Wigmore Street in 1827.) The partnership began trading at 34 Curzon Street, moving to 51 Great Queen Street in 1812, later also trading from 230 Regent Street, before being dissolved owing to financial disputes particularly involving Alfred Crace. In 1830 John Gregory Crace (1809-1889) had been sent to Rouen by his father, Frederick [i], to settle the debts Alfred had incurred. After the death of his first wife, Sarah Trery, in 1836, Alfred emigrated to Upper Canada. About this time he married his second wife, Ellen Nash, and assumed the surname Crace-Calvert. He died in Canada in 1847, leaving five children. The Crace decorating business reached its apex during the second half of the nineteenth century under the able direction of John Gregory Crace, assisted by his artistically gifted eldest son, John Dibblee Crace (1838-1919), who closed the business in 1899 but continued to work as a consultant until the First World War. 
Moreover, various Crace family members had distinguished themselves in the textile and timber trades during the second half of the nineteenth century. Dr Frederick Crace-Calvert, the son of Alfred Crace, published a definitive book on calico dyeing in Manchester in 1876, while Everard Crace, the son of John Gregory Crace, was apprenticed to a silk weaver in Lyons and wrote a manuscript ('c'.1875) on the subject that is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Another relation, Charles Napoleon Crace, descended from John [i] Crace, was a leading London timber merchant during this period. There can be no doubt that the international fame and reputation garnered by the Craces, and their successful undertaking of large and complex schemes of architectural decoration for some of the most important buildings of their day, were possible owing to the remarkable legacy of professional expertise in the building and decorating trades that had been continuously developed by family members since the seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 60734


Edward Crace (1725-1799), who was born at 40 Rochester Row, London, the son of Thomas Crace ('c'.1690-1774), a coach-maker of yeoman descent who was trading from 40 Rochester Row by 1724, and his wife, Mary ('bap'. 14 Sept 1690), whom he had married in 1718. Mary was the daughter of Henry Gregory (1660-1725), surveyor to the fabric of Westminster Abbey, whose brother, John Gregory ('b'. 1655), was college carpenter. Edward Crace was apprenticed to William Atkinson, an artist in the Painter-Stainers' Company, in 1741. His two brothers, John [i] Crace (1728-1806) and Charles Crace (1727-1784), worked with him in the family business, although John [i] later owned a print shop in Drury Lane. Drawings in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Cooper-Hewitt Museum in New York attest to the facility with which Edward and Charles designed coach panels and ornament in the then-fashionable rococo style. On 13 October 1748 Edward Crace was given the freedom of the Painter-Stainers' Company, and on 4 October 1752 he was admitted to the livery. Charles Crace published a book of designs for coach bodies in 1750, a copy of which survives in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. Edward Crace married in 1753 Anne ('c'.1733-1764), the daughter of an artist, James Munn of Greenwich. Of their three children, it was their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 60739


Bailey, Sir Harold Walter (1899-1996), Indo-Iranian scholar and philologist, was born on 16 December 1899 at 54 Northgate Street, Devizes, Wiltshire, one of three sons of Frederick Charles Bailey, labourer, and his wife, Emma Jane, 'nee' Richardt. When he was ten his parents moved to Australia to a farm, Glen Wood, Nangeenan, Western Australia, and it was in the unpromising conditions of the outback, which ruled out formal secondary education, that his interest in languages was first stimulated by a chance collection of books, later described by him to Arnold Toynbee as: 'a set of seven volumes of an encyclopaedia (eagerly devoured) and four other volumes with lessons in French, Latin, German, Greek, Italian, and Spanish. Later came Arabic and Persian, out of which Persian took the lead (joined later to Sanskrit). (Toynbee, 16)' Thus began the fascination with Iran which, nurtured by his study of Avestan grammar in the intervals of farm work, led him in 1922 to the University of Western Australia, Perth, to read classics (in the absence of any provision for oriental studies) and subsequently to write a thesis on Euripides, for which he was awarded an MA in 1927. In the latter year he won the Hackett studentship to Oxford University where, as a member of St Catherine's Society, he studied under F. W. Thomas and was awarded a first in oriental languages in 1929. 
In 1929 Bailey was appointed as the first lecturer in Iranian studies (a post financed by the Parsi community of Bombay) at the School of Oriental Studies, London. At the same time, for his doctoral thesis, he embarked on the study of a major Zoroastrian text, the 'Bundahisn' ('Primal creation'), a kind of encyclopaedia of Zoroastrianism written in Pahlavi, for which -- although it was incomplete -- he was awarded his Oxford DPhil in 1933. Learning that the Danish scholar Kaj Barr was working on the same material and preparing to have it published, with characteristic generosity Bailey handed over his own materials to Barr (who died in 1970 without completing an edition); much later in his life Bailey returned to his edition of the 'Bundahisn', which was completed in 1989 but remains unpublished, partly because his insertion by hand of words in Pahlavi script into the copy intended for photographic reproduction rendered it partially illegible. His output in this period was already substantial: over twenty articles, mostly on Middle Iranian and Avestan problems, between 1930 and 1935. 
In 1936 Bailey was elected to the chair of Sanskrit at Cambridge and became a fellow of Queens' College, living in the college until his retirement in 1967; he was not primarily a Sanskritist but the Cambridge chair gave him the freedom to pursue his Iranian studies. In the same year he delivered the Ratanbai Katrak lectures at Oxford, which were published as 'Zoroastrian Problems in the Ninth-Century Books' (1943; 2nd edn, 1971) and which rank among his most important publications, helping to give the field of Old and Middle Iranian studies a new direction. By then he was already engaged in the study of Khotanese, the Middle Iranian language of Khotan in Chinese Turkestan, which was to occupy the major part of his immense scholastic energies over nearly half a century, resulting in the publication of five volumes of Khotanese texts in facsimile, two volumes of text, translation, and commentary, five volumes of text alone, and an etymological dictionary ('Dictionary of Khotan Saka', 1979), as well as two further books and numerous articles. He was the pioneer in the study of this material, bringing to it great skill in reading the cursive script of the late Khotanese texts, unrivalled familiarity with the literatures of the region, and encyclopaedic knowledge of other Iranian and Indo-European languages (as well as knowledge of Chinese, Tibetan, and Turkish -- over fifty languages in all). He started work on Khotanese in the hope that it would shed light on the 'Bundahisn' (a hope not realized) but by publishing the entire Khotanese material, which had been acquired for the British Museum as a result of Sir Aurel Stein's central Asian expeditions, he inaugurated a whole new field within Iranian studies. He claimed not to be religious but his sympathy with the Zoroastrian and Buddhist texts that he studied was notable. 
Though wedded to his Iranian studies and following a simple lifestyle (he was a vegetarian and near teetotaller), Bailey had other diversions in his life, enjoying until his mid-fifties walking or cycling holidays (his athleticism was revealed in his tall, slim figure), playing the violin in a chamber group which quite often met in his rooms at Queens' College, and later in life taking up gardening enthusiastically. His scholastic interests, too, extended widely, including for example the study of varieties of spoken Welsh in remote villages, a study pursued to such effect that Sir Ralph Turner, the director of the School of Oriental and African Studies, recorded how he was visited by Bailey while on holiday in Wales, and Bailey talked so knowledgeably about Welsh language and history that one of those present afterwards remarked that he did not know that Cambridge had a chair of Celtic (Sims-Williams and Hewitt, 113). Similarly, Bailey's enthusiasm for the languages and literatures of the Caucasus (in particular the Armenian, Georgian, and Ossetic epics) enabled him on a visit to the area in 1966 to astonish his audience by addressing them in both dialects of Ossetic; this resulted in his being presented with a full Osset costume, in which he was later painted for a portrait commissioned by his college from Ronald Way. His extraordinarily wide scholarly interests went hand in hand with an exceptional capacity to shut everything else out when he was busy writing. 
Bailey's erudition received due recognition over the years. He became a fellow of the British Academy in 1944 and was subsequently a corresponding member of the Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish academies, the Australian Academy of the Humanities, the Institut de France, the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, and the Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente. He was knighted in 1960 for services to oriental studies, and received honorary degrees from Oxford, Manchester, Western Australia, and the Australian National University. He was president of the Philological Society (1948-52) and of the Royal Asiatic Society (1964-7), among others; a complimentary volume of the 'Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies' (33, 1970) included a bibliography of his 162 publications until then. He was a founder member of the Ancient India and Iran Trust in 1978, donating to it his vast library, and he helped to purchase Brooklands House in Cambridge as its base, living there himself and being active in the improvement of its garden. In his later years he suffered from failing eyesight, and active research became increasingly difficult; nevertheless, he was able to maintain contacts on a personal level -- in part through the trust -- with his many friends and colleagues, and clearly valued the opportunity to put his great store of knowledge at the service of others. He died on 11 January 1996 in Cambridge; a memorial service was held in Queens' College on 9 March 1996. He was unmarried. He was the most outstanding British Iranianist of the twentieth century; indeed, some have held that he was the greatest scholar of Queens' College since Erasmus. 


@@@@@


doc= 60744


Wilberforce, Marion Katherine (1902-1995), aviator, was born at Boyndlie House, Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire, Scotland, on 22 July 1902, the daughter of John Charles Mathias Ogilvie-Forbes (1850-1941), ninth laird of Boyndlie, and his second wife, Anne Marguerite Prendergast (died 1950). Her father had originally studied for the Anglican priesthood but was received into the Roman Catholic church by Cardinal Newman, later becoming privy chamberlain to four popes. There were five children from his second marriage. Educated at Boyndlie House by a succession of French governesses, from an early age Marion also became involved in the day-to-day running of the estate. At fourteen she was entrusted with collecting rents from tenants. At sixteen she went to the Convent of Jesus and Mary at Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire, and from there, in 1922, to Somerville College, Oxford, where she obtained a diploma in agriculture in 1925 and graduated in 1926. Through her agricultural interests she became involved in the work of the Fairbridge Farm Schools, a charitable organization that settled orphan children in agricultural communities in the dominions. Before her marriage she travelled widely, inspecting farm schools in Canada and Australia. 
Marion knew Robert William Francis Wilberforce (died 1984), who had been a contemporary of her brother David at Ampleforth College. After Oxford he was torn between life as a priest and matrimony. After six months testing the strength of his vocation as a monk at Ampleforth Abbey, he decided against it. Marion was waiting to collect him at the abbey gates when he emerged. They married in 1932 and bought their Essex farm, Nevendon Manor, where she kept chickens and bred pigs and cattle. The piglets she named after her brothers, reserving the name of her youngest brother, Malcolm, for the runt of the litter. Robert Wilberforce became a solicitor and a company director. 
Encouraged by her two aviator brothers, Marion learned to fly at Stag Lane, gaining her pilot's licence in 1930. After successfully investing on the stock exchange she was able to buy her first aircraft, a de Havilland Cirrus Moth, later replaced by a Hornet Moth. These aircraft were registered as farm implements for tax purposes and used to ferry livestock. A trip to Europe to visit friends for lunch would be an opportunity to bring back some chickens or a calf placed in bags behind her seat. Flying with the minimum of instrumentation and navigating visually, if uncertain of her whereabouts she would land to ask the way or read a signpost. When civilian flying ceased in 1939, she had accrued 900 flying hours in this way. 
In December 1939 Pauline Gower won her battle to form a women's section of Air Transport Auxiliary (ATA). Though limited to fly non-operational aircraft and on 20 per cent less pay than males of equal rank, this signalled a breakthrough in the prejudice against female pilots. Wilberforce was invited to go to Whitchurch for flight testing and on 1 January 1940 she became one of the first eight women to report for duty at Hatfield no. 5 ferry pool. At first pilots were engaged in ferrying RAF Tiger Moths from the de Havilland factory at Hatfield to maintenance units and RAF stations as far afield as Scotland. However, the loss of pilots in the battle of Britain, allied to increased aircraft production, brought about a radical change and by the end of 1941 Marion was piloting Hurricanes, Spitfires, and twin-engine types and had taken over command of no. 5 ferry pool, Hatfield. Early in 1943 she moved to no. 12 ferry pool, Cosford, to take command of the second all-women pool of ATA, becoming in 1944 one of only eleven women qualified to fly the four-engine Lancaster and Stirling bombers. Often required to ferry many different types in a day, ATA pilots needed the versatility usually demanded only of test pilots. By mid-1945, on leaving the ATA, Wilberforce had flown some 2400 hours and over 100 different aircraft types. Characteristically, she declined the offer to become an MBE and proceeded to immerse herself in country life and peacetime flying, rarely speaking of her wartime exploits. 
Wilberforce had begun hunting in 1933; on returning to Nevendon Manor she served on the committee of the Essex union hunt (1962-82), becoming the only woman master of foxhounds in the hunt's 236-year history. A fearless rider, she hunted into her eighties, and having little faith in doctors, would obtain her medicines from the vet, claiming her horse was sick. In 1947 she co-owned a Hornet Moth G-ADKM with her brother Neil. Though the skies had become more regulated, Marion continued to fly around the British Isles visiting friends in the same happy-go-lucky way of pre-war days. Her post-war logbook indicates that she visited most European countries. She might lunch in Luxembourg, listen to music at the Vienna Staatsoper, or even take a sister-in-law to Paris to pick up Molyneux couture. On 5 May 1949 she set off to visit her brother Neil, then an air attache in Moscow. Travelling via Amsterdam, Copenhagen, and Stockholm, she arrived in Helsinki two days later. To her annoyance she had to leave the aircraft there and go by other means to Moscow. Acquiring another Hornet Moth G-AEZG in 1964, she continued flying until the age of eighty. By this time she had become disenchanted by all the rules and regulations imposed on the private pilot. 
Having no children of her own, Marion Wilberforce continued a particular interest in the Fairbridge Farm Schools and was for many years chair of the child care committee. She often had Fairbridge children to stay with her. Though she could seem quite formidable at first, she is remembered as being kind and mothering the younger girls in the ATA ferry pool. On her husband's death in 1984 she returned to live with her brother Malcolm in the family home at Boyndlie. Now dilapidated with gardens overgrown and the family chapel derelict, they lived happily amid the decay. A stoic in old age and impatient of physical frailties, she refused to wear hearing aids. Her last months were spent in Stratford Park Nursing Home, Stroud, where she died on 17 December 1995. She was cremated at Stroud, but her ashes were interred at Markington Roman Catholic Church, Harrogate, Yorkshire, near the Wilberforce family home. 


@@@@@


doc= 60745


Evans, Ellis Humphrey (1887-1917), poet, was born on 13 January 1887 at Pen-lan in the village of Trawsfynydd, Merioneth, and brought up at Yr Ysgwrn, a farm about a mile distant and facing Cwm Prysor. He was the eldest child of Evan Evans (1852-1942) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Morris (1862-1950), a maidservant, the daughter of David Morris, blacksmith, of the same village. He received his elementary education at the village school and then helped his father on the family farm, although his heart was not in farming. The district had a rich Welsh-speaking culture in which poets enjoyed great prestige; the writing of verse in both the free and strict metres was the boy's only interest, and from the age of nineteen he began winning prizes at local eisteddfodau. Brought up in a religious home, he attended Sunday school regularly at Ebenezer, a Congregationalist chapel in the village, and was steeped in the 'Bible', but, a handsome and naturally charming man, he was not averse to the company of young women; he had several sweethearts but did not marry. Under the influence of the poet R. Silyn Roberts, with whom he used to go fishing, he was attracted to socialism. 
Although he wrote several lyrics of lasting merit, such as the one to the River Prysor, Hedd Wyn (the bardic name by which he was generally known can be rendered in English as 'blessed peace') is remembered mainly not on account of his poetry but because of his death in action during the First World War. Early in 1917 he enlisted with the 15th battalion of the Royal Welch Fusiliers, which left for Flanders in June, and was killed in the battle for Pilkem Ridge on 31 July. 
At the national eisteddfod held at Birkenhead in the following September, and in the presence of David Lloyd George, who made a speech calling for victory against Germany no matter what the cost, a poem entitled 'Yr arwr' ('The hero'), which had been posted from the trenches by a poet using the pseudonym Fleur-de-lis, was awarded the oaken chair, the prize traditionally reserved for the author of the winning poem in strict metre. When it was announced from the stage that its author was Hedd Wyn, and that he had been killed on the western front, the chair was draped in black, causing great emotion in the audience, and the usual pageantry did not take place. A number of his fellow poets then paid tribute in verse to Hedd Wyn, whose only ambition had been to win the major competition at the festival. To many in Wales, which lost a disproportionate number of its young men on the field of battle, Hedd Wyn's death seemed to represent the sacrifice of a whole generation. 
The Irish poet Francis Ledwidge was killed at Ypres on the same day as Hedd Wyn; both poets were buried in the military cemetery at Artillery Wood near Boesinghe, where the Welshman's gravestone bears the words 'Y prifardd Hedd Wyn' ('The chief poet Hedd Wyn'), a bardic title bestowed on those who distinguish themselves by winning the principal literary prizes at the national eisteddfod. 
A collection of Hedd Wyn's poems, edited by J. J. Williams, was published under the title 'Cerddi'r bugail' ('Poems of the Shepherd') in 1918; it included 'Yr arwr', which relates the myth of Prometheus to Christian symbolism and was written under the influence of Shelley's poem 'The Revolt of Islam'. 
The sequence of 'englynion' by R. Williams Parry beginning 'Y bardd trwm dan bridd tramor' ('The poet who lies heavily under foreign soil'), often sung to harp accompaniment and the tune 'Troytes Chant', was composed in memory of Hedd Wyn; the bronze statue portraying the poet as a shepherd which stands in the centre of Trawsfynydd was unveiled by his mother in 1923. The film 'Hedd Wyn', made in 1992, was nominated for an Oscar; its author, Alan Llwyd, also wrote a biography of the poet, 'Gwae fi fy myw' (1991). The poet's home, Yr Ysgwrn, which has not changed much since the poet's day, is now a small museum dedicated to his memory; among the artefacts on display is the 'black chair of Birkenhead'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60747


Mackintosh, Allan Roy (1936-1995), physicist, was born on 22 January 1936 in Nottingham, the younger of the two sons of Malcolm Roy Mackintosh and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Williams. His brother, Ian, was born in 1927. According to Mackintosh's own account, 'The family lived in a working-class neighbourhood of very good type, with honest and helpful people. My father joined the Royal Air Force when I was four years old, and thereafter I scarcely saw him again, because my parents were divorced at the end of the war. Thereafter we were very poor, but I nevertheless had a very happy childhood, largely due to my mother, whose support and deep belief in education, together with the availability of scholarships, allowed me to attend an excellent school and an excellent university.... My brother always set an excellent example, and it was largely through his influence that I became a physicist like him. (Bleaney, 323)' After attending Haydn Road primary school, Nottingham, he went as a foundation scholar to Nottingham high school from 1947 to 1954. From there he won a scholarship to Peterhouse, Cambridge, to read physics. He graduated with first-class honours in 1957, and won the Tait prize for physics both that year and in 1958. From 1957 to 1960 he continued his studies at the Royal Society Mond Laboratory in Cambridge where, supervised by Professor Brian Pippard, he investigated the Fermi surface of metals. He gained his PhD in 1960 for his dissertation, 'Ultrasonic attenuation in metals'. 
While at Cambridge, Mackintosh met a young Danish woman, Jette Stannow, the daughter of Erik Stannow, industrial manager, and his wife, Ida, 'nee' Lyng. They married on 30 August 1958 at Birkerod, near Copenhagen. They had two daughters, Anne Karen ('b'. 1959) and Ida Alys ('b'. 1964), and a son, Paul Erik ('b'. 1962). In 1960 Mackintosh accepted an appointment as associate professor of physics at Iowa State University, Ames, where he continued his study of the electronic structure of metals by a variety of sophisticated techniques. He pioneered the use of positron annihilation and magneto-acoustic effects on liquid and solid metals. He also contributed to the theoretical understanding of various metals, including tungsten, gallium, and mercury. 
At Ames, Professors F. W. Spedding and S. Legvold had begun separation of the lanthanide (rare earth) metals. Because the chemical properties of these metals are very similar this was difficult. As soon as pure samples of the metals had been prepared the magnetic susceptibility and electrical resistivity were studied. Early measurements of the heat capacity at low temperatures in Oxford started with the lighter elements, moving on to terbium, which has a large hyperfine structure. Attempts at Ames to interpret preliminary measurements by neutron scattering on polycrystalline metals showed that single crystals were needed. The first samples of sufficient size for a range of measurements were prepared there in the late 1950s. They revealed that the magnetic properties are unusually complicated through the interplay of exchange and crystal field interactions. Clearly, further investigations would form a challenge to the inquisitive physicist. Mackintosh took this up and established himself as the leading expert in this new field. Following a sabbatical year (1963-4) at the Danish National Laboratory, Riso, he realized that neutron scattering could provide precise information on the magnetic and lattice dynamics of the lanthanide metals. 
Mackintosh and his family moved permanently to Denmark in 1966. After four years as research professor at the Technical High School (later renamed the Technical University of Denmark) he was appointed professor of physics at Copenhagen University. In 1971 he became director of the National Laboratory at Riso, near Roskilde. Mackintosh had taken with him some single crystals of rare earth metals. On these, using a new reactor and novel techniques for neutron scattering experiments, with Hans Bjerrum Moller and others he made the first measurements on spin waves and magnetic structures. After the lighter lanthanide elements he studied some alloys and found that the interactions were anisotropic and again very complicated. In addition to his own work he provided the motivation and encouragement for many others, in England as well as in Denmark. He remained as director of the Danish National Laboratory until 1976, when he returned to his chair in Copenhagen. 
In later years Mackintosh turned his attention to the history of physics, including the first use of computers for calculations. At a conference, in an after-dinner speech later published as a posthumous paper in 'Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London' (1997), he compared the work of Ernest Rutherford and Niels Bohr. His title, 'The crocodile and the elephant', alluded to the crocodile carved on the wall of the Royal Society Mond Laboratory in Cambridge, and the order of the Elephant, one of the highest Danish national honours, awarded to Bohr. An earlier publication of the Royal Danish Scientific Society, in 1980, showed that Mackintosh had mastered the Danish language -- the title (in English) was 'From chaos to order: solid state physics in the twentieth century'. He drew attention to the little-known doctoral thesis by Niels Bohr, entitled 'Studies of the electron theory of metals' (1911). At Cambridge, Bohr had attempted to interest Sir Joseph Thomson in it, without success because it was in Danish. Somewhat disappointed, Bohr turned his attention to other phenomena -- 'a loss for metal physics, but a great step forward for atomic physics' (Bleaney, 327). 
Mackintosh was a firm believer in international co-operation in science. He was president of the European Physical Society from 1980 to 1982 and served on many committees in Brussels, being particularly influential in the development of the EU large installation programme. He was a member of the Danish planning committee for research from 1982 to 1985 and director of the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics from 1986 to 1989. With Jens Jensen he wrote 'Rare Earth Magnetism: Structures and Excitations' (1991), which soon became a classic text. He was appointed a knight of the Dannebrog order in 1975, and received the F. H. Spedding award in 1986. He was elected a member of the Danish Academy of Technical Sciences in 1972, the Royal Danish Academy of Science and Letters in 1977, and FRS in 1991. He died in Roskilde, Denmark, following a car accident on 20 December 1995. He was survived by his wife and three children. A memorial symposium was held in Copenhagen on 26-9 August 1996; the proceedings were published by the Royal Danish Academy of Science and Letters in 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 60750


Hopkinson, Henry Lennox D'Aubigne, first Baron Colyton (1902-1996), diplomatist and politician, was born on 3 January 1902 at 78 Holland Park, Kensington, London, the eldest of three sons of Sir Henry Lennox Hopkinson (1855-1936), solicitor and later almoner of St Bartholomew's Hospital, and his wife, Marie Ruan (died 1949), daughter of Francis Blake Du Bois, of St Croix, Virgin Islands, and New York. He was brought up at Duntisbourne House, near Cirencester, and educated at Eton College, where he was awarded the Royal Humane Society's award for saving an airman from drowning in the Thames, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read modern languages, being already bilingual in English and French. He entered the diplomatic service in October 1924 and was posted as third secretary and private secretary to the ambassador in Washington, Sir Esme Howard. There he met and on 10 November 1927 married his first wife, Alice Labouisse Eno (died 1953), the daughter of Henry Lane Eno, a professor at Princeton University. She was an elegant hostess both in Washington and subsequently at their house in Belgravia after their return to London in 1929. They had one son, Nicholas Henry Eno (1932-1991), and a daughter, Olivia, Nicholas's twin, who died when four days old. Hopkinson's next posting was to Stockholm and when he returned again to London in 1932 it was as assistant private secretary to the foreign secretary, Sir John Simon. Postings to Cairo (where he acquired a knowledge of Arabic) and to Athens (where he acted as charge d'affaires in 1938 and 1939) were followed by yet another private secretarial appointment in London -- this time to the permanent under-secretary, Sir Alexander Cadogan. 
At the age of thirty-seven in 1939 Hopkinson was thought to be too old for military service, but when he was selected to be assistant to Oliver Lyttelton, minister of state in the Middle East, Cadogan reluctantly conceded 'as a patriot, I must agree to the best man going' ('The Independent', 8 Jan 1996). His further wartime service was in Lisbon, where he was instrumental in securing the Azores air base for the allies and where he was made CMG, and as deputy British high commissioner in Italy after the collapse of Mussolini. The war years had established his reputation as a smooth and competent supporting diplomat. 
When the war ended, however, Hopkinson accepted Anthony Eden's invitation to enter politics, first as a member of the Conservative parliamentary secretariat and research department (where he had an uneasy relationship with the liberal-minded Rab Butler) and then in February 1950 as MP for Taunton. Churchill recognized him as an unusually experienced new MP and promptly made him a member of his government in November 1951, initially as a junior minister at the Board of Trade and then from May 1952 (under his wartime chief Oliver Lyttelton again) at the Colonial Office. He was made a privy councillor in 1952. As minister of state in the Colonial Office, Hopkinson toured Africa in an attempt to garner support for the short-lived Central African Federation, which was aimed partly at prolonging white domination of Southern and Northern Rhodesia as well as Nyasaland after independence. But it was the Cyprus problem that was to be Hopkinson's undoing in the House of Commons. In a debate in 1954 he effectively stated that Cyprus would never be granted independence (six years before it in fact was), and this unfortunate mis-prediction was to dog him thereafter: 'Never say never', Churchill is said to have commented. In the government reshuffle of December 1955 Hopkinson was predictably dropped and, although Eden offered him various overseas diplomatic appointments, he preferred to go to the back benches until the following year when he was created Baron Colyton and began to play an active part in the House of Lords. 
Freed from office, Colyton came out in his true colours as a traditional -- not to say reactionary -- tory. He criticized Ian Macleod's decolonizing policies and the imposition of sanctions against Ian Smith's unilateral declaration of independence regime in Rhodesia, and he supported the regime of Dr Salazar (by whom he was awarded the grand cross of the order of Prince Henry the Navigator) in Portugal and Portuguese Africa. These views fitted well with his chairmanship of Tanganyika Concessions, with its European mining interests in Africa, and his other capitalist ventures. He became increasingly a figure of the extreme right in politics and in international business. 
Colyton's first wife died in 1953 and on 11 December 1956 he married Barbara Estella Addams, the former wife of Charles Samuel Addams, the 'New Yorker' cartoonist, and daughter of Stephen Barb, of New York. There were no children from this second marriage. They continued to live in the Jacobean manor house in Devon -- Netherton Hall -- which Colyton had purchased with his first wife and to which he was greatly attached. In the last years of his life, however, he and his second wife moved to Monte Carlo where he died aged ninety-four on 6 January 1996. His son had predeceased him, and the barony passed to his elder grandson, Alisdair John Munro Hopkinson ('b'. 1958). 
With his conventional good looks, impeccable manners, ultra right-wing views and privileged career, Colyton appeared to many as almost a caricature of a defunct breed of tory grandee. But beneath the glossy -- some said cardboard -- exterior there was a sensitive man who was more vulnerable than at first appeared, and more courageous than many apparently more robust public figures. 


@@@@@


doc= 60751


Cuneo, Terence Tenison (1907-1996), painter, was born on 1 November 1907 at 215 Uxbridge Road, Hammersmith, London, the only child of Cyrus Cincinato Cuneo (died 1916/17), artist, and his wife, Nellie Marion (Nell), 'nee' Tenison, also an artist and a relative of the poet Tennyson. His father was born in the United States, of Italian descent, and was related to Garibaldi; he studied under Whistler and was a successful magazine illustrator in London until his death, from blood poisoning, when Terence Cuneo was nine. 
Cuneo was educated at St Michael's College, Dawlish, and at Sutton Valence School, Kent. He then studied at Chelsea Polytechnic and the Slade School of Fine Art before following in his father's footsteps as a commercial illustrator, working for magazines such as the 'Boy's Own Paper', 'The Magnet', and the 'Christian Herald'. In 1931 he joined the London Sketch Club, at one of whose meetings he met his future wife, Catherine Mayfield Monro (1908/9-1979), younger daughter of Edwin George Monro, army major and company director. They married on 28 September 1934 and had two daughters, Linda ('b'. 1937) and Carole ('b'. 1941). 
During the Second World War, Cuneo was war artist for the 'Illustrated London News' in France in 1940, served briefly with the Royal Engineers, portraying underground activities in occupied Europe (the subject of a one-man exhibition) in 1941, and then served as an official war artist, producing propaganda paintings for the Ministry of Information, the political intelligence department of the Foreign Office, and the War Artists' Advisory Committee. He also illustrated the book 'How to Draw Tanks'. 
After the war the publicity manager of the London and North Eastern Railway commissioned Cuneo's first poster design, 'Giants Refreshed', showing locomotives in Doncaster railway works. This was the beginning of a railway poster career that lasted for the next half century. Cuneo designed the set of stamps commemorating the 150th anniversary of the Great Western Railway in 1985, and had a train named after him in 1990. His largest painting (20 ft x 10 ft), commissioned by the Science Museum in 1967, was of the concourse of Waterloo Station. 
Cuneo was official artist at Elizabeth II's coronation in 1953, and his painting, 'The Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in Westminster Abbey', was presented to the queen by her lords lieutenant in 1955. His paintings covering numerous other state and royal functions range from 'King George VI and Queen Elizabeth at the Middle Temple Banquet' (1950) to 'The Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Banquet, Guildhall' (1969). Cuneo was a renowned portrait painter also. Among his subjects were Edward Heath (1971), Field Marshal Viscount Montgomery of Alamein (1972), King Hussein of Jordan (1980), and Colonel H. Jones VC (1984). He painted the queen on numerous occasions; his portraits 'H. M. the Queen as Colonel-in-Chief, Grenadier Guards' (1963) and 'H. M. the Queen as Patron of the Kennel Club' (1975) were particularly admired. He held one-man exhibitions at RWS Galleries, London, in 1954 and 1958, at the Sladmore Gallery, London, in 1971, 1972, and 1974, and at the Mall Galleries, London, in 1988. He was appointed OBE in 1987 and CVO in 1994, and was president of the Industrial Painters Group and the Society of Equestrian Artists. 
Cuneo 'was immensely conservative as an artist, to a point that would make Sir Alfred Munnings look like some mad revolutionary tearaway' ('The Times'); nevertheless his works were enduringly popular. He was renowned for putting a mouse in his paintings; this first appeared in 1953 and subsequently in most of his paintings. His autobiography was entitled 'The Mouse and his Master' (1977). He was an insatiable traveller and had a mischievous sense of humour. He painted almost until his death; his last, unfinished, painting was of the channel tunnel. He died, a millionaire, at Arbrook House, Copsem Lane, Esher, Surrey, on 3 January 1996, of bronchopneumonia and heart failure, and was cremated in Leatherhead on 17 January. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 17 April. He was survived by his daughter Carole, his wife, Catherine, and daughter Linda having predeceased him. A retrospective exhibition of his railway art was held at the National Railway Museum in York in January 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 60754


Mary Elizabeth Ponsonby, Lady Ponsonby (1832-1916), courtier and advocate of women's advancement, was born at Yealmpton, Devon, where she was baptized on 19 October 1832, the second child and eldest of three daughters of John Crocker Bulteel (1793-1843), squire and master of foxhounds at Flete, Devon, who sat as whig MP for South Devon from 1832 to 1835, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Grey (1797/8-1880), daughter of Charles Grey, second Earl Grey and prime minister. She was linked to whiggery in her youth by her mother's family. Intensely religious as a young woman, she was friendly with Pauline Craven, a prominent Roman Catholic, but remained a member of the Church of England, within which she was initially strongly of a high-church inclination, even contemplating joining a sisterhood. In later life her religious opinions broadened, and she was accused of freethought and atheism. She was appointed a maid of honour to the queen on 17 March 1853, retaining the post until her marriage to Henry Ponsonby in 1861 (she broke a previous year-long engagement to William Vernon Harcourt in October 1854). 


@@@@@


doc= 60757


Lawler, Sylvia Dorothy (1922-1996), human geneticist, was born on 15 January 1922 at 33 St Clement's Road, Bournemouth, the only child of Frederick Norman Corben, owner of a furniture business, and his wife, Dorothy Agnes Gwendolyn, 'nee' Cole ('b'. 1898), a schoolteacher who survived her daughter to become a centenarian. Educated locally at Wentworth School, Bournemouth, she became the school's first pupil to study medicine and entered University College, London, in 1939. There she distinguished herself as the gold medallist of her year and qualified in 1945. On 14 July the same year she married Lawrence John Lawler ('b'. 1919/20), son of John Lawler, a motor mechanic. Laurie Lawler was then a captain in the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME); he later became a schoolteacher. They had one son, Anthony John ('b'. 1955). 
After junior hospital appointments Sylvia Lawler joined the laboratory of Dr R. R. Race at the Lister Institute, working mainly on the rhesus blood-group system whose complexity had recently been decoded by Race and R. A. Fisher. Her MD thesis, 'Blood groups and human genetics' (London, 1949), gained a distinction. In 1949 she was invited by Professor L. S. Penrose to join the Galton Laboratory at University College, London, the world's first department for the study of human genetics. There, together with Dr J. H. Renwick, she described one of the earliest linkages between blood groups and a human disease in a paper published in 1955 in 'Annals of Human Genetics'. This was the first study to exploit the use of likelihoods in large families. Their collaboration uncovered several linkages and set new standards in both documentation and analysis. The Galton Laboratory was then the leading centre for the typing of both red cells and serum for genetic purposes and, through their combined use in families with inherited disorders, established its world leadership in human linkage analysis. While still a young researcher Lawler attended an international meeting in Montreal in 1956, when the distinguished American geneticist Sewall Wright sought her clarification on some detail of the rhesus blood groups. For twenty minutes those present were privileged to hear a discussion pursued by two scientists who achieved perfection in both manners and clarity of thought. 
Lawler was appointed as research scientist at the Institute of Cancer Research in London in 1960 and became the institute's first female professor in 1980. There she developed a broad interest in the genetics of malignancy and established close links with the Royal Marsden Hospital in London, working at the interface between genetic research and patient care. At the time it was appreciated that white blood cells could be typed by difficult techniques, revealing a degree of variability unknown in red cells, and she made major contributions to the development of these tissue-typing techniques. She was fascinated by the significance of acquired chromosome abnormalities in malignancy and exploited the advent of chromosome analysis in the late 1950s as a means to characterize leukaemias. As head of the department of immunogenetics and cytogenetics Lawler laid the scientific foundation for the Royal Marsden Hospital's pioneering work in bone-marrow transplantation and became chairman of the transplantation immunology subcommittee of the National Organ-Matching Service. She was a founder member of the International Workshops on Chromosomes in Leukaemia, and also established the first national fetal tissue bank in the UK, with support from the Medical Research Council. 
A principal interest was in the genetic basis of trophoblastic disease, which encompasses molar pregnancies (hydatidiform moles) and choriocarcinoma, and in efforts to improve the diagnosis and treatment of this disease. Lawler's work on histocompatibility leukocyte antigens (HLA antibodies) provided evidence that choriocarcinomas may arise from an earlier rather than simply the antecedent pregnancy. She went on to use genetic polymorphisms to determine the origins of complete and partial hydatidiform moles. Lawler was also a pioneer in the analysis of the human genome. The department she established exerted a profound influence through the staff she trained and encouraged from both the UK and abroad, and did much to establish the concept of a genetic basis to human disease. She was remarkable for the way she supported her staff and maintained a personal interest in the careers and research of former colleagues. She was a foundation member and fellow of the Royal College of Pathologists and an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. 
Lawler's first marriage was dissolved in 1976, and on 28 January 1977 she married Kenneth Dawson Bagshawe ('b'. 1925), professor of medical oncology in the University of London, and son of Harry Bagshawe. Lawler became an emeritus professor in 1987, and despite two cardiac operations continued to be involved in the research on leukaemia and trophoblastic disease which she had established. Retirement allowed her, though, to indulge her love of the visual arts and opera to the full. She died suddenly in London at her home, 115 George Street, Westminster, on 17 January 1996. She was survived by her husband and the son of her first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 60758


Elwell, Ann Catherine (1922-1996), intelligence officer and diplomat, was born on 16 June 1922 at 12 Leinster Gardens, Bayswater, London, the only child of Robert Lionel Glass, a general practitioner and former surgeon-lieutenant in the Royal Navy, of 106 Inverness Terrace, Bayswater, and his wife, Eileen Ann, daughter of the Revd W. H. Smartt, Irish scholar and honorary canon of Manchester Cathedral. She was educated at Miss Faunce's day school in Queens Gardens, Bayswater, learning French and German from a governess, and having passed her school certificate at fifteen she was sent in 1938 to Miss Lestrange's finishing school in Florence, where she spent a year learning Italian, acquired a love of Italian opera, and became skilled in bookbinding. Back in London she learned typing, domestic science, and deportment at the Monkey Club, in Pont Street, came out as a debutante in May 1939, and began to train as an actress at the Webber-Douglas School of Dramatic Art. 
In May 1940, because of her fluency in languages, Ann Glass was recruited onto the temporary wartime staff of MI5 by the deputy director-general, Brigadier Harker, whom she had met at a party. When MI5 was evacuated from its temporary quarters at Wormwood Scrubs prison to Blenheim Palace in October 1940 she moved to Oxford, where she led a hectic and exhausting social life while working on Italian translations for MI5. In November 1941 she left MI5 to work on its behalf as a secretary, and later a scriptwriter, for the film company making 'In which we Serve', 'minding' the Italian film director Filippo del Giudice, who had been released from an internment camp at Noel Coward's insistence in order to act as art director. She returned to the London office of MI5, now in St James Street, in September 1942, for the rest of the war, and continued her endless round of parties, mixing with literary figures such as Henry Yorke, who wrote novels under the pseudonym Henry Green (1905-1974), and Cyril Connolly (1903-1974), and her American friends Charles Collingwood, one of the CBS correspondents in London, and Dorsey Fisher, press attache at the American embassy -- following the advice of her friend William Saroyan (1908-1981) to 'live while you live'. In November 1945 she was sent to Rome to take over the work of Anthony Blunt (1907-1983), and spent the next ten months looking at the secret papers that had been captured with Mussolini and going through the Italian official archives, searching for documents of interest to MI5. From the end of 1946 until 1950 she worked at the head office of MI5 in Curzon Street, investigating Russian spies, and in April 1948 was sent to Egypt to lecture on double agents to security intelligence officers in the canal zone; on this trip she contracted dengue fever, and she continued to suffer bouts of ill health all her life. 
On 24 June 1950 Ann Glass married Charles John Lister Elwell, a former naval officer newly recruited to MI5; they had two sons and two daughters. He was posted in 1950 to Singapore to a position with SIFE (security intelligence Far East), but because the head of SIFE did not like to employ women Ann had no job. She was later able to work for a branch of the commission-general for south-east Asia, engaged in countering communist propaganda, a job that she loved. 
After five years in Singapore, where three of their children were born (the fourth was born in 1958), the Elwells returned to England in 1955. Ann became a first secretary at the information research department (IRD) of the Foreign Office, set up in 1948 to counter communism. As head of the Middle East section she travelled extensively, especially to Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey, and also to Washington, collaborating closely with colleagues in the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO), who were also attempting to expose the aims of the USSR and China in the Middle East. In the belief that communist propaganda would best be countered by bringing the people of these countries into contact with representatives of the best in British life she sent distinguished Englishmen, including the footballer Sir Stanley Matthews and Vic Feather, general secretary of the TUC, on missions to the Middle East. She entertained constantly, and her ability to make friends easily contributed greatly to the effectiveness of her work for the IRD. She was appointed OBE in 1970, and on her retirement in 1971 the Ariel Foundation, an organization dedicated to Anglo-Arab understanding, gave a lunch in her honour. 
Ann Elwell combined a diplomatic career with running the family home -- a large house in Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire, which she and her husband bought in 1964. Beautiful and witty, with a deep, husky voice, she was also an excellent cook with a large collection of cookbooks, although she maintained that she did not enjoy cooking but just loved good food. She died, of cancer, on 12 January 1996 at the London Clinic, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 60761


Happold, Sir Edmund Frank Ley (1930-1996), civil engineer, was born on 8 November 1930 at 86 Francis Street, Leeds, the son of Professor Frank Charles Happold (1902-1991), professor of biochemistry, and his wife, Annie Margaret Maud, 'nee' Smith, housing economist and Labour Party politician. His parents were Fabian socialists and members of the Religious Society of Friends, committed pacifists, and involved in the Youth Hostel Association. These formative influences exerted a lifelong influence on Happold and his sister, Margaret Elfrieda. 
At Leeds grammar school Happold refused to join the school's cadet force because of his pacifist beliefs. It was wartime, and to end the consequent unpleasantness in 1944 Happold went to Bootham, York, a Quaker public school. From 1949 to 1951 he attended Leeds University, where he read geology. Late in 1951 Happold was called up for national service. As a Quaker he registered as a conscientious objector and was posted to the government's experimental horticultural station at Stockbridge House, Cawood. This gave him practical experience of building a large movable greenhouse and stimulated an interest in construction. He became a junior site engineer for Sir Robert McAlpine & Sons at an office block in Leeds (1953-4) before deciding to read civil engineering at the University of Leeds (1954-7), continuing to work for McAlpines in the vacations. With the encouragement of the architect Basil Spence, who did some teaching at Leeds, he obtained a travel scholarship to study modern architecture and engineering in Scandinavia. 
On his return to Britain, Happold began working for Ove Arup & Partners as an assistant engineer in October 1957. With a multidisciplinary approach to building and civil engineering design within one practice, Arup's ethos, and his work with leading architects of the modern movement, attracted some of the leading young engineers of the time, and Happold found the rapidly growing practice an exciting place. He worked on the design of the Sydney Opera House, a project which established Arup's international reputation, and he helped to design Basil Spence's Coventry Cathedral. He also attended evening classes in architecture at Regent Street Polytechnic. Between April 1959 and October 1960 Happold visited the United States to work with Severus, Elsted, and Krueger. He became acquainted with the cable roof or tensile structures that Severus had helped design in the 1950s. 
Happold returned to Arups in November 1960 and was successively promoted until in 1968 he became executive partner of the group known as 'Structures 3'. Early projects included Ankobra Bridge, Ghana; the science buildings at Exeter University; Knightsbridge Household Cavalry barracks in London; and the British embassy in Rome. With Poul Beckmann he established a training scheme for new graduate recruits. He was also becoming more involved in the construction industry generally, organizing a conference on education in building at Cambridge and chairing a conference at Brighton on the image of the construction industry. 
Happold's early upbringing informed some of his most important work of the time. He developed a long-standing relationship involving more than thirty projects with the London borough of Lambeth and their architect, Ted Hollanby, creating the Central Hill housing project (1965-73), and West Norwood Library (1964-9), where he held his wedding reception following his marriage to Evelyn Claire (Eve) Matthews ('b'. 1941/2), a hospital nurse, on 21 December 1967. Happold's marriage gave his energies an alternative focus to his professional work, and a long relationship which brought stability to his life. With Eve and their children, Thomas (Tom) and Matthew, he was able to pursue, in his own words 'his favourite pastime... to travel with his family experiencing together new and interesting locations' (quoted in Walker and Addis, 13). 
In 1963 Arups became involved in the design of a new assembly hall at Bootham School and Happold took over this project. His personal satisfaction was enhanced by the understanding he developed with the architect Trevor Dannatt. They collaborated on the Quaker meeting-house, Blackheath (1970-72), and more importantly on several projects in Saudi Arabia. This was at a time when few Western firms had worked in Saudi Arabia, and success there brought further prestige work. 
When Happold and Dannatt went out to the Middle East in January 1967 they met Rolf Gutbrod and Frei Otto, the prize-winners for the conference centre at Mecca. After discussion it was agreed that Arups would co-operate as engineers on the Mecca scheme as well. Otto was the leading pioneer of lightweight tensile structures, a structural form which Happold had encountered while with Severus in the United States. He had already seen and admired Otto's work. He seized on Otto's radical structural ideas, and tensile structures became a characteristic of much of his later work. In the meantime, further projects followed with Arups in the Middle East. Happold developed a strong working relationship with leading Saudi engineers and architects which continued throughout his life. 
While Happold's work in Saudi Arabia was arguably the most significant for his later career, his best-known work with Arups is probably the Beaubourg or Pompidou cultural centre in Paris. Happold persuaded the young architects Richard and Su Rogers and Renzo Piano to enter the design competition and created one of the landmark buildings of the twentieth century. To his intense regret, after two years at the helm in Paris, Happold was called back to London full-time following the completion of the foundation work. As work on the Beaubourg proceeded (1971-5), Happold was involved with a number of other significant projects such as Kensington town hall (1970-77), again with Spence; the St Katharine's Dock, London, redevelopment (1972-3) with the architects Renton Howard Wood; and the City Club, Milton Keynes, with Derek Walker Associates. 
Happold's work is generally associated with tent, canopy, and freeform tension, and pneumatic structures. Much of this work was with Otto and Gutbrod. In the early 1970s collaboration included the unexecuted design for a pneumatic supported roof to create accommodation for 40,000 people in Antarctica (1971), and a temporary humped tent for the opening ceremony at Dyce near Aberdeen of the BP Forties Field in 1975. Perhaps the most remarkable collaboration was the Mannheim Bundesgartenschau (1973-5) exhibition hall and restaurant, a timber lattice-grid shell supporting a free form PVC membrane, with Otto, and Carlfried Mutschler & Partners. 
By this time it was clear Happold was unlikely to rise to the top within the Arup organization. His multidisciplinary interests in education and the construction process, and academic background, and no doubt the prospect of a new challenge, led him to accept an offer in 1976 of the position of professor of building engineering at the school of architecture and engineering at Bath University. There he was able to address audiences combining students of architecture and engineering in a curriculum designed to preclude the compartmentalization of the design professions which often created problems within the construction industry of the time. 
Happold's interest in research, already in evidence at Arups, was now capable of further development. With the support of the Wolfson Foundation, Happold established a research group to study the performance of air-supported structures, and later the Centre for Window Cladding and Technology. The research was fed into building design partly through the work of Buro Happold, the firm he established in Bath on 1 May 1976. He envisaged the practice on a Quaker model, with all participating in discussions and consensus rather than majority voting as the basis for decision making. Happold was able to attract some distinguished colleagues from Arups, such as Michael Dickson and Ian Liddell. His view, as expressed in a speech to the Institution of Structural Engineers in 1992 ('Structural Engineer', 20 October 1992), was that 'what I know about engineering is that it has to be a group activity. The best work is done by the most diverse group of talents who can still live together.' Happold had a great ability as a team builder, and by encouraging the realization of bold ideas from young talent, he was able to attract brilliant collaborators and colleagues. 
Even after Happold had left Arups, Rolf Gutbrod insisted on his involvement alongside them on the Kocummas project for the Saudi Arabian government in Riyadh. He also continued to be involved with the development with Qatar University, a project on which he had begun working while with Arups (1975-85). From 1976 for twenty years Happold was involved in a succession of exciting projects all over the world, including the Munich Aviary (1978-82); Sainsbury's extension, Worcester College, Oxford (1980-82); the sports complex at King Abdul Aziz University, Jiddah; the British embassy, Riyadh (1981-6); the Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, and Globe Theatre, Southwark (1989-96); the Diplomatic Club, Riyadh; the Royal Armoury Museum, Leeds (1993-96); and the Tsim Sha Tsui Cultural Centre, Ocean Park Aviary, and Kowloon Park -- all in Hong Kong -- to name but a few. Some of these, such as the Munich Aviary and structures for the Atlanta Olympics, were developments of earlier work on tensile structures, but there were important works in timber such as the West Totton and Bishopstoke schools in Hampshire (1987-90), and the development of joints for green timber at Hooke Park, Dorset (1985-91). Happold became increasingly interested in developing energy-efficient sustainable buildings; some notable projects such as the pneumatic structure in Alberta (58 degree N, 1981) and the Commercial Bank competition entry for Frankfurt were not realized, but the design experience informed Happold's work generally, as later exemplified by the energy-efficient Millennium Dome, North Greenwich, London. 
Happold's engineering practice and teaching were paralleled by significant contributions to construction industry politics. These culminated in his work as founder of the Building Industry Council in 1988, acting as its first chairman. In 1990 it became the Construction Industry Council, an inter-institution multidisciplinary body reflecting his own co-operative approach. This strategy was endorsed as an alternative to the confrontation between clients, designers, and contractors which had bedevilled the British construction industry in the second half of the twentieth century by two influential government-funded reports in the 1990s: those of Sir Michael Latham ('Constructing the team: final report of the government / industry review of procurement and contractural arrangements in the UK construction industry', 1994) and John Egan ('Rethinking construction: the report of the construction task force... on the scope for improving the quality and efficiency of UK construction', 1998). 
From the late 1960s Happold's reputation won him national and international awards, in part in response to his own determination to enter design competitions, but largely reflecting his numerous contributions to engineering and design. These included the Institution of Structural Engineers gold medal in 1992, and the Murray Leslie medal of the Chartered Institution of Building in 1982. Actively involved in the governance of the Institution of Structural Engineers from 1974, he was elected president in 1986-7. He was also vice-president of the Royal Society of Arts (1991). Honorary fellowships and honorary doctorates abounded. Happold served on numerous government and other technical committees, including the Building Regulations Advisory Committee (from 1988) and the Design Council (1988-94). His many talents were reflected in his appointment as master of the faculty of royal designers for industry (1991-3). He was knighted for his services to the construction industry in 1994. 
Sir Ted Happold died at the Royal United Hospital, Bath, on 12 January 1996, survived by his wife and sons. A memorial service was held at Friends' Meeting-House, Euston Road, London, on 31 January 1996. Personally involved in the design of some of the most exciting buildings of the late twentieth century, his work as an educator, researcher, and a driving force for change in the construction process marks Happold as an engineer in the polymath tradition of the eighteenth-century founder of the British civil engineering profession, John Smeaton, whom he much admired. 


@@@@@


doc= 60762


Charlton, Donald Geoffrey (1925-1995), scholar of French literature, was born on 8 April 1925 at Haslam Maternity Home, Heaton, Bolton, the son of Harry Charlton, local government clerk, and his wife, Hilda, 'nee' Whittle. He was educated at Bolton School and read philosophy on a short course scheme at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in 1943-4 before enlisting in the Royal Navy as an interpreter in French and German. In 1946 he returned to university studies, but this time to read modern languages at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1948 with first-class honours. Elected an Emmanuel College research scholar, he was appointed the following year to an assistant lectureship at the University College of Hull. He spent fourteen happy years at Hull, where he met Thelma Doreen Edith Masters (daughter of Albert Wilfred Masters, a psychiatric nurse), who was studying to become a social worker. They married at St James's Church, Darwen, Lancashire, on 26 June 1952, and had one son and two daughters. Charlton worked for a London PhD under the direction of H. J. Hunt, participated actively in the administration of a college that was preparing its submission for a university charter (granted in 1954), became secretary and chairman of the local Association of University Teachers, and added adult education classes to his work for the French department. 
Charlton was awarded his PhD in 1955 for a thesis on positivism, which was published in 1959 as 'Positivist Thought in France during the Second Empire, 1852-1870'. This was followed in 1963 by 'Secular Religions in France, 1815-1870'. In the same year he was appointed to the chair of French at the new University of Warwick, which was planned to open in 1964. This gave him the opportunity to put into practice his ideas for a much wider programme of French studies than the exclusive concentration on language and literature then characteristic of modern language syllabuses, with opportunities to study French political and social history, philosophy, art, and soon cinema. 
At Warwick Charlton played a leading role for the next twenty-five years in the creation of one of the most successful of the new universities, while remaining for twenty-one of those years an inspiring chairman of department and creative gadfly for the humanities as a whole. In the complicated business of day-to-day administration he never lost sight of the wider educational issues, and in later years he served on the National Council of Languages in Further and Higher Education, on the committee for the Association of University Professors of French, and on the editorial boards of new journals like the 'European Studies Review', the 'Journal of European Studies', and 'Parnasse'. In 1972 he produced an influential multidisciplinary volume 'France: a Companion to French Studies', long the standard book of reference, and in 1984 a similar two-volume collection of international essays, 'The French Romantics'. In 1961-2 he had already spent a year at the University of Toronto, and he returned to North America often to lecture, to listen, and to advise on new developments: in 1966 to Berkeley, in 1969-70 to Yale, Princeton, Pennsylvania, Brown, the City University of New York, and Toronto, in 1972 to Laval University, Quebec, and in 1981 to the University of California at Santa Barbara and Riverside. A brilliant speaker, in 1983 he was invited to give the Gifford lectures at the University of St Andrews, and delivered a series subsequently published as 'New Images of the Natural in France: a Study in European Cultural History, 1750-1800' (1984). It was characteristic that when he was elected president of the Society for French Studies in 1988 he succeeded in rejuvenating the annual conference of the society with a forward-looking programme. 
Charlton encouraged broad views of cultural developments in his teaching and the same outlook governed his research, which proved most influential on the history of nineteenth-century thought. In particular the Methodist lay preacher he had once been remained fascinated by the nineteenth-century struggle to fill the gap left after the French Revolution by the loss of faith and sense of community. On retiring in 1984 he settled with his wife in Bath and was appointed to a part-time visiting professorship of French at the University of Bristol. The Festschrift that was presented to him in 1993, 'French Literature, Thought and Culture in the Nineteenth Century: a Material World', reflected the breadth of his views, and showed clearly the affection and admiration with which he was regarded by colleagues and pupils. He died of heart disease on 22 December 1995 while on holiday in Tenerife and was survived by his wife and their children. 


@@@@@


doc= 60767


Webb, Kathleen (Kaye) (1914-1996), children's publisher and journalist, was born on 26 January 1914 at Flanders Road, Chiswick, London, only daughter and second child of Arthur Webb (died 'c'.1971) and his wife, Kathleen Stevens (died 'c'.1962), both journalists. 
Webb's family had a strong journalistic and theatrical tradition. One grandfather was William Webb, whose 'penny plain, twopence coloured' toy theatres were eventually taken over by the publishing firm of Pollocks. Her father, Arthur Webb, was foreign correspondent of the 'Daily Herald' and news editor of the 'Irish Times', and her mother, Kathleen Stevens, was the drama critic of the 'Irish Times'. Webb's brother Bill worked on the 'Sporting Life'. 
When she was nine, Webb was kept in bed for a year by rheumatic fever. During this time she read voraciously, encouraged by her mother. Formal education was at Hornsey high school and Ashburton School in Devon, where she and her brother boarded. She detested Ashburton, but was fortunate in her English teacher, Ben R. Gibbs, who sent poems written for the school magazine by some of his pupils to Walter de la Mare. These were returned with the comment 'There is one exceptional poem here': it was Webb's. Years later, she met and became friends with de la Mare. 
At the age of fifteen Webb wrote replies to children's letters for 'Mickey Mouse Weekly', receiving 2died for each answer. She also wrote film reviews for her mother and in 1931 she joined 'Picturegoer' as George the Answerman, moving later to 'Caravan World' and 'Sports Car'. She later admitted, 'I didn't know a thing about it -- I read it all up in books' (interview, 'Mother', December 1979). 
In 1938 Webb moved to Sir Edward Hulton's new publication, 'Picture Post', as a secretary. When war broke out and many of the staff joined up Webb became assistant editor of another Hulton publication, the magazine 'Lilliput', in 1941. Tom Hopkinson, who edited both magazines, left her to produce 'Lilliput' practically single-handed: 'Without the war, it could have taken years to bring me to the point when I was asking Dylan Thomas to write captions, and ringing up H. G. Wells and Bernard Shaw to get articles out of them' (quoted in L. Birch, 41-4). At this time Webb was also an ambulance driver, an air raid warden, a canteen worker, and a member of the Fleet Street women's rifle brigade. She married Christopher Brierley in 1937 and then Andrew Hunter in 1942 but both marriages ended in divorce. On 12 March 1948 Webb married Ronald Searle (1920-2011), the artist who had illustrated some of 'Lilliput''s most successful cartoons about the dreadful girls' school St Trinian's. Webb and Searle had twins, a boy and a girl. 
Webb left 'Lilliput' and worked as a freelance from her home at 32 Newton Road, London W2. She became theatre correspondent to 'The Leader', wrote weekly features for the 'News Chronicle', broadcast regularly on 'Woman's Hour', and had her own television programme. With Searle she started the Perpetua Press, and she worked with him on a number of books, for which she provided the text and he the illustrations. 
In 1955 John Grigg asked Webb to edit the children's magazine 'Young Elizabethan', which he had bought from Collins. Webb worked on this magazine, soon renamed 'Elizabethan', until 1961, publishing work by many of the foremost children's authors and illustrators of the day. She also developed her special genius for communicating with children, especially through the magazine's club, which encouraged young readers to submit their own work. 
In 1961 Webb's marriage to Searle collapsed and divorce followed in 1967. Also in 1961 Allen Lane, founder of Penguin Books, asked Webb to become editor of Puffin Books, replacing Eleanor Graham, editor for twenty years, who was retiring. Webb tackled her new job with characteristic verve and enthusiasm. Publishing children's books was new to her, so she set about investigating just what children enjoyed and wanted to read. Discovering that a child could read about 600 books during the period of childhood, she determined that 'every single book must count'. Lane allowed her to publish more than Eleanor Graham's twenty titles a year, agreeing also to keep the prices low. 
There were 124 Puffins on the list when Webb arrived. Her first Puffin was J. R. R. Tolkien's 'The Hobbit'. It was on her list for only one year due to a fixed-term contract from Allen and Unwin, Tolkien's publisher. Webb widened and diversified the list, adding Young Puffins, Picture Puffins, and Peacocks. Many titles came from the explosion of new and exciting writers that appeared in the 1960s and 1970s. She published books by authors whom Graham had been unable to buy, and introduced authors from overseas. She also published Puffin Originals -- some were stories rejected elsewhere but in which she saw merit; work was also specially commissioned and there were film and television tie-ins. Some books supported charities. 
Webb became director of the children's division of Penguin Books in 1966. Like Graham before her, she believed that children deserved the highest quality of writing and artwork, whatever their age. With her instinct for promotion, Puffin sales soared, and authors longed to be 'Puffined'. But Puffin's success encouraged other publishers to start their own paperback publishing and some of the titles Puffin had made famous reverted to appear on the new lists. Each loss was a personal blow. 
Perhaps Webb's most extraordinary achievement was the creation of the Puffin Club in 1967. This was designed to cut out layers of adults, and to tell children directly about books and the authors and artists who wrote and illustrated them. Club members could also submit their own work for publication in the quarterly journal, 'Puffin Post', and competition winners' work was shown at the annual Puffin exhibition. Members enjoyed badges and books, a secret code, a song, and passwords. There were parties, activities, and holidays. Club members raised money to buy a mile of cliff for a seabird sanctuary and buried a time capsule containing Puffin books and memorabilia. Webb won the Eleanor Farjeon award for distinguished services to children's literature in 1969, and became one of the first women members of the Society of Bookmen in 1972. In 1973 she became a director of the Unicorn Children's Theatre, and chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority's local advisory committee. She was made an MBE in 1974. 
Webb ran Puffin Books and the Puffin Club with a small staff. Dedicated to her work, she demanded -- and almost got -- the same twenty-four-hour devotion to children and their books that she herself displayed. She commanded great affection and great exasperation, often both at the same time. 
Kaye Webb was about 5 feet 6 inches tall and had a mass of grey wavy hair. Her nickname of 'Fat Puffin' was not to do with her appearance, but originated with the Puffin Club. Via its magazine, 'Puffin Post', it developed characters such as Odway the dog, TOMCAT (Totally Obedient Machine, Can't Actually Think), the unreliable computer, and Fat Puffin, who was the leader of many of the cartoon puffins, illustrated by Jill McDonald. He was fat because he ate too many doughnuts, but Webb became identified as Fat Puffin because she was the chief Puffin. 
During the 1970s Webb left Newton Road, living for a while in Chiswick before moving to a mansion flat by the canal in Little Venice. She suffered for many years from osteo- and rheumatoid arthritis, ill-health finally forcing her to retire in 1979. That same year, Puffin 1295 was 'I Like this Poem', her own compilation of children's favourite poetry. She continued to work from her wheelchair, editing 'Puffin Post' until 1981, acting as children's adviser to Goldcrest Television until 1984, broadcasting, reviewing, and editing books. Kaye Webb died on 16 January 1996 and was cremated at Kensal Green cemetery. 
When Webb arrived at Puffin Books, she had already enjoyed a career in journalism which many might have envied. Yet it was her later career as a children's publisher which brought her the greatest fame, and perhaps more importantly, the friendship and gratitude of many thousands of children around the world who discovered because of her that books are fun. 


@@@@@


doc= 60769


McFadzean, William Hunter, Baron McFadzean (1903-1996), businessman, was born on 17 December 1903 in Stranraer, Wigtownshire, Scotland, the second of the three sons of Henry McFadzean (died 1918), cheese merchant and travelling instructor in cheese-making, and his wife, Agnes Wylie Hunter (died 1960). He was educated at Stranraer Academy and high school, and read law and chartered accountancy at Glasgow University, but graduated only in accountancy in 1922. Having been articled to McLay, McAllister, and McGibbon, chartered accountants, in Glasgow in 1922, he qualified as a chartered accountant in 1927, and moved to London to join Chalmers Wade. On 8 June 1933 he married Eileen Gordon ('b'. 1911/12), daughter of Arthur Gordon, of Blundellsands, Lancashire. They had one son and two daughters, one of whom was adopted. 
McFadzean moved to Liverpool in 1932 to become the accountant of British Insulated Cables Ltd, a client of Chalmers Wade. He became financial secretary in 1937 and executive manager in 1942, playing a key role in the company's contribution to war production, and he was closely involved in planning the merger with Callender's Cable and Construction Company in 1945. He joined the board of the new company, British Insulated Callender's Cables (BICC) as executive director in 1945 and after being appointed deputy chairman in 1947, and chief executive director in 1950, he became chairman and managing director of BICC in 1954. He played an important part in its growth in the post-war years from a small cable company to an international cable and construction group. He realized that if the company was to expand, it could not confine its operations to England, and he negotiated partnerships and co-operative deals, including one with Rio-Tinto Zinc (RTZ) and British Aluminium; he was deputy chairman of RTZ/BICC Aluminium Holdings Ltd from 1967 to 1973. During his chairmanship of BICC exports and overseas sales grew from $3 million to $250 million. McFadzean retired as managing director in 1961, and chairman in 1973, when he became honorary life president. 
McFadzean was knighted in 1960. He was president of the Federation of British Industries (later the Confederation of British Industry) from 1959 to 1961, and was the first chairman of the British National Export Council from 1964 to 1966, and president from 1966 to 1968. He was also a founder member of the Export Council for Europe in 1960, serving for four years, and a member of the Commonwealth Export Council from 1964 to 1966. McFadzean wanted the government to back a strong export policy for British companies. BICC was the largest employer in Huyton, Harold Wilson's constituency, and McFadzean was a friend of the prime minister, who rewarded him for his services to exports with a life peerage in 1966. 
Banking was another area which interested McFadzean. He was appointed to the board of Midland Bank in 1959, and was deputy chairman from 1968 to 1977, remaining a director until 1981. During the period of his deputy chairmanship, in 1971, Midland Bank was part of a consortium that bought Thomas Cook, the travel agent business, which had been nationalized after the war. This went on to become a profitable part of the Midland Bank group. Midland Bank was one of the clearing banks that shared in the rescue of the secondary banks during the secondary banking crisis of 1974. McFadzean was also involved in the nuclear industry, as president of the British Nuclear Forum from 1964 to 1966, and later as deputy chairman of the National Nuclear Corporation from 1973 to 1980. 
McFadzean, chairman of the Council of Industrial Federations of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) from 1960 to 1963, supported Britain's entry into the Common Market, and was one of the first British businessmen to see the advantages of a political union. He made his maiden, and only, speech in the House of Lords on 26 July 1971 during the debate on the government white paper 'The United Kingdom and the European Communities'. In this he described the Common Market as an 'inspiring conception' ('Hansard 5L', 5th ser., 65-9), and talked of the tragedy of Britain's lack of involvement in the talks leading up to the treaty of Rome in 1957. Emphasizing the importance of Britain's being part of a larger economic grouping, he argued that Britain had to join the EEC, already an economic success, in order to halt the decline of its competitive position in the world, and take advantage of the great potential of a larger market. He also thought that membership would give the British people a new sense of purpose and direction. 
McFadzean was created a knight of the Thistle in 1976. He died of bronchopneumonia, following a stroke, on 14 January 1996, at Bybrook House Nursing Home, Middle Hill, Box, Wiltshire. He was survived by his wife, son, and daughter, his adopted daughter having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 60770


Cobb, Richard Charles (1917-1996), historian and essayist, was born on 20 May 1917 at Hurstlyn, Fourth Avenue, Frinton-on-Sea, Essex, the only son of Francis Hills Cobb, a civil engineer in the Sudan civil service, and his wife, Dora, 'nee' Swindale. He was educated at Shrewsbury School and went to Merton College, Oxford, in 1935 with a postmastership to read modern history. He graduated in 1938 with a second-class degree. He immediately went to Paris to do research, but returned to England in September 1939 at the outbreak of war. 
After failing the medical test, Cobb went into the Air Ministry in a civilian post until 1941. His ambition, however, was to work either in France or with the Free French. Unsuccessful in his attempts to achieve this, he became somewhat agitated and was only rescued from difficulty by the intervention of his mother through a military acquaintance. He was sent to work as liaison with the Czechoslovak independent brigade group, which he always saw as a compromise between himself and the government. Here he helped to prepare the assassination of Heydrich, the 'gauleiter' of Bohemia. He was later attached to the Polish military authorities. Between 1944 and 1946 he served as an interpreter in France and Belgium. 
Demobilized in France, he remained there until 1955 doing research in French national and local archives. He worked under Georges Lefebvre, the professor of the history of the French Revolution at the Sorbonne, with whom he began a monumental doctoral thesis, 'Les armees revolutionnaires: instrument de la Terreur dans les departements, avril 1793 - floreal an II' (2 vols., 1961-3). He did not in fact gain the doctoral degree in France since he did not write the 'these supplementaire' which was then a requirement. 
Cobb's abiding passion for France and for the radical phase of the French Revolution was ignited during the year he spent in Paris, staying with a French family near the Porte St Martin and working on a never-completed Oxford thesis on the Hebertiste faction. During his post-war years he became completely assimilated into the world of French, mostly communist historians in this field. Although not the only foreigner in the group, he was certainly the dominant one, both by the length of his stay and by the degree of his integration. Possessed of perfect French ('Les armees revolutionnaires' was written directly in French), he was sustained through years of real penury by a mixture of small jobs and free food brought to him by a network which was based on politically tinged camaraderie, admiration for his real gifts, and affection. 
On 30 September 1952 Cobb married Francoise Suzanne Marguerite Richard (1914-1994), daughter of a French army officer; she was then working for the French national railways, SNCF. They had one son, but the marriage was dissolved in 1957. His second marriage took place at Tonbridge, Kent, on 6 March 1963 to Margaret Goggin, daughter of James Goggin, a quantity surveyor. She was then a student at Leeds University. Three sons and a daughter were born to the marriage, which lasted until his death. 
Cobb had returned to the United Kingdom in 1955 in order to take up a lectureship at the University of Wales, Aberystwyth. By his own account, Georges Lefebvre, in receipt of a letter from the head of department there seeking advice on filling a post in the field, dispatched Cobb with words to the effect that he had been too long in France and needed a proper job. It is evident that the move to Aberystwyth was an enormous rupture for him. He later wrote some compelling sketches of the sense of isolation and claustrophobia in a small university town, where the most comforting event was a weekly walk to the railway station in order to check that it was still there and escape thus possible. 
He spent the year 1959-60 as a Simon senior research fellow at Manchester University and moved to a lectureship at Leeds University in 1961. In 1962 he became a tutorial fellow at Balliol College, Oxford. It was during his ten years there that his historical writing developed a broad sweep and compelling maturity. At the same time his idiosyncratic character, unrestrained opinions, strong likes and dislikes, and fondness for liberal, noisy entertainment gave him something of a legendary reputation among students and colleagues. Many undergraduates and postgraduates found him inspirational; many people were attracted to him; few could be indifferent. 
He was elected fellow of the British Academy in 1967. In 1969 he was appointed reader in French Revolutionary history at Oxford and then, in 1972, he took the chair of modern history, which was attached to a fellowship of Worcester College. He retired in 1984. He won the Wolfson prize for history in 1979. He was an honorary fellow of Balliol College (1977) and of Merton College (1980) and held honorary doctorates from Essex, Leeds, and Cambridge (1981, 1988, 1989). He was awarded the CBE in 1978 and created officier de l'ordre national du merite (1977) and chevalier of the Legion d'honneur (1986). He died at his home, 18 Wintenbourne Road, Abingdon, on 15 January 1996. 
The quality and the influence of Cobb's historical writing -- principally 'Les armees revolutionnaires' (1961-3), 'Terreur et subsistances' (1965), 'The Police and the People' (1970), 'Reactions to the French Revolution' (1972), 'Paris and its Provinces' (1975), 'Death in Paris' (1978) -- resided, first, in his exceptional and intimate knowledge of the French archives. The range of his experience in all types of national and local collections surpassed that of any contemporary French historian, let alone any foreigner. This was largely acquired during his long years in France and refreshed by visits at every opportunity subsequently. There was a long tradition of local erudition by local worthies in France; there had also been substantial scholarly monographs devoted to a department or particular region. It was Cobb who first brought this local perspective to underpin a broad sweep of national history across France. 
The theme of Cobb's writing was popular history. He belonged to the group of historians at the time in Europe who were concerned with 'history from the bottom up'. However, he was clearly distinguished from them. He was a historian of the people by temperament and not by ideology. Indeed, it is extremely difficult to discover any theoretical basis to any of his writing. He was simply not interested in the debates about the social interpretation of the French Revolution or mentalities or political culture that divided historians in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. 
What shines through Cobb's historical writing is an intense intimacy with the individuals who form his subject matter. He had no particular historical method other than to listen to the voices of people through a great quantity of manuscript records, often police reports and interrogations, that he read assiduously. He had an exceptional empathy with the poor and the marginal in society; he had an exceptional ability to understand and capture their angers, their derision, their private concerns and rhythms of life, their personal joys and tragedies. Unlike others writing on this subject, he understood that the Revolution was not necessarily the most important event in their lives. Finally, he wrote with strong directness, full of the voices of his subjects who were given a vivid physical context. Cobb had a strong and detailed sense of place, a gift for atmosphere, and a talent for prose. 
Cobb's greatest influence was upon a generation of postgraduate students from the United Kingdom and North America at Oxford. They learned the value of the provincial history of the period, the importance of large-scale reading of manuscript archives at all levels, and the necessity of a real enthusiasm for France. This was a new direction in the historiography of the French Revolution. It cannot be said that Cobb created a school of history. His work was basically unrepeatable, given life by his own intimate relationship with it, too devoid of engagement with matters of interpretation. 
Cobb's most formal scholarly work ('Les armees revolutionnaires') was devoted to the most insubordinate and temporary of all the institutions of the French Revolution (the popular political armies of the interior). His work moved increasingly towards a concern with marginal individuals or groups and those outside society. Such figures are the least documented, only momentarily visible. This must have contributed to an apparently growing frustration with the contradiction between the essential unknowability of individuals in the past and his desire for intimacy with his subjects. These preoccupations are evident and unresolved in his last monograph, based on the inventories of Paris suicides in the 1790s ('Death in Paris'). 
It is perhaps for this reason that Cobb turned to writing autobiographical essays and memoirs -- principally 'Still Life' (1983), 'A Classical Education' (1985), 'Something to Hold on to' (1988), and 'The End of the Line' (1997). This genre allowed him to display to a high level all his talents for detail, sense of place and atmosphere, his quick sense of the absurd, and his capacity for compassion allied to derision in the face of pomposity and self-importance. These books brought him a considerable general readership. Certainly, 'Still Life' is an enduring classic among middle-class memoirs. 
Much of the power of Cobb's writing, whether historical or other, derived from the force and complexity of his personality. It is impossible to situate him in any political terms. He belonged essentially to the long tradition of English radical individualism. Temperamentally, he was insubordinate and had a quick dislike of authority, particularly that assumed with rank or office. Yet, at the same time, he had great respect for institutions, especially venerable ones, and enthusiasm for membership of them. He had also a liking for badges of rank. He delighted in the Legion d'honneur and was always disappointed when someone else wearing the distinctive red ribbon in the lapel did not give a sign of recognition of their mutual distinction. 
Indeed, Cobb saw the world very much in terms of persons, not of hierarchies or social bonds or ideas. He was curious, inquisitive, and quick to judge. Dismissive of cant, pomposity, and moralizing (he was deeply antagonistic to Robespierre -- and, hence, to dogs which Robespierre liked), he gave himself to numerous, diverse, and enduring friendships. His correspondence with friends was voluminous and a direct, vivid outpouring of opinions and narratives of the moment. He prized fidelity in friendship. Yet, he could on occasion rupture relationships irrevocably in one burst of passionate anger. Cobb lived an intensely sociable life, though it was never allowed to interfere with regular daily habits of research and writing. He loved rather schoolboy pranks and the company of students, as well as of like-minded colleagues. Lavish and prolonged evenings in common room and pub echoed similar releases of high spirits in Paris. 
The French saw Cobb as a Jacobin. However, his very English individualism did not translate into such institutionalized radicalism. He was not much concerned with the approval or disapproval of anyone. Indeed, this tension of cultures ran beneath his apparently complete absorption into France. France provided him with a second identity, as the title of one of his books put it. Revealed first perhaps by his choice of long-distance running as a means of securing a secret life at boarding-school, Cobb needed a separate world to step into. History certainly provided this for him. He lived with an imaginative landscape activated by memories, people, situations, history, and even place names. It was not the least of his complexities that such a sociable temperament should have co-existed with such a private other world of imagination. 


@@@@@


doc= 60771


Levison, Wilhelm (1876-1947), historian and philologist, was born on 27 May 1876 in Dusseldorf, Germany, the elder son of the two children of Hermann Levison (1839-1886), merchant, and his wife, Josephine Goldschmidt (1845-1916). The Levison family, whose origins in Siegburg are traceable at least to the end of the seventeenth century, was by the mid-nineteenth century an assimilated German Jewish family, and consequently Wilhelm received a general non-Jewish education at the municipal grammar school in Dusseldorf. In 1894 Levison began his studies at the University of Bonn (spending one semester in Berlin), and in January 1898 he passed his exam and received his doctorate 'summa cum laude'. His thesis, entitled 'Die Beurkundung des Civilstandes Altertum', written under the supervision of Heinrich Nissen (1839-1912), was the first Bonn dissertation in ancient history to be written in German. On 1 January 1899 Levison joined the staff of the Monumenta Germaniae Historica (MGH) and worked with Bruno Krusch (1857-1940) on the grand project of the 'scriptores rerum Merovingicarum' until 1920. At the same time he also worked as an archivist in Hanover (1899) and Breslau (1900), and in 1903 he was offered a teaching post as 'Privatdozent' at the University of Bonn, where he taught for the next thirty-two years. 
In 1909 Levison received the title of professor. In 1917, after the death of his mother, whom he had supported with his modest income, Levison married Elsa Freundlich (1888-1966); they had no children. Levison's academic career went from strength to strength. In 1920 he was installed in a full chair of medieval and modern history at the University of Bonn, and in 1925 he was elected a full member of the MGH's directorate. By 1930 Levison was not only one of Germany's leading medievalists, but also a well known and highly respected scholar throughout the world. In 1931 he was made an honorary DLitt by the University of Durham in recognition of his contributions to Anglo-Saxon studies and the early history of the north of England. 
During the early years of the 1930s Levison, the liberal open-minded Jew, watched with great dismay the rise of the right in Germany. Because of his stature and fame he was allowed to keep his position in Bonn during the early years of the Nazi regime, but not for long. Life in Bonn became increasingly difficult, and following the Nuremberg laws of 1935 Levison was forced to leave his position at the university. A further blow came when in 1938 Jews were forbidden to use public libraries. Urged to leave Germany by his younger brother Arthur (1881-1949), who had lived in England since 1899, Levison accepted an offer made to him in 1939 by James Fitzjames Duff, the vice-chancellor of Durham University and warden of the Durham colleges (through the mediation of his old friend, the Anglo-Saxonist Bertram Colgrave) to become an honorary fellow of Durham University. On 16 April 1939 Levison and his wife left Germany and moved to Durham, where he spent the rest of his life. 
Levison, who was over sixty by this time, did not stop working on his research. He was invited to be the Ford lecturer in English history at Oxford University; his lectures, delivered in February and March 1943, were later published as 'England and the Continent in the Eighth Century' (1946). Still a landmark in early medieval studies, the book in more than one respect represents a grateful tribute to the British people, written by one of the greatest scholars who found a refuge in the British Isles. In his preface to the book he thankfully mentions 'the kindness and humanity of so many, who, in this [Durham] University and outside it, have striven to persuade us to find a positive answer to the question of Goethe's Iphigenia, whether a foreign country can become to anybody a fatherland' (p. vii). 'May these pages', he added, 'in their small way, contribute to join again broken links, when the works of peace have resumed their place lost in the turmoil of war' (p. vi). 
When the war was over Levison's students and colleagues in Bonn were planning to celebrate his seventieth birthday with the publication of a volume containing some of his most outstanding papers. However, Levison did not survive to see these plans materialize. In the summer of 1946 he suffered a severe heart attack, from which he never fully recovered, and after a second heart attack he died at his home, 4 Victoria Terrace, Durham, on 17 January 1947. He was buried in Durham. He bequeathed all his books (more than 1000 volumes) to Durham University Library, with the proviso that the University of Bonn might claim from them works lost from certain Bonn libraries as the result of the war damage. His personal and other papers were sorted by his widow and divided between the two libraries. 
Levison was one of the most important medievalists of his generation, and certainly the most innovative and thought-provoking of them all. In many respects he is the founder of what may be termed the German school of early medieval studies. As an associate of the MGH, first as a 'Mitarbeiter' and later as a member of the governing board, Levison set the tone for the MGH's agenda for many years, and his editions of Merovingian as well as Carolingian texts are still irreplaceable. His many articles and papers, although written more than half a century ago, remain valuable, despite the huge amount of research that has since been undertaken in the field. Levison also trained a generation of early medievalists, and his legacy is admired and followed by many early medievalists in Germany and throughout the world. Those who knew him recalled his magnanimity as his first and most obvious characteristic, aside from his academic achievement. Many of his colleagues and students did not turn their back upon him when things became difficult in the early 1930s; between 1930 and 1933 Levison supervised no less than seven dissertations. Years later he recalled 'with grateful mind' the old pre-war colleagues and students from his 'alma mater Bonnensis' and the MGH, 'many of whom did not bow the knee to Baal, but remained faithful till the hour of parting could no longer be avoided' ('England and the Continent', vii). 


@@@@@


doc= 60772


Dryden, Sir Henry Edward Leigh, fourth baronet and seventh baronet (1818-1899), archaeologist and antiquary, was born on 17 August 1818 at Adlestrop, Gloucestershire, the eldest of the three children of the Revd Sir Henry Dryden, third baronet (1787-1837), and Elizabeth (1782-1851), daughter of the Revd Julius Hutchinson, of Woodhall Park, Hertfordshire, and Owlthorpe, Nottinghamshire. He was educated at Shrewsbury School, where, according to Dr Butler, he 'didn't at all shine in academic subjects, but he was good at drawing' (Sargant, 86). He was nineteen and studying at Trinity College, Cambridge, when he inherited the baronetcy and its debts. In 1874 he enlarged the title by succeeding to that of his cousin Sir Edward Page-Turner, as seventh baronet. By then, however, he was a much-loved squire in Northamptonshire, where he was a deputy lieutenant and local magistrate and had been high sheriff in 1844 when Queen Victoria and Prince Albert visited the county. 
Sir Henry, as he was universally known, owed his popularity to a genial nature formed by his old-fashioned values, sharp yet kind wit, and notable eccentricity. He was scrupulous in observing the English Sunday and had a paternalistic view of Christian duty towards the community. He regularly practised with local church choirs, among which he introduced the Hullah-Wilhem method for teaching singing. He built schools for his neighbours, together with cottages and other vernacular buildings, and was the first chairman of Canons Ashby parish council. He had his clothes made in the villages, and dressed in an out-of-date fashion. In these outfits he would befriend tramps and recommend Canons Ashby House as a place to beg a meal; getting there by a short cut, he would astonish the subsequent caller by becoming his host. 
Dryden acquired the nickname 'the Antiquary' from his passion for exploring ancient churches, ruins, and other monuments, all of which he investigated with close attention to detail. His methods were truly archaeological, involving careful observation and recording by accurate drawing and measured survey. The exactness of his plans was notorious among contemporaries, who told how he had travelled 200 miles across France in order to check a half-inch discrepancy of measurement. His lifelong interest in history, archaeology, ecclesiology, and medieval architecture was characterized by thoroughness, which occasionally bordered upon the obsessive, such as setting the type for one of his publications. He deplored shoddy work, and condemned what he called the 'decadent and bastard type' of heraldry which it was proposed to include in the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England' series. 
Because Dryden collected information about many historic structures since destroyed or subsequently altered, his drawings and notes remain of value. Over 500 portfolios of plans, elevations, and other records survive, mostly as a gift to Northampton Public Library, where he helped to establish the town's museum and was its honorary curator of antiquities, costumes, and leather work. Together with letters exchanged with the leading authorities at the time, the material illustrates the wide range of his researches. These extended from British antiquities and sites of all ages to Scandinavian prehistory and the megaliths of Brittany, which he surveyed with the Revd William Collings Lukis FSA. He also worked in the Orkney and Shetland islands, in particular making measured drawings of St Magnus Cathedral in Kirkwall, Orkney, which formed the basis of a published description (1868). 
Dryden was made an honorary fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland in recognition of his archaeological work in the north. He was president of the Oxford Archaeological Society, a member of the Peterborough Diocesan Church Building Association, and a founding vice-president of the architectural society for the archdeaconries of Northampton and Oakham, in whose journal he published various papers. He was a popular contributor to the annual series of Saturday evening talks at Northampton town hall, where his inevitable banter with the audience was eagerly looked forward to, in spite of the often abstruse subject matter. According to one observer, he was a restless speaker: 'pacing rapidly from one illustration to another: now sketching an old gable on a blackboard; now calling for someone to come up and try on some ancient armour, then giving measured details of medieval houses; then thanking God that there were no Radicals in those days. (Adkins, 4-5)' Dryden died at Canons Ashby House on 24 July 1899 after succumbing to septicaemia from gangrene of his right leg, which he had scratched three months earlier while working on the estate. His brother, Sir Alfred Erasmus Dryden (1821-1912), succeeded him as baronet. Sir Henry's only child from his marriage on 24 January 1865 to Frances (1825-1899), eldest daughter of the Revd Robert Tredcroft, prebendary of Chichester and rector of Tangmere, Sussex, was 
Alice inherited her father's sense of service, becoming an earnest worker for the Primrose League and founding the Northamptonshire Home Arts and Industries Association, through which she sought to revive local lacemaking. She also had his bent for historical research, revising Mrs Bury Palliser's 'History of Lace' (1902) and compiling a series of county studies, beginning with 'Memorials of Old Northamptonshire' in 1903. Her publication of medieval manuscripts on 'The Art of Hunting' (1908) reissued some of Sir Henry's work. 


@@@@@


doc= 60773


Scott, George Gilbert (1839-1897), architect and scholar, was born on 8 October 1839 at 20 Spring Gardens, London, the eldest of the five sons of Sir George Gilbert Scott (1811-1878), architect, and Caroline Oldrid (1811-1872), daughter of John Oldrid, draper, of Boston, Lincolnshire. Scott won a scholarship to Eton College in 1852. In 1857 he began a three-year articled pupillage in his father's office in Spring Gardens, after which he worked there as an assistant. Friends then persuaded him to enter Cambridge University and Scott went up to Jesus College in 1863 and in 1866 headed the first class in the moral sciences tripos. In 1868 Scott won the Burney prize for an essay published in 1870 as 'The argument of the intellectual character of the first cause, as affected by recent investigations of physical science'. In 1872 he was elected a fellow of Jesus College, but was obliged to resign after four months owing to his marriage that year to Ellen King Sampson (1854-1953), daughter of William King Sampson, of Eastbourne, Sussex. 
On his nomination form for election as a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (declared void in 1878), Scott stated he was in independent architectural practice from 1863, but he had continued to assist his father, who passed on to him the restoration of Cheddleton church, Staffordshire (1863-6), and the restoration and enlargement of the hall and combination room at Peterhouse, Cambridge (1868-71), in both of which he used William Morris and his firm for decoration and stained glass. Scott's early career, however, is difficult to document, as all his papers and drawings were destroyed in a fire in 1870 in the house in Cecil Street, London, off the Strand, where he had rooms, a disaster that may have encouraged more freedom in designing but also affected his health. Scott subsequently opened an office at 7 Duke Street, Portland Place, while in 1872 he and his wife moved into 26 Church Row, Hampstead. 
George Frederick Bodley, his father's former pupil, was the principal influence on Scott's own architecture. With Bodley and Thomas Garner, and J. D. Sedding, Scott was responsible for changing the direction of English church design in the 1870s by using English and late styles of Gothic instead of thirteenth-century and continental models, and he went further than his friend Bodley by defending the despised Perpendicular. This was evident in his cemetery chapel at Ramsgate, Kent (1869-71), and the additions to Cattistock church in Dorset (1872-6); but the building which became most influential was his masterpiece, the church of St Agnes, Kennington Park, London (1874-91; dem.). Designed for Anglo-Catholic worship and the English liturgy, the spare Late Gothic interior, with its characteristic arch mouldings disappearing into the piers, was filled with furnishings about which there was 'the mysterious but unmistakable smell of Renaissance that hung about his most Gothic details' (H. S. Goodhart-Rendel, 'The work of Temple Moore', 'RIBA Journal', 35, 26 May 1928, 478). St Mark's, New Milverton, Leamington Spa (1876-9), was designed in a similar style but All Hallows, Southwark (1879-92; dem.), was better-known and combined the refinement of Late Gothic with the toughness of the mid-Victorian urban church. Scott's other churches included that at Eastmoors, Yorkshire (1881-2), and what is now the Roman Catholic cathedral at Norwich (1882-1910), built by the fifteenth duke of Norfolk. 
Scott was described by E. W. Godwin as 'a master and a leader in the 'Queen Anne' revival' as he showed in his domestic architecture ('British Architect', 9, 5 April 1878, 156). His only country house was Garboldisham Manor, Norfolk ('c'.1868-1873; dem.), but he designed a group of houses in Westbourne Park, Hull, and several vicarages. He also undertook work at Oxford and Cambridge. At Pembroke College, Cambridge, he built a new block (1879-93) in a Renaissance manner and enlarged Wren's chapel with rare tact and sensitivity at a time when few were prepared to defend classical work of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Scott also designed wallpaper and furniture and, with Bodley and Garner, set up the firm of Watts & Co. 'c'.1874 to produce their own designs. Scott moved in artistic circles: the architect Alexander Thomson met him at a dinner in 1871, when he 'made his appearance in black knee breeks black silk stockings high heeled shoes with large buckles, blue coat, yellow vest white neck cloth with stiffner and frilled shirt -- he is one of the Queen Ann folks' ('Alexander Thomson Society Newsletter', 11, October 1994, 11). 
Scott's diffidence towards professional practice was encouraged by a large inheritance following Sir Gilbert Scott's death in 1878. He edited his father's 'Personal and Professional Recollections' (1879), and in 1881 published his 'Essay on the history of English church architecture prior to the separation from the Roman obedience'; the previous year he had shocked members of his family by becoming a Roman Catholic. Scott's later years were clouded by mental instability and scandal, and he gradually withdrew from practice. In 1883 his behaviour required him to be confined in the Bethlem Hospital, from which he escaped to Rouen. In 1884, following a public examination under the 1862 'Lunacy Act' resulting from a petition by his wife and brothers, he was found to be of unsound mind although, as he wrote to a friend, 'here in France I have been examined by the official medicals, and have been pronounced with equal certainty to be perfectly sane, and quite competent to manage both other people's affairs and my own. I am thus insane in the Kingdom of England and sane in the Republic of France. (Scott to Edward Walford, 'The Times', 12 May 1884, 14)' Scott returned to England in 1885, but he had to be confined in St Andrew's Hospital, Northampton, in 1888 and again in 1891-2. His loyal pupil and 'coadjutor' Temple Lushington Moore (1856-1920) finished Scott's outstanding jobs other than the Norwich church, which was completed by his brother John Oldrid Scott. His wife moved the children to Hollis Street Farm, Ninfield, Sussex, in 1889 and Scott spent his last years in rented accommodation in London. He died on 6 May 1897 from acute cirrhosis of the liver and heart disease while a permanent resident in the Midland Grand Hotel, St Pancras, designed by his father. 
When admitted to St Andrew's Hospital in 1891, Scott was described as 'short of stout build, muscular and well nourished... Features regular, eyes grey, pupils equal. Hair bald on top, hair, beard, moustache and whiskers grey' (St Andrew's Hospital records). He was buried on 11 May 1897 in the Hampstead additional burial-ground in London. Of his six children, four survived infancy. One son was the radiologist Sebastian Gilbert Scott and the two other sons, Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and Adrian Gilbert Scott ['see under 'Scott, Sir Giles Gilbert], achieved distinction as architects. 


@@@@@


doc= 60774


Scott, Sir Giles Gilbert (1880-1960), architect, was born on 9 November 1880 at 26 Church Row, Hampstead, London, the third son of George Gilbert Scott (1839-1897) and the grandson of Sir George Gilbert Scott (1811-1878), both architects. Scott's mother, Ellen King Sampson (1854-1953), was the daughter of William King Sampson, of a Sussex yeoman family. In 1889 her uncle George King-Sampson died and left Hollis Street Farm outside Ninfield to the young Giles Scott, with a life tenancy to his mother, which enabled her to take her children to Sussex and escape her sometimes violent husband who, in 1884, had been declared of unsound mind. The most direct influence of Scott's father on his upbringing was to choose his school, Beaumont College, Windsor, because he admired the buildings there designed by J. F. Bentley. 
In Sussex Ellen Scott took her children 'steeplechasing' on bicycles to visit churches and she decided that her two youngest children, Giles and Adrian, should follow in their father's profession. In 1899 Scott was articled for three years to Temple Lushington Moore, his father's former pupil and 'coadjutor', but it was not a conventional pupillage as he saw little of Moore, who worked at home in Hampstead while his office in Staple Inn was run by P. B. Freeman. Although Scott hardly knew his father -- he later recalled seeing him only twice -- he became familiar with his architecture, and later remarked that 'I always think that my father was a genius.... He was a far better architect than my grandfather and yet look at the reputations of the two men!' (Scott to J. Betjeman, 19 Dec 1938, Betjeman papers, University of Victoria, British Columbia). 
With the encouragement of Moore, Scott entered the second competition for a new Anglican cathedral in Liverpool in 1902 with a 'Design for a twentieth century cathedral', for which he prepared the drawings at home in Battersea in his spare time. To his surprise, this was one of five designs chosen to go forward to a second round, in preference to schemes by, among others, Temple Moore. In 1903 Scott's design was selected by the assessors, Norman Shaw and G. F. Bodley, but it was a choice which dismayed the Liverpool Cathedral committee on account of Scott's youth, lack of experience, and religion: he was still only twenty-two, and a Roman Catholic. In the event, the compromise was reached that Bodley should join Scott as joint architect for the project. 
Although Bodley had been a close friend of Scott's father, this was not a happy collaboration, especially after the elder architect had acquired two more cathedrals in the United States to design; Scott complained that this 'has made the working partnership agreement more of a farce than ever, and to tell the truth my patience with the existing state of affairs is about exhausted' (Kennerley, 38). He was on the point of resignation when Bodley died in 1907. The separate lady chapel was then under construction and Scott promptly redesigned everything above the arcades, making the vault more continental in style with curvilinear ribs and the triptych reredos more elaborate. This first part of the cathedral was opened in 1910. In that same year the cathedral committee approved Scott's proposal completely to redesign the rest of the building: a remarkably brave decision, not least because it necessitated the demolition of stonework already executed. Scott had become increasingly unhappy with his winning design, which, for all its imagination, belonged essentially in the Gothic tradition established by his father, Bodley, and Temple Moore. With Bodley gone, 'I decided to start all over again' (Cotton, 29), and Scott made his new conception much more monumental, sublime, and, in its overall symmetry, almost classical in feeling: what John Summerson described as a 'sudden diversion of late Victorian Gothic into an equivalent of Edwardian Baroque' (Ford, 235). Instead of twin towers inspired by Durham Cathedral, Scott now proposed a single, central tower rising above pairs of transepts, which had the further advantage of providing the central space required but not supplied in the original competition design. 
Scott also greatly simplified the elevations to create a masterly balance between massive bare walls of pink sandstone and concentrated detail. Writing later, he explained how 'at Liverpool I have endeavoured to combine the uplifting character imparted by vertical expression with the restful calm undoubtedly given by the judicious use of horizontals' ('Morning Post', 19 July 1924). This, together with the rich sculptural feeling of the great reredos and other furnishings, may reflect the influence of Albi Cathedral, France (which, in fact, Scott never saw), as well as that of a visit to Spain made with Sir Frederick Ratcliffe, honorary treasurer and later chairman of the cathedral executive committee, who became a lifelong friend. Scott designed every detail in the building and the work of craftsmen and artists, such as the sculptor Edward Carter Preston and the stained-glass artist J. H. Hogan, had to conform to the architect's personal vision. 
By adopting symmetry for the cathedral, Scott imposed an obligation on posterity which ensured its completion in a very different economic and social climate and he continually refined his design as the building rose. In 1922 the American architect Bertram Goodhue described it as 'the finest modern church building without a doubt' ('Daily Courier' [Liverpool], 5 Sept 1922, 5), while for H. S. Goodhart-Rendel it was 'a scenic prodigy, displaying the great imaginative power of its designer... it has permanence as the memorial of long and arduous labour on the part of an architect exceptionally sensitive to the tastes and aspirations of his contemporaries, and permanence also as a memorial of the lofty aims of countless able artists who, in three generations, spent their efforts in the service of Romance. (Goodhart-Rendel, 252)' The choir and first pair of transepts were opened in 1924, the central tower was finished in 1942, and the first bay of the nave was opened a year after the architect's death, in 1961. The (liturgical) west end was finally completed to a revised and reduced design by his old assistant, Roger Pinckney, made for Scott's former partner Frederick G. Thomas. 
The building of Liverpool Cathedral, an undertaking on a prodigious scale, dominated Scott's life, and it was in Liverpool that he met Louise Wallbank Hughes (1888-1949), whom he married in 1914. The daughter of Richard Hughes, she had been working as a receptionist in the Adelphi Hotel and was, to the distress of Scott's mother, a protestant. Despite his astonishing early success, Scott initially had little work other than the cathedral; his first complete church was the Annunciation at Bournemouth (1905-6), in which he used the high, flush transept idea he had initially proposed for Liverpool to make a sort of crossing tower at the end of a low nave. Another Roman Catholic church, at Sheringham, Norfolk (1909-14), revealed Scott's development towards simplifying Gothic forms, and the contemporary church at Ramsay on the Isle of Man (1909-12), with its rugged tower facing the sea, displays his acute sensitivity to site. At the church of Our Lady at Northfleet, Kent (1913-16), Scott's Gothic was made more monumental and unified with horizontal banding like classical rustication, and the modelling of the tower and shallow transepts makes the building seem like a prototype for Liverpool Cathedral. Similarly experimental is St Paul's, Stonycroft, in Liverpool (1913-16), where the wide vaulted interior is cleverly expressed externally in triple transepts. 
Scott established himself as one of the most accomplished and sophisticated inter-war ecclesiastic designers in Britain in the several churches he designed for both Anglican and Roman Catholic parishes. In these buildings traditional styles were given a distinctive contemporary expression. He always took great care over building materials, and at St Andrew's, Luton (1931-2), long and streamlined behind a powerful squat west tower, interior transverse arches of reinforced concrete were expressed externally by buttresses faced in beautiful brickwork. At St Francis's, Terriers, High Wycombe (1928-30), a church of sophisticated simplicity faced in knapped flint, he demonstrated his masterly handling of natural light by omitting the west and clerestory windows so that dramatic illumination comes from the transepts and crossing tower placed towards the east. The Roman Catholic church at Ashford, Middlesex (1927-8), with its inward-sloping, self-buttressing walls, was a particular favourite of the architect. 
Scott seldom repeated himself, and he experimented with different church plans. The Anglican church of St Alban, Golders Green, London (1932-3), is cruciform and built of special thin bricks, with pitched tiled roofs over the four arms and the low central tower. The Roman Catholic cathedral at Oban (1931-51) has a massive, rugged tower of pink granite facing the sea while the timber roof raised above tall, simple piers gives the interior a grandeur out of proportion to its actual size. A. S. G. Butler wrote how 'Oban cathedral is a notable example of a design most suitable to its site and, in every way, to its purpose. It was Scott's power to grasp clearly the practical object of a building and design it on that basis. Appearance followed from the expression of this more than from a preconceived idea of beauty. ('DNB')' Scott also designed the church at Ampleforth College, Yorkshire, as well as boarding-houses for the school, and completed the nave of the church at Downside Abbey, Somerset. At St Alphege's, Bath (1927-30), and at the chapel for Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford (1931-2), he used a simplified Romanesque style instead of Gothic. Perhaps his finest chapel for an educational institution is that at Charterhouse, Godalming (1922-7), where a long, powerful mass like a fortress is articulated by a row of thin flush transepts which allow light to enter laterally as if from a hidden source. 
Scott was far from being exclusively a church architect, and his success at Liverpool led to a series of large secular commissions after the First World War (in which he served as a major in the Royal Marines, supervising the construction of defences in the English Channel). The Memorial Court for Clare College, Cambridge (1922-32), was built on the west side of the River Cam in a refined neo-Georgian or 'neo-Grec' manner in silver-grey brick. His own London house, Chester House, in Clarendon Place (1924-5), and Whitelands College at Putney (1929-31) were designed in a similar style. At Clare, a few years later, the dramatic central axis through the war memorial arched entrance was closed by the tall tower and massive wings of the new Cambridge University Library (1930-34), a building designed after study of American libraries in which windows between bookstacks were linked to leave the intervening brickwork to read as massive pilasters. The New Bodleian Library at Oxford University (1935-46), in its semi-traditional style with rounded corners, was perhaps less successful, but the technical achievement of keeping the building low in scale by building underground was considerable. More appropriate in Oxford was Longwall Quad at Magdalen College (1928-9), which continued St Swithun's Buildings by Bodley and Garner in a simplified Tudor manner. 
As an established architect, knighted in 1924, Scott was in demand as consultant on new commercial building projects in London. He acted as 'associated architect' with Gordon and Viner on the William Booth Memorial Buildings at Denmark Hill in south London (1926), where his personal treatment of the tall brick tower is unmistakable. Scott's Gothic canopy proposed in 1939 for the King George V memorial close to Westminster Abbey met with opposition, however, particularly from the newly founded Georgian Group defending the buildings on the site, and his alternative, classical design, with a statue by William Reid Dick executed in 1946-7, is not characteristic. Equally untypical but much more successful was Scott's design for the Charing Cross Road facade of the Phoenix Theatre. He was also responsible for Cropthorne Court at Maida Vale (1928-9), where a clever diagonal zigzag plan was adopted to obviate light wells. American architects expressed surprise that Scott could handle so much work; in the 1920s, Roger Pinckney recalled, 'it was a small office, not more than 8 to 10 altogether, very informal and apparently unbusinesslike, but it was our pride never to have delayed a job from lack of drawings. Sir Giles designed everything himself, down to the smallest detail, but did not do a lot of visiting. (Pinckney to Stamp, 11 Sept 1974)' Other assistants included A. G. Crimp, the office manager, Lesslie K. Watson, and Arthur Gott. 
A remarkable aspect of Scott's career was how he rose to the technological challenges of the twentieth century, for which his training as a church architect can hardly have prepared him. In 1924 he was one of three architects invited by the newly founded Royal Fine Arts Commission to design a standard telephone kiosk for the General Post Office. Scott proposed a classical design in cast iron surmounted by a Soanian dome which reflected the contemporary interest in Regency architecture (it may be significant that he became a trustee of Sir John Soane's Museum at this time). This was chosen the following year and went into production as the General Post Office's kiosk no. 2. Scott subsequently adapted his design for other kiosk types and a decade later reduced and refined it for mass production, giving the fenestration a more horizontal and modernistic character. This, the no. 6 or jubilee kiosk, was introduced in 1935 and soon became ubiquitous and a familiar aspect of the British landscape. 
Scott's resourceful talent as an industrial designer was confirmed in 1930, when he was asked to act as consultant architect to the London Power Company for its electricity generating station in Battersea. This large and controversial structure had already been designed by J. Theo Halliday, of Halliday and Agate, and the engineer Sir Leonard Pearce. Scott's evident ability to handle huge awe-inspiring masses of masonry, to balance concentrated ornament against bare wall-surfaces, was put to good effect in such buildings; he chose the external bricks, detailed the walls with 'jazz modern' fluting to humanize the structure while not denying its scale or industrial character, and remodelled the four corner chimneys to resemble classical columns. After the first half of the Battersea power station was completed in 1933, it became one of the most admired as well as conspicuous modern buildings in London. 'Whatever criticisms have been levelled against it, it remains one of the first examples in England of frankly contemporary industrial architecture', concluded Nikolaus Pevsner in 1957 (Pevsner, 'London', 1957, 510). 
Scott's success at Battersea resulted in similar industrial commissions, notably the Guinness brewery at Park Royal (1933-5), where he worked with the consulting engineers, Sir Alexander Gibb & Partners, on designing the several large brick-faced blocks; Scott wrote of such work that 'there is not nearly as much to do as might be anticipated from the size of the buildings' (Scott to H. Robertson, 17 Oct 1947, RIBA). In 1932 he was appointed by the London county council to design the controversial new Waterloo Bridge. Working with the engineers Rendel, Palmer, and Tritton and with Sir Pearson Frank, he proposed an austere and elegant structure of reinforced concrete with five shallow arches faced externally in Portland stone. After further controversy over the demolition of John Rennie's Greek Doric bridge, work on its replacement began in 1937 and it was formally opened in 1945, although without the railings or the sculptural groups at either end proposed by the architect. 
Having demonstrated such versatility and openness to new ideas, Scott was an ideal choice for president when the Royal Institute of British Architects was celebrating its centenary. It was a time when the authority of historical styles was being undermined by the impact of ideas from the modern movement in Europe and, in his inaugural address, delivered in 1933, Scott announced that 'I hold no brief either for the extreme diehard Traditionalist or the extreme Modernist and it seems to me idle to compare styles and say that one is better than another.' Scott believed in 'a middle line' and was impatient of dogma, although happy to use new types of construction such as reinforced concrete when appropriate; his approach to design was intuitive rather than intellectual. He was not hostile to modernism, and recognized its 'negative quality of utter simplicity' as a healthy reaction against 'unintelligent Traditionalism'. But although he liked fast cars (and drove a Buick at the time), Scott believed that the machine aesthetic had been taken to extremes at the expense of the human element in architecture: 'I should feel happier about the future of architecture had the best ideas of Modernism been grafted upon the best traditions of the past, in other words, if Modernism had come by evolution rather than by revolution' ('RIBA Journal', 11 Nov 1933, 5-14). 
Scott's belief in compromise and in 'gradual evolution' was to be rejected in the changed architectural climate after the Second World War, but at first enemy bombs brought opportunities. He was appointed architect for the new Coventry Cathedral in 1942, following the destruction of the town centre, and prepared a scheme with a remarkable centralized plan around a free-standing baldachin. The arrival of a new bishop in 1943 obliged him to modernize the interior with unusual parabolic arches, but this scheme was criticized by the Royal Fine Arts Commission for its compromised character and in 1947 Scott resigned, commenting that 'it is unlikely that a modernist or a traditional design will ever meet the approval of both parties.... These differences of opinion, and the formation of numerous societies, committees and commissions etc. to give them expression, are characteristics of our time; they harass the unfortunate artist and hamper the production of the work. (Scott to the provost of Coventry, 2 Jan 1947, RIBA)' Scott's scheme for rebuilding the House of Commons was less controversial. Following the decision by the wartime parliament to rebuild the chamber exactly the same size and shape as the old, a select committee sought the architect 'best qualified to provide plans in keeping with the Gothic style of the Palace' ('Select committee on the House of Commons', 4), so that Scott's appointment in 1944 now seems almost inevitable. Assisted by his younger brother Adrian and working with Dr Oscar Faber as consulting engineer, he succeeded in creating a new chamber in harmony with, but distinct from, the surrounding architecture by Barry and Pugin, while incorporating new technology and creating much more ancillary accommodation within the confined space. Scott described this as the most complex building with which he had ever been involved, and compared the new interior to that of a battleship. He followed Pugin in adapting Gothic to new purposes, but his was different, personal in style and characteristic of his time. 'Feeling as we do that modernist architecture in its present state is quite unsuitable for the rebuilding of the House of Commons', Scott wrote, 'and bearing in mind that the Chamber forms only a small portion of an existing large building, we are strongly of the opinion that the style adopted should be in sympathy with the rest of the structure, even if it has to differ in some degree in order to achieve a better quality of design. ('Select committee on the House of Commons', 8)' Although when the new chamber was opened in 1950, few had a good word to say for Scott's unfashionable 'Neon Gothic,' both the tact and the cleverness of his approach have become evident over the intervening years. 
Scott also rebuilt the war-damaged hall of London's Guildhall for the city corporation (1950-54), replacing Sir Horace Jones's Victorian timber roof with one with transverse stone arches which the medieval original probably possessed. In addition, he designed an office building to the north in his modernistic brick manner. But his greatest impact on the City of London was to rebuild Bankside power station on the south bank of the Thames opposite St Paul's Cathedral, even though the Royal Academy planning committee, which he had chaired after the death of Sir Edwin Lutyens, had advocated the removal of industrial buildings from such sites in 1944. Scott's design was published in 1947 and provoked controversy, with the architect lamely countering that 'power stations can be fine buildings, but it must be demonstrated' ('The Builder', 23 May 1947, 494). 
This Scott certainly did demonstrate in what was his supreme 'cathedral of power'. He disagreed with modernists by arguing that appropriate ornament had a purpose even in industrial buildings, and that 'contrast between plain surfaces and sparse well-placed ornament can produce a charming effect' (Stamp and Harte). At Bankside the brickwork is superb, achieving a monumentality that reflects Scott's generation's interest in the sublime monuments of the ancient world, and, in contrast to Battersea where he had never been happy with the upturned table configuration, he contrived to gather all the flues into one single chimney or campanile. Completed in 1960, the building had a short life as an oil-fired power station before becoming an art gallery, Tate Modern at Bankside, although in the conversion carried out in the 1990s by the Swiss architects Herzog and de Meuron, the symmetrical stepped profile of the principal elevation was removed. 
Scott continued to design churches in the post-war years which, although superficially conservative, reveal a continuing interest in internal structural expression. In his new Carmelite church in Kensington (1954-9), which replaced another casualty of the Second World War, Scott used transverse concrete arches pierced by passage aisles to support a continuous clerestory as well as developing his favourite motif of flush transepts. The new Roman Catholic church in Preston (1954-9) is reminiscent of his pre-war church at Luton in its repetitive length. Scott's last church was the Roman Catholic church of Christ the King at Plymouth, and he was working on the preliminary details of the executed scheme in University College Hospital when he died there of lung cancer on 9 February 1960. 
After a requiem mass at St James's, Spanish Place, London, Scott was buried by the Benedictine monks of Ampleforth outside the west end of his great cathedral at Liverpool next to his wife at a point which should have been enclosed by a 'porte-cochere' had his final design of 1942 been carried out. The marriage had been singularly happy and they had three sons, of whom two survived infancy. The younger, Richard Gilbert Scott ('b'. 12 Dec 1923), trained as an architect and became a partner in the firm in 1952, before eventually completing several projects such as the Guildhall Library, London, but he resigned from Liverpool Cathedral rather than make further economies to his father's conception. The firm of Sir Giles Scott, Son & Partner was finally dissolved in 1986. Until 1934 Giles Scott practised from 7 Gray's Inn Square, where Bodley had had his office; he then worked in 3 Field Court, Gray's Inn, and in 1956 moved to 6 Gray's Inn Square. He shared these offices with his younger architect brother, Adrian. 

Adrian Gilbert Scott (1882-1963) was born on 6 August 1882 and had also been articled to Temple Moore. He assisted his brother Giles in early domestic jobs such as Greystanes, Mill Hill (1907), and during the First World War served in the Royal Engineers at Gallipoli and Egypt and was awarded the Military Cross. His principal work was the Anglican cathedral in Cairo (1933-8; dem.), for which the first designs were made in 1918. Most of his other buildings were for the Roman Catholic church and are very similar in style to his brother's. Adrian Scott also designed his own house, Shepherd's Well, Frognal Way, Hampstead (1930), in a neo-Georgian manner. After the Second World War, during which he was deputy controller of military aircraft production, Adrian Scott rebuilt the Roman Catholic church of Sts Joseph and Mary in Lansbury, Poplar (1951-3), using a pyramidal cruciform plan similar to that earlier used for St James's Church, Vancouver (1937). Mercifully, his simplified scheme for completing the Metropolitan Cathedral in Liverpool designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens was soon abandoned. A particular success was the rebuilding of St Leonard's Church, Hastings (1953-61), which is enlivened by nautical symbolism. Adrian Scott married Barbara Agnes, daughter of the marine painter Charles Napier Hemy. He died on 23 April 1963 and was buried alongside his wife and father in the Hampstead churchyard extension. 
Of Giles Gilbert Scott, A. S. G. Butler recalled that 'this excellent architect was a man of medium height and, at first sight, not unduly impressive, in view of his high distinction. He was very modest and approachable, with a charming sense of humour' ('DNB'). Apart from architecture, Scott's passion was for golf. He lost most of his hair at an early age and John Summerson, who worked briefly in his office, was initially dismayed to find that the famous architect was a short man in an overcoat and bowler hat, with a newspaper under his arm, smoking a cigarette (he then smoked sixty a day): 'I was disappointed that the creator of so passionate a piece of architecture as Liverpool Cathedral could be so unpassioned in his person' (autobiography of Sir John Summerson). In many ways Scott had a very conventional outlook, and assistants were sometimes disconcerted by his golfing and business friends. 'He was a jovial, generous man who looked more like a cheerful naval officer than an architect' ('Birmingham Post', 10 Feb 1960), recorded Sir John Betjeman. For Sir Hubert Worthington 'his was a singularly beautiful character, free of the jealousies that so often spoil the successful artist. He bore life's triumphs and life's trials with an unruffled serenity' ('RIBA Journal', April 1960, 194). 
Scott became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1912 and received the institute's royal gold medal in 1925. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1918 and a full academician in 1922, the youngest since Turner. He was knighted in 1924 after the consecration of the first portion of Liverpool Cathedral and was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1944. He was also made a knight of the order of St Olaf of Norway for his advice on the completion of Trondheim Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 60775


Medd, Henry Alexander Nesbitt (1892-1977), architect, was born on 21 September 1892 at the rectory, North Cerney, Gloucestershire, where his father, Peter Goldsmith Medd (1829-1908), one of the founders of Keble College, Oxford, had been rector since 1876; his mother was Louisa, the daughter of Alexander Nesbitt of Byfield House, Barnes. Medd had to overcome physical disabilities as well as being the youngest in the family. Poor eyesight prevented him joining the Indian forestry service as he wished and it was decided that he should be an architect. In 1911 he was articled to the ecclesiastical designer Frederick Charles Eden who, by coincidence, would later embellish North Cerney church; he also attended evening classes at the Architectural Association in London. Repeatedly rejected for war service on medical grounds during the First World War, Medd was fortunate to be employed by Edwin Lutyens in the Apple Tree Yard office working on the drawings for New Delhi (the British having moved the Indian capital from Calcutta in 1911 and embarked on building a new imperial capital next to the old Mughal capital, 'Old Delhi'). Later in the war he worked as a turner in a munitions factory and on the erection of a large tank factory for the Anglo-American Commission in France. 
In the autumn of 1919 a meeting with one of Herbert Baker's assistants resulted in Medd's successful application to act as Baker's assistant representative in Delhi; 'Such was the fortuitous encounter which set me on the course I was to pursue for the best part of my working life', he later recalled ('What India meant to me', 44). A few weeks later Medd found himself on the SS 'Egypt' with Lutyens bound for Bombay. At Christmas, soon after his arrival in Delhi, Lutyens encouraged him to see Agra. 'On this occasion I also visited Fatehpur Sikri, always a favourite of mine, and it was on that first excursion into India's past that was laid the foundation of what has remained a life-long interest in Indian history, archaeology and architecture' (ibid.). 
Medd's task in Delhi was to receive, interpret, and, if necessary, adapt the drawings sent from Baker's office in London. These were mostly for the secretariat buildings flanking Viceroy's House and for the circular legislative assembly building required by the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms of 1919. However, although it was Baker for whom Medd acted, it was Lutyens who was his mentor and inspiration, and the paramount influence of Lutyens is evident in Medd's own executed buildings. In 1925 Medd won a competition, assessed by Lutyens, for an Anglican church in New Delhi, but the project was aggrandized following the arrival of Lord Halifax as viceroy the following year. The church (later cathedral) of the Redemption was begun in 1927 on a new site on an axis north of Viceroy's House; the central tower and dome were completed in 1935. The influence of both Palladio and Wren is evident in the design, but it is also very reminiscent of Lutyens's Free Church at Hampstead Garden Suburb in London; when Medd sent him photographs of the church under construction, his hero wrote back that he was surprised and horrified to see that Viceroy's House was being demolished. Medd also designed the Roman Catholic church (also later a cathedral) of the Sacred Heart in New Delhi, won in competition in 1927. Based on the Gesu in Rome, the interior employs the idea of a hierarchy of arches developed by Lutyens for his Liverpool Cathedral project. The west front had to be redesigned with two towers to incorporate a huge cartouche of St Francis ordered from Florence without consultation with the architect. Medd later admitted that the towers were 'rather banal. I could have done better than that' (personal knowledge). 
In 1931, on the inauguration of the new capital, Medd returned home to England and, in addition to working on the drawings for his Delhi churches, vainly attempted to resume practice by entering architectural competitions. However, unlike his Delhi colleague A. G. Shoosmith, Medd was eventually able to return to India. In 1935 he was appointed consulting architect to the government of the Central Provinces and Berar with the specific task of designing a new high court building at Nagpur (1937-42). Medd recorded that 'the work was absorbing. But I was alone, isolated, there was not a soul with whom I could discuss a professional matter other than those of a structural nature which the P.W.D. [Public Works Department] were able and willing to solve' ('What India meant to me', 45). 
In 1939 Medd succeeded Robert Tor Russell as chief architect to the government of India, an appointment blighted by the outbreak of the Second World War. His principal task was to plan the huge amount of temporary accommodation in New Delhi required by the war effort, and Medd achieved this without sacrificing a single tree planted in the new capital. 'It was a sad time for me' Medd nevertheless later recalled. 'I used to feel that, though I had a good deal to do with the original New Delhi, I was now the principal instrument of spoiling it' ('What India meant to me', 46). More congenial was involvement in restoration work at the Badshahi mosque in Lahore and at the Taj Mahal in Agra; he also succeeded in designing a new mint for Calcutta in an appropriate neo-classical style. On 21 September 1945, while on home leave, he married Marjorie Isabel Lloyd (1898-1986) of Carmarthen, the daughter of the Revd John Francis Lloyd. He was appointed OBE the following year. 
Medd left India at independence in 1947. His wife later revealed that he burst into tears on the quay at Bombay when he realized that he might never see India again. After this, he was obliged to take on work scarcely commensurate with his achievements in India until he retired from architectural practice. Although a convinced classicist with little sympathy for either the arts and crafts approach or modernism, he unsuccessfully submitted a design in a traditional Islamic manner in the competition for the mausoleum of Mohamed Ali Jinnah in Karachi in 1958. A man of strong moral convictions, always modest about his own achievements, he was pleased to be master of the Art-Workers' Guild in 1959, thus following in the footsteps of Sir Edwin Lutyens, to whose memory he remained devoted. Living latterly in Ashley Gardens, Emery Hill Street, Westminster, he died of cancer of the colon in St Thomas's Hospital, Lambeth, on 26 October 1977. A plaque commemorating him in the cathedral church of the Redemption, New Delhi, was unveiled in 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 60776


Shoosmith, Arthur Gordon (1888-1974), architect, was born in St Petersburg on 30 June 1888, one of the five sons of Henry Shoosmith (died 1918), entrepreneur, then resident there, and his wife, Alice Southern. Shoosmith was brought up in Russia and Finland before being sent to Latymer School and then to Haileybury College after winning a scholarship. In 1906 he was articled to C. Smith & Son, architects, in Reading, and attended evening classes at University College, Reading. After 1909 he worked as an assistant to M. S. Ward, Ralph Knott and E. Stone Collins, R. Frank Atkinson, and H. S. Goodhart-Rendel in succession while attending evening classes first at the Architectural Association School of Architecture and after 1911 at the Royal Academy Schools. There he became friends with Cyril Farey (1888-1954) and Alick Horsnell (1882/3-1916), both brilliant draughtsmen; he also knew J. W. Whitelaw (1886-1913), about whom he later wrote a memoir for the memorial book published after his accidental death. Shoosmith was unfit for active service in the First World War but his knowledge of Russian and German was used by the intelligence corps in prisoner-of-war camps in Scotland. 
Shoosmith returned to Goodhart-Rendel's office in 1919 and then worked for Sir John Burnet. In 1920 he won the Soane medallion and travelled in Italy. In that same year he was recommended to Sir Edwin Lutyens by the Royal Institute of British Architects to succeed John Greaves as his permanent representative in New Delhi. Shoosmith's task was to supervise the construction of Viceroy's House, and in the opinion of Henry Alexander Nesbitt Medd (1892-1977) -- his opposite number in Herbert Baker's office and later the last chief architect to the government of India -- 'its success was in no small measure due to his meticulous insistence on the highest standards of workmanship in his interpretation of the drawings sent out from London' (note in photo album III, Medd papers, department of south Asian studies, University of Cambridge). Shoosmith greatly admired Lutyens's achievement in New Delhi in which, he argued, 'East and West so blend their music that one is unaware of difference of origin. The effect is of something astonishingly original, and yet nowhere is there a wilful departure from sanctified tradition' ('The design of New Delhi', 'Indian State Railways Magazine', 4/5, Feb 1931, 428). 
Shoosmith was responsible for two buildings in Delhi on his own account. The Lady Hardinge Serai (1930-31) was a rest house for travellers and their beasts of burden which owed much to Lutyens's stylistic synthesis. As he came only second in both of the competitions held in 1927 for the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches in New Delhi, both won by Medd, Shoosmith was recommended by Lutyens as architect for the new military church to be built in the cantonments to the west of the city. Built in 1928-30, this was his masterpiece. Lutyens encouraged him in using simple brickwork: 'My dear Shoo, Bricks!... The Romans did it! Why should not Britons? You will get a fine wall, and their mass, proportion, with precious fenestration, will do the rest' (letter of 28 Feb 1928, Hussey, 493). Shoosmith's massive brick walls step back to enclose the interior volumes, creating an austere and sublime mass which echoed both the monuments of the ancient world and modern industrial structures; although exotic, however, the result was recognizably a Christian church. Contemporaries were deeply impressed; 'It is 'superb'', wrote Robert Byron (postcard to Shoosmith, 4 May 1931, formerly in possession of Mrs Shoosmith), while Christopher Hussey argued that this 'Elemental' conception 'has very definite style, appropriate both to the climate and the building's purpose. Had this church been the work of a French or German architect, Europe would be flabbergasted by the magnificently simple and direct design. But since it is the work of an Englishman, it will probably never be heard of abroad. ('Country Life', 69, 9 May 1931, 582)' The first baby baptized in St Martin's, in 1931, was Shoosmith's daughter and only child. In 1927, in Rangoon, he had married Marjorie Cartwright Reid (1894-1996), the daughter of Herbert Cartwright Reid, military dock engineer; she had been brought up in Edinburgh and studied at the Edinburgh School of Art before travelling with her parents to India. Marjorie Shoosmith advised Lutyens on inscriptions used inside Viceroy's House and executed a portrait group in the style of a Mughal miniature depicting the architects presenting models of the government buildings to the viceroy, Lord Irwin (original now in possession of the earl of Halifax). Both Shoosmith and his wife became deeply interested in the culture of India. 
Following the inauguration of New Delhi in 1931, Shoosmith was appointed OBE and returned home. With Britain in depression it was a difficult time to attempt to set up in private practice after so long an absence. Prospective commissions at home and elsewhere in the British empire all evaporated. A design for a viaduct on Western Avenue, London, made during a trial partnership with William Robert Davidge in 1937, remained unexecuted, and all Shoosmith managed to carry out were alterations to a factory in Smithfield. He was also depressed to observe that developments in Europe were undermining New Delhi as an influence in India, so that 'it is in danger of appearing as a splendid culmination to the old epoch instead of inaugurating a new' ('Present-day architecture in India', 'The Nineteenth Century and After', 120, Feb 1938, 209). In 1942 he joined the Ministry of Works, and in the following year he became an inspector in the new Ministry of Town and Country Planning; his widow considered that 'though sadly frustrated in his creative urge to design buildings, he did find some outlet in writing about them, and influencing the decisions to preserve those of value to posterity' (private information). He retired in 1957 and died of bronchopneumonia at his home, Wade's Cottage, Slindon, Sussex, on 14 January 1974. 
'Shoosmith I used to meet at lunch at the A. A. (1939-40)... [A] tired, gentle little man, quite nice to talk to but somehow crushed', recalled Sir John Summerson when discussing the several architects who had immersed themselves in India only to return to a Britain which did not care. 'All sad men... It all fits into the picture of latter-day India which Paul Scott's 'Raj Quartet' gives us' (private information). Shoosmith nevertheless deserves to be remembered. He was responsible for only two buildings, but one of them is among the most remarkable churches of the twentieth century, for in the Delhi cantonments he displayed genius. Arthur Shoosmith may also be taken as representative of so many talented architects who devoted their careers to service far away in British India. 


@@@@@


doc= 60777


Harris, Emanuel Vincent (1876-1971), architect, was born on 26 June 1876 at 3 Lambert Street, Devonport, Devon, the son of Major Emanuel Harris and Mary Vincent. He was educated at Kingsbridge grammar school and in 1893 was articled to James Harvey, architect, of Plymouth. Harris then moved to London to study at the Royal Academy Schools while working in several offices. He was first with E. Keynes Purchase, then with Leonard Stokes, and finally with Sir William Emerson for three years before joining the architect's department of the London county council, which was then erecting the buildings connected with its electric tram system. Harris was assistant architect for the generating station at Greenwich and designed several transformer stations which were also characterized by the use of an austere and monumental neo-classical style in yellow brick. The station in Upper Street, Islington, was evidently inspired by Newgate prison, the masterpiece of George Dance junior, which was demolished in 1902. 
Harris was awarded the gold medal and travelling studentship at the Royal Academy Schools in 1903 and the following year set up in practice. He was placed sixth in the competition for the Wesleyan Methodist hall in London and second in that for Torquay town hall before winning the competition for the Glamorgan county hall in Cardiff in 1908 in partnership with Thomas Anderson Moodie (1875-1948), who had spent the preceding five years as architect to the Central South African Railway. The executed design 'achieved the Roman scale he was to maintain in his work throughout his life' (Stuart Gray), and this success launched Harris on his uniquely successful and prolific career as an architect of public buildings reflecting the contemporary taste for the grand manner as an expression of civic pride and expansion. It was a career described by C. H. Reilly as 'a series of raids all over England, and mostly carried out single handed. No one of his age... has tackled so many competitions, and at the same time been placed in so many' (Reilly, 393). In 1914 Harris won that for the new offices of the Board of Trade in London, although two world wars were to pass before his much simplified version of 'the Whitehall Monster' (Summerson, 424) was completed on the site in 1959 for the Ministry of Defence. 
After the First World War, E. Vincent Harris (as he was known) won a series of open competitions for public buildings owing to his firm grasp of planning combined with his assured handling of a monumental classical language. These included Sheffield city hall (1920-34), Braintree town hall (1926-8), Leeds civic hall (1930-33), Somerset county hall at Taunton (1936), and Nottingham county hall (1937-46). In 1927 Harris won two separate competitions for two important adjacent buildings in Manchester, and while the circular central library is classical, the town hall extension is in a subtle hybrid style which respects the vigorous Gothic of Alfred Waterhouse's Victorian pile. Other departures from the pure classic included Messrs Atkinson's premises in Bond Street, London, and some of the buildings in an abstracted Tudor manner (designed with Sidney K. Greenslade) for the University College of the South West (later Exeter University), for which he had prepared a master plan in 1931. 
For Sheffield, Harris looked to H. L. Elmes's St George's Hall in Liverpool for inspiration, while in Leeds there are echoes of Wren, but his later civic buildings were designed in a simpler Georgian manner in brick, influenced by the work of Sir Edwin Lutyens. The long, curved council house at Bristol was designed in 1935 but not completed until after the Second World War. The Kensington Central Library (1955-60) was designed when the architect was almost eighty years of age and was the object of one of several public demonstrations against such conservative traditional architecture, organized by a pressure group calling themselves the Anti-Uglies. 
Harris did not only handle public buildings; he designed a church at Stewartby, Bedfordshire, and his versatility was demonstrated by the screen wall and racquets court in Carlos Place, London (1924), shielding the courtyard of 47 Grosvenor Place for Stephen Courtauld. Harris considered his best building to be 2-3 Duke Street, St James's (1910-12). His own house in Fitzroy Park, Highgate, of 1932-4 (which he gave to the London borough of Camden when he retired to Chard, Somerset) was largely designed by Donald McMorran, one of several talented architects who assisted him in his busiest years. Others included E. Berry Webber, who went on to design Southampton civic centre and Hammersmith and Dagenham town halls, and Arthur Bailey. 
Short in stature and taciturn, Harris was respected rather than liked. He wrote to McMorran in 1942 that 'we both know there is only one thing that really matters and that is 'the work'. All the rest is vanity though it does sweeten labour' (private information). Arthur Bailey recalled that 'This man was completely dedicated to classical architecture to the exclusion of all other interests and he expected and received the same approach from his staff, not only quality of work, but an austerity which would not be acceptable today; no smoking, no tea or extended public holidays, the whole office closing for the summer recess... He had no time for letters, meetings or officialdom. ('The Times', 13 Aug 1971)' Harris was very conscientious; in 1929 Reilly noted that, 'as an indication of the pains he takes with his actual buildings when he has won them, there is the fact that he has been three times to America, each time to study some particular type he was about to build' (Reilly, 393). 
Harris was awarded the royal gold medal for architecture in 1951. He was elected FRIBA in 1914 and RA in 1942, and later served as treasurer of the Royal Academy; he was appointed OBE in 1950 and was awarded an honorary DLitt. by the University of Exeter. In 1913 he married Edith Maule, the daughter of William Maule MD of Southport; she died in 1965 and there were no children. Harris died at the Cranhill Nursing Home, Weston Road, Weston, Bath on 1 August 1971 and was buried in the churchyard of St Michael and All Angels at Chaffcombe, near Chard, under a stone designed by Arthur Bailey. The RIBA holds some of Harris's drawings, presented to them in 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 60779


Proctor, Sir (Philip) Dennis (1905-1983), civil servant, was born at Foxley Hatch, Godstone Road, Purley, Surrey, on 1 September 1905, the son of Sir Philip Bridger Proctor KBE (1870-1940), a businessman and a senior civil servant during the First World War, and his wife, Nellie Eliza Shaul. He was educated at Harrow School (where he was a noted cricketer) and at King's College, Cambridge (1924-8), achieving a first in both parts of the classics tripos. He was made an honorary fellow of the college in 1968. 
In 1929, after a year at the University of Marburg, Proctor entered the civil service, serving first in the Ministry of Health, but soon switching to the Treasury, where he spent twenty years (1930-50). For a short time he was assistant private secretary to Stanley Baldwin, then lord president of the council, but was transferred out of Baldwin's office because it was feared that Mrs Baldwin would not approve of his imminent appearance as co-respondent in a divorce case involving the woman who became his first wife, Dorothy Varda or Vardas (1900/01-1951), whom he married on 4 July 1936. She had been divorced first from Jean (Janko) Varda or Vardas, artist, and second from Gerald Roberts Reitlinger, the art connoisseur, and the daughter of John Edwin Stewart, mechanical and electrical engineer. There were no children. 
During the Second World War, Proctor's work in the Treasury brought him into close contact with the Ministry of War Transport (he acquired a great interest in and knowledge of shipping), and he also served as principal private secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer, Kingsley Wood. He knew Keynes well during this time. From 1948 to 1950, as a Treasury third secretary, he had responsibility for dealing with the arts and science. 
Proctor suddenly resigned from the civil service in 1950 to take a job with a shipping company in Copenhagen, but though he intended a permanent break with Whitehall this foray into the business world did not work out, and he was fortunate that in 1953 Sir Edward Bridges invited him to rejoin the civil service as deputy secretary in the Ministry of Transport. The suicide of his wife in 1951 was a shocking blow. On 29 August 1953 he married Barbara Forbes (1917-2002), daughter of General Sir Ronald Forbes Adam, chairman of the British Council; the couple later adopted two sons and a daughter. 
In 1958 Proctor was appointed permanent secretary at the Ministry of Power, a post he held until 1965. Having been appointed CB in 1946, he was created KCB in 1959. As a civil servant, in the words of his 'Times' obituary: 'he was an effective and popular colleague in a style all his own: practical sense and good judgment battled continuously with strong views and natural impatience. The only jobs he could not do were those... which involved suppressing his personality. Where force, originality and disregard of convention were required, he was first-rate. ('The Times', 31 Aug 1983)' As permanent secretary he saw his main task as putting the right people into every job and then keeping them on their toes, the Ministry of Power winning a reputation as something of a centre of excellence in mid-1960s Whitehall. Under his supervision was developed the country's first explicit energy policy (he wrote a pioneering paper in his own hand in the late 1950s), and the framework for early North Sea oil exploration. In great secrecy, he prepared a plan for steel nationalization in the run-up to the 1964 election which he was able to present to the new Labour minister of power, Fred Lee, as he came out of no. 10. 
Unusually, Proctor was chairman of the Tate Gallery, 1953-9, while still a civil servant, having become a trustee of the gallery in 1952. A connoisseur of the arts, with many friendships in the art world, he was always passionate about painting. But he came into a difficult situation at the Tate, and there were huge battles with the then director which left their scars. He also served on the governing body of the Courtauld Institute and on a number of Gulbenkian Foundation arts committees. 
Proctor believed strongly in the traditional values of a non-political civil service, but his own politics were firmly left-wing. He once said that at Cambridge he had been a Marxist, but he was never a member of the Communist Party. As a Cambridge Apostle, and a close personal friend of Guy Burgess and Anthony Blunt, he inevitably came under suspicion as a Soviet agent and was investigated by MI5 in 1966. Blunt told his interrogators that Proctor had been one of Burgess's best sources, and Proctor himself admitted that he had no secrets from Burgess (adding he had 'no real secrets to give'). The authorities seem to have concluded that there was no evidence of treason or other wrongdoing, and that while Proctor may have been indiscreet he was not an intentional or committed spy. 
In retirement Proctor took a directorship at William Hudson Ltd, a shipping and fuel firm (1966-71). His interest in the Vaucluse region of France (where he had a second home) inspired his book 'Hannibal's March in History' (1971), praised as a piece of scholarly detective work about Hannibal's route through Gaul and over the Alps. 'The Experience of Thucydides', published in 1980, was the product of a lifelong interest in the subject. At Cambridge he had been profoundly influenced by Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson (and had indeed been Dickinson's last love). He took over Dickinson's papers from E. M. Forster and in 1973 published, with a sensitive introduction, the unexpurgated version of his 'Autobiography'. Proctor's intellectual curiosity and appetite for new experience never let up. Having a family late in life kept him young. He took up horse-riding in his fifties, studied A-level maths in his seventies, and began work on a layman's guide to astronomy. Diagnosed with cancer of the lung in 1982, he died at his home, 102 High Street, Lewes, Sussex, on 30 August 1983. His funeral was held on 9 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 60780


Madan, Judith (1702-1781), gentlewoman and poet, was born on 26 August 1702, probably at the family estate, Hertingfordbury Park, Hertfordshire, the only daughter of Spencer Cowper (1670-1728), lawyer, judge, and MP, and his wife, Pennington, 'nee' Goodere ('bap'. 1665, died 1727). 
From her mid-teens Judith Cowper composed verse, mainly in heroic couplets, characteristically in imitation and celebration of the poets she was reading. She probably met Pope while sitting to his friend Charles Jervas for her portrait. He compared her favourably with Lady Mary Wortley Montagu: '
Tho sprightly Sappho force our Love & Praise, 

A softer Wonder my pleasd soul surveys, 

The mild Erinna, blushing in her Bays. 
('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 2.138-9)' The poem concludes with a version of the comparison of sunset to moonrise, to the latter's advantage, which was later to be applied to Martha Blount at the close of 'Characters of Women'. In 1723 he sent Judith 'To a Lady on her Birthday', which she seems to have assumed to have been addressed to her, whereas the 'lady' was actually Martha (ibid., 2.180, 3.18-19). Pope suggested poetic projects as diversions to counter the depression to which Judith was subject, and in 1723 proposed that she should write 'something in the descriptive way on any Subject you please, mixd with Vision & Moral': if she wrote the descriptions, he offered, 'I would undertake to find a Tale that shoud bring em all together' (ibid., 2.202-3). 
In 1723 an outburst of rapturously lyrical poems proclaimed Judith's love for Lysander, alias Colonel Martin Madan (1700-1756), whom she married on 7 December. They had nine children, including Martin Madan (1725-1790) and Spencer Madan (1729-1813). After her marriage her writing of poetry came to a virtual standstill. Money was short and her husband often abroad, and she suffered recurrent depression. She was confirmed about 1749 and joined the Methodist circle of John Wesley and Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon, corresponding with her like-minded nephew the poet William Cowper. Her daughter Maria also published religious verse. Madan was praised as 'Cornalia' in John Duncombe's 'Feminiad' (1754), and a few of her poems appeared in the miscellanies of Matthew Concaren (1731), George Colman and Bonnell Thornton (1755), and Robert Dodsley (1755); 'Abelard to Eloisa', written in 1720 in response to Pope's poem, appeared in William Pattison's 'Poetical Works' (1728) as his own. However, much of Madan's most interesting work remains unpublished. 
Madan died on 7 December 1781 at her home in Stafford Row (now part of Buckingham Gate), London, and was buried in the churchyard of Grosvenor Chapel, Mount Street, Grosvenor Square. 


@@@@@


doc= 60782


Walsh, Octavia (bap. 1677, d. 1706), poet, was baptized at Abberley, Worcestershire, on 1 January 1677, the youngest of eight children of Joseph Walsh (1618/19-1682) of Abberley, and Elizabeth ('bap'. 1637, died 1719), daughter of Sir Bryan Palmes of Lindley, Yorkshire. Octavia wrote her earliest surviving poems at the age of fifteen, by which time her brother, William Walsh (bap. 1662, d. 1708), was a published poet and friend of Dryden, but she did not show her verses to any of her close family. 
The original manuscript of Walsh's verse (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. poet. e. 31) is a notebook containing 150 pages of drafts and copies of poems, some recipes, a note dated 22 January 1705, and a pen and wash portrait of her. Another manuscript, probably prepared by Octavia's family after her death, was listed in a bookseller's catalogue of 1962 but has not been located. It was said to contain prose discourses on religious subjects as well as poems and a pen and wash portrait of the author. The surviving poems include a few comic narratives and burlesques which sometimes hover on the brink of indelicacy; there are some pastorals; but death, solitude, contempt of the world, and the goodness of providence are more common subjects. There are some apparent references to an unhappy love affair. 
Walsh never married. She died of smallpox on 10 October 1706 and was buried in Worcester Cathedral; a long monumental inscription to her was erected on the south wall of the nave. Seven of her poems were published in 'Poems upon Divine and Moral Subjects' by Simon Patrick (1626-1707) 'and other eminent hands' (1719). The anonymous dedication of this volume claims that the authors in it were 'once dear to' the dedicatee, William Talbot (1659?-1730), bishop of Salisbury. Talbot was dean of Worcester from 1691 to 1715. One of Octavia's poems appears, with an informative headnote, in Roger Lonsdale's 'Eighteenth-Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology' (1989). 


@@@@@


doc= 60783


Holt, Jane (fl. c.1682-1717), playwright and poet, is of obscure origins, though her maiden name appears to have been Wiseman. The prompter John Downes notes that a 'Mrs. Wiseman' inherited the part of Roxolana in the earl of Orrery's tragedy 'Mustapha' from Mary Betterton some time after 1665 (Downes, 26), and this may have been the writer. A 'Mrs. Wiseman' was listed as a member of the Duke's Company about the time of the union of theatrical companies in 1682, and the United Company revived 'Mustapha' in October 1686, though no cast list from this production has survived. Wiseman may indeed have acted the part in 1686 as Betterton had reduced her schedule in the mid-1680s. 
The actress named Wiseman is probably the Jane Wiseman who appears late in 1701 when her play, 'Antiochus the Great, or, The Fatal Relapse', was acted at the New Theatre, Lincoln's Inn Fields. The exact date of the premiere remains unknown, but the play was performed in the week of 11 November, and it was published on 25 November 1701 (but dated 1702). According to Giles Jacob, Wiseman worked as a servant in the family of William Wright, recorder of Oxford, before her success with 'Antiochus'. In Wright's household she read novels and plays from his library which apparently sparked her first attempt at composition (Jacob, 301). In the dedication to John, Lord Jeffries, Wiseman provides only a general hint that 'Antiochus' is the product of a self-taught, labouring-class type as she describes her work as 'the first Fruits of a Muse, not yet debas'd to the Low Imployment of Scandal or Private Reflection'. Some time after the success of 'Antiochus', according to Jacob, Wiseman married 'a young Vintner' named Holt and retired from the stage, using the profits from her play to open a tavern in Westminster with her husband (ibid.). 
In 1717 a 'Mrs Holt' published a short book of verse titled 'A Fairy Tale Inscrib'd, to the Honourable Mrs. W --, with other Poems'. The many detailed references to the Restoration stage and to fellow playwrights among the verses serve to connect the poet Holt to the actress-playwright Wiseman. The author is more explicit about her humble origins, referring to herself as 'the meanest of the Muses Train' and describing her poetic efforts as 'artless Song' ('Fairy Tale', 26). But there are several accomplished poems in this volume, and Holt also presents herself, perhaps imaginatively, as a retiring country type, content with a 'few choice books' and her female 'Friends', far removed from the strife of London. No details of Holt's death and burial appear to have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 60785


Jemmat, Catherine (bap. 1714, d. 1766?), memoirist, was baptized on 12 November 1714 at St Thomas the Apostle, Exeter, the eldest of three children of John Yeo (died 1756), a half-pay admiral, and his first wife. The family moved to Plymouth shortly after her birth. She is known for her 'Memoirs' (2 vols., 1762; 2nd edn, 1765), the chief source of information about her life. There, she describes her father as an indifferent sailor and, at home, 'a bashaw, whose single nod of disapprobation struck terror into the whole family' (Jemmat, 'Memoirs', 1.5). Her mother died when she was five or six years old and, within months, her father had married 'a giggling girl of nineteen' (ibid., 1.10); they had five children, four of whom died. Catherine Yeo was sent to a boarding-school for a time; she describes herself as 'endow'd with a quick genius, and a propensity to learn whatever was in the reach of my capacity' (ibid., 1.16). She left the boarding-school 'to learn plain work, under the care of three gentlewomen' (ibid., 1.17), and eventually returned to her father's house. 
Much of Catherine's 'Memoirs' describes the tensions between her own 'giddy and romantic' nature (Jemmat, 'Memoirs', 1.118-19) and her father's desire to arrange a financially advantageous marriage for her. She characterizes herself as being 'used to the gaiety of public places; to a perpetual round of company' (ibid., 2.4), and the first volume of her 'Memoirs' is largely devoted to accounts of her numerous suitors. But Catherine also implies that her father resorted to domestic violence in his efforts to control her choice of husband, for she characterizes his behaviour as 'insupportable, and such as I had much rather the reader would guess at... than I should attempt further to illustrate' (ibid., 1.96). She does describe being 'lock'd... up for two months' in order to be kept apart from one of her suitors, 'during which space, I never saw a creature but the person who brought me victuals; I was neither suffered to have pen, ink, or paper' (ibid., 1.52). Finally, she 'resolved to marry the first person who should propose himself to me' (ibid., 1.166). 
Catherine's resolution resulted in marriage to a Mr Jemmat, a Plymouth silk mercer. He claimed to have 'a pretty fortune of about three thousand pounds, well laid out in business' (Jemmat, 'Memoirs', 2.1), and offered his 'affection and fortune' as a means of escape 'from the tyranny of a relentless father' (ibid., 2.7-8). After their marriage they returned to Jemmat's home and business in Plymouth: the house was 'an hog-sty' (ibid., 2.33), and Jemmat himself alcoholic and physically abusive, with 'no intentions to settle in the world, or to obtain the reputation of an upright man' (ibid., 2.33). She described their marriage: 'night after night, like a poor submissive slave, have I laid my lordly master in his bed, intoxicated and insensible: day after day have I received blows and bruises for my reward: in short, I thought I had married a man, I found I had married a monster. (ibid., 2.57)' She also soon learned that Jemmat married her in order 'to extort money from my father to pay his creditors, who were very numerous and pressing' (ibid., 2.34); when her father refused to comply, Jemmat finally went bankrupt within three years of their marriage. By this time, Catherine Jemmat had given birth to a daughter. Despite the intervention of her friends, Admiral Yeo refused to help his daughter, with the result that she was 'thrown upon the wide world for support' (ibid., 2.58). 
Catherine Jemmat employs many of the stock defences of the eighteenth-century woman writer to justify her entrance into print. At one point she laments her own romantic streak which led her to reject a marriage proposal from an 'eminent tradesman... had I been but worldly enough to have suppressed my want of regard, and to have acted like the modern young ladies, I might now have been driven in a coach and six, instead of driving myself a quill. (Jemmat, 'Memoirs', 1.119-20)' But elsewhere she suggests something more than financial motives for her 'Memoirs'. She is 'induc[ed] to... resigning the needle for the pen' in order '[t]o arraign my words, thoughts, and actions, with the minutest truth, at the tribunal of publick justice' (ibid., 1.3). Jemmat confesses that her reputation has been irretrievably damaged, but at the end of her 'Memoirs' she is at pains to demonstrate that she has not 'act[ed] beneath the dignity of my sex', and provides evidence from her acquaintances in order to 'shew the opinion that every one that knew me had of my father and husband's behaviour' (ibid., 2.59). 
Almost nothing is known of Catherine Jemmat's life beyond the events described in her 'Memoirs'. In 1762 the first edition of her 'Memoirs' was published by subscription, with an extensive list of subscribers. A second edition appeared in 1765. Her 'Miscellanies, in Prose and Verse' was published in 1766, again by subscription. She explains in her introduction that the collection 'does not consist wholly of originals', and includes pieces by friends as well as some previously published material. Modern scholars have been reluctant to ascribe any sections of the 'Miscellanies' to Jemmat herself. Her death was reported in the 'London Magazine' in November 1766. Two further editions of both her 'Memoirs' and 'Miscellanies' appeared in 1771. 


@@@@@


doc= 60786


Whateley, Mary (bap. 1738, d. 1825), poet, was born on her father's farm in Beoley, Worcestershire, the last of nine children of William Whateley ('bap'. 1694, died 1763), gentleman farmer, from Beoley, and his wife, Mary Beach ('b'. 1695), who was from Tanworth. She was baptized at Beoley on 9 February 1738. The Whateleys were well known and influential in Beoley, where John Whateley, Mary's grandfather, had been churchwarden at the parish church of St Leonard's. 
Mary Whateley first came to minor prominence by publishing a few poems under the pseudonym of Harriott Airy in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1759. One of these she addressed to Mr Copywell, pseudonym of the writer William Woty, who replied in that same magazine. In 1761 William Shenstone, the pastoral poet and landscape gardener, told Thomas Percy, collector of ballads, and his friend Richard Graves, that he had received Mary Whateley's collection of manuscripts of her own poetry, which he edited as well as praised ('Letters', 588-9). Shenstone described Mary Whateley as: 'neither handsome, nor, I believe, in affluent circumstances; has seen mighty little of the world. On the other hand, she is young, unaffected, and unassuming; and that she has generous and delicate sentiments, as well as ingenuity, may, I think, be fairly concluded from the whole tenor of her Poetry. (ibid., 158)' His doctor, John Wall, wrote a brief account of her in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1761), presumably in order to attract a readership for her poetry by demonstrating that she had the little education of 'the meanest of menial servants'. But in 1762, in an attempt to correct the impression he had created of Mary Whateley's servitude, he amended this biography and described her education as 'such as is usually given to the daughter [of] a substantial farmer [who] occupied his own estate'. Mary Whateley was taught 'reading, writing, and needlework, comprehending most of what is thought necessary. But her genius is not to be confined to such slender limits. She had a great love for literature, and applied herself with great assiduity to the reading of the best authors. ('GM', 1762)' In 1760 Mary Whateley left Beoley in order to keep house for her brother, an attorney in Walsall, Staffordshire (although, at the death of her father, she returned to Beoley for about three years, in 1763). She published her first volume of poetry, 'Original Poems on Several Occasions', by subscription in 1764. John Langhorne, who wrote the preface to this volume, also praised it in the 'Monthly Review' (1764, 445-50). On 4 November 1766 she married a widower, the Revd John Darwall (1732-1789) of Walsall, who had six children from his first marriage. John Darwall wrote music for hymns, as well as poetry and sermons, some of which he published on his own printing press: 'A Visitation Sermon' (1775) and 'Political Lamentations' (1777). Mary Darwall subsequently had six children of her own: Leicester Yonge ('b'. 1767), Whateley ('b'. 1768), Charles Henry ('b'. 1769), Harriet ('b'. 1771), Frederick ('b'. 1773), and Elizabeth ('b'. 1776). She wrote hymns for her husband's congregation in Walsall as well as epilogues and a play for local theatre. John Darwall died in December 1789 and Mary Darwall then lived for a time in Deritend, near Birmingham, with her stepson John. In 1793 she moved to Newtown, Montgomeryshire, and published by subscription her second work, 'Poems on Several Occasions' (2 vols., 1794), which included pastoral and elegiac poems mainly in quatrains with an occasional sonnet. In one of these poems, 'Lines, Occasioned by Seeing a Beautiful Print of the River Clyde' (Whateley, 'Poems', 1.14-18), Mary Darwall allied herself with the work of Robert Burns and Helen Maria Williams: '
Can'st thou the glen, or pine-topp'd hill 

Like Burns, with strains ecstatic fill? 

Or dare to touch thy humble wire, 

Where beauteous Helen's sweet-ton'd lyre 

Breathes harmony in every gale... 

' The second volume printed fourteen sonnets by her two daughters. One of these daughters, Harriet Darwall, also published her own work, 'The Storm and other Poems' (1810). 
Mary Darwall died in Walsall on 5 December 1825. In 1924 and again in 1979 the Gregynog Press, Newtown, reprinted from her 'Poems on Several Occasions' her landscape poem, 'Written on Walking in the Woods of Gregynog in Montgomeryshire, the Seat of Arthur Blayney, esq.', dated 1 July 1794, as a limited edition broadsheet. Mary Whateley's poetry has since received attention because of an increase of critical interest in the history of women's poetry generally. In 1989 a few of her poems were reprinted by Roger Lonsdale in 'Eighteenth-Century Women Poets: an Oxford Anthology'. 


@@@@@


doc= 60788


O'More, Owny MacRory (b. in or before 1577, d. 1600), chieftain and rebel, was born in Gallen, co. Leix (Laois), a son of Rory Oge O'More (c.1540-1578), chieftain and rebel, and his wife, Margaret (died 1577), daughter of Hugh MacShane O'Byrne, chieftain of the Gabhal Raghnaill branch of the O'Byrne clan, and his first wife, Sadhbh. Owny's career was conditioned by two factors: the government's elimination of his parents and four brothers during Rory Oge's rebellion in 1571-8, and the dismemberment of the O'More lordship and replacement with an English plantation. Owny's career, like his father's, oscillated between pursuing lands within the plantation or securing its overthrow. Beyond the fact that he was raised in Wicklow under the fosterage of his uncle Fiach MacHugh O'Byrne (c.1544-1597), little is known about Owny's earliest years, save that the government feared him greatly. They believed that the scattered O'Mores were merely 'waiting for Rorie Oge's son, who hath already taken in hande weappon, and is of styrring spirit', before seeking 'to kyll and spoyle the present possesors of that whych they take to be theyr right' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/132/8). To forestall this, successive lord deputies attempted to capture Owny, but Fiach MacHugh's protection ensured that he reached maturity safely. 
It was not until May 1596, while the government was preoccupied with the Nine Years' War, that Owny made his mark, successfully attacking the Cosbys of Stradbally, Leix. This was an attempt to have his claims to lands within Leix recognized because during the next month he sought pardon, protection, and 'to have lande at a reasonable rennt in Gallyn where his preedecesors and hym self werr borne'. The government's indifference persuaded him to escalate the violence. Thereafter, he harassed the settlers so vigorously that 'Leix was totally ravaged by him, both its crops, corn and dwellings, so that there was nothing in the territory outside the lock of a gate or a bawn which was not in his power' ('AFM', s.a. 1597). These martial endeavours saw a corresponding increase in Owny's standing in Leix and in October 1597 he was described as the 'chiefest of the Moores' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/201/22). Whereas he was initially willing to accept the plantation if granted land, his ambitions grew during 1597, perhaps as a result of his understanding with Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone. 
The link between Owny and Tyrone was established either through Fiach MacHugh or through Owny's brother Brian Reagh O'More, who served the earl in Ulster. Its terms appear to have been that, in return for military support and inclusion in any peace negotiations, Owny would open a front against the government in Leinster. Thereafter, Owny frequently received mercenaries and munitions from Tyrone, which he used to wreak havoc in Leinster and increase his regional influence: his assistance to junior branches of the Butler family who sought to escape the authority of Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, dates from this time. After 1597 Owny was the means by which men like Edmund Butler, second Viscount Mountgarret, sought Tyrone's favour in Leinster. 
Tyrone's support allowed Owny to transform his strategy. Rather than just waging a guerrilla campaign like his father, he was capable of engaging substantial English contingents in the field, as he illustrated in December 1597 when he decimated two English companies near Maryborough Fort, Leix. In September 1598 he attacked a relief column of 'twenty-four companies of foot and two hundred horse', led by Ormond and bound for Maryborough Fort. In this engagement Ormond 'lost more than the value of the provisions in men, horses, and arms' ('AFM', s.a. 1598). Immediately after this success Owny, on Tyrone's orders, marched into Munster at the head of 2000 men. He established Tyrone's nominee, James Fitzgerald, as fifteenth earl of Desmond and destroyed the Munster plantation. 
Owny's reputation as 'a gentleman [skilled] in the arts of war' was well established and enhanced further by his attack on Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, the lord lieutenant, at the Pass of the Plumes (Bearna na gCleti) in May 1599. As Essex marched south through Leix with 7000 foot and 900 horse he discovered Owny's forces behind prepared ground. In the ensuing battle Owny's men 'made fierce and desperate assaults, and furious, irresistible onsets on him [Essex], in intricate ways and narrow passes, in which both parties came in collision with each other, so that great numbers of the Earl's people were cut off' ('AFM', s.a. 1597, 1599). This engagement exacerbated the lord lieutenant's difficulties, coming as it did at the same time as Fiach MacHugh's great victory at Deputy's Pass near Wicklow on 29 May. 
Owny had been a thorn in the English administration's side since 1596, but his influence was mainly based on support from Ulster. His survival was due to the fact that the government's army was constantly preoccupied elsewhere until 1600. He might have survived until the end of the war but for his most famous and ill-advised exploit -- capturing Elizabeth I's Irish favourite, Ormond, in April 1600 -- which marked him out for elimination. Ormond's abduction caused considerable consternation in certain government circles because it was feared that 'therle wilbe passed over by Owny McRory to the traitor Tyrone'. However, Sir Geoffrey Fenton informed Sir Robert Cecil, the principal secretary, that he believed Owny would 'reserve him in his owne possession, to thend to make his deliverie proffitable to hymself'. Others wondered 'how farr this sodden trecherous action might alter some of the Butlers'. Owny initially planned to use Ormond as a bargaining tool to get Leix and Offaly restored to the O'Mores and the O'Connors but he was forced to abandon this course when it became apparent that many of his allies and supporters sought to dissociate themselves from the earl's abduction. The predictions by Fenton and Sir George Carew that Ormond's captivity would create breaches among Owny's supporters proved correct. Forced to move Ormond 'every night from one cabin to another', Owny appeared at a loss as to how best to use his prisoner. The rumour that the queen resolved to send large numbers of soldiers into the midlands to find Ormond 'brede such alteration in most of the Irishry' that they swore 'to be at open deffiance with him [Owny]'. Consequently, Owny was forced to release Ormond early in June. 
With Ormond's liberation the new lord deputy, Charles Blount, eighth Baron Mountjoy, could move safely against Owny. On 15 August 1600 his forces began to ravage Leix, cutting down the ripening wheat and laying waste to the country. Recognizing that Mountjoy was uninterested in concession, Owny engaged the government's forces on 17 August in the Douglas valley in 'an overwhelming and fierce battle', during which he was fatally wounded ('AFM', s.a. 1600). Fearing that Mountjoy would display Owny's head on Dublin Castle, Owny 'wyled it to be cutt of after his death and burried'. Mountjoy continued his policy of killing and displacing the O'Mores and the O'Connors until mid-1601, when the midlands had been pacified. 
Owny's death and Mountjoy's elimination of his followers meant that all the leading O'Mores were removed from Leix and finally ended the resistance of the sept or clan to the plantation scheme. The Gaelic lordship of Leix was shattered, ensuring that the planter community could return and face the seventeenth century with a reasonable degree of confidence -- a fact not lost on the annalists, who bitterly lamented the death of 'an illustrious, renowned and celebrated gentleman', who: 'had wrested the government of his patrimony, by the prowess of his hand and the resoluteness of his heart, from the hands of foreigners... until he brought it under his own sway and jurisdiction, and under the government of his stewards and bonnaghts, according to Irish usage. ('AFM', s.a. 1600)' 



@@@@@


doc= 60790


Foord, Joseph (1714-1788), land surveyor and hydraulic engineer, was born on 13 July 1714 at Fadmoor, near Kirkbymoorside in Yorkshire, the third of the four children of Matthew Foord ('bap'. 1682, died 1744), Quaker farmer and land agent of the Duncombe Park estate, and his wife, Leah (1678-1752), daughter of William and Jane Pilmoor, Quakers, of Fadmoor. 
Foord moved to Skiplam with his parents in 1734, and continued to farm at Skiplam Grange after his father's death in 1744. At twenty-nine Foord's strong Quaker affiliation was disrupted when Kirkbymoorside meeting concluded, after exhaustive inquiry, that he was the father of a child, Joseph, born at Fadmoor late in 1743 (perhaps on 31 October) to Sarah Pilmoor ('bap'. 1713, died 1778). The Society of Friends formally denied unity with Foord in March 1744. On 16 January 1746 he married Mary Anderson ('bap'. 1713, died 1779) of Kirkbymoorside; of their six children only two attained adulthood. He inherited his father's copyhold farms and water cornmills and a lease in Ankness moorland coalfield. A practical understanding of hydrology, supplemented by an intimate working knowledge of the geology of his native landscape, led him to construct an experimental water race about 1747. It ran 5 miles from moorland springs to Gillamoor and Fadmoor and was extended about 1757 to the market town of Kirkbymoorside. Between 1759 and 1768 open cuts to Carlton, Nawton, Pockley, Old Byland, and Rievaulx townships completed Foord's gravity-fed water system of some 70 miles in length. He was 'a self-taught engineer of great ingenuity' (Marshall, 1.166) whose races, starting in distant moorland valleys, supplied running water to nine villages and 'to ponds in all the fields' (Tuke, 241) of a large tract of dry limestone uplands. They functioned for much of the twentieth century. Their uniqueness as a rural water supply system has ensured their recognition by English Heritage. 
As well as being skilled in fixed-level surveying over long distances, Foord became an accomplished land surveyor. He was surveyor and commissioner for seven enclosure awards between 1763 and 1776. Between 1780 and 1785 he carried out a general survey and valuation of the 29,000-acre Duncombe estate. In 1786 Foord hired a London attorney when Charles Slingsby Duncombe refused to pay, in full, his bill for $564. The case never came to court, Duncombe being advised that Foord was an 'honest man' and as 'eminent' a surveyor as James Brindley (Duncombe, 2'v'). No personal documents survive but four court cases initiated by Foord indicate an assertive temperament. 
In 1765 he moved to farm at West End in Kirkbymoorside, where his wife died in 1779. Foord seems to have visited America in 1787. A later local source described him visiting 'the wilds of America' and dying 'when setting his foot upon the English shore' (Parker). The sea voyages must have taxed the old man's strength. He died on 23 January 1788 at Fawdington, near Thirsk, Yorkshire, in the farmhouse of his Quaker daughter Mary Flower. The record of his burial on 25 January 1788 in the Quaker burial-ground at Thirsk (then sited in an area called Barbeck, on the edge of the town) stated that he was not a member of the society. His goods were valued at under $73, including his surveying instruments at $5; his house was his only immovable property. His telescopic level and brass theodolite are preserved at Ryedale Folk Museum. 
Foord's natural son, Joseph Pilmore (also Pilmoor) (1743-1825), baptized on 13 April 1747, was sent to America by John Wesley in 1769 to further the Methodist cause. Ordained in 1785, Pilmore served as an Episcopalian rector in New York (1794-1804) and Philadelphia (1804-21). The man he called 'my father' ('Journal of Joseph Pilmore', 15) was William Sleightholme of Fadmoor, who married Sarah Pilmoor in 1754. 


@@@@@


doc= 60792


Tarleton, John (1755-1841), merchant and politician, was born at Liverpool, the third of the seven children of John Tarleton (1719-1773), a merchant, and Jane Parker (1726-1797), daughter and coheir of Banastre Parker of Cuerden, Lancashire. At his death the elder John Tarleton left an estate worth some $80,000, of which $5000 went to his son. Where the younger John was educated is unknown, but three of his brothers -- Thomas, Banastre Tarleton, and Clayton -- went to Oxford University. 
Tarleton became a freeman of Liverpool in January 1777 and went on to become a leading West Indian and African trader. By 1785 he had an office in Duke Street and was a partner in the firm of Tarleton and Backhouse; the other partners included his brothers Thomas and Clayton, and Daniel Backhouse. Through Tarleton and Backhouse his standing in Liverpool rose substantially, and in 1788 he was one of the delegation of Liverpool merchants who attended parliament to give evidence on the state of the African slave trade. In the same year he had a meeting with the prime minister, William Pitt the younger, but failed to persuade him to abandon his support for the abolitionist cause. Recounting this meeting to Clayton Tarleton, he expressed his fears for the future of the trade, 'except we can prove that it is not carried on with that shocking inhumanity that is imagined by all ranks of mankind out of doors' (Tarleton MS 920 TAR 4/5). 
Despite failing to prevent parliament from regulating the slave trade in 1788, Tarleton and Backhouse remained a prominent investor in slaving voyages. Between 1786 and 1804 the firm backed forty ships, many intended for the African trade. In March 1790, with monetary interests of some $85,000, Tarleton and Backhouse was the third largest investor at Liverpool in slaving voyages. Throughout the 1790s Tarleton seems to have been a regular partner in the firm, though he left it temporarily in 1792 after a 'very violent quarrel' (Tarleton MS 920 TAR 4/26) with Backhouse. The earnings it achieved are difficult to calculate, but one writer, referring to Thomas Tarleton, claimed that 'two scions of the Old Stile House', a former residence of Edward Tarleton (1620-1690), 'formed a partnership with a third individual, in July 1776, each advancing $5000', and in 'the course of less than twenty-seven years, their gains amounted to $233,633' (Herdman, 16). In 1792 alone $68,406 was said to have 'appeared to their credit' (ibid.). However, one cannot be sure that these claims are accurate or that they relate to Tarleton and Backhouse. Surviving accounts for the firm suggest, nevertheless, that it had a healthy balance sheet during its life. 
While remaining active in trade, Tarleton's interests shifted towards politics and real estate during the 1790s. Having joined the Whig Club in 1787, he stood for the Cinque Ports parliamentary seat of Seaford in 1790 as a Pelhamite whig. Beaten in the election, he was seated on petition on 19 March 1792. In parliament he remained a staunch opponent of abolition and also opposed the 'Liverpool Corporation Loan Bill' in 1793, though he did not vote against the government on any major issue in 1792-6. Declaring himself a 'decided supporter of the general measures of the present administration' (Port and Thorne), he stood at Liverpool in the 1796 parliamentary elections, thereby challenging his brother Banastre, who was one of the two sitting members for the constituency. His campaign was tarnished by accusations that he had failed to pay debts of $3000 arising from the Seaford election and charges of 'unbrotherly' conduct. Unsupported by any of his close family, he finished bottom of the poll. This crushing defeat ended his political ambitions and may, temporarily at least, have caused a rift with his family; his mother and brother Clayton died in 1797 and, of their close relatives, only John was denied a bequest in their wills. 
His political hopes thwarted, Tarleton devoted the rest of his life to his family and his real estate interests. On 26 October 1790 he married Isabella ('c'.1770- 'c'.1850), daughter and heir of Alexander Collingwood of Unthank and Little Ryle, near Alnham, Northumberland. They had four children, all born in Liverpool between 1792 and 1806. On marrying, he began to seek a country residence outside Liverpool, and by 1796 was described as a gentleman living at Finch House, West Derby, Lancashire. One authority claims that he 'failed in business and went to Holland' (Stewart-Brown, 63), but this has not been verified. In later years, however, he inherited the Collingwood estates in Northumberland and also acquired property in Gloucester Place, London. 
John Tarleton died on 20 September 1841 at 14 Grove Terrace, London, and was buried at St Pancras. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 60794


Boaks, William George (1904-1986), road safety campaigner and parliamentary candidate, was born on 25 May 1904 at 104 Warner Road, Walthamstow, Essex, the son of William Robert Boaks, a vegetable salesman's cashier, and his wife, Annie Edith, 'nee' Palmer. Educated in elementary schools, he entered the Royal Navy as an ordinary seaman during the First World War, perhaps aged only twelve. Boaks enjoyed a varied and distinguished naval career, rising through the ranks to retire in 1949 as a lieutenant-commander. During the Second World War he was gunnery officer on HMS 'Rodney' in the engagement with the 'Bismarck' and commanded HMS 'Basilisk', a corvette, at Dunkirk, for which he was awarded the DSC. He married Ivy June Collier (1909-1997) in 1930 and they had three children. 
On leaving the navy Boaks settled in south London, took a job in local government, and embarked upon his eccentric campaigning career. Standing as an independent, he mistakenly contested Walthamstow East in the general election of 1951, having intended to oppose Clement Attlee in the west division; Boaks received just 174 votes in a poll of over 40,000. In 1956 he fought Walthamstow West when Attlee retired. Throughout his political career he campaigned for better road safety. Rather than canvass, or issue leaflets, he painted his car as a zebra crossing and decorated it with placards bearing slogans, a mast and sail, and loudspeakers. Later he devised a reinforced bicycle laden with placards for the same purpose. 
Boaks's early campaigning activities led him to become a regular visitor to the law courts in the 1950s and 1960s. He was fined once in 1952 and twice in 1953 for using his car as an advertisement. In 1955 he was convicted of obstructing the highway by stopping his car in the middle of London's Kilburn High Road when traffic was heading away from a major football international at Wembley stadium, and again at Cambridge Circus in the city centre. Later that year he blocked up the Strand and broadcast his argument with a policeman over his car's loudspeakers to the gathering crowd. This led to a period in custody when a magistrate requested an assessment of Boaks's state of mind, but he was eventually given a conditional discharge. He sued the magistrate involved for wrongful imprisonment and took his case to the House of Lords but received no satisfaction. 
In 1959 Boaks failed in an attempt to summons Lady Attlee for causing death by dangerous driving following a serious road accident in which she had been involved. Undaunted, he tried again in 1960 after Lady Attlee was involved in another crash, and in 1964 he unsuccessfully sought the summons of the queen and the duke of Edinburgh for the same reason. Boaks himself was reprimanded in court in 1963 for helping to cause a crash in which a girl was injured after he stopped for her to cross at traffic lights which were green. 
Boaks championed other causes as well as the rights of pedestrians. In his early election contests he demanded equal pay for women and tax-free allowances for children. These ideas later became part of the political mainstream, although others were more unusual. He was an enthusiast for helicopters and asked for planning permission for a heliport in his own garden. He wanted inland airports closed and replaced by coastal heliports instead. Opposition to immigration also became a theme of his campaigns. Allowed six words of description on ballot papers after 1970 he chose 'Public Safety Democratic Monarchist White Residents' but he would have liked many more. 
Throughout the 1960s his intentions to stand for election came to nothing, but after 1970 Boaks became a regular feature in parliamentary elections throughout the country. He fought Clapham in 1970 and three London seats in the general election of February 1974, achieving the best result of his career -- 240 votes -- in Wimbledon, his home constituency. Between 1976 and 1982 he contested eighteen by-elections, polling only five votes in Glasgow Hillhead in 1982, the lowest poll of any parliamentary candidate in modern times. 
Boaks was involved in a road accident in November 1982 and never fully recovered from the head injuries he suffered. He died on 4 April 1986 in St George's Hospital, Tooting, of pneumonia and heart failure. Boaks's long-standing interest in road safety was widely admired and the transport minister, Peter Bottomley, attended his funeral. He was buried at sea, in the naval graveyard outside Portsmouth harbour, with full honours. 
A maverick political campaigner, who enlivened the political scene for many years, Boaks differed from other perennial by-election candidates in the earnestness with which he held his views and the lengths to which he was prepared to go to publicize them. Rather than demean politics, he demonstrated how anyone unprepared to conform with mainstream views could put them before the electorate for judgement, although at a cost; he lost over $3000 in deposits. He was sure that, in his case, the line between success and utter failure was thin. After his triple defeat in February 1974 he declared: 'If I had been elected I would have been the next Prime Minister' ('The Times', 3 March 1974). 


@@@@@


doc= 60796


Read, Alfred (1909-1987), comedian, was born at 11 Kipling Street, Salford, Lancashire, on 3 March 1909, the second of the six children of William Henry (Herbert) Read and his wife, Elizabeth Fielding. He spent the first six years of his life in 'a two up, two down in Kipling Street, Salford' (Read, 17). His father and uncles had been in the meat processing business but went bankrupt. Eventually their fortunes recovered, the debts were paid off, the business was relaunched, and the family moved to Sedgely Park when Al was six. He was educated at St John's infants school, Sedgely Park, and North Manchester preparatory grammar school, leaving at fifteen to join the family firm of E. and H. Read Ltd as a salesman. He was such a success that he was a director by the age of twenty-three and eventually, when his father retired, took over the running of the business. On 18 April 1938 he married Joyce ('b'. 1910/11), daughter of Fred Entwistle, town clerk. There were two sons and a daughter from that marriage, which ended in divorce in 1970. During the Second World War Read developed a new canned meal, Frax Fratters, which immediately became the butt of comedians' jokes. He also served in the Prestwich Home Guard. 
Read's salesman patter had incorporated anecdotes, jokes, and accents; he developed this into an act, which he called 'Pictures from Life', and began to perform as an amateur in theatres and holiday camps and in after-dinner speeches. As a monologist he was in an established comic tradition already mastered by Robb Wilton and Norman Evans. One of his performances caught the attention of the BBC light entertainment producer Bowker Andrews, who signed him up for radio. He made his debut on radio in 'Variety Fanfare' in 1950. He was an immediate success and soon had his own show, 'Such is Life', which was to run in various guises for twenty years. It brought him the 'most promising comedy show' award at the 1951 'Daily Mail' radio awards and an invitation to perform for the royal family at Windsor. From radio he moved to the variety stage, topping the bill at Blackpool and the London Palladium. His catch-phrases, 'You'll be lucky' and 'Right, monkey', swept the nation. Read did summer seasons and pantomime and in 1954 opened at the Adelphi Theatre in London's West End in a revue, 'You'll Be Lucky', which ran for twelve months. He returned to the Adelphi in 1956 with another revue, 'Such is Life'. 
In the 1960s Read sold the family business and moved reluctantly and belatedly into television, but he did not like it and his style was anyway quintessentially radio. He abandoned television and retreated to the northern club circuit, playing his last Blackpool summer show in 1970. When his first marriage ended he married, on 13 June 1970, a model, Elizabeth Ann Read ('b'. 1937/8), a divorcee (whose former husband was also named Read) and daughter of Frederick Howard Allen, an architect. From then on he divided his time between Spain, where he had built a house near Almeria, and Yorkshire, where he had a cottage near Leyburn in the dales. In 1976 the BBC discovered that it had wiped all the tapes of his radio shows and he was persuaded to re-record his classic routines, which were subsequently issued on audio cassette. In 1985 he published an autobiography, 'It's All in the Book'. 
Read was a master of the monologue and radio was his ideal medium. In his show he did all the voices, including the dog. There were no costumes, wigs, or disguises -- it was pure vocal comedy. Working with experienced scriptwriter Ronnie Taylor he had converted his ideas and anecdotes into perfectly honed and timed scripts, based on Read's total mastery of the vocal patterns, preoccupations, values, and mores of his northern audience. The laughter of recognition from the audience is continually in evidence in recordings of his shows. The nagging wife 'from the kitchen', the embarrassingly forthright and questioning child ('Dad, Dad, what's that man doing, Dad?'), the know-all from next door ('You'll be lucky, I say, you'll be lucky'), and a gormless phone-user ('Just, just, just a minute') were regular features, as were send-ups of institutions, the police force, the Post Office, hospitals, and garages. His classic sketches were 'The Decorator', 'The Gardener', 'The Football Match', and 'The Chip Shop'. 
Read's signature tune, 'Such is life', which he wrote with Ronnie Taylor: '
Such is life, 

life is what you make it, 

Show 'em you can take it on the chin 

' was in the optimistic, never-say-die vein of fellow northern comedians such as Gracie Fields and George Formby. Audiences related to his routines because they were truthful and based on precise observation of reality. Read wrote: 'The comedy had grown up with me and reflected my own personal experience... I never tried to make people laugh, and there were never any 'gags' as such in my routines... All the story lines were culled from the small embarrassments and frustrations of everyday life... the tittle tattle that makes the world of ordinary folk go round; the exchange of rumours and confidences in small confined places -- in the corner shop, on top of the bus. (Read, 68-71)' Offstage Al Read was known for his sartorial elegance, a cultured voice, and a love of horses and riding. He died on 9 September 1987 in Rutson Hospital at Northallerton following a stroke. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 60798


Drake, Sir James (1907-1989), civil engineer, was born on 27 July 1907 at 69 Prospect Terrace, Whalley Road, Altham, Burnley, the son of James Drake, a commercial clerk, and his wife, Ellen Hague. He was educated at Accrington grammar school (1918-1924) and at the Victoria University of Manchester (1924-7), where he graduated BSc in civil engineering, with first-class honours. He passed the professional exams of the Institution of Civil Engineers in April 1931, and was accepted as an associate in 1933 and as a full member in 1943. He married Kathleen Shaw ('b'. 1913/14), daughter of Richard Shaw Crossley, company director, on 6 July 1937; they had two daughters. He served Stockport county borough council (1927-30), then Bootle county borough council (1930-37), where he built a sports stadium and cycle track and an eighteen-hole golf course, and prepared plans for an arterial road 84 feet wide. He then moved on to work for Blackpool county borough council, first as deputy, and from 1938 as chief, engineer and surveyor, and constructed a number of municipal offices, housing estates, libraries, and schools. He designed sea defences costing $950,000, an 18 mile sewerage system with three pumping stations costing $750,000, and a 7 mile ring road and other road improvements costing $670,000. He was also responsible for the construction of Britain's first multi-storey car park, with a bus station below, which anticipated modern multi-modal policy. 
In the later 1930s many new road schemes were projected. In 1936 the Institution of Highway Engineers published a plan for 2826 miles of motorways and the first 'Trunk Roads Act' (1936) brought central government into road building for the first time. Drake had viewed Germany's autobahns in 1937 for the County Surveyors' Society, which published its own plans for 1000 miles of motorway in Britain in the following year. At this time Drake became a persistent, often acerbic, advocate of motorways for access, speed, and safety. From the mid-1950s he was also a prime administrator of contracts in the field when post-war construction of houses and schools, and relief from rearmament for the Korean War, had progressed far enough to release exchequer money for the 'Special Roads Act' (1949). As county surveyor and bridgemaster of Lancashire (1945-72) Drake devised a road plan for the county, published in 1949, resting on measurement and projection of traffic flows, as the basis of the county's development plan. His document was seminal for the highway strategies of his county for more than thirty years and was the forerunner of national highway planning procedures. His deep Lancastrian knowledge kept the public inquiry to a single hearing, at which the sole objector did not appear. His method was to anticipate obstacles by sequential contracts for advance works: for example, for the lofty Thelwall Viaduct, 4114 feet long, which the M6 would later require. 
From 1946 government plans incorporated a new north-south trunk route through Lancashire. So did Drake's plan, which he pressed on government from 1949 to 1955. Work began in 1956 on the Preston bypass with the county as the government's agent. This became the first section of Britain's motorway system, opened to traffic in 1958. His Lancaster bypass followed in 1960, along with the Stretford-Eccles bypass which became part of the M63, including the Barton high-level bridge, 2425 feet long, over the Manchester Ship Canal; and the Warrington-Preston section in 1963. Drake's planning envisaged linking Preston, Liverpool, Manchester, Blackpool, and eventually Hull by the M6, M61, and M62. He was involved in intense discussion in 1962-4 between the Ministry of Transport, the Scottish development department, the Association of County Councils, and the County Surveyors' Society over the local and national economic benefits of motorways. 
Detailed studies of the new rigid concrete road pavements built for the Grantham and Newark bypasses convinced Drake of the need to improve upon what the road research laboratory and the Cement and Concrete Association recommended. He headed a technical delegation to Switzerland comprising staff from Alfred McAlpine, Fairclough Construction, and Ribblesdale Cement to study Swiss construction and maintenance techniques and frost-resistance. In 1964-5, as president of the County Surveyors' Society, he took a team of highway engineers to North America, and sent another to Europe, to gather information on motorway specifications, methods, costs, and productivity. A resultant conference of 800 delegates exchanged their findings and led to 'Motorways', edited by Drake and others, published in 1968. Drake's research trips led to major changes in the standard Ministry of Transport specification for rigid concrete pavements on motorways and the methods of building them from 1971. Other innovations he had tested and successfully introduced were the use of 'Bunter', a red sandstone from south Lancashire and north-east Cheshire substituted for the usual sand and gravel sub-base, and crushed limestone or 'crusher run' to top it. The Lancashire motorways incorporating these features far exceeded their expected design lifetimes. In 1967-8 Drake was seconded to the Ministry of Transport as director of the first road construction unit, for the north-west of England, constructing the M6 through the Lune valley and planning the M53 and M56 in Cheshire. In 1968 he returned to his Lancashire office, adding the duties of chief engineer of the Lancashire sub-unit of his former unit to complete construction of the M61 and part of the M62 and to prepare plans for the M55, the M58, and the M66 before retiring in 1972. 
The author of many technical papers, Drake was elected fellow and member of the council of the Institution of Civil Engineers and a fellow and president of the Institution of Highway Engineers. In 1973 he was knighted (having been appointed CBE in 1962) and awarded an honorary DSc degree by Salford University and an honorary fellowship of Manchester Polytechnic. On retiring, he served as a director and later a consultant for the Fairclough construction group. He enjoyed playing golf at Royal Lytham St Anne's, near his home at 11 Clifton Court. Drake died on 1 February 1989 at the Victoria Hospital, Blackpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 60799


Simson, Frances Helen (1854-1938), promoter of women's higher education and suffragist, was born at 13 Bruntsfield Place, Edinburgh, on 2 April 1854, the daughter of William Simson (1811-1858), secretary of the Bank of Scotland, and his wife, Jane Christiana Aberdein ('b'. 1820). She was the seventh of nine children, seven girls and two boys. While she was an infant, the family moved to 9 Eton Terrace, a smart address in an area then being developed to the south-west of the New Town, where she would spend much of her life. 
Frances Simson was one of the first eight women to graduate from the University of Edinburgh in 1893 (all MA), following the 'Universities (Scotland) Act', 1889, which made that possible. At thirty-eight she was the oldest of the group and had studied for her degree at the classes run by the Edinburgh Association for the University Education of Women (EAUEW; formerly the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association, ELEA, founded in 1867), in which she enrolled in 1877. Women were first admitted to lectures, examination, and graduation at Edinburgh in 1892, when seventy matriculated, but from 1868 the ELEA held lectures, conducted and examined by university staff, leading to certificates in literature, philosophy, and science; it was the first to do so in Scotland. A year before graduating she began a collaboration with Elizabeth Sanderson Haldane, translating and editing Hegel's 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy' (1892-6), first published in German in 1833-6. It remains the standard English translation. 
Simson belonged to the management committee of St George's Teacher Training College in Edinburgh and was later a member of the council of St George's School for Girls, both set up by the EAUEW. Once it had succeeded in its aim of entry for women to the Scottish universities, the EAUEW turned its attentions to the women students' well-being, seeing a need for a library, a place of meeting for rest or study, and residential accommodation. She was a member of the sub-committee, set up by Margaret Houldsworth and Louisa Stevenson, to raise subscriptions for the university's first hall of residence for women. When Masson Hall opened in autumn 1897, Frances Simson was deemed to be 'a superintendent of the right sort' (Mrs J. Balfour to Louisa Stevenson, EAUW MSS) and became its first warden, a salaried post which she held for twenty-one years. Working at a large desk in a corner of the library, she gained the respect and affection of many students. She later said that when she was offered the post she 'had never even managed a private house'. Nevertheless she modelled the hall on the home in which she had been brought up, giving the hall 'a peculiar and individual charm' (H. S. Taylor, 'Masson Association News Letter', 1938, 27). The association donated valuable furniture and books to the hall. 
Masson Hall remained the centre of the EAUEW's continuing activities and became a focus of women's suffrage activity. It offered a communal life to all women students, many of whom lived at home or more cheaply in lodgings. Isolation, shyness, and inarticulacy were seen as particular problems for Scottish women students. In a climate that was not uniformly welcoming to women -- they met with amused toleration and scepticism as to their ability -- a supportive centre for women students was needed. It was intended that the hall would develop as a women's college on the model of Girton College, Cambridge. Although its collegiate ambitions were not realized, the hall had a strong collective culture and old girls -- Massonians -- kept in touch through the Masson Association, of which Frances Simson was president after her retirement as warden in 1918. 
Simson played a leading role in the attempt by five women graduates to vote for the university MP at the general election of 1906; the others were Margaret Nairn (also one of the first eight graduates), Dr Elsie Inglis, Chrystal Macmillan, and Frances Melville. The universities of Edinburgh and St Andrews together elected an MP and Glasgow and Aberdeen universities a second MP; the 1906 election was the first time that the joint Edinburgh and St Andrews seat had been contested since women had been permitted to graduate. The women argued that their membership of the general council of each university entitled them to vote, and that the university franchise was unique in both qualification and constituency since it was 'a franchise of education, of intellect' ('Glasgow Herald', 11 Nov 1908). When the registrar refused to issue them with voting papers, they took the case to the Court of Session in June 1906. Their action failed when 'person' in the relevant legislation was interpreted to mean 'male person' rather than 'human' as the women argued; the denial of the vote to women, Lord Salveson declared, was on the ground of decorum and did not underrate their worth or intellect. The appeal in November 1907 was also lost but the women graduates then took their case to the House of Lords, in November 1908, raising $1000 to do so. Simson, Melville, and Macmillan attended, with Macmillan opening and acting as senior counsel. Simson spoke on the second day of the hearing, 12 November, making a more general argument and closing the case. The 'Glasgow Herald' next day described hers as 'a well ordered argument upon the broad grounds'; her main points were that women graduates exercised all privileges as members of the general council except the parliamentary franchise; that women's exclusion from the suffrage generally was by custom rather than a constitutional principle and that society and elections had changed considerably from when that custom had been established; and that male graduates were qualified to vote not as men but as graduates and that women now had identical qualifications. The appeal was dismissed, with costs against the appellants, but generated useful press coverage and sympathetic support. 
That women could argue their case so well at the highest court of the land, in the Palace of Westminster where they were otherwise not admitted other than as visitors behind the grille, was in itself a powerful statement. Against expectations there was no accompanying demonstration and the serious and constitutional manner in which they sought the suffrage was emphasized. Although the imposing 'modern Portia', Macmillan, gained more media attention and Simson, dressed plainly in black, was somewhat in her shadow, she was judged 'sufficiently clear and impressive in her manner' ('Glasgow Herald', 13 Nov 1908). Elizabeth Haldane wrote to her on 16 November 1908: 'Whatever the result this will do great things for the cause and makes me proud of my sex' (NL Scot., Haldane MSS). The case led to the formation of women's suffrage societies in the four Scottish universities and Simson became president of the Scottish University Women's Suffrage Union. She was also vice-president of the Edinburgh National Society for Women's Suffrage (NSWS) and active in the Scottish federation of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies; after 1918 she was president of the Edinburgh Equal Citizenship Society, the successor to the Edinburgh NSWS. 
When Edinburgh University marked its 350th anniversary, in October 1933, Simson received the honorary degree of LLD, as the only woman graduand, for her role in the cause of the university education of women. The citation described her as 'a survivor of the plucky band of eight ladies' who were first to graduate and referred to the 'useful and decorous' part she played in 'the general struggle for the rights of her sex' ('University of Edinburgh Journal', 6/2, Jan 1934, 163-4). She saw herself as honoured on behalf of the many women who had worked for women's education -- 'they knew what they wanted and were determined to get it, and not to accept anything inferior' -- and one of those who had been first to reap the fruits of those efforts ('The Scotsman', 2 Nov 1933). In retirement she spent her summers in highland Perthshire, usually with her sisters and members of their families, and was often visited by former Masson Hall residents. Contemporaries described her as avoiding the limelight but as working quietly and steadily for her ideals ('Masson Association News Letter', 1938, 27). She died at her home, 9 Eton Terrace, Edinburgh, on 4 September 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 60800


Carrie, Isabella Scrimgeour (1878-1981), suffragette and schoolteacher, was born on 3 May 1878 at 26 Wardmill Road in the parish of St Vigeans, Arbroath, the daughter of Richard Carrie ('c'.1836-1912), bleachfield worker, and his wife, Ann Robertson Harris ('c'.1842-1903). Isabella was one of only three children who survived beyond infancy and the only one to survive into adulthood. 
Carrie spent her early years in Arbroath, where she attended Inverbrothock public school and then Arbroath high school. She left school at fourteen to become a pupil teacher at the Abbey School. The pupil-teacher system was common in Scotland at this time, especially for women, providing a four-year apprenticeship of teaching by day and studying at night. She then sat an examination for a queen's scholarship which enabled her to study further at the Church of Scotland Training College in Edinburgh, one of three such denominational teacher training colleges. She recalled being unimpressed by the college because the lecturers were 'old and dull and I got nothing new or interesting' ('Memories', fol. 9). She also noted that the men and women students were allowed to meet only once a year. 
Once qualified Carrie worked in the mining village of Kelty, Fife, and then was an infant teacher at Parkhouse, Arbroath, from 1904 until 1908. Unfortunately she began to suffer ill health caused by the ventilation system in Parkhouse; this prompted a brief move to another school and then on to Wallacetown School, Dundee, in September 1908. She later became infant mistress at Tay Street School in the early 1930s. Throughout her teaching career she witnessed the impact of poor social conditions on her pupils and her main priority was to ease their poverty, which she did through many quiet voluntary and philanthropic actions. 
Within the story of the 'votes for women' campaign, Isabella Carrie can be said to represent the countless unknown women campaigners who never received recognition, and she is probably typical of many who were recruited to the cause because of their sense of outrage and indignation at the treatment of women. She always had an interest in politics. Her father had been an ardent tory, and she sometimes attended local political meetings. One of her earliest recollections was of seeing William Ewart Gladstone when he visited Forfar. Carrie's interest in women's issues may well have been sparked off by teasing from her brother. He used to tell her that 'lassies dinna hae brains' but, she recalled, she had 'a feeling that my brain was as good as his' (interview, 14 Nov 1976). This conviction had a major impact on her outlook and subsequent involvement in the women's movement in Dundee. 
Carrie's arrival in Dundee in 1908 coincided with the rise of the suffrage movement in the city, which was a particular target of both suffragists and militant suffragettes: earlier in the year Winston Churchill had won the Dundee by-election and he did not support women's suffrage. Carrie liked to hear good women speakers and often attended public meetings. The significant moment for her was when she was given a ticket to hear Churchill speak at a ladies' meeting in the Gilfillan Hall, Dundee, about 1913. She was incensed at the rough tactics of the stewards towards some women and even more so at Churchill's attitude to women, so much so that she stood up and protested. She too was evicted rather roughly from the hall. Her actions caught the attention of the leaders of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), who thought it had been a planned interruption. Carrie was asked to join the WSPU but was not prepared to be militant, and she kept in the background, introducing speakers and helping in the library and office. 
Although Isabella Carrie was never a leading figure, her role in the local WSPU was none the less significant. Despite her aversion to militancy she took on a task which was fraught with danger and surrounded by secrecy. By this time, living on her own after the death of her father in 1912, she began to give hospitality to visiting activists in the WSPU. Her quiet, respectable neighbourhood and her regular stream of visitors were a good cover for her secret visitors. She never knew the identity of those who stayed, rarely spoke to them, and never questioned them or gave information away. The need for secrecy remained with her until her nineties, when she still would not reveal the names of the WSPU leaders in Dundee. 
On one notable occasion in 1914 Carrie was asked if she would shelter Mrs Pankhurst, a request which she viewed as both an honour and a risk. She agreed and decided she would stay up late to speak to her, but unfortunately Mrs Pankhurst was arrested in Glasgow. Like many women campaigners Carrie continued her interest in women's issues after the First World War; she was a founding member of the Women Citizens' Association in Dundee and of the Scrimgeour Clan Society founded in the early 1970s. 
Carrie's retirement in 1938 was prompted by the fear that she would not live long because of ill health. She decided to spend her annuity on a year-long trip around the world. However, she was in New York in 1939 when war broke out, and returned home. She thought about going back into teaching but decided to continue her voluntary work, including giving hospitality to evacuees. In old age she remained a great letter-writer, and she maintained a lively interest in others and also wrote down her memories. She had a much longer life than she had anticipated, and died, unmarried, aged 103 on 29 November 1981 at the Duneaves Eventide Nursing Home, Broughty Ferry, Scotland. The policeman who caught her as she was thrown out of the Churchill meeting claimed she was the gentlest suffragette he had ever seen -- a suitable epitaph. 


@@@@@


doc= 60803


Hall, William (1800-1847), bookseller and publisher, was born on 19 October 1800 in London, where he was batpized at St Lawrence Jewry on 24 November 1801, the son of John Hall and his wife, Elizabeth. He emerged from an obscure past to become a partner with Edward Chapman (1804-1880) in 1830 in a bookselling and publishing business housed in narrow premises at 186 Strand, London. Chapman and Hall's first enterprises, usually joint ventures with other firms, were, in the words of John Forster, 'ingenious rather than important' (Forster, 1.87), being modest periodicals and factual compendia. By 1835 they were expanding into illustrated fiction and magazines issued weekly or monthly; such periodicity encouraged customers to return to the shop on a regular basis and recycled the firm's capital often. In December 1835 the comic artist Robert Seymour, who was doing other work for Chapman and Hall, proposed to them a monthly serial spoofing Cockney sportsmen. He had prepared some initial drawings and needed a writer to produce accompanying letterpress. A few weeks later Charles Whitehead, just hired to edit a monthly, 'Library of Fiction', which the firm launched in April 1836, was asked by the proprietors if he knew the real name of Boz, who had recently contributed lively sketches to the 'Monthly Magazine' for which Whitehead had formerly worked. He did; it was Charles Dickens. William Hall then paid a visit to Dickens in his Furnival's Inn chambers on 10 February 1836. Dickens immediately recognized him as 'the person from whose hands' he had bought in December 1833 a copy of his first story, just published in the 'Monthly'. Both hailed this as 'a good omen' (preface to the 'Cheap Edition', 'Pickwick Papers'). Dickens listened to Hall's proposal and agreed to it in principle, though in fact he made many alterations from the first, and after Seymour's suicide in April took control of the venture. The result, 'Pickwick Papers', grew into an unprecedented success, both because of its exuberant humour and sympathy and because its serial issue at 1's'. per month put upwards of 40,000 copies into circulation, some $2000 into Dickens's pockets, and made about $14,000 for his publishers. 
Hall, a brisk businessman who inspired respectful awe in the clerks, paid most attention to the commercial aspects of the firm. It proved most generous to Dickens, buying out competitors who could not keep up with his accelerating popularity and price, and capitalizing on the mode of serialization both in monthly parts (reissuing the previously published 'Sketches by Boz' in twenty 1's'. parts from November 1837 to June 1839 and the newly composed 'Nicholas Nickleby' in the same format from April 1838 to October 1839) and, at Dickens's request, in weekly numbers ('Master Humphrey's Clock', containing 'The Old Curiosity Shop' and 'Barnaby Rudge', from 4 April 1840 to 4 December 1841). During these heady days 'the best of booksellers past, present, or to come' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 1.601-2) gave many celebratory dinners and gifts. Dickens attended Hall's marriage, an event he fictionalized for 'Sketches of Young Couples' which Chapman and Hall published in 1840. There Mr Chirrup (Hall) is described as having the smartness and 'the brisk, quick manner of a small bird' (Waugh, 6). The Halls resided at Norwood, where they hosted pleasant, playful evenings. Hall's younger brother Spencer Hall (1805-1875), a skilled bibliographer and librarian of the Athenaeum from 1833 until his death, took a 'kind interest' in Dickens's election to the club in 1838 ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 1.399, n.5). 
Dickens's friend the lawyer John Forster became literary adviser to Chapman and Hall by 1837. In addition to supervising Dickens's publication arrangements, he edited the 'Foreign Quarterly Review' after the firm bought it late in 1841, and he brought other authors to the Strand, notably Thomas Carlyle. But in the early 1840s the firm was still largely dependent on Dickens, so when in August 1841 Dickens asked for a year's retirement, with advances to be set against future works, Hall and Chapman were troubled. They agreed reluctantly: Chapman was 'very manly', Dickens judged, while Hall, 'with his pocketfull of figures and estimates' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 2.366) seemed feeble though well-intentioned. However, instead of taking the rest he said he required, Dickens took off for America on a lecture tour. At his return he wrote up his travel notes and letters into 'American Notes' (October 1842). Though the book went through four editions before the end of the year, it was not considered by Dickens or his publishers notably successful. The serial novel that Dickens commenced immediately afterwards, 'Martin Chuzzlewit' (January 1843-July 1844), fell victim both to a downturn in the economy and to the four-year hiatus since Dickens's last monthly. When it became clear that the profits from 'Chuzzlewit' would not pay off the advances, in June 1843 Hall hinted that it might be necessary to invoke a clause in the agreement of 7 September 1841 reducing by $50 the $200 monthly stipend Dickens received for writing each instalment. Dickens was so irritated he could not write. 'I am bent upon paying Chapman and Hall 'down'', he told Forster. 'And when I have done that, Mr. Hall shall have a piece of my mind' (ibid., 3.517). First he tried to work off the balance by publishing a short holiday gift, 'A Christmas Carol' (19 December 1843). He insisted that Chapman and Hall take nothing but a commission on sales, but then he spent so much on binding and hand-coloured illustrations that, at the retail price of 5's'. he specified, there was very little in the way of profit to divide in spring 1844. Dickens severed relations. However, he believed that Chapman and Hall understood the business of serial publishing better than the printers, Bradbury and Evans, whom he asked to be his new publishers. Moreover, Chapman and Hall owned a share in most of his copyrights. Consequently Dickens continued to receive accounts from, and plan republications with, the firm, which co-published 'The Chimes' (16 December 1844) and was considered though not chosen by a nervous Dickens as publisher for 'Dombey and Son' (October 1846-April 1848). 
Hall fell ill suddenly and died at the firm's office at 186 Strand, London, on Sunday, 7 March 1847, aged forty-six. Dickens, having ascertained from Chapman that his presence at the funeral would be acceptable, attended the burial at Highgate cemetery 'to pay that last mark of respect'. Hall 'had a good little wife, if ever a man had,' he wrote afterwards to H. K. Browne, who did not attend; the 'accounts of her tending of him at the last, are deeply affecting' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 5.36). 


@@@@@


doc= 60805


Dodds, Madeleine Hope (1885-1972), historian, was born on 2 January 1885. She was the second of the five children (four daughters and one son) of Edwin Dodds (died 1929) of Home House, Kells Lane, Low Fell, Gateshead, co. Durham, and his wife, Emily (died 1896), daughter of John Mawson of Low Fell. Edwin ran a printing and stationery business on Quayside, Newcastle upon Tyne, which had been founded by his father, M. S. Dodds, in 1834. Hope attended Gateshead High School for Girls and went to Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1904. She was awarded second-class honours in each part of the history tripos in 1906 and 1907. She spent a further year at Newnham researching for a thesis on the boroughs of the bishops of Durham which won the Creighton memorial prize in 1909. Women were not allowed to graduate at Cambridge until 1948, and in 1949 Hope took her MA. She was an associate of Newnham from 1945 until 1958. 
Dodds's thesis derived from work which she began in 1907 for the Durham volumes in the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England'. Newnham had established a link for its students with the 'Victoria history'. Anxious to secure a fourth year at Cambridge, Hope wrote in June 1907 to the general editor of the 'Victoria history', William Page, asking whether he could provide her with a research project relating to Northumberland or co. Durham. Her tutor backed her request, and Page offered her paid work on his staff in London for as long as she wanted in order that she could gain some experience. She may have taken up the offer for a few weeks during the autumn. By October she was back at Newnham with a commission from Page to write the article on Darlington as an outside contributor at the rate of 1 guinea for every 1000 words, with a limit of around 5000 words. She submitted the article in August 1908. She went on to write several more articles, including those on Gateshead and Easington. Finally, in February 1913 Page commissioned her to write the article on Hartlepool and three shorter articles. The 'Victoria history' was suspended nationally in 1916 because of the war but was revived in the early 1920s. Three of Hope's articles were at last published when volume 3 of the Durham 'Victoria history' appeared in 1928. Work on the Durham history then ceased until the 1990s, but her unpublished articles remain part of its archives. Hope also found time to write, in collaboration with her younger sister Ruth, 'The Pilgrimage of Grace, 1536-7, and the Exeter Conspiracy, 1538', a two-volume history begun by 1909 and published in 1915 (reprinted in 1971). 
In October 1915 Hope joined Ruth in weekend work at the munitions factory at Elswick, near Newcastle. With labour short because of the war, they next worked in the family business: Ruth started that October and Hope and the youngest sister, Sylvia, by the following February. By July 1916 Hope was helping her father transcribe the register of All Saints', Newcastle, for the Durham and Northumberland Parish Register Society, which he was instrumental in founding, but she found the work dull. In 1920 she published extracts from the Newcastle corporation minute book 1639-56 as the first volume of the publications of the Newcastle upon Tyne Records Committee. She followed it in 1923 with a further volume relating to the freemen of Newcastle. In 1922 the Northumberland County History Committee appointed her editor of the multi-volume history of Northumberland which had been in progress since the early 1890s. Between 1926 and 1940 she produced the final four volumes (12-15), not only editing them but writing much of the contents. Other publications included contributions to various historical journals, notably 'Archaeologia Aeliana', published by the Newcastle Society of Antiquaries. She was a member of that society from 1908 and its librarian from 1941 until eye trouble forced her to resign in 1946. The society made her an honorary member in 1947. 
Hope also had strong literary interests, including the history of English drama, and she published on literary as well as historical topics. She was an active member of the Progressive Players of Gateshead from the time of their foundation in 1920, and she provided much of the money for building the Gateshead Little Theatre, opened in 1943. When her eyesight failed towards the end of her life, she learned braille so as to be able still to read. In 1918 Hope and her sister Ruth started to attend Quaker meetings, and Hope had become a member of the Newcastle Society of Friends by the end of 1919. She was also a socialist and contributed to the monthly 'Gateshead Labour News' (later the 'Gateshead Herald'), of which the more politically active Ruth became editor in 1925. 
Hope continued to live at Home House after her father's death in 1929, sharing it with Ruth and Sylvia. From 1940 to 1942 she also had a flat on the Isle of Wight, where her married sister Molly lived. Remembered as a quiet and retiring person but one who was full of gaiety and generosity, Hope died at Home House, 231 Kells Lane, Low Fell, Gateshead, on 13 May 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 60810


Uhlman, Manfred (1901-1985), writer and painter, was born on 19 January 1901 in Stuttgart, Germany, the first of two children of Ludwig Uhlman (1869- 'c'.1943), textile merchant, and his wife, Johanna Grombacher (1879- 'c'.1943). His father, a descendant of an old-established Jewish family in Stuttgart, and his mother were killed in the concentration camp Theresienstadt. Uhlman grew up in Stuttgart. He studied law in Freiburg, Munich, and Tubingen, finishing with a doctorate in 1925. In 1927 he started to work as an attorney in Stuttgart. In the same year he joined the local group of the Social Democrat Party of Germany, became its official legal representative in 1932, working with Kurt Schumacher, later the party's president, and campaigned for the party in Wurttemberg in 1933. In March of that year, after a warning that his arrest was imminent because of his political adherence, he emigrated to Paris. There, unable to work as a lawyer and encouraged by Andre Lhote, a French art critic, and Paul Westheim, a German refugee art historian, who had promoted unknown talents in the Weimar republic, Uhlman started to paint successfully in a naive and colourful style, such as in 'Au palais des gourmands' (1935; priv. coll.). His first exhibition took place at the Galerie Le Niveau, Paris, in 1936. While he was staying in Spain in 1936 the civil war broke out. Uhlman emigrated to Britain, where he began assisting refugees from Nazism, for which he is still remembered. He was supported by Diana Page Croft ['see below'], whom he had met in Spain and married on 4 November 1936. They found guarantors and accommodation for the refugees and even put their own home at the disposal of the photomontagist John Heartfield for six years. In 1938 Uhlman co-founded the only German artistic association of refugees in Britain, the Freier Deutscher Kulturbund, which shortly after its foundation moved into his house in Hampstead, London. At the beginning of July 1940 Uhlman, together with further refugees, was interned at Ascot and then at the Hutchinson camp, Isle of Man, where he met the Dadaist Kurt Schwitters, who portrayed him in a naturalistic way reading (1945; Hatton Gallery, University of Newcastle upon Tyne). During his internment his first child, Caroline, was born. After Uhlman's release in December 1940 he lived with his family in Bambers Green, Essex, where his son Francis was born in 1943; he returned to London in 1944. He continued to paint and had one-man exhibitions, including those at the Leicester Galleries (December 1941) and Redfern Gallery (1943), both in London. After 1945 he became internationally known, exhibiting, for example, at the Graphisches Kabinett, Bremen (1954). He also published his drawings, produced while interned, under the title 'Captivity' (1946), and 'An Artist in North Wales' (1947). North Wales inspired him for many of his landscape paintings, such as 'North Wales' (1958; priv. coll.). From the late 1940s he wrote an autobiography, 'The Making of an Englishman' (1960), and several novels, which have been translated into twelve languages. The most successful is 'Reunion' (1971), a book about a German-Jewish childhood in Stuttgart in the early 1930s, which was made into a film by Harold Pinter with the same title in 1989. Although Uhlman was a member of the London Group he never really belonged to the art establishment. He died in the Royal Free Hospital, Hampstead, London, on 11 April 1985, his wife and their two children surviving him, and was buried in Yarpole, Herefordshire. His paintings are in private and public collections, such as the Hereford City Art Gallery and the Ben Uri Gallery, London. The Fred and Diana Uhlman collection of African sculptures was donated to the Hatton Gallery, University of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Uhlman's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 60811


Elisabeth Maria Martha Ullman (1907-1985), who had been born in Berlin on 17 June 1907, befriended him and began nursing him back to health. Thus began a new phase in Laban's life. 


@@@@@


doc= 60826


Caroline Colman (1831-1895)], eldest daughter of William Hardy Cozens-Hardy of Letheringsett Hall, Norfolk. Caroline shared his religious and social views and was an active partner in his life while raising their family of six children at Carrow House, Carrow, Norwich. 
Between 1856 and 1862 Jeremiah James organized the relocation of the factory from Stoke to a newly built, large integrated factory and workshops at Carrow in Norwich, producing mustard, starch, and laundry blue. Growth led to incorporation in 1896, capitalized at $1,350,000, though ownership remained entirely within the Colman family. In business Jeremiah James sought to be 'useful', in accordance with his mother's prescription for a fulfilling but reverential business life, in two ways. One was by increasing employment opportunities for Colman employees and their families in a town which had seen its staple industry destroyed: by 1869 the number of workers employed at the Carrow works was 1100 rising to 2500 by 1898. The second form which usefulness took was an attempt to promote their employees' general well-being. The first was achieved by successful innovation, partly in production and organization but principally through innovative marketing policies first introduced by the elder Jeremiah and James during the 1840s. From that time the sale of mustard, starch, and blue began to be made in small amounts packed in containers distinctive in size, shape, label, and colour. 
The bull's head logo introduced in 1856, one of the first merchandise marks of its kind, heralded such a growth in brand advertising that in the 1870s a separate advertising department was formed at Carrow. In 1871 the partners appointed an outsider, Robert Haselwood, as manager (and later general manager) of the Carrow works. His responsibility was to implement the partners' policies. The appointment of accountants also marked the beginning of systematic accountability and control over the business. 
Successful managerial delegation was accompanied by an informal arrangement whereby Caroline Colman took responsibility for supervising welfare provision in the company. When in 1857 the company school, started by the elder Jeremiah and James at Stoke, was transferred to Carrow, Caroline became responsible for its management and for planning the new purpose-built accommodation on Carrow Hill. She also originated several welfare initiatives. The Carrow works kitchen, forerunner of the works canteen, was opened in 1868 to serve commuting workers with early morning tea and coffee and hot midday meals at nominal cost. Basic, low cost lodging accommodation, including laundry, was available to young female workers under the immediate charge of a matron. To help women workers to save, Caroline organized a clothing club, to which she contributed a bonus added to their savings, and purchased drapery in bulk annually for sale at cost at Christmas. To help young women to sew and 'to become better women and wives' in 1874 the company engaged a dressmaking teacher. 
The provision of medical and health care was exceptional, available within a context defined by the company's insistence that employees must be insured either through the company's accident, sickness, and provident schemes or through an independent friendly society. A dispensary was opened in 1864, staffed by a doctor and a nurse. In 1878 an assistant was appointed for the sole purpose of visiting sick employees with food from the works kitchen, probably the first example of industrial nursing in the country. Jeremiah James ensured that the charitable activities within the company designed to alleviate sickness and the consequences of infirmity and old age of Colman employees and families were continued after his death by inserting a clause in the 1896 articles of association. His will included the annual provision of $20,000 for twenty years to be used by trustees for this purpose. 
As the Liberal MP for Norwich between 1871 and 1895 Jeremiah James voted as a Gladstonian Liberal until the Parnell sex scandal. He became a friend of the prime minister, who stayed with him at the Cliffe, Corton, Suffolk, on a number of occasions. Lacking oratorical skill Colman made little impact on an institution with which he quickly became disillusioned. However, as a Norwich town council representative between 1859 and 1871 (sheriff in 1862 and 1868 and mayor in 1869) he was the central figure in the movement to remove bribery and corruption for which Norwich was notorious. As the founder chairman of a committee of independent reformers set up in 1859 he campaigned for measures which advanced the liberty and interests of nonconformists and for franchise reform. 
In February 1895 Jeremiah James's and Caroline's son Alan Cozens-Hardy Colman ('b'. 1867) died. In the early part of 1895 Caroline's health, too, declined and she died on 5 July at Corton. She was buried five days later at the Rosary burial-ground, Norwich. Depressed by the deaths of his wife and son, Jeremiah James took up again the burden of work. In February 1898 he started out for the Riviera but was detained in Paris by an attack of influenza. His penultimate visit to London was to attend Gladstone's funeral on 28 May. His final weeks were spent at Corton surrounded by the youngest members of his family. News of his mother's death, at the age of ninety-three, on 15 September further depressed him, and he died at the Cliffe, Corton, on 18 September 1898. Four days later he was buried alongside his wife at the Rosary. After his death, James Stuart (1843-1913), who was married to his eldest daughter, Laura Elizabeth, ran the firm for some years. 
Members of the nineteenth-century Colman family were responsible for three enduring achievements: the establishment of a business which, well before the merger with Reckitts in 1938 had become one of Britain's 100 largest manufacturing companies, and whose products, especially Colman's mustard, became part of national life; second, the success of the 'Eastern Daily Press', with which Jeremiah James was closely involved when it was launched in 1870; not least, the family had a significant impact on the physical and cultural environment of Norwich. This was largely the effect of 'Citizen Colman's' campaigning to promote the civic gospel, a cause to which he was a major contributor. He was a leader of the subscription campaign to ensure the use of all historic buildings for the public benefit, which by 1886 had seen both the castle and Blackfriars Hall pass into corporation ownership, and for the inclusion of the city walls and towers as part of the process of preservation. As a trustee of the Norwich Museum, in 1876 he bequeathed a large, varied collection which included paintings of the Norwich school. His library, relating to the history of Norwich and Norfolk, was donated posthumously by the Colman family to the city library, forming the unique Norfolk Studies Collection. Jeremiah James also purchased land for an extension to the children's hospital, the Jenny Lind Infirmary, in 1895, following the death of his son. Behind his conduct and achievements in business and public life lay his insistence that 'it is by taking our religion into everyday life, and by so acting that the world around us sees that in party strife, or commercial enterprise, we do that, and that only, which is consistent with our Christian profession' (Colman, 134). 


@@@@@


doc= 60836


Cecil Pinsent (1884-1963), was born in Montevideo, Uruguay, on 5 May 1884, the son of Adolphus Ross Pinsent (1851-1929), a businessman, and his wife, Alice Nuttall (1855-1901). Educated at Marlborough College (1897-1900), the Architectural Association School (1901-5) and the Royal Academy School of Architecture (1905-6), he began his career in England, but spent most of his life in Italy, especially in Tuscany, designing gardens and villas in the Renaissance style. Among his most important works, apart from the Villa I Tatti and the Villa Le Balze, are the gardens at La Foce, Chianciano, Siena (1924-36), for Antonio and Iris Origo, the Villa Gli Scafari, at Lerice (1932), for Lady Sybil and Percy Lubbock, the Villa Colletti-Perucca at Castiglioncello (1932), for Mrs Colletti-Perucca, and the Villa Le Sabine for Count Niccolo Antinori, at Bolgheri, Leghorn (1935). He died in Hilterfingen, Thunersee, Switzerland, on 5 December 1963, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 60935


Fulk (V) Fitzwarine (1252?-1315), of whom, along with Whittington Castle, Simon de Montfort gained custody immediately after Lewes. However, after the battle of Evesham in August 1265 custody of both was given to Hamon L'Estrange, whose family held Knockin Castle adjacent to Whittington and had traditionally been allies of the Fitzwarines. Fulk (V) came of age and inherited control of his lands in 1273. 
The romance 'Fouke le Fitzwarin' is now extant only in an early fourteenth-century manuscript, 'Fouke le Fitz Waryn', but was probably composed during the period 1258-65, or perhaps a little later. The author displays detailed local knowledge of the Whittington and Ludlow districts of Shropshire. This work conflates the careers of Fulk (I) and Fulk (II), is confused about many twelfth-century events, and focuses most of its attention on the long and remarkable career of Fulk (III). The romance alleges that Fulk was a playmate of the young Prince John and quarrelled with him while playing chess. It is mistaken in calling Fulk (III) 'warden' of the march ('gardeyn de tote la Marche'), for no such office existed during the early thirteenth century, although various border barons and others were appointed to 'keep' the march on an 'ad hoc' basis when circumstances required such special military commanders. While mistaken on some facts, however, 'Fouke le Fitzwarin' presumably reflects the pretensions and aspirations of the Fitzwarines during the last portion of Henry III's reign. 


@@@@@


doc= 60936


Kate Fanny Loder (1825-1904), a successful pianist and composer, was born in Bath on 21 August 1825. In 1844 she became a professor of piano at the Royal Academy of Music, where she had previously studied. Among her compositions were works for the piano, notably the 'Twelve Studies' of 1852, an orchestral overture (1844), a string quartet (1848), and songs. On 16 December 1851 she married the surgeon Henry Thompson (1820-1904), with whom she had a son and two daughters. Her husband was knighted in 1867 and created a baronet in 1899. She became paralysed after 1871, in which year the first performance in England of Brahms's 'German Requiem' was given at her house. She died at Headley, Surrey, on 30 August 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 60953


Mirza I'tizam al-Din (fl. 1765-1785) left India in January 1766 as part of a diplomatic mission from the Mughal emperor Shah Alam, seeking British government support against the company. Robert Clive, however, blocked the emperor's letter and $10,000 gift for King George III, frustrating I'tizam al-Din, who returned to India late in 1768. In 1785 I'tizam al-Din completed a Persian-language account of his visit to France, England, and Scotland: 'Shigurf-nama-i Vilayat' ('Wonder book of Europe'). While he appreciated the cordial reception he received from the British, he noted their inability to read cultured literature in Persian or to appreciate the advantages of Islam over Christianity. 


@@@@@


doc= 60960


John Hardman Powell (1827-1895) became his chief designer. Powell was born in Birmingham on 4 March 1827, the seventh of the twelve children of William Powell (1789-1861), brass-founder, and his wife, Lucy (1793-1863), embroiderer, daughter of John Hardman senior and his first wife, Juliana Weetman. Lucy Powell's textile business was closely allied to her half-brother's metalworks, and she undertook commissions for vestments and other textiles for Pugin. Her firm continued in existence throughout the nineteenth century under the successive titles Mistress Powell & Daughters, Powell and Browns, and finally (after her death) the Misses Brown. 
John Hardman Powell (also known as John Powell) showed early evidence of his artistic abilities and was placed under George Elkington (of Elkington & Co., Birmingham) to learn modelling. He also spent some time as a pupil at the Birmingham School of Art. However, the association of his uncle John Hardman with Pugin, and the latter's need for an assistant, led to his being dispatched in December 1844 to Ramsgate to take up residence in Pugin's home, The Grange, and to be trained by him. Powell and Pugin's own son, Edward, were his only pupils. Initially Pugin complained to John Hardman about the injury done to Powell by Elkington's style (as well as Powell's propensity for somnambulism), but soon even the perfectionist Pugin found his work satisfactory. There is evidence that even before Pugin's death Powell was drawing a significant number of cartoons for Hardman windows, as well as designing many pieces of metalwork. With the exception of the first half of 1848 Powell remained in Ramsgate until Pugin's death. Thus it was in Ramsgate on 21 October 1850 that he married Anne (1832-1897), Pugin's eldest daughter by his first wife, Anne Garnet. 
Following Pugin's death Powell returned permanently to Birmingham, living in the same street as his uncle, Hunter's Lane, Handsworth, and assumed Pugin's mantle as chief designer for Hardmans. He was instrumental in the relocation of the firm's premises to New Hall Hill, where it remained until 1970. Powell was also taken into partnership by his uncle, joining his two elder brothers, William Powell (1820-1895) and James Powell (1825-1865). From the early 1850s the firm was known as John Hardman & Co. Two younger brothers, Edward (1833-1876) and Henry (1835-1882), worked for the firm in Ireland. 
John Hardman Powell was concerned with all aspects of design as artistic director of both glass and metal departments until the business was divided in 1883, whereupon his activities were confined to the glass making. Although he adhered faithfully to the Gothic principles of his master, and never strayed too far from the basic premise of most of Pugin's designs, he nevertheless had his own distinct style which gave his creations a somewhat softer appearance than Pugin's. While opinion of his inventiveness varies he was without doubt an extremely talented designer who worked effectively in the diverse fields of Hardman production and was a major contributor to the firm's continued success throughout the nineteenth century, some of his windows being particularly fine. Although energetic and hard-working he was of a retiring disposition and, unlike his Hardman relatives, took no part in public life beyond a small amount of lecturing, notably to the Birmingham School of Art, and rare excursions into print. During the mid-1880s he left Birmingham and settled at 12 Lee Road, Blackheath, Kent, in order to be able to superintend the firm's London office. He died at his home of pneumonia on 2 March 1895 and was buried in the chantry of The Grange, Ramsgate. His obituary in the 'Birmingham Weekly Post' (9 March) described him as modest, amiable, and charming, and surviving likenesses show him as a slightly diminutive, dark-haired, and moustachioed figure. His second and eldest surviving son, Dunstan John Powell (1861-1932), succeeded him as a partner and principal designer for the firm. 
John Hardman Powell's brother William Powell appears to have been involved in the business from its earliest days, always on the metalwork side. He effectively took over control of that arm when it was divided from the glassworks in 1883 to form a distinct firm under the name Hardman, Powell & Co. and moved to separate premises in King Edward's Road, Birmingham. The declining demand by the early twentieth century for the type of metalware the firm produced led to its reabsorption into John Hardman & Co. in 1914, and, following family disagreements, to the eventual shedding of this aspect of the firm's business. 
At its zenith in the third quarter of the nineteenth century John Hardman & Co. could boast that it had supplied windows or church plate or other metal furniture to the majority of the Roman Catholic and Anglican parish churches of England and Wales besides a number in Ireland. It also exported to Australia, the USA, South Africa, and other destinations abroad. The firm's popularity declined in the twentieth century, and the last family member to be involved in the business, John Tarleton Hardman (1872-1959), son of John Bernard Hardman, retired in 1935. The firm continues in existence, however, under different ownership and the slightly altered title of the John Hardman Studios, specializing in glasswork. 


@@@@@


doc= 60973


William Peake (c.1580-1639), also a painter and a freeman of the Goldsmiths' Company, who expanded the operation into print publishing from 1626 onwards. 'Mr Peake the younger Paynter', like his father, was allocated mourning cloth for the funeral of Henry, prince of Wales, in December 1612 (Wilks, 281). In the accounts he was credited with fashioning a gilded staff for the prince's effigy. Although some paintings, such as the 'Portrait of a Boy of the Howard Family with a Bow' (Ranger's House, Blackheath), have been attributed to the younger Peake, his actual 'oeuvre' remains unclear. He married first, on 2 February 1604, Ann Acton and second, at an unknown date, Mary Dennis, and fathered at least five children. William Peake took over a large number of plates from William Humble, and also issued new plates engraved for him by George Glover, Thomas Cecil, and others. The engraver William Faithorne was apprenticed to him in 1635; another apprentice was the painter William Dobson. 


@@@@@


doc= 60982


Henry Spittall (d. 1536) appears to have been the son of James Spittall ('fl'. 'c'.1490), of Blairlogy in Perthshire; his mother is unknown. Hector Boece describes him as a relative of William Elphinstone, bishop of Aberdeen, but the degree of relationship is not known. Spittall is first recorded attending the commissary court in Aberdeen in January 1508, several months before he became a student at the University of Orleans. He returned to Aberdeen, becoming canonist at the university in 1512 and rector of Snow Kirk. Spittall married Margaret Bothwell, an event which in February 1517 allowed him to be admitted as a burgess of Edinburgh, and in 1525 he became a bailie of the burgh. Spittall later married, as his second wife, Elizabeth Forbes. Following his first marriage he maintained links with Aberdeen, becoming in 1518 clerk of the coquet of that burgh. By then he was also a notary by apostolic authority. From 1516 until his death he remained one of the busiest advocates in the realm, with numerous clients particularly in Fife and the north-east. He died without legitimate children in 1536, when he was succeeded by his nephew, Alexander Spittall. A natural son, James, was legitimated in 1558. 


@@@@@


doc= 60983


William Johnston (fl. 1516-1550) was the son of the Edinburgh burgess James Johnston ('fl'. 'c'.1500-1516). He graduated in arts from St Andrews in 1516 and then studied law at the University of Orleans, where in 1518 he was elected procurator of the Scots nation. The following year he received David Beaton (the future cardinal) there as a novice. In 1524, along with Henry Lauder, he was appointed sheriff of Linlithgowshire 'in hac parte' (to hear a specific case only). Johnston's legal career as an advocate was reasonably busy by the late 1520s and he acted as commissary of Lothian in 1531. In 1534 he was appointed to an embassy to England, where he appears to have had numerous protestant contacts. Later that year he was accused of heresy and fled abroad, later being escheated. Johnston subsequently recanted but his goods were again escheated in 1550 after sentence of relapse was pronounced against him. He survived the Reformation but his later career remains obscure. 


@@@@@


doc= 60984


Thomas Marjoribankis of Ratho (d. c.1561) was originally from the diocese of Glasgow (or possibly from Dumfries), and was educated at the University of Orleans where he was procurator of the Scottish nation in 1517. He married Janet Purves before 1523 and they had four sons, John, Thomas, Robert, and James; Marjoribankis also had a natural daughter, Janet. His name does not appear in the Edinburgh burgess roll until 1538, even though he obtained the status of burgess by right of his wife. The timing may be explained by the fact that in 1538 he also acted as a burgh assessor. Marjoribankis's career as an advocate progressed during the 1520s and reached its peak in the 1530s. In 1535 he and John Gladstanes were appointed advocates for the poor; the following year he acted as clerk to the king's treasurer. Two years later he produced a letter from the king before the lords which granted actions involving advocates the same privileged status in court procedure as those concerning judges. A creditor to Cardinal Beaton and his relatives, Marjoribankis had trading connections with France; in 1545 he was 'custumar' of Inverness and in the following year he was granted the privilege of exempting his merchandise from royal customs. In 1549 he was appointed lord clerk register and also purchased a share in a three-year lease of the mint. Marjoribankis purchased part of the estate of Ratho in Lothian in 1538. He became secured creditor in the rest of the estate in 1540 and eventually became infeft as owner, his title surviving legal challenge in 1547. Although dismissed as clerk register in 1554 and replaced by James MacGill, Thomas Marjoribankis does not appear to have died until about 1561, when he was succeeded by his grandson, Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 60985


John Lethame (d. c.1549) was of unknown origins. He had obtained an arts degree, possibly by studying abroad, before October 1507, when he is described as a cleric of Glasgow diocese, and recorded in Edinburgh acting as a notary by apostolic authority. In April 1511 he was evidently studying at the University of Orleans, being then elected procurator of the Scots nation there. Lethame's career as an advocate began around 1514 and reached the peak of its success in the years immediately after 1532. In 1521 he acted as commissary of Lothian and may have retained that office throughout the 1520s. By 1527 he had become subdean of Trinity collegiate church near Edinburgh and he later became parson of Kirkchrist. In 1530 he is referred to as commissary of the Chapel Royal at Stirling and from that date there are references to him as commissary south of the Forth. Lethame became a lord of session, apparently sitting for the first time in that capacity on 10 December 1538, though there is no record of him taking the oath 'de fideli administratione'. He resigned the parsonage of Kirkchrist on 17 April 1542 and died before 13 February 1549. 


@@@@@


doc= 60986


Thomas Kincraigie (d. 1564) was the legitimated natural son of James Kincraigie ('fl'. 'c'.1500), dean of Aberdeen. A student of arts at St Andrews, Kincraigie's legal career leaned heavily towards the church courts, though he also had a steady practice in the secular courts from the late 1520s. He may also have worked briefly in the royal chancery, since in 1532 he received a payment from the fees of the privy seal. In 1528 he acted as commissary in that part for James Beaton, archbishop of St Andrews, and later he acted as his procurator fiscal, an office he subsequently retained under Cardinal David Beaton. In 1548 Kincraigie was appointed advocate for the poor -- an office which he probably held, sometimes in conjunction with other advocates, until his death in 1564. 


@@@@@


doc= 60987


Robert Leslie of Inverpeffer (d. 1536) was the son of Walter Leslie ('fl'. 'c'.1480), parson of Menmuir and commissary of Dunkeld. His mother is unknown. Leslie married Christine Wardlaw and they had six children: Andrew, John, George, Gilbert, Elizabeth, and Janet. He also had a sister, Euphemia, who with his help became the last prioress of the Cistercian convent at Elcho in Perthshire. In return for his assistance Leslie received in feu-farm from the convent the lands of Kinnaird in Fife. Little is known of his education, though he may have been a determinant at the University of St Andrews in 1508. By 1518 he had become a burgess of Edinburgh, but it was in Fife and the north-east that his legal career took root. His major client in the area was, for over two decades, George Leslie, fourth earl of Rothes, to whom he may have been related through his father. By 1525 Leslie had acquired the estate of Inverpeffer in the sheriffdom of Forfar. A year later he was described as keeper of the signet, and in 1529 as custodian of the privy seal. Leslie last appeared before the lords of council on 31 July 1536. He was dead by 1 December that year. In 1540 James V had the corpse exhumed so that it could be tried for 'lese majeste', alleging Leslie's involvement in a 1529 plot to kill the king. There is no evidence of any such involvement. 


@@@@@


doc= 60988


Henry Lauder of St Germains (d. 1561) was the son of the Edinburgh burgess Gilbert Lauder ('fl'. 'c'.1490) and Margaret McCalzeane ('fl'. 'c'.1490). He married Agnes Stewart and they had a son, Gilbert, and possibly other children. A graduate by November 1513, Lauder may have studied abroad. He was certainly admitted burgess of Edinburgh before the end of 1517. In that year he also began appearing as an advocate before the lords of council and by the late 1520s his legal services were very heavily in demand. This continued until 1538, when he replaced Adam Otterburn as king's advocate. Earlier that year he had made a speech of welcome in French to Mary of Guise on her entry into Edinburgh and had also acted as deputy to the marischal in parliament. In January 1539 the king directed that Lauder be permitted to remain in the council chamber so that he could intervene in any case where the king's interest was affected. This was a temporary measure until Lauder could fill a vacancy on the bench, which he had done by March 1540. Lauder remained king's advocate, holding the office jointly from 1555 with John Spens of Condie, until he died on 19 July 1561. 


@@@@@


doc= 61030


Samuel [i] Farley (c.1675-1730), printer, the first member of the family to be active in the newspaper trade, was probably the son of Edward [i] Farley (or Farlow), yeoman, of Twining, Gloucestershire. He was apprenticed to the London printer Freeman Collins, citizen and stationer, on 6 May 1689 and became a freeman of the Stationers' Company on 4 September 1699. By 1698 he had moved to Exeter, where he became the partner of Samuel Darker, the city's first resident printer. He lived in the parishes of St Paul and, later, St Lawrence and had offices in the High Street and thereafter St Peter's Churchyard. After Darker's death, in London in 1700, Farley continued in business alone, among the first works that he saw through the press being John Prince's 'Danmonii orientales illustres, or, The Worthies of Devon' (1701), a folio of 600 pages with woodcut coats of arms. He also printed several of the Latin works of the Exeter medical practitioner and antiquary William Musgrave. About 1704 Farley established the first known Exeter newspaper, 'Sam. Farley's Exeter Post-Man', of which only issue 556, for 10 August 1711, survives. From 1705 to 1707 he was the partner of the Exeter printer Joseph Bliss, who in 1709 began a rival newspaper. In 1713 Farley issued the first number of 'Sam. Farley's Bristol Post-Man', the first surviving issue of which (no. 24) is dated 15 July 1713, with stray issues surviving until 28 January 1716. 
Farley seems to have maintained his Exeter office for two or three years, possibly with the assistance of the bookseller Philip Bishop, and on 24 September 1714 he started the 'Exeter Mercury'. On 30 September 1715 he gave details in his Exeter paper of an agreement whereby he had contracted with Philip Bishop that henceforth he should print the news in Exeter. This was just three days after the first issue of the 'Salisbury Post-Man' had appeared from his new office 'adjoyning to Mr. Robert Silcock's on the Ditch in Sarum'. Farley overstretched himself in this venture, which seems to have been short-lived. He appears to have relinquished his Exeter office in 1715 but to have continued printing in Bristol from his premises in St Nicholas Street until at least 1721. In May 1723 he or his son, also named Samuel [ii], was in Exeter to establish 'Farley's Exeter Journal'. By May 1726 this was being run by another son, Edward [ii], as Samuel [i] had now concentrated his activities in his premises in Wine Street, Bristol, where in April 1725, after the new 'Stamp Act', he had started 'Farley's Bristol Newspaper'. Samuel [i] died 18 August 1730 in Bristol, after which date the newspaper was continued by his son, 


@@@@@


doc= 61072


George Jackman (1837-1887) was born at Woking on 13 March 1837, and was educated at a private school, Foster House, Egham, Surrey, before joining the nursery business. He married, at St John's, Woking, on 3 October 1865, Mary Ann, daughter of Thomas Lee, a farmer. They had four sons and four daughters, two of whom, Arthur George Jackman ['see below'] and Percy Jackman, later ran the business. On his father's death he succeeded to the ownership of the nurseries and displayed considerable business acumen; the nursery exported large quantities of plants to North America, the home trade was built up, and the stock of clematis was improved with new introductions. 
In 1872 George Jackman co-wrote with his friend Thomas Moore, the curator of Chelsea Physic Garden and a horticultural journalist, the first book on the genus Clematis. 'The Clematis as a Garden Flower' described how, as a result of the recent work of hybridizers, the hardy clematis had been transformed in fewer than ten years 'from an ordinary climbing shrub, handsome in some, and elegant in all its forms, to one of the most gorgeous of garden ornaments, unrivalled as a flowery woody climber' (p. 19). While the book reflected the depth of understanding and love of the subject that must have gripped the young George at an early age, it also made commercial sense to advertise and encourage the use of clematis in gardens. Judging by the names of the nobility after whom many clematis were named by the nursery, the Jackmans rarely missed the opportunity to bring their products to the attention of estate owners and other potential customers. 
George Jackman also grew trees, roses, and shrubs. Ornamentals such as peaches were very profitable. Roses formed a large part of his trade and latterly rose petals were sold to the nearby Essential Oils Distillery at Byfleet. Brick making was also another side to his business. He died at Woking on 29 May 1887 after catching a cold that developed into pneumonia. 
His son 


@@@@@


doc= 61093


Benjamin Greene (1780-1860), born on 5 April 1780 in Oundle, the youngest child (there were thirteen by two marriages) of Benjamin Greene (1732-1782), draper, and his second wife, Rebecca Ashton (1739-1830). The family throughout the eighteenth century were engaged in the woollen drapery business of the south midlands and possessed impeccable dissenting credentials through their long association with the Howard Congregational Chapel in Bedford. There is no evidence of Benjamin Greene's education beyond his apprenticeship in the late 1790s with the leading London brewing firm of Whitbread. He appears to have settled in Bury St Edmunds in 1801 on forming a partnership with John Clark, brewer, in Guildhall Street. By 1804 the partnership was in difficulties, and early in 1806 Greene entered a new partnership with William Buck (a one-time yarn merchant, leading Suffolk dissenter, and the father-in-law of Thomas Clarkson, the great anti-slavery campaigner) to brew beer in the town's historic Westgate Brewery. 
Sales of beer in land-locked, backward Bury were unlikely to take off dramatically before the railways, and output during Greene's management of the brewery (1806-36) probably never exceeded that he declared in 1831 -- 5000 barrels of strong and 2000 of small beer. But Greene was an energetic and unconventional brewer whose abilities and ambitions were never realized in running a small country brewery. By good fortune Greene's neighbour across the brewery yard was a relatively impoverished, rackety, and, most significantly, childless owner of a West Indian plantation, Sir Patrick Blake, second baronet (died 1818). Greene became one of his executors, obtained the management of his Suffolk and St Kitts estates, and on his widow's death in 1823 was left her Nicola Town plantation on the island. Greene had become a proprietor in the West Indies himself. In addition to the Blake properties he managed those of a south Norfolk landowning family (Molyneaux), and there were three more he acquired on his own account. In 1829 his eldest son, the immensely capable Benjamin Buck Greene (1808-1902) was sent out to St Kitts to run all these properties and consolidate the family's good fortune. On his return to England in 1836 he was managing and modernizing no fewer than eighteen estates (together producing one third of the island's sugar exports in the mid-1830s) and enjoying the greatest reputation as a planter. 
Meanwhile Benjamin Greene had thrown himself with enormous vigour into representing the interests of the West Indian slave proprietors at a critical juncture of their affairs. To effect this he acquired the 'Bury and Suffolk Herald' in 1828. For six years he ran this ultra-tory provincial newspaper during the heady period surrounding the 'Reform Act' and the abolition of slavery amid mounting controversy, involving himself in no fewer than three libel cases. Utter reaction to these key pieces of legislation was a strange position for a one-time prominent dissenter to occupy and the third case heaped such obloquy upon him that he left Bury in 1836 to found a sugar importing and shipowning firm at 11 Mincing Lane, London. He died at Russell Square on 26 November 1860, was buried in Highgate cemetery, and left an estate sworn under $80,000. 
Benjamin Greene was twice married: in 1803, to Mary, third daughter of Abraham Maling, yarn merchant of Bury St Edmunds, and in October 1805, a year after Mary's death, to Catherine (1783-1855), daughter of the Revd Thomas Smith (1749-1801), minister of the Howard Chapel in Bedford, and his wife, Elizabeth (1750-1792), only daughter and heir of Zachariah Carleton of London, banker. The second marriage produced seven sons (two dying in infancy) and six daughters. Four of the five sons, all of whom were educated at Bury's renowned Edward VI Grammar School, inherited their father's ability. Besides the eldest, Benjamin Buck Greene (later governor of the Bank of England), John (1810-1867) was a solicitor, prominent in the affairs of Bury and west Suffolk and twice mayor of the town in 1841 and 1852. The career of the third son, Edward, brewer and MP, is discussed below. Charles (1821-1840) succeeded his eldest brother in the management of the St Kitts estates at the tender age of sixteen. It was, however, neither the burdens of his task nor his father's expectations, formidable as both were, which killed him three years later, but fun (he supposedly fathered thirteen illegitimate children) and yellow fever, the traditional toll upon the longevity of West Indian planters. Only the youngest, William (1824-1881), failed in all the tests his father set him, being completely unable to establish himself in any settled occupation. His nine children included Sir William Graham Greene, permanent secretary to the Admiralty and Ministry of Munitions, 1911-18, and Charles Henry Greene (1865-1942), headmaster of Berkhamsted School between 1910 and 1927, the father of Graham Greene (1904-1991), the novelist, and Sir Hugh Carleton Greene (1910-1987). 



@@@@@


doc= 61094


Sir (Edward) Walter Greene, first baronet (1842-1920), was born at the Westgate Brewery on 14 March 1842. Educated at Rugby School he then travelled on the continent before becoming a brewery pupil at Tamplin's in Brighton. Just before he became of age he was given a partnership in his father's firm. Two years later he married Anne Elizabeth Royds (1842/3-1912), the daughter of a Lichfield prebendary, the Revd C. Smith Royds, and they had two sons and three daughters. Good looking and the apple of his father's eye, Walter had three great (and expensive) interests in life: hunting (he hunted packs of harriers and fox and stag hounds in Suffolk and Worcestershire), driving carriages four-in-hand, and his succession of ever bigger steam yachts. The running of the brewery was, in effect, left to his steely, independent, highly competent first cousin, E. W. Lake (1852-1922). Lake was prominent in Suffolk affairs, mayor of Bury no fewer than six times, and under his guidance for almost half a century the brewery went from strength to strength. By 1920 it owned 460 public houses in East Anglia and was reckoned to be one of the best managed and most profitable breweries in England. The success was largely Edward Lake's. 
After his father's death Walter Greene, chairman of Greene King from 1891 to 1920, did no more than attend a weekly directors' meeting, if he was in Suffolk. He drew an income from the brewery not far short of $20,000 in some years before 1914. In 1897 he served office as high sheriff of Suffolk and three years later he was rewarded with the baronetcy his father had been promised shortly before his death. Although nowhere near as effective on the hustings as Edward Greene (Sir Walter's speeches lacked gravity and substance) he was Conservative MP for Bury St Edmunds in the parliament of 1900-06. Indeed in that parliament there were two other Greene members besides Sir Walter: his elder son, Raymond Greene (1869-1947), and his first cousin Henry Greene QC (1843-1915), the third son of Benjamin Buck Greene. 
Sir Walter was characteristic of many third generation British businessmen. The 'Bible' and Surtees formed the limits of his reading matter; sport and practical jokes were his favourite pursuits. Although dutiful -- an avid churchman, colonel of militia, and JP -- his convivial life was a prolonged pursuit of pleasure. He was fortunate that Edward Lake was one of the shrewdest brewers of his generation. Sir Walter Greene died at Nether Hall on 27 February 1920 and was buried at Thurston church, Suffolk. 
After the Greene-Lake regime at Greene King came to an end in 1922 the brewery was run by Edward Lake's eldest son, Major E. L. D. Lake (1881-1946), one of the best-known country brewers of the 1920-45 period. Lacking his father's capacities he nevertheless ran the company well on somewhat military lines and effectively sidelined the next two Eton- and Oxford-educated Greene baronets, Sir Raymond Greene and Sir Edward Greene (1882-1966), although both served (Raymond very briefly) as chairmen of Greene King. Sir Raymond initially had a promising career as MP (for West Cambridgeshire, 1895-1906; North Hackney, 1910-23), as member of London County Council, and as a distinguished soldier in the First World War. But he lacked ambition and, like so many of his generation, his health never fully recovered from the war. When Sir Walter died in 1920 both brothers showed provincial Suffolk a clean pair of heels. Enjoying society, they lived principally in London. On Sir Edward's death in 1966 the baronetcy became extinct. The Greene connection with the brewery was maintained by Sir Hugh Carleton Greene, who, on the strength of his high profile at the BBC, became a director in 1964 (he was chairman, 1971-8); his son, Graham C. Greene, publisher and chairman of the British Museum trustees, has continued the Greene interest since 1979. Like his schoolmaster father and troubled grandfather, Sir Hugh, a great-grandson of the firm's founder, had had nothing to do with brewing. But he and his brother Graham had a long held interest in sampling the beers of different breweries during their holidays. Possessing a deep respect for the industry's traditions Hugh brought a breath of the outside world to the board, although Benjamin and Edward Greene must have shifted uneasily in their graves at the prospect of William Greene's grandson heading their brewery. 
The Greenes provide a classic illustration of the upward mobility of countless families engaged in industry and commerce in the century before 1914, a microcosm of a significant slice of our social history in these years. Benjamin Greene and his sons, Edward and Benjamin Buck, were men of ability and achievement bent on establishing their families at the pinnacle of Victorian society. Plantation owning, sugar trading, banking, and, above all, brewing, provided all the mammon-based trappings of nineteenth-century social arrival -- country and London houses, steam yachts, expensive educations, membership of the House of Commons, eventually a title. With these advances came a diminution in business application. But the Greene family has a greater interest than this typically British plutocratic evolution of those supremely successful in business, for no brewing dynasty possesses more celebrated literary connections since Graham Greene and Christopher Isherwood were both direct descendants of the founder of Greene King, Benjamin Greene. 


@@@@@


doc= 61150


Sir Alexander Seton (d. 1440/41), son of William Seton and Janet Fleming. His mother was Elizabeth Gordon (died 1439), daughter and heir of Sir Adam Gordon, lord of Gordon, who died at Homildon Hill on 14 September 1402. When Alexander senior married Elizabeth Gordon in 1408, she brought with her the Berwickshire baronies of Gordon and Fogo, but also the lordship of Strathbogie in the heart of the north-east, largely neglected by the Gordons throughout the fourteenth century. Alexander had an elder brother, John Seton, who was already reasonably prominent in the borders, and so he seems to have taken the decision to develop his own sphere of influence, moving his base to the northern estates. Over the next two decades he gradually built up a network of support and alliances which included Alexander Stewart, earl of Mar (died 1435), the most powerful magnate in the region, and also members of prominent local families, such as the Forbeses, Ogilvys, and Irvines of Drum. 


@@@@@


doc= 61299


Robert Hollond (1808-1877), Liberal MP for Hastings. 


@@@@@


doc= 61373


John Veitch (1752-1839), who was born in Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, in October 1752, the eldest of the five children of Thomas Veitch, gardener to Sir William Scott at Ancrum House, and his wife, Mary (died 1780). Apprenticed aged fourteen into the horticultural trade at the nursery of Robert Dickson & Son at Hassendean, he continued his apprenticeship at the Vineyard nursery of James Lee in Hammersmith. He then went to be steward to the estate of Sir Thomas Dyke Acland, ninth baronet, at Killerton, near Exeter, Devon, and in 1780 he married Anna Davidson, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. About 1800 he founded a tree nursery at Budlake, near Killerton. He was also responsible for tree plantings at Luscombe Castle and Poltimore House in Devon. In 1832 he moved to Mount Radford, Exeter, where his son James [i] Veitch ['see below'] had recently bought land for a new nursery. John Veitch died at Killerton nursery, Broad Clyst, Devon, on 22 November 1839. 



@@@@@


doc= 61374


James [i] Veitch (1792-1863), youngest son of John Veitch, born at Killerton on 25 January 1792, was trained in his father's nursery at Budlake from 1800 to 1810. In 1814 he married Mary Tosswill (died 1826), with whom he had four sons and a daughter; after her death he married, in 1831, her sister Rebeca Tosswill (died 1863), who looked after her dead sister's children. He developed the new nursery at Mount Radford from about 1830 and, in partnership with his son James [ii] Veitch ['see below'], acquired the Exotic Nursery of Joseph Knight and Thomas A. Perry, on the King's Road, Chelsea, in 1853. In the 1840s he employed as plant collectors William Lobb in South America and his brother Thomas Lobb in Asia. James died suddenly of heart failure at Buckerel Villa, Heavitree, Exeter, on 14 May 1863, shortly after the death of his wife. He was buried at Broad Clyst 



@@@@@


doc= 61375


James [ii] Veitch (1815-1869), eldest son of James [i] Veitch, was born at Exeter on 24 May 1815. He was apprenticed at Alfred Chandler's nursery in Vauxhall and then with William Rollison, an orchid specialist, at Tooting before returning to Exeter, where in 1838 he married Harriot Reynolds Gould (died 1879), the daughter of a farmer. They had three sons and four daughters. He moved to Chelsea in 1853 as business partner to his father; the following year he relinquished his interest in the Exeter nursery, which was thenceforth run separately. He also acquired a large site for a nursery at Coombe Wood on Kingston Hill in Surrey. Orchids were his particular interest, and he sponsored several collecting expeditions to South America. He died of a heart attack at his home, Stanley House, King's Road, Chelsea, on 10 September 1869, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. The Veitch memorial medal was instituted in his honour from the proceeds of a subscription raised by nurserymen and members of the Royal Horticultural Society, of whose council he had been a member. 
Shortly after James [ii] Veitch became involved with the Chelsea nursery, about 1856 or 1857, his younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 61376


Robert Tosswill Veitch (bap. 1821, d. 1885), baptized at Broad Clyst on 18 August 1821, returned from the Cape of Good Hope, where he had been an apple farmer, to take charge of the Exeter nursery. In 1864 he established nurseries at New North Road and High Street, Exeter, trading as Robert Veitch & Son. Married to Sarah Jacoba, who was from the Cape, he had four sons and five daughters. He died at Torre, Torquay, Devon, on 18 January 1885. 
Robert Tosswill's son 


@@@@@


doc= 61377


Peter Christian Massyn Veitch (1850-1929) was born at the Cape of Good Hope. He collected plants for the Veitch firm in Australasia between 1875 and 1878 before going to Britain to succeed his father in charge of the Exeter branch of the business. In 1881 he married Harriette Drew, with whom he three sons and two daughters. He received the Victoria medal of honour of the Royal Horticultural Society in 1916. He died in Exeter, Devon, on 9 March 1929. His daughter, Anna Mildred (1889-1949), became managing director of Robert Veitch & Son Ltd. 
Meanwhile in the running of the Chelsea nursery James [ii] Veitch was succeeded after 1865 by his three sons, John Gould [i] Veitch, ['see below'] Harry James Veitch ['see below'], and 


@@@@@


doc= 61378


John Gould [i] Veitch (1839-1870), was born at Exeter on 17 April 1839. He visited the Far East in 1860 and Australasia in 1864, bringing back many trees which were new to Britain. He was elected fellow of the Linnean Society in 1866. In 1867 he married Jane Hodge; they had two sons, James Herbert Veitch ['see below'] and John Gould [ii] Veitch ['see below']. He died at the nursery, Coombe Wood, Kingston Hill, Surrey, on 13 August 1870, aged only thirty-one, when his sons were still in their early infancy. 



@@@@@


doc= 61380


Arthur Veitch (1844-1880). Arthur was born in Exeter on 24 February 1844 and became a partner in the family firm. In 1867 he maried Emily Eliza Drew, with whom he had at least two sons, but he died young on 25 September 1880 at 16 Edith Grove, Fulham Road, London. 
Arthur Veitch's eldest brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 61381


John Gould [ii] Veitch, second son of John Gould [i] Veitch, was born on 19 July 1869 at Kingston Hill, Surrey. After attending Westminster School he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, and graduated BA in 1890 and MA in 1894. He won soccer blues at Cambridge in 1888-91 and went on to play for England in the Corinthians' (gentlemen amateurs') game against Wales in 1894. He was described as 'an ivory-faced hero with a black moustache' (Grayson, 119) and 'a brilliant dribbler in the best Westminster tradition, with a deadly shot that brought him 60 goals in 68 games for the Corinthians' (ibid.). On 16 December 1894 he married Dorothy Maud, widow of Carl Richard G. Le Doux. He lived at 22 Homefield Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, and died at Wimbledon on 3 October 1914. 
John Gould [ii] was a partner in the family firm, but far more important to the business was his elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 61547


Christian Anthony Rassam (1808-1872), who after five years' training with the Church Missionary Society in Cairo became the society's Arabic translator in Malta in 1832. There he joined the Church of England and married on 1 January 1835 Matilda Badger (died 1867), sister of the Revd George Badger, missionary and Arabist; three months later he joined Francis Chesney's Euphrates expedition as principal interpreter (1835-7), after which he accompanied W. F. Ainsworth on his two expeditions to Kurdistan and Asiatic Turkey (1837; 1838-40) before returning to Mosul, his home town, where he had already, as from December 1839, been appointed British vice-consul. There he had a Scottish business partner, A. H. Ross, from 1844 to 1848, and 'brought the Yezidis into the 19th century' (Guest, 67). He died in Mosul on 30 May 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 61551


Frank Debenham (1837-1917), silk mercer and draper, and his wife, Emma Folkard Ridley. 


@@@@@


doc= 61597


Mark Ostrer (1892-1958), financier and film producer, was born three years after Isidore, on 4 November 1892. He served very effectively as the public face of the Ostrers. It was Mark who attended film premieres and hobnobbed with film stars and his amiability well qualified him as the envoy of the Gaumont-British Picture Corporation in its negotiations with Hollywood. When the corporation was taken over by J. Arthur Rank, Mark retained his place on the board because of his good relations with the heads of Twentieth Century Fox and MGM; he remained a popular and influential figure in the British film industry until his death. Mark Ostrer was married twice, first to Karen Peterson (died 1940); and then in 1943 to Olivia May Venning, with whom he had two sons. Mark Ostrer died at 186 Charles Street, London, on 5 November 1958. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 61598


Maurice Ostrer (d. 1975), financier and film producer, was the youngest of the brothers. He was described by James Mason (who married Isidore's daughter Pamela) as Isidore's shadow. Certainly the brothers collaborated very closely throughout a long and adventurous business career and Maurice died within months of his older brother, in December 1975. Maurice's main achievement, other than helping to manage Isidore's affairs, was in running Gainsborough Studios. He was in charge of production from 1937 onwards, but the day-to-day running of the studio was left in the capable hands of Edward Black until November 1943, when the two men fell out and Black resigned. It was in the period between the end of 1943 and the beginning of 1946, when Maurice took direct charge of the studio, that Gainsborough's most successful films, such as 'The Wicked Lady' (1945), were produced. After resigning from Gainsborough in May 1946, Maurice worked briefly as an independent producer, and then joined Isidore in Cannes. Until the early 1970s he spent most of his time there, returning to England only for Illingworth-Morris board meetings. But his last years were spent with Isidore in a large house in Sunningdale, where the brothers became increasingly reclusive, even from each other. Maurice Ostrer died on 3 December 1975 at Sunningdale. 


@@@@@


doc= 61599


David Elder (1784-1866), born at Little Seggie, Kinross-shire, had been apprenticed in the works of his father, Charles Elder, whose family had been wrights in Fife for generations. Like others of his contemporaries he had supplemented his training with much private study, particularly in hydraulics and hydrodynamics. He left the family business at the turn of the century to gain experience in the construction industry, particularly in building and fitting out large cotton mills in the Glasgow area. In the late 1810s he supervised the commissioning of Mile End factory for J. Clark & Co. of Paisley and James Dunlop's Broomward mill. In 1821 he went to work for Robert Napier. The following year he helped Napier build his first marine engine and went on to make many improvements in the design of the engines built by the firm. He also developed special machine tools for turning and boring the large cylinders and other components, training cartwrights and joiners in their use. The reputation of Napier's engines for reliability in service owed much to Elder's skill in design and production. 


@@@@@


doc= 61612


Lucy Everest Boole (1862-1904), pharmaceutical chemist, was born on 5 August 1862 in Blackrock, near Cork. Despite little formal education, she was the second woman to pass the London School of Pharmacy's major examination (1888). Taking a post as assistant to W. R. Dunstan, professor of chemistry to the Pharmaceutical Society, she became the first woman in Britain to formally undertake research in pharmaceutical chemistry. Her procedure for analysis of tartar emetic (proposed in an 1889 joint paper with Dunstan) became the official method of assay, retained until 1963. She became lecturer in chemistry at the London School of Medicine for Women, was elected a fellow of the Institute of Chemistry, and continued research in the Pharmaceutical Society's laboratory for some years. Never marrying, she shared her mother's London house (not always harmoniously), and died there on 5 December 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 61633


Failbe mac Pipain (d. 679), whose death was commemorated on 22 March, and the early years of his successor, Adomnan, were, therefore, particularly unfavourable to Iona. Failbe's long visit to Ireland, stretching from 673 to 676, may have enabled him to shore up Iona's position. Both of the two references to Failbe in Adomnan's life of Columba show him in close association with Segene and as a link in the chain by which stories about Columba came to Adomnan. He was, perhaps, not likely to make any change in Iona's position on the Easter question. 


@@@@@


doc= 61634


Faelchu mac Dorbeni (d. 724), who belonged to a remote collateral branch of Cenel Conaill. By this stage Northumbria was in confusion, with the killing of the king, Osred, son of Aldfrith, in 716, and the death of the next king, Coenred, son of Cuthwine, in 718. In 717, however, apparently after the death of Abbot Dunchad, King Nechtan drove the community of Iona out of Pictland, westwards into Dal Riata; and in 718 the community of Iona received the Petrine tonsure. 


@@@@@


doc= 61635


Cillene Fota (d. 726) became abbot, Cinaed mac Irgalaig was king of Tara. Cinaed came from the Ui Neill of Brega, but he was to be the last of that branch to gain the kingship of Tara for many generations. After his death, Flaithbertach mac Loingsig of Cenel Conaill was king of Tara until 734; he also was the last member of his branch of the Ui Neill to gain the kingship of Tara for centuries. These branches, dominant since the sixth century, were ousted by other Ui Neill kindreds, Cland Cholmain, rulers of Mide, and Cenel nEogain from the valley of the Foyle, now supreme among the southern and northern Ui Neill respectively. 


@@@@@


doc= 61636


Cellach mac Congaile (d. 815), was responsible for building the new monastery at Kells, beginning in 807. When he had completed the buildings in 814, he resigned the abbacy and died the next year. 


@@@@@


doc= 61637


Diarmait alumnus Daigri (d. in or after 831), who had been abbot since 814, made a visit to Britain with the shrine of Columba; just as, in 849, his successor, 


@@@@@


doc= 61638


Innrechtach ua Finnachtai (d. 854), went with the relics of Columba to Ireland. Innrechtach was martyred by Englishmen on 12 March 854, while on pilgrimage to Rome. His successor, 


@@@@@


doc= 61639


Cellach mac Ailella (d. 865), is described in his obit as abbot of Kildare and Iona and as dying in Pictland; this combination is perhaps explained by the links of Cinaed mac Ailpin, king of Scotland, with Leinster. Nothing is known of the next two abbots, 


@@@@@


doc= 61640


Feradach mac Cormaic (d. 880) and 


@@@@@


doc= 61641


Flann mac Maile Duin (d. 891), apart from their names and obits. Flann, who died on 20 April, was, however, succeeded by 


@@@@@


doc= 61642


Mael Brigte mac Tornain (d. 927), whose feast day is 22 February and who contrived to be both abbot of Armagh and abbot of Iona. It is quite uncertain whether Mael Brigte spent any significant time on Iona. The headship of the community of Columba was now passing to Kells. 


