@@@@@


doc= 61644


Thomas Dent (1796-1872), was born on 21 December 1796 at Crosby Ravensworth, Westmorland, and was schooled in London. After three terms at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1815-16, he went to Canton, where by 1820 he was exercising powers of attorney on behalf of the absent merchant W. S. Davidson. By 1823 he had formally joined forces with Davidson and an American, William Blight, to trade as W. S. Davidson & Co. Following Davidson's retirement to London, Dent became the senior partner and by 1824 the firm had changed its name to Thomas Dent & Co. In order to legitimize his trade as a private merchant in Canton in the face of the East India Company's monopoly, Dent followed a well-established practice and between 1824 and 1829 he acted as the Sardinian consul. With his younger brother now entrenched in the business he left Canton for London in 1830 to develop the family interest in Rickards, Mackintosh & Co. He finally abandoned his residual role in the Canton partnership when he joined the London firm known from 1835 as Palmer, Mackillop, Dent & Co. Consorting in business with the impressive Horsley Palmer, a governor of the Bank of England (1830-33), Dent clearly aspired to the role of a City grandee himself but was not to be accorded the laurels he sought. His attempt to become a director of the Bank of England when he assumed leadership of Dent, Palmer & Co. in 1858 was frustrated. On 19 January 1837 at St George's, Hanover Square, London, he married Sabine Ellen Robarts, and they had eight sons. He died on 19 November 1872, at 12 Hyde Park Gardens, London, and was survived by his wife. 
The fifth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 61645


Lancelot Dent (1799-1853), was born on 4 August 1799 at Crosby Ravensworth, Westmorland, and appears to have been engaged initially in the wine trade. He is recorded in 1824 as a partner in Messrs Keirs & Co. of Madeira, yet by 1827 he had arrived in Canton. Under his leadership the firm evolved from its status as a barely tolerated participant in the 'country trade', on the fringes of the East India Company's monopoly, to that of the second largest China trading house making its constructive contribution to the institutions of local commerce and society. He successfully navigated the firm through the uncertainties resulting from the ending of the East India Company's monopoly of the China trade in 1834 and ensured that it exploited the main chance then presented. By the late 1830s, following the return to Britain of William Jardine, Lancelot Dent was regarded as the senior British merchant in Canton. From no. 6 Pao shun hong he presided over a burgeoning trade which included imports of raw cotton, manufactured goods, and, most famously and illegally, opium; exports of tea and silk; and the range of attendant insurance and banking services typical of an agency house. 
Lancelot Dent combined an unusual attention to detail bordering on pedantry, with sufficient large-mindedness and affability to secure greater popularity than his brother Thomas. His moderate temperament, finding expression in the firm's mouthpiece, 'The Canton Press', sprang from a tory political sympathy, a respect for the stable framework provided by the East India Company, and a practical recognition that coercive measures against the Chinese to expand trading opportunities could be counter-productive. As a prime mover in the establishment of the Canton general chamber of commerce in 1836 he helped to reduce divisiveness within the merchant community, and his leadership of and benefaction to the Morrison Education Society (founded in the same year) fostered, in a modest way, greater mutual understanding between Chinese and Western cultures. 
The painting by George Chinnery 'On Dent's Verandah', executed about 1840, well evokes the languorous interludes between the Canton trading seasons when Dent would decamp for his well-appointed residence on Macao's Praya Grande. This pattern was to be rudely interrupted when the Chinese imperial government intensified its intermittent attempts to end the opium trade with the appointment in 1838 of Lin Zexu as high commissioner for Canton. Faced with Lin's summons to an interview at Canton's city gates, urgently reinforced on 23 March 1839 by the appearance of two leading Chinese Cohong merchants in chains, Dent would have acceded if not prevented by fellow merchants afraid both for his safety and for the possible surrender of opium stocks. The situation was saved only by the arrival in Canton of Captain Elliot, the British government's superintendent of trade. With the disruption of trade caused by the ensuing First Opium War (1839-42), Lancelot Dent possibly moved at least a part of his operations to Manila, where he had acquired a house. As the firm became established in Hong Kong, gaining a substantial foothold near Pedders Wharf in the first land sale of 1841, and extending its operations into the newly acquired treaty ports, Dent's role diminished. On his return to England by 1842, he retired to the Skersgill estate in Cumberland. He died, unmarried, at the Plough Hotel, Cheltenham, on 28 November 1853. Reporting his death the 'Gentleman's Magazine' noted he was the head of an eminent house in China which bore his name, and added that 'He was the type of a true English merchant' ('GM', 217). He was buried in St Lawrence's churchyard, Crosby Ravensworth. 
Born on 24 December 1800 at Crosby Ravensworth, 


@@@@@


doc= 61646


Wilkinson Dent (1800-1886) was in many respects a lesser man of business than his elder brothers, and his arrival in Canton was by a more circuitous route. Unsuccessful in Europe, he showed no greater promise in Calcutta. He departed in 1835 for Canton where by the year end Lancelot Dent had secured a partnership for him in Daniell & Co., hoping ultimately to effect a takeover (which never materialized). Present at Lancelot's discomfiture of 23 March 1839, Wilkinson Dent was a key restraining influence on his brother's readiness to leave the factories and face Lin. It was the Hong Kong branch of the firm which subsequently became his base. On his return to England, Wilkinson Dent lived at Flass House, Maulds Meaburn, Westmorland, which he and Lancelot had reconstructed with the fruits of their Far Eastern endeavours. The nearby church of St Lawrence, Crosby Ravensworth, was equipped with a chapel dedicated to the Dent family in 1871, funded by Wilkinson. He too died a bachelor, on 10 May 1886, at the family residence, 8 Fitzroy Square, London. He was buried near his brother in St Lawrence's churchyard. 
Unfortunately a degree of complacency set in after the death or retirement of the three brothers, and the firm collapsed in 1867. A nephew, John Dent (1821-1892), had a lifestyle that certainly suggested extravagance (he was reported to have spent $10,000 on a racehorse to win the Hong Kong cup) but the firm's achievements, principally in the leading role it played in the establishment of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, were still registered and failure was poignant when it came. 
'It was a bitter moment when we had to haul down the old house flag' (Lubbock, 373), recalled 


@@@@@


doc= 61647


Sir Alfred Dent (1844-1927), who was responsible for restoring the family fortunes. Born on 12 December 1844, the third son of Thomas Dent, he was educated at Eton College between 1858 and 1862, and was in the firm's employ on the China coast by 1864. Soon after the crash he had the business, reconstituted as Alfred Dent & Co., operational once more in the old Shanghai premises. He was, however, to make a spectacular departure from the time-honoured Dent career path. With Alfred's financial backing the Austro-Hungarian Herr van Overbeek, a former manager of Dent & Brothers in Hong Kong, succeeded in extracting commercial concessions from the sultan of Brunei and the Pangiran Temanggong in the face of American, Spanish, and Italian competition. The treaty sealing these arrangements in 1877 resulted in Overbeek's becoming maharaja of Saba and raja of Gaya and Sandakan. It was Dent's long-standing friendship with Sir Julian Pauncefote, permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office, which provided support against the resulting complaints of Raja Brooke to which the colonial secretary, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, had lent a sympathetic ear. Dent bought out Overbeek's interest in 1880 and, following the grant of a royal charter the following year, the British North Borneo Company was created with sovereign rights over the territories formerly in Overbeek's charge. For $120,000 Dent transferred all his rights to it. One of the provinces created for administrative purposes was named Dent. 
Sir Alfred Dent was to broaden his activities even further. Head of the City firm of Dent Brothers & Co., merchants and commission agents, he also became chairman of the Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea Estates, and the Shanghai Electric Construction Company, and held directorships of the Chartered Bank of India, Australia, and China, the London County and Westminster Bank, and the Royal Exchange Assurance Corporation. In 1898 he was appointed to the Indian silver currency commission. His wide-ranging achievements were recognized by his knighthood (KCMG) in 1892 and his appointment as high sheriff of Sussex in 1908. 
Something of a sportsman Dent pursued recreations such as rowing, tennis, hunting, and shooting. He married late, in 1896, Margaret, the daughter of Charles Aird; they had one son, Lesley. Dent's London addresses included Belgrave Mansions, Grosvenor Gardens, and, later, 10 Cambridge Gate, Regent's Park; he also favoured his country house, Ravensworth, in Eastbourne. Sir Alfred died on 23 November 1927 at his home in Cambridge Gate, and he was buried in Ocklynge cemetery, Eastbourne. He was survived by his wife. 
Managers of a business partnership which played a major role in the expansion of British trade in the Far East, the Dent family provided an outstanding example of economic imperialism at work. At its height the firm rivalled the now better-known Jardine Matheson partnership for supremacy of the old China trade. Unfortunately, the presumed loss of the Dent business records has radically distorted historical accounts of the opening of trade with China in favour of Jardines, whose archive is still largely intact and readily accessible to scholars. 


@@@@@


doc= 61718


William Day Wills (1797-1865), born on 6 June 1797, and his youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 61719


Henry Overton [ii] Wills (1800-1871); but because another partner, William Ditchett, remained in the business, the firm did not adopt its subsequently world-famous style of W. D. and H. O. Wills until 1831, and then only for two years, since in 1833 it amalgamated with another firm to become Ricketts, Wills & Co. This merger made the firm one of the largest in the country. The style of W. D. and H. O. Wills returned in 1847, when the Ricketts family retired from the business. 
The market for tobacco at that time consisted mainly of smoking tobacco, with snuff and cigars being very much minority tastes. Firms sold various types of smoking tobacco under their name as the distinguishing feature and guarantee of quality, but retail tobacconists made up their own blends from these tobaccos to suit local tastes. In 1846 the Willses hit upon the idea of giving brand names to certain of its tobaccos, and the first two brands -- Best Bird's Eye and Bishop Blaze -- made their appearance on new year's day 1847. This was a major breakthrough which gave Wills a market advantage and it represented a shift in market power away from specialist retail tobacconists to the manufacturer. 
By the standards of the time the Wills brothers were wealthy, and, while William and Henry now lived in comfortable style, it was at a level somewhat below the limits of their income, a characteristic that was to mark successive generations. Both entered local politics as Liberals; and from the 1840s onwards both made significant benefactions towards the establishment of new Congregational churches in the city and to associated charitable activity. In 1820 William Day Wills married Mary, daughter of Robert Steven of Glasgow and Camberwell, Surrey. They had one surviving child, Sir William Henry Wills (1830-1911). W. D. Wills died at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, on 13 May 1865. His brother Henry Overton [ii] Wills, who remarried after the death of his first wife, had eleven children surviving out of fifteen by 1851 and the total eventually reached eighteen. However, only those male children born to his first wife succeeded to the family business. These included Henry Overton [iii] Wills (1828-1911), Sir Edward Payson Wills (1834-1910), and Sir Frederick Wills (1838-1909): all four became partners in the firm. Their father died at 3 Hillside, Cotham, Bristol, on 23 November 1871. 
Control of the business now devolved to these members of the family. William Henry became the senior partner by virtue of the fact that he inherited all his father's share in the business. W. D. and H. O. Wills was subsequently transformed from being a highly successful firm among a number in the industry into the dominant tobacco manufacturer in the United Kingdom, such that it proved capable in 1901-2 of beating off a powerful challenge to its position from the mighty American Tobacco Company. The question remains as to how it was Wills that had achieved this phenomenal success rather than another firm in the industry. 
During the 1860s and 1870s the firm paid close attention to selling, and steadily improving the quality of its product. Moreover, as sales grew, the scale of capital required to finance the duty (which was approximately equivalent to four times the cost of raw leaf) increased proportionately, and it accounted for a large part of the $300,000 required to carry on the business in 1880; in turn, this represented a major hurdle to would-be new entrants. Growth in the market was matched by the now almost continuous extension of premises and the opening of a new factory at Bedminster, Bristol, in 1886. Premises had been acquired in London in 1864 and these were steadily added to. An entirely new departure occurred in 1883, when a bonded factory was opened in Bristol to facilitate Wills's growing export trade. 
William Henry Wills was chairman of the company and its main business strategist until the formation of the Imperial Tobacco Company in 1901. Nevertheless, from the late 1870s onwards he began to develop a public career, and in 1880 he entered parliament as a Liberal member for Coventry. Having been educated at Mill Hill School and retaining his nonconformist connections, William Henry was more outgoing and metropolitan in outlook than his cousins. By 1880 each of this generation was possessed of a fortune of $100,000 in terms of book values, though in market values the figure would be $300,000. All of them enjoyed comfortable lifestyles. William Henry purchased a country estate and a large motor yacht. Through his wide business and political connections he became a leading figure in commercial circles in London. H. O. [iii] Wills purchased a small estate in Norway, where, partly for reasons of ill health, he spent a great deal of time during the remainder of what proved to be a long life. 
From the early 1880s increasing responsibilities in the firm were assumed by members of the fourth generation. Sir George Alfred Wills (1854-1928), the elder son of H. O. [iii] Wills, emerged as the leading figure, though he was well complemented by the second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 61720


Henry Herbert Wills (1856-1922), tobacco manufacturer. Born on 20 March 1856, Harry Wills was educated at Mill Hill School and Clifton College. He trained as a pupil engineer with Avonside Engineering Co. and also studied engineering at Bristol University College. In 1878 he was appointed engineer of W. D. and H. O. Wills. In 1886 he married Mary Monica, daughter of Sir Philip Cunliffe Owen; they did not have any children. 
Wills's leading position in the industry resulted in its attracting offers of exclusive use of new processes and techniques. In 1885, for example, it secured exclusive rights to the use in the tobacco industry of an airtight tin, which significantly improved the keeping qualities of tobacco, an especially valuable thing in the export trade. But what was to prove the most dramatic technical advance occurred in 1883, when Wills acquired exclusive patent rights in the United Kingdom to an American invention, the Bonsack cigarette-making machine, to which there was no effective competitor. The cost was $4000, and this purchase must rank as one of the outstanding buys in British industrial history. 
Wills had first introduced handmade cigarettes in 1860, but cigarettes remained a minuscule element in total sales. Even with a prospect of cheaper, machine-made cigarettes, the expectation was that sales would remain small. Nevertheless, the Bonsack machine could produce cigarettes at a quarter of the cost of the handmade alternative, and with minor developments machine-made cigarettes would be of superior quality. Wills did not, however, move quickly to exploit its technical advantage, which can be explained mainly in terms of the partners' doubts about the potential scale of the market and the concern of Frederick Wills, in particular, that handworkers would be put out of employment. Cigarette sales began to grow quite fast in the 1880s, however, but at 3died for ten they remained significantly more expensive than smoking tobacco. Eventually, in mid-1888, George Wills proposed that a new cigarette should be produced that would retail at 1died for five. With the enthusiastic backing of Harry Wills (who had trained as an engineer) and, more importantly, with the support of William Henry, the resistance of the other partners was overcome and two brands were launched -- Wild Woodbine and Cinderella. Their success was phenomenal, that of Woodbine outstandingly so; and it is fair to claim that Woodbine became the most famous cigarette brand of all time. The effect of cigarette sales on Wills's profits was dramatic. From $66,500 in 1887, profits rose to $788,000 in 1901. 
By 1901 Wills accounted for 12 per cent of UK tobacco sales by weight. Of these sales, 64 per cent was accounted for by cigarettes, which was equivalent to 55 per cent of UK cigarette sales, yet cigarettes still accounted for only 14.5 per cent of UK tobacco sales by weight. On the face of it, therefore, Wills hardly appears dominant. But the crucial fact is that Wills had a virtual monopoly of the cigarette market, and cigarettes had become up to ten times more profitable than smoking tobaccos. At 1died for five the gross profit on a packet of Woodbine in 1900 was as little as just under one farthing because of the large amount of duty in the price. But Wills's profits on cigarettes were so high because of huge turnover and the need for even money pricing. 
The formation of the Imperial Tobacco Company in 1901 was the outcome of a trial of strength between the American Tobacco Company, under its flamboyant president, James Buchanan Duke, and a combination of British manufacturers. By aggressive business tactics, Duke had succeeded in building American Tobacco not only into by far the largest American tobacco manufacturer but also into one of the largest corporations in the United States and, therefore, in the world. In 1900 he decided to make a bid for the dominant share of the lucrative UK market. To achieve his end he acquired Wills's strongest competitor, the Liverpool firm of Ogden. He immediately announced his intention of capturing the British and European markets and declared that the large sum of $6 million had been set aside for this purpose. The British trade was thrown into fearful agitation and firms petitioned Wills to take the lead in resisting the American invasion. 
The possibility of selling out to Duke was seriously considered by some of the partners, but, under the decisive lead of William Henry and George, Wills resolved to form an amalgamation of thirteen leading UK tobacco manufacturers and to fight American Tobacco. The name Imperial Tobacco Company was deliberately chosen to appeal to patriotic and imperial sentiments. The constituent firms agreed not to reveal their annual profits (on which the capitalization of the new company would be calculated and distributed) until all other matters had been settled. When disclosure finally occurred, the other firms were astounded at Wills's profits, which meant that the Wills family controlled 60 per cent of the new company. 
The 'tobacco war' raged, but the British line held. Towards the end of 1902, in view of the mounting losses, Duke came to the conclusion that he could not win and that the better option was to negotiate a peace. The warring parties met in late 1902 and quickly came to an amicable agreement. The main terms were that American Tobacco agreed to withdraw from the UK market and Imperial Tobacco agreed not to enter the American market. In their own markets each company acquired exclusive trading rights in the other's brands. The sale of Ogdens to Imperial Tobacco gave American Tobacco a substantial minority interest in the former; and in a grand declaration that would have done justice to Pope Alexander VI in the fifteenth century, trade in the rest of the world was to be served by a new UK registered company, the British American Tobacco Company, the ownership of which was to be divided between American Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco in the proportions of two-thirds to one-third. 
The outcome was in part a tribute to the business vision of Sir William Henry Wills and the skills of his younger cousins George and Harry; and also to the sons of John Player, J. D. Player and W. G. Player ['see under 'Player, John] of the Nottingham tobacco firm who were responsible for advertising. In larger part it reflected the near monopoly that Wills had secured in the UK cigarette market, together with the strength of the smoking brands owned by the British firms. Testimony to Wills's dominance came from Duke himself when he declared: 'I did hope that I should be able to force you to reduce your prices, and if you had I should have had you, but you refused to do so and I was therefore beaten' (Alford, 275). 
The assured financial success of the new company continued to bring enormous rewards, as shown by the estates of the senior members of the Wills family who died between 1909 and 1911: these totalled well over $13 million. In addition, Harry Wills died at his home, St Vincent's, Clifton Park, Bristol, on 11 May 1922 leaving an estate valued at $2.75 million. A further measure of these riches is that at his death in 1928 Sir George Wills's estate was valued at $10 million. These princely fortunes made the family one of the richest in the land. At the time of their deaths these men stood at the head of the Imperial Tobacco Company, which ranked as the seventeenth largest industrial enterprise in the world. 
Moreover, both this generation of the family and the previous one had made substantial benefactions to a variety of causes, many, though not all, associated with the city of Bristol. In 1908, for example, H. O. [iii] Wills gave $100,000 which enabled the university college at Bristol to become the fully independent University of Bristol. Lord Winterstoke (Sir W. H. Wills) donated $35,000 to the new university and, earlier in 1904, he had made a gift to the city of a museum and art gallery. Furthermore, between 1913 and 1920 Harry Wills and his brother Sir George donated a further $500,000 to the university, and this was substantially added to in following years. The scale of the family's gifts to the University of Bristol can be judged from the fact that in terms of prices a hundred years later their value would run into hundreds of millions of pounds. The other benefaction of princely proportions was Harry's gift of $1.5 million for the building and endowment of the St Monica's Home of Rest in Bristol: somewhat contrary to family tradition this home was for gentlewomen who were Anglicans with high-church leanings, which reflected the Anglo-Catholic beliefs of Harry's wife, Dame Monica. These were the largest of a wide variety of charitable gifts made by members of the family. 
The business success of the Wills family is, in an obvious sense, beyond question. Much more difficult to assess is the extent to which this achievement was the reward to their exceptional business talents or whether it was relatively easily come by. The picture that emerges is of a family that succeeded in maintaining a solid level of business ability through successive generations, and that during the period of exceptional opportunity in the 1880s those directing the firm were able, with an element of luck that is commonly an ingredient of business success, to mobilize the firm's steadily accumulated resources to achieve phenomenal rewards. Even so, once the firm had established itself among the leaders of the industry by the mid-century, conditions were such that competition was steadily reduced. Government regulation of the industry, especially through the excise tax, and the protection of patent law both played their part as barriers to the entry of new firms. Moreover, the manufacture of tobacco did not involve a range of complex technical problems. It is for this reason that the exclusive ownership of the Bonsack patent was such a powerful commercial weapon. Thus while it would be mistaken to describe leading members of the Wills family as heroic entrepreneurs in the Smilesian tradition, they proved their true worth when confronted with one of the most successful of the American 'robber barons'. There is perhaps no better testimony to their business achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 61721


Walter Stowe Bright McLaren (1853-1912) on 18 April 1883 introduced her to the politically influential Bright-McLaren family, with its extensive connections to the Liberal Party and the Victorian women's movement. Walter was born in Edinburgh, the youngest son of Duncan McLaren (1800-1886), lord provost of Scotland and MP for Edinburgh, and Priscilla Bright McLaren (1815-1906), president of the Edinburgh National Society for Women's Suffrage and sister to John and Jacob Bright. Charles Benjamin Bright McLaren was his brother, and John McLaren his half-brother. After an education at Craigmount School and Edinburgh University, Walter entered into business as a worsted spinner in the firm of Smith and McLaren in Keighley, and in later years became a director of numerous companies. However, his heart lay in politics, and he was subsequently elected Liberal MP for Crewe (1886-95). 


@@@@@


doc= 61745


Eanfrith (fl. c.670), brother of 


@@@@@


doc= 61746


Eanhere (fl. c.670), who were Christians along with their people, the Hwicce (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.13). This implies that Eanhere had been king, and perhaps that Eanfrith had ruled jointly with him. Bede also refers to King 


@@@@@


doc= 61747


Osric (fl. 674-679), apparently as patron of Bishop Oftfor; charters imply that he ruled at least from 674 to 679, and associate him and his brother Oswald with the foundation of Gloucester and Pershore monasteries respectively. Oswald may be the father of an 


@@@@@


doc= 61748


AEthelric (fl. c.693-736), were attesting charters without him. The last of these is best evidenced in charters; these extend from the 690s to 736, when he is styled 'subregulus' of the Mercian king AEthelbald ('AS chart.', S 89). He may be associated with the church at Wootton Wawen, Warwickshire. It is not known whether he succeeded Oshere directly; or whether one or more of his three brothers reigned first. Another member of the family who witnesses AEthelbald's charters was Osred, but he may not have ruled. There is in fact a gap in the record of Hwiccian 'reguli' between AEthelric and the appearance together, in charters of 757 and 759, of three brothers, 


@@@@@


doc= 61749


AEthelmund (d. before 746), son of Oswald, whom AEthelbald of Mercia (died 757) slew, afterwards making reparation to Gloucester monastery (in 746: 'AS chart.', S 1679). Gloucester tradition says that the first abbess Cyneburh was Osric's sister. The third, Eafe, was conceivably the same woman as the Eaba mentioned above. Osric was evidently succeeded as king of the Hwicce by 


@@@@@


doc= 61750


Eanberht (fl. 757-759), 


@@@@@


doc= 61751


Uhtred (fl. 757-777), and 


@@@@@


doc= 61752


Ealdred (fl. 757-777), each styled 'regulus'. This is the first unequivocal evidence of joint rule among the Hwicce. Uhtred and Ealdred were active at least until 777. A relative of theirs was AEthelburh, the abbess of Fladbury, Withington, and Twyning in the 770s; she was the daughter of the thegn AElfred, and was no doubt related to Oshere's son AEthelheard, who had also been associated with Fladbury. No member of the dynasty is known to have ruled after the 770s; AEthelmund, ealdorman of the Hwicce (died 802), may be unrelated. His wife Ceolburh may have been the abbess of Berkeley who died in 807, and his son AEthelric refers to an extensive inheritance in the kingdom of the Hwicce in the will that he made in 804. AEthelric's wish to be buried at Deerhurst may indicate a break with the traditions of the Hwiccian kings, for Osric is said to have been buried at Gloucester, and the bodies of the ancestors of the brothers Eanberht, Uhtred, and Ealdred were said to lie in the church of St Peter at Worcester. There is a post-medieval effigy of Osric in Gloucester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 61814


Bessell, Peter Joseph (1921-1985), politician and businessman, was born on 24 August 1921 at Elm Bank Nursing Home, Bath, the only son of Joseph Edgar Bessell, tailor, and his wife, Olive Simons Hawkins. His parents divorced in 1926 and Bessell was brought up by his father. Educated at Lynwyd School, Bath (1928-37), he took on his father's business at the latter's death in 1940. Having commenced a career as a Congregational lay preacher in 1939 he registered as a conscientious objector at the outbreak of the Second World War, only to de-register in 1942 and lecture for the Ministry of Information. He married Joyce Margaret Thomas in 1942; she died five years later. 
Bessell married Pauline Colledge, with whom he had two children, in 1948; he sold his father's business and moved to Paignton, Devon, where he established his own dry cleaning firm. He became prominent in the Torbay area, particularly through organizing Paignton's coronation pageant, which led to his selection as Liberal candidate for Torquay for the 1955 general election. Bessell had first joined the Liberals in 1945, probably as a natural consequence of his religious nonconformism, but had no political experience before his selection. He saved his deposit and within months raised the Liberal vote by 10 per cent at a by-election, his brash showmanship making a significant contribution to the Liberals' best English by-election performance since the war. 
Bessell moved to Bodmin in 1956 and was quickly adopted as the constituency's Liberal candidate. His organizational ability and modern, go-ahead image reinvigorated the Liberal Association and broadened its appeal beyond its traditional, nonconformist support. He cut the Conservative majority in Bodmin in 1959 and won the seat by more than 3000 votes in 1964. Despite this success the contradictions which destroyed his career were already becoming evident. He cultivated the support of Isaac Foot, symbolically visiting his grave after his election was declared in 1964, and continued his preaching and his membership of the Brotherhood Movement, of which he was president in 1967-8. Behind his public image, however, his private life was shambolic. His Paignton business had collapsed and Bessell used his parliamentary office to try, unsuccessfully, to broker an ambitious range of Anglo-American business deals. Senior Liberals ensured that he did not lose his seat through bankruptcy as he lurched from one financial crisis to another. Self-confessedly a promiscuous womanizer, he boasted of affairs with his parliamentary secretaries. 
Bessell was a hard-working MP, speaking for the Liberals on a wide range of economic and industrial issues and sitting on select committees on procedure, estimates, and agriculture. Nevertheless, he was not a popular figure within the party. His views on capital punishment, the Rhodesian situation, and the American intervention in Vietnam, which he had witnessed at first hand as part of a parliamentary delegation in 1967, were decidedly illiberal. He was ridiculed for a television interview in 1965 during which he predicted that Jo Grimond would be elected speaker and that he would gladly accept the Liberal leadership. His majority was reduced in 1966, and two years later he announced that he would not contest the next general election, in order to concentrate on his business career. 
When he moved to the United States in 1970 Bessell's financial position worsened, and by 1974 he was bankrupt. He divorced in 1978 and immediately married his intimate friend, Diane Miller, spending the last decade of his life living modestly in California. His notoriety was to be enhanced by one further episode, however. A friend and ally of Jeremy Thorpe, Bessell was closely involved in the events which culminated in Thorpe's trial for the attempted murder of Norman Scott. Bessell was chief witness for the prosecution, but his credibility was systematically destroyed by George Carman QC; he wrote his memoir of the trial, 'Cover up', in 1981. A chain-smoker, Bessell died of emphysema on 27 November 1985, in Oceanside, Los Angeles, California. 


@@@@@


doc= 61822


John Lakyngheth (d. 1396), was a member of the order at Westminster, holding a number of offices there, most notably as treasurer of the abbey at various times between 1363 and 1392. In 1386 Richard II unsuccessfully sought to secure his election as abbot of Westminster. Lakyngheth has been proposed as the author of the Westminster chronicle (in Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 197A), which ends in the year of his death and includes a vivid account of the Salisbury parliament of April-May 1384 which was attended by him. However, it seems unlikely, from the description of the attempt to make him abbot, that he was responsible for this chronicle. As Barbara Harvey has observed, 'It hardly seems likely that the author who chose to record this episode -- according to the evidence of the rest of his chronicle a self-effacing man -- was himself the abbot 'manque'' ('Westminster Chronicle', xl). 


@@@@@


doc= 61823


Mannock, Edward (1887-1918), air force officer, was born in Brighton, Sussex, on 24 May 1887, the third of four children of Corporal Edward Mannock, Royal Scots Greys, and of his wife, Julia O'Sullivan of Ballincollig, co. Cork. The elder Edward Mannock, son of a Fleet Street editor, was at the time serving under his mother's maiden name of Corringhame, though in 1893, after a period of civilian unemployment, he re-enlisted as Trooper Edward Mannock, 5th dragoon guards. His regiment was shortly afterwards posted to India, and there his family joined him in May, at Meerut. 
At the outbreak of the South African War the 5th dragoon guards were posted to South Africa, and Mannock's family, remaining in India, did not rejoin him until 1901, at Shorncliffe in Kent. Shortly afterwards, in Canterbury, he was discharged at the expiry of his service, and within weeks he deserted the family, taking with him their meagre savings. None of them saw him again. 
The desertion of Mannock's father left his family in great poverty, and it was necessary for Edward to earn a living, which he did as a greengrocer's (and then a barber's) assistant, before joining his elder brother Patrick in working for the National Telephone Company. Three years' office work were followed, more congenially, in the spring of 1911 by a transfer to a line gang. This entailed a move from Canterbury to Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, where Mannock widened his circle of friends and articulated the social and political opinions that he was to hold until his death -- a passionate combination of socialism and patriotism. 
His horizons broadened and his ambitions enlarged, in February 1914 Mannock left the National Telephone Company and travelled to Turkey, where in Istanbul he found employment with the Societe Ottomane des Telephones. When Turkey entered the war on the side of the central powers Mannock, like many others, was interned. Several attempts to escape were followed by imprisonment under conditions so harsh that, sick and emaciated, in April 1915 he was repatriated as medically unfit for military service. 
Before leaving Canterbury Mannock had joined the home counties (territorial) company of the Royal Army Medical Corps, and on his return, his health restored, he rejoined his company at Ashford, Kent. Promoted sergeant, he chafed at his unit's inactivity and transferred to the Royal Engineers, where he was commissioned as second lieutenant. A chance meeting with an old friend suggested a way out of yet more frustration, and on 1 April 1916 he transferred to the Royal Flying Corps. On gaining his pilot's brevet he was posted for advanced training at Joyce Green, Kent, before, on 6 April 1917, joining 40 squadron at Treizennes, near Aire, in Artois, France. 
Mannock was fortunate in that at the beginning of what became known (because of heavy losses) as 'bloody April' he was joining a squadron equipped with what was probably the best fighter in Royal Flying Corps service: the Nieuport 17. Even so, his operational career began inauspiciously. He was lucky to survive a crash landing when a lower wing broke away from the Nieuport that he was flying. He also got offside with many in the officers' mess when, as a fellow officer recalled, he 'offered ideas about everything; how the war was going, how it should be fought, the role of scout pilots, what was wrong or right with our machines' (Smith, 64). But the most serious cloud over Mannock during his first weeks on the squadron was the suspicion that he lacked fighting spirit. Eventually questioned about this he candidly admitted to fear, adding that, having conquered it, he was ready to conquer the enemy. It was to prove no empty boast. 
Like many aces Mannock was a slow starter. His first victory, on 7 May 1917, was followed by a second a month later, with the third and fourth coming on successive days, 12 and 13 July. With success (and the award, on 22 July, of the Military Cross) came both growing confidence and acceptance, though a handful of his fellow pilots remained unconvinced that he was an appropriate choice as flight commander, to which he was appointed later that month on promotion to captain. August, however, brought accelerating success, with four victories in six days in mid-month, one of them, on 12 August, taking place almost over Treizennes, and resulting in the capture of the aircraft and its pilot, Joachim von Bertrab, a German ace. 
By the end of August 1917 Mannock was credited with nine victories, and September brought six more, earning him on 14 October a bar to his MC. In October 40 squadron converted to the S.E. 5a, one of the finest fighters of the First World War, but the autumn and early winter was a fallow period, both for Mannock and the squadron, and he did not score again until new year's day 1918. The next day he left for home establishment, where he soon became restless at being away from combat. A period of intense frustration, serving with the Wireless Experimental Establishment at Biggin Hill, ended when on 11 February he was posted to 74 training squadron at London Colney, as flight commander. 
It was at London Colney, where 74 squadron was working up on the S.E. 5a, that Mannock came fully into his own as a charismatic teacher and leader. His first biographer, Ira (Taffy) Jones, whom he trained, has given a vivid account of Mannock's inculcation of the principles of air fighting in a series of lectures that began: 'Gentlemen, always above; seldom on the same level; never underneath' (Jones, 161). 'He had the ability', Jones writes, 'to convince the poorest and most inoffensive pilots that they could knock Hell out of the best Hun' (ibid., 160). 
On 30 March 1918 74 squadron flew to France, and by 11 April was settled at its base at Clairmarais, near St Omer. Its first victory, the following day, went to Mannock, and by the end of the month he had raised his total to twenty-one, while B flight, which he led, had proved conspicuously successful. May 1918 proved even more so, with Mannock himself scoring a remarkable twenty victories, including four in one day (21 May). A DSO, awarded on 24 May (with a bar on 30 May), followed. In June he continued to score at a high rate, adding eleven further victories before going on leave on the 18th (and being awarded a third bar to his DSO). 
While on leave Mannock was promoted major, as commanding officer of 85 squadron at St Omer. He took up his appointment on 5 July and set about restoring morale in a squadron that under his predecessor, the controversial Canadian ace Major W. A. (Billy) Bishop, had lacked cohesion and a sense of identity. Within days the squadron was transformed, Mannock's tactical skill, combined with his ability to foster team spirit and raise morale, moulding a group of individuals into an efficient fighting unit. He himself continued to score steadily, with seven victories prior to his final sortie, at dawn on 26 July 1918, when he went up with a young pilot who had yet to score a victory. They shot down a German reconnaissance aircraft over the German lines, with Mannock (as he often did to give new pilots confidence) ensuring that his companion completed the 'kill'. Immediately afterwards, however, his aircraft was hit by ground fire, and it crashed in flames near Pacaut Wood. He was buried by the Germans at a point 300 m north-east of La Pierre-au-Beurre, although his grave could not be identified after the war. Dudgeon, however, makes a compelling case (pp. 174-6) that after the war Mannock was exhumed and reinterred as the 'unknown British aviator' in grave 12, row F, plot 3 of the military cemetery at Laventie, some 4 km to the east of the crash site. 
Where James McCudden and Albert Ball became legends in their lifetime, Mannock was for some reason little known by the general public until after the war, though intensely admired in the RAF. Agitation for further recognition of his achievements eventually met with success, however, and on 11 July 1919 the award of the Victoria Cross was gazetted. Tall and thin, Mannock had a shock of unruly hair, deep-set, piercing blue eyes, and walked with a stiff, slightly awkward gait. Sensitive and somewhat shy, he was at first handicapped by an awareness of his humble origins and limited education but as he gained confidence he became a charismatic figure, inspiring something approaching devotion in those who served under him. He had a keen sense of fun, often expressed in morale-raising practical jokes, but also a melancholy streak that intensified over the sixteen months of his combat career. On his last leave he was clearly exhausted and under severe emotional strain (Dudgeon, 154-5), though he concealed it well on his return to France. It was perhaps this strain that led him to break his own cardinal rule in flying low over the trenches after shooting down his last victim. 
Two frequent claims concerning Mannock need dispelling. One is that he was a fervent 'Hun hater'. That he urged those under his command to extirpate their opponents is clear, as is evidence that he fought for a time with fierce vengefulness after the death of close friends. But it is not entirely clear whether his 'hatred' was a deeply felt personal one or a means of boosting morale and ensuring a single-minded application to the job in hand -- winning the war. His diary, covering his first months with 40 squadron, suggests, by implication, the latter. For instance, of his first certain victory, on 7 June 1917, he wrote: 'I saw him go spinning and slipping down from fourteen thousand. Rough luck, but it's war, and they're Huns' ('Personal Diary', 105). And, after viewing the wreckage of a two-seater he had brought down and seeing the corpse of the pilot, he wrote: 'I felt exactly like a murderer' (ibid., 119). Undoubtedly he became hardened to killing but it may perhaps be fairer to conclude that Mannock was more a hater of 'hunnishness' than of individual Germans. 
If the claim that Mannock was a 'Hun hater' cannot be settled either way, the second claim, that Mannock was blind in one eye (McScotch, 139-40), can without doubt be discounted. He certainly suffered a serious eye infection when a child in India, and his sight was for a time impaired, but there is no reliable evidence of permanent damage, and Mannock family sources categorically deny this, while several who flew with him testify to his excellent vision. Neither Mannock's human qualities, which made him loved and admired by those who served under him, nor his standing as perhaps the greatest tactician and teacher of fighting tactics and one of the greatest aces of the First World War (his sixty-one victories, verifiable to a remarkable degree, being second in British service only to the highly questionable and often unverifiable seventy-two of Bishop), needs a fiction of this kind to sustain or enhance it. 


@@@@@


doc= 61828


Nesbitt, Colebrooke (1755/6-1798), army officer, was one of two natural sons of Arnold Nesbitt (bap. 1721, d. 1779) ['see under 'Nesbitt family], a prominent merchant and banker in the City of London and MP for Winchelsea in Sussex and Cricklade in Wiltshire, and Martha Yeates ('fl'. 1756-1798). From 7 June 1773, when he became an ensign in the 32nd regiment of foot, in which he was gazetted lieutenant on 25 October 1775, his career followed the usual advancement by purchase. He became a captain in the 82nd on 5 January 1778 and a major in the 19th on 3 May 1782. He transferred to the 52nd on 9 May 1789 and was gazetted lieutenant-colonel on 21 June 1789, brevet colonel on 26 February 1795, local major-general on 3 May 1796, an aide-de-camp to George III, also in 1796, and major-general on 8 January 1798. 
Nesbitt is presumed to have served in Ireland with the 32nd, in North America with the 82nd, and in the West Indies with the 19th. With the 52nd he took part in the Third Anglo-Mysore War of 1790 against Tipu Sultan. On 21 December 1791 he led the successful assault on the hill fort of Savanadrug without loss to the British. That victory helped prepare the way for Lord Cornwallis's final and successful attack on Tipu's stronghold at Seringapatam, which began on 6 February 1792. During the preliminary stages Nesbitt's insistence on adhering to clearly erroneous orders for an assault on the mosque redoubt, although achieving the establishment of the right-hand division before Tipu's camp outside Seringapatam, resulted in heavy British casualties. 
On 1 January 1795 Nesbitt was appointed inspector-general of all the foreign corps raised for the crown after the outbreak of war with France in 1793. His brief was to muster all the corps already serving or about to be engaged to serve as part of the British army on the continent, and his correspondence and reports show that he carried out his tasks energetically and efficiently. He was based in Hanover, chiefly at Stade on the River Elbe, throughout 1795 and in the autumn of 1796. Early in 1796 he established a London office in John Street, near Berkeley Square, though he was sometimes at Southampton to oversee the embarkation and disembarkation of troops. 
On 26 or 27 May 1797 the duke of York sent Nesbitt, as 'an officer whose discretion and prudence could be thoroughly depended upon' ('Later Correspondence of George III', 2.582), to take command at Gravesend during the naval mutiny at the Nore. The same qualities may have occasioned his appointment in January 1798 as commander of an expeditionary force to Haiti. 
The moiety of an estate in Grenada which Arnold Nesbitt devised to him in tail male in 1779 may have been his chief source of income. He had married Elizabeth Sneyd (1766/7-1835), the daughter of his father's friend Jeremy Sneyd, at St George's, Hanover Square, on 7 November 1789. They had one son, Douglas, and two daughters, Mary Elizabeth Emma and Caroline. From 1798 the Nesbitts had a leasehold house in St James's Place, Piccadilly. They also had a house at Crookham, and often stayed with Jeremy Sneyd at Testwood House. 
Nesbitt's only known liaison was with Christiana Skellhorn, who, as Christiana Nesbitt, was living with their daughter Carolina at Brunswick in Germany in 1798. His closest friends were Major-General Sir James Craig, Colonel John Moore (both of whom received bequests in his will), Major-General George Don, and Robert Ballard Long, for whom he negotiated the succession to the lieutenant-colonelcy of Ferdinand Hompesch's mounted riflemen in February 1798. Accompanied by Long, Nesbitt embarked at Portsmouth on 6 February 1798 as commander of an expeditionary force to Haiti, but while becalmed at Cowes fell ill with 'a violent bowel complaint' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/150, fol. 153), possibly caused by an intestinal obstruction. After putting in at Funchal, Madeira, for treatment, he eventually returned to London, where he died, at his home in St James's Place, on 21 July 1798. He was buried in the south vault of St James's, Piccadilly, on 25 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 61829


Farley, Abraham (bap. 1712, d. 1791), exchequer official and antiquary, was born in Kent, probably at Linton, where he was baptized in August 1712. He was the son of Abraham and Sarah Farley, of Linton, who had at least two other children, a son, John, who died before 1775, and a daughter, Anne (died 1775). Farley seems to have spent his whole career, and presumably came by much of his education, in the public service. He was appointed a deputy chamberlain of the exchequer in 1736, and subsequently became first clerk to Richard Morley, the keeper of the public records deposited in the chapter house at Westminster. Farley married Jane Askew at St Katharine by the Tower on 9 November 1744; they had a son, Abraham, and three daughters. Abraham was christened in 1745 at St John's, Smith Square, and probably died young. Farley succeeded Morley in 1773, but held the keepership jointly with George Rose (1744-1818), who was later vice-president of the Board of Trade and treasurer to the navy. They shared the office until Farley's death. 
Farley had long experience of making official transcripts of the records, a valuable perquisite for their custodians, and was often consulted by antiquaries. He undertook some collation for the printing of the 'Rotuli parliamentorum' in 1767, but he had a long-standing interest in 'Domesday Book'. When the printing of 'Domesday' was authorized by parliament, largely at the urging of Charles Morton (1716-1799), later principal librarian of the British Museum, Farley submitted a proposal to the Treasury, urging his expert knowledge of the volume, which he said had been in his care for nearly thirty years. The work was, however, entrusted to Morton. The original intention was to produce a facsimile, but both engraved plates, and Morton's own preference for a specially cut type proved impracticable. In 1770 the Treasury therefore endorsed a fresh start on a printed text, and associated Farley with the work. 
The partnership was uneasy, and Farley eventually excluded Morton from printing and correcting the sheets. They were, however, able to agree in 1774 on the use of a record type designed by John Nichols (1745-1826) for texts in John Hutchins's 'History and Antiquities of the County of Dorset' and refined by Nichols and his apprentice Vincent Figgins. The type was an ingenious innovation, mischievous in the long run because it was used indiscriminately and often carelessly for more than a century, but a measure of the awe which the density and complexity of 'Domesday Book' inspired. 
From that point Farley took over the entire transcription, moving on to the second volume, known as 'Little Domesday', in 1779, and working closely with Nichols at every stage of the intricate setting and correcting which followed. The two volumes were printed in 1783, without preliminary pages or other apparatus. They were distributed, as had always been the intention, only to members of either house of parliament, and under warrant to nine learned institutions. Farley received $2500 for his share of the work. 
Formal publication had to wait some thirty years for the issue of 250 sets with additional material issued by the record commissioners in 1811, and a reprinting in 1816-17, which included an introduction by Sir Henry Ellis. Scholarly work on 'Domesday' was nevertheless greatly facilitated from 1783 onwards, and the exceptional precision of Farley's text, which replicated not only the foliation but the lines and spacing of the original, was readily recognized and acclaimed. John Nichols reprinted the 'Domesday' survey of Leicestershire in his 'History and Antiquities of the Town and County of Leicester' (1795-1815), and translations of other county entries soon followed. 
Farley's daughters were Jane, who married the Revd James Wynter (1743-1814) (later rector of Tyringham-cum-Filgrave, Buckinghamshire), and Sarah, who married Charles Henry Tufnell (1770-1822) (later vicar of All Saints', Northampton). A third daughter married Mark Wade of Orford, Suffolk. 
Farley died early in 1791, having made his will on 21 January: probate was granted to his executors, both of St John's parish, on 22 March. He left freehold and copyhold property at Stockbury and Sutton Valance in Kent, in Middlesex and London, in Essex, and in Suffolk, to his wife for her life with reversion to his daughters, and to his grandson, Mark Farley Wade. He also bequeathed the use of his silver plate to his wife, with reversion to his daughters, among other legacies. 
All subsequent students of 'Domesday Book' have been in debt to Farley. His transcript of the manuscript was preternaturally exact, even given his long familiarity with the record and the many office-copies he had undertaken. His attention to the proofs also impressed Nichols, an able and experienced publisher. He seems not to have pursued any wider antiquarian studies, but he plainly knew as much about 'Domesday' as any of those who have followed him in elucidating its beguiling and perennially rewarding text. 


@@@@@


doc= 61831


Penhaligon, David Charles (1944-1986), politician, was born on 6 June 1944 at Truro Nursing Home, the eldest son of Robert Charles Penhaligon (1903-1975), owner of a caravan park, and his wife, Sadie Jewell ('b'. 1913). Educated at Bosvigo primary school and Truro School, Penhaligon joined the Camborne engineering firm Holman Bros in 1962, studying towards a higher national diploma in engineering at Cornwall Technical College at the same time. As a chartered engineer he specialized in the research and development of rock-drilling equipment. 
Although his parents were Conservatives, Penhaligon was inspired to join the Liberal Party after acting as a witness in a murder trial in 1963, in which his evidence failed to prevent both defendants from being hanged. Truro Liberal Association was then one of Cornwall's weakest, but Penhaligon's flair for organization and leadership fashioned the Young Liberals into a powerful force in the district. He swiftly assumed positions of prominence within the regional and national Young Liberal organizations, but his ambition to contest the Truro parliamentary seat in 1966 was thwarted. He was also rejected for the Falmouth and Camborne constituency in 1968, partly because of his youth but also because his thick Cornish burr was deemed unsuitable for a Westminster candidate. 
Undaunted, Penhaligon was adopted as Liberal candidate for Totnes in 1970, finishing third in a disappointing election for the party. He was adopted, with little resistance, for Truro in 1971 and, inspired by the impact Wallace Lawler had made in Birmingham, revolutionized electioneering in the constituency. Liberal candidates were encouraged to stand in local elections for the first time as Penhaligon worked tirelessly to promote the Liberal cause, appealing in particular to the staunchly Labour clay workers in the east of the constituency. Narrowing the Conservative majority to 2561 in February 1974, he bucked the national trend to win by 464 votes eight months later. 
Penhaligon had married Annette Lidgey ('b'. 1946), a fellow Young Liberal, on 6 January 1968 and at the time of his election they ran the post office at Chacewater. They had a son and a daughter. His immediate impact in the House of Commons was as a champion of Cornish interests, often working across party lines with fellow MPs for the county. He cultivated the image of a political outsider, deploying humour and common sense to confound his opponents and to appeal to people, Liberal or otherwise, both within his constituency and beyond. He increased his majority substantially in the elections of 1979 and 1983. 
Initially speaking for the Liberal Party on employment matters, Penhaligon was later spokesman for energy and industry, before becoming the party's Treasury spokesman in 1985. Throughout his political career he championed industrial profit-sharing schemes and worker participation in the management of companies. Decentralization of power was another consistent theme, and Penhaligon argued against the establishment of bodies representing the south-west of England but based in distant Bristol. He was a critic of the civil uses of nuclear power, but at the 1980 Liberal assembly told delegates that proponents of a non-nuclear defence policy were 'advocating surrender' ('The Times', 23 Dec 86). No financial expert, he initially struggled with the high-profile Treasury brief, with which he was becoming more comfortable at the time of his death. 
Behind his affable charm Penhaligon was a sharp political operator. Although not an enthusiastic supporter of the Lib-Lab pact, he worked well with Bill Rodgers on environmental matters, but less well with Tony Benn on energy. His speech to the special Liberal assembly of January 1978 made a significant contribution to the continuation of the pact. He played a key role in the allocation of constituencies to be fought by Liberal and Social Democrat candidates, before both 1983 and 1987 general elections, again working in tandem with Rodgers. He headed the Liberal by-election unit from 1983 to 1985. 
A favourite of Liberal activists, he was the only sitting MP ever to be elected president of the party, in 1985. Above all, however, he was a politician who related to the lives of ordinary people, as was shown by the reaction to his death in a car crash at Truck Fork, near Probus, on the road between Truro and St Austell, on 22 December 1986. Thousands of people thronged the streets of Truro for a service of thanksgiving for his life at the city's cathedral on 10 January 1987 and supported a memorial fund set up in his name. David Steel described Penhaligon as 'an instinctive Liberal of the old school' (Penhaligon, 122) and his contribution to Liberalism was sorely missed in the years of turbulence which affected the Liberal Party and its successor in the years after his death. Penhaligon was buried on 30 December 1986 at All Hallows Church, St Kea, Truro, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 61838


Knight, Anne (1786-1862), slavery abolitionist and campaigner for women's rights, was born on 2 November 1786 at Chelmsford, Essex, the third of the eight children of William Knight (1756-1814), wholesale grocer, and his wife, Priscilla, 'nee' Allen (1753-1829). Her mother was first cousin to the philanthropist William Allen, while she herself was first cousin to the chemist William Allen Miller. Her younger sister Maria (1791-1870) married in 1814 the abolitionist John Candler (1787-1869) and with him travelled to the West Indies and United States in the anti-slavery cause; they were for some years (1842-6) superintendents of The Retreat, York, the Quaker mental hospital founded by William Tuke. 
In 1824, having by then a good knowledge of French and German, Anne Knight travelled on the continent with a group of fellow Quakers, combining sightseeing with religious and philanthropic concerns. From her base in the Chelmsford Ladies' Anti-Slavery Society she was deeply involved with the anti-slavery movement, travelling frequently to London and working with Thomas Clarkson, Joseph Sturge, Richard and Hannah Webb, and Elizabeth Pease (later Nichol). During the 1830s she returned several times to France in the same cause, in 1834 undertaking a speaking tour. The 1840 World's Anti-Slavery Convention in London gave her the opportunity to meet such American abolitionists as William Lloyd Garrison, Wendell Phillips, and Lucretia Mott. The movement for women's suffrage in Britain has been dated from the exclusion of women from the floor of this conference, for it drew women's attention to their marginal status within the movement, and highlighted the limitations placed on their capacity to act in the public sphere. In July 1848 the first women's rights convention in the United States was held at Seneca Falls, New York. The previous year an anonymous leaflet was issued in Britain claiming that 'Never will the nations of the earth be well governed, until both sexes, as well as all parties, are fully represented and have an influence, a voice, and a hand in the enactment and administration of the laws'. It has been persuasively argued that the author was Anne Knight. Certainly from the 1840s she had been writing frequent letters (she was a voluminous correspondent) to American abolitionists, including Angelina Grimke, and she was capable of sharp rejoinders to Chartists who suggested that the class struggle took precedence over that for women's rights. 
Although Knight was in many ways typical of nonconformist women abolitionists, her views were more radical than many: a sympathizer with Chartism, she was interested in the British and French utopian socialist movements, maintained links with the White Quakers in Ireland, and in the 1840s supported the radical Garrisonian wing of the American abolition movement. Her support for women's rights led her in 1851 to be involved in forming the first organization for women's suffrage in Britain, the Sheffield Female Reform Association. In 1847 or 1848 Anne Knight left Chelmsford for Paris and, after living there enthusiastically (despite her Quaker upbringing) through the year of revolutions, she was at the international peace conference in Paris in 1849. Lucretia Mott described her in the 1840s as 'a singular looking woman -- very pleasant and polite' (F. B. Tolles, ed., 'Slavery and 'the Woman Question'', 1952, 29). 
In the late 1850s Anne Knight moved to Waldersbach, a village in the Vosges, south-west of Strasbourg. This had been the home of the pastor Jean-Frederic Oberlin (1740-1820), whose philanthropic work she revered. Here she lived for the last few years of her life, lodging with Oberlin's grandson, and died there after a short illness on 4 November 1862. 
Researches into Anne Knight's life have been hindered by persistent confusion of her with another Anne Knight (1792-1860), children's writer. This Anne Knight was born at Woodbridge, Suffolk, on 28 October 1792, the eldest of the eight children of Jonathan Waspe (1756?-1818), a leather-cutter, and his wife, Phebe, 'nee' Gibbs (1761-1851). She married in 1818 her first cousin and fellow Quaker James Knight (1794-1820) of Southwark. After her husband's early death, she returned to Woodbridge, where by 1826 she was keeping a school. She was a close friend of the poet Bernard Barton, and is frequently mentioned in Charles Lamb's letters to him. She was the author of a number of books for children, certainly 'School-Room Lyrics' (1846), and most probably of 'Poetic Gleanings' (1827), 'Mornings in the Library' (1828), with a prefatory poem by Barton, and 'Mary Gray' (1831), works which were previously ascribed to Anne Knight the social campaigner. Anne Knight the author died at her home in Woodbridge on 11 December 1860, and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground there. 


@@@@@


doc= 61846


Murray, Sir Andrew Hunter Arbuthnot (1903-1977), politician and businessman, was born on 19 December 1903 in Edinburgh, the city with which he was associated throughout his life. His parents were Alfred Alexander Arbuthnot Murray, writer to the signet and fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Moir. He was educated in Edinburgh at Daniel Stewart's College and George Heriot's School, where he was sports champion in 1922. He then entered business as an insurance broker. 
Murray was elected to Edinburgh town council for the North Leith ward in 1928. He served on the council until 1951, being latterly elected for the Liberton ward, albeit with one year's absence in 1934. Leith suffered as much as any other industrial town from the depression of the 1930s and Murray's record of social work was a distinguishing feature of his career. He quickly rose to prominence on the council, serving as the city's honorary treasurer between 1943 and 1946 and as lord provost from 1947 to 1951. 
Murray was widely respected as lord provost, being described by contemporaries as a 'tireless and devoted personality' ('The Scotsman', 22 March 1977, 4). He exercised a central influence over the post-war redevelopment of the city of Edinburgh. Slum properties in the Old Town were cleared, and replaced by estates in the suburbs, while the Old Town's historical character was preserved. He also championed the city's artistic scene. Having, during the Second World War, revived the Leith pageant, he was instrumental in the foundation of the Edinburgh festival in 1947. He argued that the festival could engender a 'better spirit of understanding between men and women, through an appreciation of the arts' ('The Times', 24 Aug 1948, 4f) and towards that end he travelled to Belgrade to bring the Yugoslav National Ballet to Edinburgh. He was awarded the freedom of the city of Athens in 1950, in recognition of his efforts to promote the city of Edinburgh abroad. As lord provost he received a knighthood in 1949 and an honorary doctorate in laws from Edinburgh University in 1950. After his period of office ended he was commissioned, in 1953, as a deputy lieutenant of the county of Edinburgh. 
Known as a supporter of the National Liberal Party, Murray was adopted as Unionist candidate for the marginal Labour seat of Central Edinburgh following the 1950 general election, but resigned before the 1951 election took place. He was adopted by Leith Liberal Association in 1954 to contest the town's parliamentary seat as an independent but finished a distant third to the Labour MP, James Hoy, in the 1955 election. Seeing no future for the National Liberal cause, he persuaded the Leith Liberals to rejoin the Scottish Liberal Party, of which he became a vice-president in 1957. He fought Leith as a Liberal candidate in 1959, but saw his vote drop and he again finished third. It was to be his last parliamentary contest. Murray was elected president of the Liberal Party in 1960, serving for twelve months, and was a treasurer of the party for three years from 1962. He was not universally popular within the party, given his previous connections with the National Liberals; nevertheless, the Liberals benefited from association with such a senior figure in lowland Scottish politics as well as from his assistance during a period of considerable financial strain. 
Murray was as prominent in Scottish business as in politics, sitting on the boards of the stores group Hide & Co. and the Scottish Motor Traction Company. He was also, briefly, chairman of the Equitable Industrial Company of Scotland. His involvement with the latter two firms ended with litigation in which he played a prominent part in the defence of small shareholders' rights in the face of hostile takeover bids. 
Murray was appointed OBE in 1945 for his involvement with the fire service before and during the Second World War. He was elected commandant of the Edinburgh Auxiliary Fire Service in 1938 and was responsible for its being one of the few to be close to its full authorized strength on the outbreak of the conflict. He was made fire inspector of the headquarters of the fire brigades division of the Scottish home department in 1942. He was closely allied with the order of St John of Jerusalem throughout his life, becoming a companion of the order in 1949, a knight of the order five years later, and a chancellor of the order in 1963. At his death he was preceptor of the ancient Knights Templar institution at Torphichen, West Lothian, and held the title of chancellor of the priory of Scotland. 
In his later years Murray remained committed to several of the causes he had first espoused in his youth. He was a governor of George Heriot's School and chaired the governors of Carberry Tower, a Church of Scotland youth centre opened in 1962. He died on 21 March 1977, at his home, 1 Randolph Place, in the New Town of Edinburgh. His obituary in 'The Scotsman' (22 March 1977) recalled the occasion when, as captain of the orange colours, an archaic council post which entitled the holder to the use of a white stallion in an official capacity, Murray had acquired such an animal and ridden it through Edinburgh. A subsequent lord provost, Sir Herbert Brechin, summed him up as 'a great figure' who 'commanded attention wherever he went' ('Evening News', 22 March 1977, 9). He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 61848


MacRae, Douglas Gordon (1861-1901), printer and newspaper editor, was born on 6 April 1861 in Upper Hill Street, Richmond, Surrey, the son of John Gordon MacRae of Fyvie, Aberdeenshire, then a coal merchant, and his wife, Harriette Elizabeth Tolley. 
Little is known of MacRae's early years. One obituary mentions that his father was a director of the Richmond Gas Company ('Financial News'); another that MacRae attended Shoreham grammar school, Sussex, before taking up an apprenticeship in the printing trade ('City Press'). While serving his apprenticeship MacRae also took his first steps in journalism, writing notes on cricket and subsequently supplying weekly items to the 'Eastern Province Herald' and other South African newspapers. 
Once qualified, MacRae set up business in Catherine Street, off the Strand, London, where he printed a number of papers owned by Horatio Bottomley's Catherine Street Publishing Association. In 1887, seeking capital to expand the business, Bottomley and MacRae approached H. Osborne O'Hagan, the City financier, who arranged a merger between the Catherine Street Association, MacRae & Co., and Curtice & Co., newspaper publishers and advertising agents. O'Hagan was 'much impressed' by MacRae's plan for utilizing the spare capacity of his printing works. The new company quickly justified MacRae's prediction that it would generate a 10 per cent return on O'Hagan's capital (O'Hagan, 1.265-6). 
Bottomley's tendency to overreach ensured that his relationship with MacRae was short-lived. It ended in 1888, when Bottomley formed a new company, the Hansard Union, with a view to taking over MacRae's business and various other printing and publishing firms. MacRae severed his connection with the rogue financier, taking with him the 'Financial Times' and the 'Draper's Record'. 'He was a printer and I was a journalist', Bottomley later recalled, 'but he took the papers and left me the printing works' (Hyman, 30). It proved a wise decision. Bottomley's over-capitalized enterprise crashed within two years, by which time MacRae was ensconced as editor of the 'Financial Times' and managing director of Financial Times Ltd. 
The 'Financial Times' had first appeared on 9 January 1888 as the 'London Financial Guide', challenging the position established by the 'Financial News', founded four years earlier. Bottomley had taken it over when the original owners could not pay their printing bills. MacRae joined the board in June 1888 and quickly secured control. The 'Financial Times' soon matched the 'Financial News' in coverage of City affairs but its approach was 'cooler and more pragmatic' (Kynaston, 30). MacRae's most significant editorial decision was to widen its scope by supplying a digest of general news likely to interest 'the intelligent business man' ('Financial Times', 2 Jan 1893). Despite this initiative the paper struggled to break even; for a number of years MacRae relied heavily on weekly subsidies from O'Hagan. It was rescued by the boom in South African mining companies after 1895 and the abundance of prospectus advertising which followed. 
There is ample evidence of MacRae's drive and energy, not least in the intensity of his rivalry with the 'Financial News' in the late 1880s. O'Hagan recalled a vindictive side, but the persistence with which MacRae exposed fraudulent enterprises suggests that this could be usefully directed. 'Our chief', noted his paper in its obituary: 'was a man in a thousand -- a man of the finest business faculties, of the most intense energy, of the most indomitable pluck and the most unswerving loyalty towards those who worked with him or who enjoyed the privilege of his friendship. ('Financial Times')' Tributes in rival newspapers were equally heartfelt.MacRae lived life to the full, working more hours than were good for him and seeking recreation in hunting, yachting, and billiards. On 11 July 1885 he married Caroline Cecilia Colbourne, the daughter of George Colbourne. They had several children. In the late 1890s his health began to fail on account of a renal disorder. MacRae died while on holiday at Kreuzlingen, near Lake Constance in Switzerland, on 2 April 1901. O'Hagan was glad to sell MacRae's interest in the 'Financial Times' 'for a very large sum for the benefit of his wife and children' (O'Hagan, 1.109). He was buried at Norbiton, Surrey, on 10 April 1901. MacRae was survived by his second wife, Florence Lucy Frederica MacRae. 


@@@@@


doc= 61850


Aldridge, Amanda Christina Elizabeth (1866-1956), singer and composer, was born on 10 March 1866 at Luranah Villa, Hamlet Road, Penge, Surrey, the second of three daughters and third of four children of Ira Frederick Aldridge (1807?-1867), the distinguished African-American tragedian, and his second wife, Swedish opera singer Amanda Pauline, 'nee' von Brandt (died 1915). Ira Aldridge died on tour in Lodz, Poland, on 7 August 1867, leaving his widow with three young children: Irene 
(Luranah; 1860-1932)
, Ira Frederick (1862-1886), and Amanda. A fourth, Rachel Margaret Frederika ('b'. 1868), was born after her father's death. The Aldridge children showed great musical promise from childhood and their mother encouraged them to have a sense of pride in their African heritage. In honour of her father Amanda added the name Ira to her own. She and her elder sister, Luranah, were educated at a convent school in Belgium. One of her earliest appearances as a singer was at a concert in Crystal Palace in 1881, when she sang Beethoven's 'Creation's hymn' and a ballad. Two years later, at the age of seventeen, she won a foundation scholarship to the newly opened Royal College of Music, where she studied singing (from 1883 to 1887) with Jenny Lind, known as the Swedish Nightingale, and Sir George Henschel. She was also a pupil of Dame Madge Kendal, who had played Desdemona to her father's Othello in 1865. 
For many years Amanda Aldridge enjoyed success as a contralto, and often appeared with her brother, Ira Frederick, as her accompanist until his early death in 1886. In June 1905, after hearing a recital at Steinway Hall, a reviewer in 'The Times' wrote: 'Miss Ira Aldridge held the attention of a large audience on Saturday afternoon... Dvorak's gipsy songs call for the exercise of a great deal of art... Miss Aldridge's style is excellent, her voice warm and mellow, and her intelligence far beyond dispute; the combination may well serve to explain the measure of her success.' When her singing career ended after an attack of laryngitis damaged her throat, Aldridge remembered what Jenny Lind had once told her:'Never mind what happens to your throat.... You can always earn a livelihood as a singing teacher, because you have a good insight into voice theory and practice'. 
Until she died Amanda Aldridge played an important part in the musical life of London's black middle class: after her singing career had ended she turned her attention to composing and teaching voice production and piano. She started composing when she was in her thirties and always published under the name Montague Ring, to separate her work as a composer from that as singer and instructor. She composed love songs, suites, sambas, and light orchestral pieces. Sophie Fuller summed up her work as a composer thus: 'Most of her music is in a popular style, often using syncopated dance rhythms. Her best-known work is 'Three African Dances' (1913)... The slow, central movement, 'Luleta's Dance', uses themes reminiscent of music from West Africa... Aldridge also published over 25 songs [and] wrote her own words for many of her earliest songs. (Fuller, 37)' As a teacher, Aldridge's singing pupils included three distinguished African-Americans: tenor Roland Hayes, contralto Marian Anderson, and Paul Robeson. Hayes went on to perform her songs throughout England and Europe. In 1925 she befriended the African-American singer and actor Paul Robeson and his wife, Eslanda, when they visited London. That same year she composed music for the poem 'Summah is de lovin' Time', written by the African-American Paul Laurence Dunbar, and dedicated it to the Robesons. She also presented Robeson with the ear-rings her father had worn on stage as Othello, expressing the hope that he would one day wear them when he too played the role. After settling in London in 1928, Robeson turned to Aldridge for elocution lessons before making his first appearance as Othello at London's Savoy Theatre with Peggy Ashcroft in 1930. 
Although Aldridge appears to have stopped writing (or at least publishing) music by the end of the 1920s, she continued to teach and play an important part in musical life. She never married, partly because -- in addition to her teaching work and composition -- she had to look after her elderly, bedridden mother, who died in 1915, and her sister Luranah, whose own musical career had ended when she developed severe rheumatism. Luranah spent the last twenty years of her life as an invalid, before killing herself in 1932. 
When Bermuda-born actor Earl Cameron began his professional career in Britain in the 1940s, there were few openings for young black actors in drama schools. On the advice of a friend, he turned to Aldridge for help. Much later he recalled: 'Miss Aldridge was about eighty at this time but still giving elocution lessons and instructing people in voice projection. She was light-skinned, rather short and stocky. She was a lovely, well-spoken, delicate and dignified lady with a tremendous sense of humour. She could laugh about most things. She was a courteous, beautiful human being, but not wealthy. I had the highest regard for her, and we got on extremely well. She helped me tremendously and I continued having lessons with her for at least two years. She told me all about her father, and showed me pictures of him. She did not like Herbert Marshall who later published a biography of her father. She didn't have a high opinion of Paul Robeson, either. She had given Robeson elocution lessons when he was preparing for his first appearance as Othello at the Savoy. She helped him greatly but, in later years, she was hurt when he failed to give her any credit. (Bourne, 156-7)' Aldridge died the day before her ninetieth birthday, in 1956, at Cave Hill Hospital in Coulsdon, Surrey. She was buried in an unmarked grave in Streatham Park cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 61854


Barthelemon, Cecilia Maria (1767-1859), pianist and composer, was born on 1 September 1767, the daughter of the French-born violinist Francois Hippolyte Barthelemon (1741-1808); her mother, Mary (Polly) Young (1749-1799) ['see under 'Young family (per. c.1700-1799)], 'also... a musician of no mean capacity' (Higham), was from a celebrated musical family, and a niece of Cecilia Arne, wife of Thomas. Cecilia Barthelemon accompanied her parents on their continental tour in 1776-7; she sang before King Ferdinand IV of Naples and Queen Marie-Antoinette of France. Her London debut may have been her performance at a benefit concert for her mother on 30 March 1778. On 3 March 1779 she appeared at the Haymarket, singing a duet with her mother. She was taught by the leading pianist J. S. Schroeter and became 'not only a good organist and pianist but also a composer' (Landon, 168-9). During the 1780s the 'procession of new pianists' appearing on the London concert stage included Miss Parke, Miss Barthelemon, and Miss Reynolds, 'none of whom, at their debuts, would admit to more than fourteen years' (Plantinga, 118). Her talents as a keyboard virtuoso are attested to by her performance at a benefit concert for her father on 8 May 1783, when she played a 'Lesson [i.e. sonata] on the Piano Forte' by Clementi. She was listed in 1794 in Doane's 'Musical Directory' as a resident of Kennington Lane (her parents' address was given as 8 Kennington Place) and as a soprano (singing at the Vauxhall Pleasure Gardens) and harpist. She took part in a charity concert at Brighton in August 1795 with her parents. Her performing career apparently ceased with her marriage to a captain in the 15th King's light dragoons, Edward Prentis (or Prentice; not W. H., as in some reference works) Henslow ('bap'. 1772, died 1857), later spelt Henslowe, at St Mary, Lambeth, on 12 January 1797; they had a daughter, Fanny, and several sons. In 1791 she received a substantial inheritance from an aunt; this was not Mrs Arne as claimed by Ehrlich, but Isabella Scott ['see 'Young, Isabella, 'under' Young family]. She produced four publications of instrumental music between 1791 and 1795, and a vocal piece, 'The Capture of the Cape of Good Hope', for soprano and piano or harpsichord (1795). The 300 or so subscribers to her op. 1, dedicated 'by Permission' to Princess Sophia Matilda, included members of high society, as well as leading musicians. Her op. 2 was dedicated to Frederica, duchess of York. Her music, right from the start of her op. 1 no. 1, is confident, well paced, structurally assured, and stylistically accomplished. 
During the 1790s, when Joseph Haydn visited England, he spent much time with the Barthelemon family 'at their retreat at Vauxhall' and 'gave music lessons to the daughter of the house' (Higham, 11). Cecilia dedicated her sonata op. 3 (1794) for piano or harpsichord to Haydn, and included in it effects reminiscent of his musical wit; she preserved relics including signed copies of his music, and wrote down her memories of her 'caro Maestro Haydn', with whom she often sat 'when he play'd' (Landon, 169); and she was a subscriber (as 'Mrs Ed. Henslow') to 'The Creation' (1798). She is the source of the story of Haydn's replying, when she asked him 'Papa Haydn, Why do you cry?', 'Oh! 'my dear Child'. I do not like to leave my English Friends, they are so kind to me' (ibid.). Her reminiscences also convey her affection for her 'Dear Father' and 'beloved mother'. She published a brief memoir of her father in 1827, prefaced to a selection from his oratorio 'Jefte in Masfa'. Her third son, the Revd William Henry Henslow, said in 'The Phonarthon', published in 1840, that his mother, who had told him that their ancestor Anthony Young composed the music for 'God Save the King', was 'now living'. She died at Tottenhill, Norfolk, on 5 December 1859, of 'natural decay' (d. cert.). She has also been referred to as 'Mrs Hinchliffe' on the basis of a note on a manuscript copy of a Haydn aria, but this is probably a mistranscription of Henslow. 


@@@@@


doc= 61855


Mary Young (1749-1799), singer and composer, was born on 7 July 1749 and baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 23 July 1749, the daughter of Charles and Mary Young. On 29 November 1755 at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, 'Miss Polly Young, a Child of Six Years of Age, pleased and astonished the whole Company, having a sweet melodious Voice, accenting her Words with great Propriety, and Singing perfectly in Time and Tune' ('Dublin Journal', 2 Dec 1755). This was in Thomas Arne's 'Eliza', and she later sang in his 'Rosamond' and 'Alfred'. When the Arnes parted, Polly, as Mary was known as a child, remained with her aunt Cecilia in Dublin, and her earnings then and later contributed to Cecilia's support. She sang in concerts, at the theatre, and in the pleasure gardens in Dublin for another six years, before returning with her aunt to London. On 30 September 1762 she made her debut at Covent Garden, when the 'Theatrical Review' commented on the agreeable innocence of her appearance and found her playing on the harpsichord equal to her excellent singing. She remained at Covent Garden as an entr'acte and chorus singer until summer 1764 and then performed with the Italian opera company at the King's Theatre for three seasons. On 10 December 1766, at the age of seventeen, she married the leader of the opera orchestra, the violinist and composer Francois Hippolyte Barthelemon (1741-1808). She appeared with Barthelemon in concerts and oratorios, at Marylebone Gardens (1770, 1773), in a further Italian opera season (1770-71), and in Dublin (1771-2), where Barthelemon presided over concert seasons at the Rotunda. They made a successful tour of Germany, France, and Italy in 1776-7; Mrs Barthelemon sang in her husband's oratorio 'Jefte' at Florence and Rome and in Italian opera at Leghorn. Their only child, Cecilia Maria Barthelemon (1767-1859), who performed with her parents at the royal courts of Naples and France, later claimed that her mother refused Marie-Antoinette's offer of a court appointment because of her desire to return to England and her aunt Cecilia. 
Maria Barthelemon, as she now called herself, performed in 1780-82 at the Italian Opera in London. The Barthelemons continued to give concerts together and in 1784 had another summer season at the Dublin Rotunda. On 2 November 1784 a letter from Mrs Barthelemon appeared in the 'Morning Post' complaining that, despite her unblemished reputation and the honours she had received in continental courts, she was not engaged by the London managers because they were swayed by influence rather than merit. During Haydn's visits to London in the 1790s the composer became friendly with Barthelemon and visited the family at its house in Kennington Place, Vauxhall. Cecilia Maria remembered singing Handel duets with her mother to Haydn's accompaniment. Between 1776 and 1795 Maria Barthelemon published a number of her own compositions, including six sonatas for keyboard and violin, a set of English and Italian songs, and a collection of hymns and anthems for the chapels of the Asylum for Female Orphans and the Magdalen Hospital. Their friendship with Jacob Duche, the chaplain of the asylum, led to the Barthelemons' becoming Swedenborgians. Maria died at her home in Vauxhall on 20 September 1799 and was buried on 26 September 1799 at St Martin-in-the-Fields; her coffin was joined to that of her aunt Cecilia by a chain. 


@@@@@


doc= 61859


Davis, Miss (b. c.1736, d. in or after 1755), musician and singer, was the daughter of Mr Davis ('fl'. 1735-1745), an organist, harpsichordist, and composer, and the singer Mrs Davis ('fl'. 1730-1751), sister of the violinist John Clegg and the singer Miss Clegg. Both parents were active in Dublin concert life. Miss Davis -- whose forename is unrecorded -- was a child prodigy, first advertised in Dublin in November 1742 with notice of a forthcoming 'Concert of Vocal and Instrumental Musick' for her benefit and described as 'a Child of 6 years old' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). The concert (postponed from December 1742 to February 1743) featured her accompanying her mother in a song as well as playing a concerto and other pieces on the harpsichord. Thereafter she generally held at least one benefit concert each year up to 1750, at either the Crow Street Musick Hall or the Fishamble Street Musick Hall in Dublin. At her debut on 5 February 1743, which took place at Crow Street, both her mother and aunt sang; subsequently Mrs Davis frequently sang at her daughter's benefits. Her benefit concert on 5 February 1745 received an enthusiastic critical notice: 'Last Tuesday... (a child of 8 Years old)... played several of Mr Handel's most difficult Grand Lessons and Concertos upon the Harpsichord, to a numerous and polite Audience[;] there were present some of the best Judges, who unanimously expressed their great Admiration of her extraordinary and masterly Performance. ('Faulkner's Dublin Journal', 9 Feb 1745, quoted in Boydell, 'Musical Calendar', 102)' Miss Davis's London debut was at Hickford's Room (then London's foremost concert venue) on 10 May 1745, when she was described as 'a child of eight years... lately arrived from Ireland' (Boydell, 'Musical Calendar', 276); on this occasion she again accompanied her mother. On 6 February 1748, now described as 'a child of eleven' (ibid., 114), besides playing the harpsichord at her annual benefit, Miss Davis sang 'some fine Italian songs' (ibid.) of her own composition. By 1750 the notice of her benefit concert advertised her talents in hyperbolic terms: 'Miss Davis, a Native of this Town... is by all Judges of the Harpsichord, both in England and in Ireland, allowed to have arrived at a greater Perfection on the Instrument than any one ever of her age' ('Faulkner's Dublin Journal', 30 Jan 1750, quoted in Boydell, 'Musical Calendar', 136). Some 'Ladies of Quality' (ibid.) had encouraged her to think of teaching the harpsichord to young ladies; she hoped with her benefit performance to attract the 'Nobility and Gentry' (ibid.) that they might judge her qualifications 'for that Purpose' (ibid.). She took part in a benefit concert for Signor Marella at Crow Street in December 1751, playing a solo on the harpsichord with Marella playing the violin. In October 1753 it was noted in the 'Dublin Journal' that 'Miss Davis, who has been many years distinguished... for her fine Performance on the Harpsichord... proposes to attend young Ladies to teach them' (ibid., 187). In November 1755 a further notice in the 'Dublin Journal' stated that she had given up harpsichord playing in public but continued to teach. Nothing further seems to be known of her life and career. 


@@@@@


doc= 61860


Dering, Mary, Lady Dering (bap. 1629, d. 1704), composer, was baptized at St Laurence Pountney, London, on 3 September 1629, the daughter of Daniel Harvey (1587-1647), merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Kynnersley ('bap'. 1601, died 1655). Her father was described by his son-in-law as 'a Turkey merchant of very eminent loyaltie, prudence, integritie and generositie' ('Diaries and Papers', 109); her uncle William Harvey was the discoverer of the circulation of blood. Mary attended Mrs Salmon's boarding-school in Hackney, where Katherine Fowler (later Mrs Philips, 'the matchless Orinda') and Mary Aubrey, niece of the antiquary John Aubrey, were among her friends. About 1645 she made a clandestine marriage to her cousin William Hauke ('b'. 'c'.1625), who had been her father's apprentice. According to one account Hauke 'had bedded with her twelve months before the marriage was discovered' (Hasted, 7.469) but Sir Roger Twysden's near-contemporary account tells of her 'the very day returning him his ring, and disclayming it, and never suffering him to come neere her' (Twysden, fol. 95'v'). An annulment was obtained, and on 5 April 1648 Mary married Sir Edward Dering (1625-1684) of Surrenden Dering, Pluckley, Kent. 
In 1649 Mary was taking lessons with the composer Henry Lawes, who had known Dering's father and who, during the civil war, 'betook himself to the teaching of ladies to sing' (Hawkins, 4.56). When Lawes published his 'Second Book of Ayres, and Dialogues' in 1655 he dedicated it to Lady Dering: 'Not only in regard of that honour and esteem you have for 'Musick', but because those Songs which fill this Book have receiv'd much lustre by your excellent performance of them; and (which I confesse I rejoice to speak of) some which I esteem the best of these 'Ayres', were of your own 'Composition', after your Noble Husband was pleased to give the 'Words'. (Lawes, a2)' Three charming airs in the style of her master -- 'When first I saw fair Doris eyes', 'And is this all? what one poor kisse?', and 'In vain, fair Cloris, you design' -- bear the words 'The Lady 'Deerings' Composing'. All the other works in the book are by Lawes himself. Sir Edward, who wrote the words for all three of his wife's songs, was an accomplished poet and was known in the Katherine Philips circle as 'the noble Sylvander'. It was rare for well-born amateurs to allow works to be published under their own names, and this is the first time that a woman composer is thus credited, so it is remarkable that in this Lawes volume the work of the Derings is so clearly acknowledged. 
The marriage of the Derings proved a notably happy one. No more compositions by Lady Mary Dering were published, but she had seventeen children, ten of whom survived childhood. On his wedding anniversary in April 1684, two months before his death, Sir Edward wrote: 'after 36 years I believe we are not weary of one another, nor our children weary of either of us' ('Diaries and Papers', 28). Lady Dering died at Surrenden Dering on 7 February 1704 and was buried in the family vault at Pluckley on 12 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 61862


Dring, Madeleine Winefride Isabelle (1923-1977), composer, was born on 7 September 1923 at 66 Raleigh Road, Hornsey, London, the younger child of Cecil John Dring (1883-1949), an architect and surveyor, and his wife, Winefride Isabel (1891-1968), the daughter of John Austin Smith of Fochabers, Moray. A Roman Catholic, she was initially educated at La Retraite Convent, Clapham Park. Since she showed precocious musical talent, in 1934 she was awarded an exhibition to the junior department of the Royal College of Music to study the violin. Her youthful diaries (1935-43), written in school exercise books and full of amusing drawings, give a witty commentary on her life, from national events to holidays at the seaside, ghastly visits to the dentist, troubles at school in the form of a jealous music teacher, the joys of the Royal College of Music, her early compositions, and, in 1940, the news that her brother Cecil ('b'. 1918) was reported missing in action in France. She won a further scholarship to the college as a senior student, where she studied composition with Herbert Howells, Ralph Vaughan Williams, and Gordon Jacob, as well as furthering her studies of the violin, piano, singing, drama, and mime; she left in 1944. 
During the 1950s Madeleine Dring was involved in various musical radio programmes in collaboration with D. F. Aitken and others. She wrote items of a gently satirical nature for Laurie Lister's 'intimate revues', sometimes providing words as well as music, notably for 'Airs on a Shoe String' (1953) and 'Fresh Airs' (1955), at the Royal Court Theatre, where she made many friends, including Michael Flanders and Donald Swann. She also had a happy association with the Players' Theatre, where she had the opportunity to sing and act as well as compose. 
Of striking appearance, very pale, with long blond hair, Madeleine Dring was highly intelligent and prepared to work intensively at the things which interested her -- mainly music and theatre. She had perfect pitch, and also synaesthesia, in which musical sounds and keys had individual colours. Some of her compositions were influenced by George Gershwin and Cole Porter, and she used a syncopated or blues style in the 'Colour Suite' (1963) for piano, for example, and in her setting of John Betjeman's 'Song of a Nightclub Proprietress' (1976). She also admired Poulenc, whose influence may be traced in her chamber and instrumental pieces and in her many songs. On 12 August 1947 she married Roger Frewen Lord ('b'. 1924), an oboist, with whom she had a son, Jeremy, born in 1950. She wrote several pieces for the oboe, of which two trios, one for flute, oboe, and piano (1968), the other for oboe, bassoon, and harpsichord (published 1986), are the most important. Two pianos and four hands appealed to her, and she wrote various dance movements for this combination. Not sympathetic to the fashionable idioms of the atonal and the serial, she continued in the mainstream tradition of English songwriting, using mainly classical texts in a lyrical way. Her use of subtle and sophisticated harmonies to grace a melody gives her songs an individual voice. 
In later life Madeleine Dring became interested in parapsychology; she attended lectures and conferences of the Centre for Spiritual and Psychological Studies, and occasionally gave talks there on music. She died unexpectedly from a brain haemorrhage on 26 March 1977 at her home, 52 Becmead Avenue, Streatham, London, and was buried in Lambeth cemetery. Her wind music seems to have a secure place in the chamber repertory, and her settings of five poems by Betjeman, which were published in 1980, continue to be performed. 


@@@@@


doc= 61865


Gambarini, Elizabeth (1730-1765), composer, keyboard player, and singer, was born on 7 September 1730 in Holles Street, St Marylebone, Middlesex, the third of the four children of Charles Gambarini (died 1754) and his wife, Joanna (Giovanna Paula) Stradiotti (died 1774). She seems to have been the only sibling to have survived to maturity. Her parents had probably arrived in London from Italy by 1726, when a sale of 'Mr Gambarini's entire collection' was advertised (BL, S.C. 222 (4, 5)). The baptismal records for the Gambarini children are unusually helpful in revealing the parents' origin and social status, Elizabeth's showing that her father was a nobleman from Lucca and her mother a woman of similar status from Dalmatia. She described her father as 'Librarian, Antiquarian and Counsellor to the late Landgrave of Hess Cassel' (Gambarini, proposal to the Royal Society and accompanying letter to Dr Birch, BL, Add. MS 4308, fol. 13); he is almost certainly the 'Conte Carlo Gambarini' who published 'A Description of the Earl of Pembroke's Pictures' (1731), and the 'G-mb-r-ni, the Picture-monger' mentioned in the anonymous pamphlet 'Do you know what you are about, or, A protestant alarm to Great Britain' (1733, 21). Her mother may have been a tutor to the nobility: a letter from Elizabeth to Lord Bute in 1761 notes, 'My Mamma had the honour of teaching Lady Bute [Mary Wortley Montagu] when she was about fourteen years of age' (BL, Add. MS 5726 D, fols. 22-23'v'). 
Elizabeth began her career in the mid-1740s as a singer in Handel's oratorio productions. By 1748 her developing reputation enabled her to promote her own benefit concert, in which she sang and played some of her own compositions on the organ, and to issue her first two volumes of music. The 'Six Sets of Lessons for the Harpsichord' was the first collection of keyboard music to be published by a female composer in Britain, and contains a lengthy and illustrious list of subscribers. The music is charming, in the new Italian mould rather than traditionally Handelian, and full of imaginative strokes. The success of this volume seems to have prompted the production of the second later in the year. As a frontispiece to 'Lessons for the Harpsichord Intermix'd with Italian and English Songs' there is an engraving of Gambarini by Nathaniel Hone, showing her sitting at a desk composing. This engraving is the source of the usual, incorrect, date of birth for the composer. 
Gambarini issued her final publication, 'XII English & Italian Songs', in 1750; after this there is little indication of public musical activity until 1760 and 1761, when she gave a number of benefit concerts, appearing as composer, harpsichordist, organist, and singer. Her letter to Lord Bute quoted above shows that at the same time she sought a court appointment, and she later attempted to sell her father's collection of paintings to the Royal Society. 
On 20 March 1764 Elizabeth married Etienne Chazal at St Martin-in-the-Fields. She gave one concert as Mrs Chazal in May, but died at her home in Castle Court, Strand, in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, less than a year later, on 9 February 1765. She was buried at St James's, Westminster, on 14 February. Her mother's will reveals that Elizabeth had a daughter, Giovanna Georgiana Chazal. Elizabeth may have died in or as a result of childbirth. Nothing more is known of either her husband or her daughter. 
Henry Bromley's 'Catalogue of Engraved British Portraits' (1793, 310) and a note against Gambarini's signature in BL, Add. MS 5726 B, fol. 31'v' claim that Elizabeth was also a painter. In recording her death, the 'Gazetteer and New Daily Advertiser' (11 February 1765) observed that she used to exhibit pictures at her home. 


@@@@@


doc= 61871


Howell, Dorothy Gertrude (1898-1982), composer and pianist, was born on 25 February 1898 in Handsworth, Birmingham, the daughter of Charles Edward Howell (1855-1932) and his wife, Viola Rosetta Feeny (1862-1942). Dorothy's father worked as an ironmaster in Birmingham; he was a self-taught pianist and was for a time organist and choirmaster at Handsworth church. Her mother was the daughter of Alfred Feeny, the arts and music critic of the 'Birmingham Post'. She had three brothers and two elder sisters. Her eldest brother, Charles, was a very talented violinist; he was killed in action during the First World War. The family were Roman Catholic, and Dorothy's younger brother Clifford had much to do with the working-out of the form of the English mass after the Second Vatican Council. 
They were a musical family, and Dorothy Howell received lessons and encouragement from an early age. One of the first examples of her compositional work is a set of six pieces for piano, printed in 1911 when she was thirteen. Educated at convents in Birmingham, and also in Belgium, she went on to study with John McEwen and Tobias Matthay at the Royal Academy of Music. She was a gifted pianist and composer, and much of her work was subsequently written for this instrument, most notably the piano concerto, which was premiered in 1923 at the Queen's Hall, London, with herself as soloist. Howell first gained recognition, however, in 1919, when her symphonic poem 'Lamia' was premiered at the BBC Proms by Sir Henry Wood, the work being performed four more times that same season and again at the Proms in 1920, 1921, and 1926. Her orchestral overture 'The Rock' was premiered at the last night of the Proms in 1928. 
Dorothy Howell's style is essentially romantic, often drawing on nature and landscape for inspiration. The music is tonal, coloured by rich harmonies and chromaticism. Her output covered the whole range of instrumental, vocal, and choral genres. An early piece, her 'Phantasy' for violin and piano, won the Cobbett prize in 1921. Her music for the stage included 'Christmas Eve' (1922) and 'Sanctity' (1938), and among her significant orchestral works were 'Two Dances' (1920), 'Danse grotesque' (1919), 'Three Divertissements' (1940?), 'Fanfare' (1930?), 'Humoresque' (1921), and a symphony. Her notable chamber works included piano sonatas (1916 and 1955), a string quartet (1919), and a violin sonata (1947), as well as a work for piano, 'Spindrift' (1920), and 'The Moorings' for violin and piano (1925). 
From 1924 to 1970 Dorothy Howell was professor of harmony and counterpoint at the Royal Academy of Music, having been elected a fellow in 1928. In 1971 she was elected a member of the Royal Philharmonic Society. She was also a professor at the Tobias Matthay Pianoforte School. Having spent the early part of her career in London, she moved during the Second World War to Letchworth in Hertfordshire, where she lived with her parents, commuting to London when necessary. During this time she served in the Women's Land Army. Dorothy Howell was a founder member of the Society of St Gregory, and her church music includes several masses -- both Latin and English -- as well as motets and psalm settings. In her later years she had connections with both Ampleforth and Stanbrook abbeys. Howell wrote a mass in English for Ampleforth and seven pieces for Stanbrook, and gave the copyright and the manuscripts to the abbey; these pieces include a mass, responsorial chants and psalms, and an alleluia written for a celebration of the dedication of the church. Owing partly to illness, the majority of her later works were small-scale pieces for piano, voice, or ensemble. In her late forties Dorothy Howell was diagnosed with cancer, and although she survived many more years, her later life was clouded by periods of depression. She moved to Malvern Wells and eventually to a nursing home nearby, Perrins House, 28 Moorlands Road, Malvern. Howell died there on 12 January 1982 and was buried on 30 March at St Wulstan's Church, Little Malvern, Worcestershire, directly next to the grave of Edward Elgar, which she herself had tended. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 61877


Marshall, Julian (1836-1903), music and print collector and writer, was born at Headingley, near Leeds, on 24 June 1836, the youngest of the five children of John Marshall jun. (1797-1836), MP for Leeds from 1832 to 1835, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Joseph Ballantyne Dykes of Dovenby Hall, Cockermouth, Cumberland. He was educated at the Revd John Gilderdale's private school at Walthamstow, Essex, and at Harrow School (1852-4), where he was champion racket. His grandfather John Marshall of Headingley (1765-1845), MP for Yorkshire (1826-30), had established flax-spinning factories at Leeds and Shrewsbury, and on leaving school Marshall took part in the family business, though with no great liking, until 1861, soon after which he moved to London. In Leeds, Marshall, an amateur musician, had sung in the choir of the parish church when, under S. S. Wesley, it was being brought close to cathedral standards, and served on the committee of the first music festival in 1858. 
Marshall's collection of prints, begun before he was twenty, included Italian, Dutch, German, and French as well as English items; catalogued by G. W. Reid of the British Museum, its sale at Sothebys in 1864 occupied twelve days and raised well over $8000. Books on the technique of engraving and catalogues of earlier sales of prints featured in a sale of items from Marshall's library at Sothebys in 1870. Although he retained his interest in prints, writing an introduction to the 1895 catalogue of British portraits in the National Art Library at the Victoria and Albert Museum, he subsequently collected principally printed and manuscript music. No catalogue of his collection as a whole exists, and its extent and nature is apparent only from his disposal of it. He sold part of his Handel collection, comprising early editions of printed music and librettos, to Arthur J. Balfour (later first earl of Balfour) in 1876; these are now in the National Library of Scotland. 
Marshall married Florence Ashton ['see below'], daughter of Canon Thomas, vicar of All Hallows Barking by the Tower, on 7 October 1864; they had three daughters. He and his wife were founder members of the Musical Association. At a time when the association wanted more importance given to music in the British Museum Library, Marshall began to sell music manuscripts to the museum. In 1878 and -- after protracted negotiations -- in 1880-81 the museum acquired well over 400 volumes of music from him (BL, Add. MSS 30930-30934, 31384-31823). The manuscripts range from the thirteenth to the nineteenth centuries. They include substantial groups of English sixteenth-century sources and of Handel scores (all copies), as well as autograph music by Purcell, Haydn (symphony no. 103), Mozart, and Beethoven (the major part of the sketchbook for the 'Pastoral' symphony). Marshall also owned the autographs of Mozart's C minor keyboard sonata and fantasia (now in the Mozarteum, Salzburg), and in 1880 attempted to buy the autograph of 'Don Giovanni' from Pauline Viardot. Letters of musicians from Marshall's collection were sold in London in 1884; much of the remainder of his library was sold after his death in a two-day sale at Sothebys in 1904, and there was a further sale in 1922. 
The most important of Marshall's writings about games is 'The Annals of Tennis' (1878), which had first appeared as a series of articles in 'The Field' in 1876-7. He was among the major contributors to 'A Dictionary of Music and Musicians', which appeared under the editorship of Sir George Grove in 1879-89. The longest of his articles was the entry for Handel, and there, as in some of his other contributions, he drew on items in his collection. The majority of his other contributions are for Italian singers of the baroque and classical periods, though he also contributed the article on the Mendelssohn Scholarships Foundation, of which he was secretary from 1871. Marshall died at his home, 13 Belsize Avenue, Hampstead, London, on 21 November 1903. 
His wife, Florence Ashton Marshall (1843-1922), writer and composer, was born in Rome on 30 March 1843, and studied at the Royal Academy of Music. Like her husband she contributed to Grove's 'Dictionary', though on a lesser scale. Some of her articles survived unchanged into the fifth edition. She was elected an associate of the Philharmonic Society. Her biography of Handel was published in Hueffer's 'Great Musicians' series in 1883, and her two-volume 'Life and Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley' in 1889. She was the composer of two operettas, 'The Masked Shepherd' (written by 1879) and the fairy operetta 'Prince Sprite' (1897). Her published works include solo songs, part songs, and educational pieces. She conducted the South Hampstead Orchestra, a substantial enough body to perform under her direction in 1908 a Brahms symphony and the violin concerto of Saint-Saens with Mischa Elman as soloist. She died on 5 March 1922; the last of her husband's collection was sold the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 61880


Park, Maria Hester (1760-1813), composer and keyboard player, was born on 29 September 1760. She was almost certainly the Miss Reynolds who on 5 November 1772 sang and played a harpsichord concerto in a concert at the Oxford Music Room. She was a vocal and harpsichord soloist at concerts there in 1773, and then appeared regularly as a harpsichordist. For her benefit concert on 11 February 1779 tickets were available from Miss Reynolds in Holywell, Oxford. In spring 1783 she was one of the principal instrumental soloists for the series of Wednesday concerts at the Hanover Square Rooms, London. Jane Guest was the other harpsichordist for these concerts, and 'Miss Reynolds, Oxford' subscribed to Miss Guest's 'Six Sonatas', for which subscriptions closed in April 1783. At the benefit concert of the oboist John Parke at the Tottenham Street Rooms she joined his daughter, the ten-year-old Maria Frances Parke (with whom she has often been confused), in a Clementi piano duet, and 'displayed great ability on the instrument' ('Morning Herald', 1 May 1783). In March 1784 she organized her own London benefit at Willis's Rooms, when tickets were to be had of Miss Reynolds at 102 Pall Mall. 
Maria Hester Reynolds's first publication, a set of six 'Sonatas for the Harpsichord or Piano forte' (1785), was dedicated to the countess of Uxbridge, with the word 'Gratitude' prominent on the illustrated title-page. The impressively long list of subscribers included a large Oxford contingent. She became a sought-after music teacher of the aristocracy, and later dedicatees were to include the duchess of Ancaster, the duchess of Devonshire, Lady Charlotte Greville, Lady Mary Bentinck, and Lady Harriet Montagu. At times she stayed with her pupils at their country houses, for Anna Seward later remembered Miss Reynolds as 'resident near Lichfield, in the unintellectual house of pride' ('Letters of Anna Seward', 4.187). She published her op. 2, 'Three Sonatas for Harpsichord or Piano forte', before her marriage on 21 April 1787 to Thomas Park (1758/9-1834), engraver and future man of letters. 'Mr Park, engraver and wife' visited Horace Walpole's Strawberry Hill that September (Walpole, 'Corr.', 229). Her compositions from op. 3, 'A Set of Glees with the Dirge in 'Cymbeline'', appeared under the name Maria Hester Park or M. H. Park. She was a very capable, professional composer, whose published works reached op. 13. Keyboard sonatas predominate, several with a violin accompaniment; they are varied and show rhythmic vitality. Her most striking work is her op. 6, the concerto for piano or harpsichord and string orchestra. 
During his visits to England, Joseph Haydn became acquainted with Maria Hester, and a letter of October 1794 survives in which he thanked Thomas Park for 'the two so charming Prints' and continued 'I tack me the liberty to Send for the Mistris Park a little Sonat, and to come to Her next Friday or Saturday' (Landon, 'Haydn in England', 275). Three prints engraved by Thomas Park were in Haydn's possession at the time of his death. The Parks' fifth daughter was born in August 1796, and there was also a son, John James Park (1793-1833). Maria Hester continued to teach and so was able 'to contribute very materially to the comfort of that happy and united home' (Jenkins, 11). Thomas Park was a devoted husband, and his wife figures in many of his published poems: '
By skill and science highly was she grac'd 

In Music's melting art, and with such taste 

And touch of feeling did she sounds convey, 

Her heart appear'd more than her hands to play. 
(Park, 'Morning Thoughts', 112)' She continued teaching in London until at least 1807, but suffered increasingly from rheumatism. Various cures were tried, but the mineral water and salubrious air of Hampstead proved most helpful, and the Parks spent the summers there from 1801. A house in Church Row, Hampstead, became their home, and Maria Hester died there, aged fifty-two, on 7 June 1813. She was buried at St Mary's, Acton, on 12 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 61885


Poston, Elizabeth (1905-1987), composer, was born on 24 October 1905 at Highfield, Walkern, near Stevenage, Hertfordshire, the daughter of Charles Poston (died 1913), stockbroker, and his wife, Clementine Elizabeth Brockner Bewley (died 1971). Ralph, her brother, was born in 1907. She lived at home until 1914, when she moved to Rook's Nest House, Weston Road, Stevenage, a year after her father's death. She studied the piano as a child with her mother and in her teens with Harold Samuel. Her early schooling was in Yorkshire. In 1924 she enrolled at the Royal Academy of Music, where she subsequently received many composition awards. During this time she met and studied with Ralph Vaughan Williams. Poston also developed a passion for the composer known as Peter Warlock (Philip Heseltine). Although she came to know Warlock very well and became an authority on his work, it is not known whether the relationship went further. In 1947, seventeen years after his death, she presented a five-part lecture series on his music for BBC radio's Third Programme. 
Poston established herself as a skilled pianist, and Dame Myra Hess often invited her to perform at the National Gallery concerts during the early 1940s. After one performance, Poston was approached by E. M. Forster, a former resident of Rook's Nest House. With a shared love of the building -- the model for Forster's novel 'Howards End' -- they became good friends. Together they fought to preserve the land near Rook's Nest, and after Forster's death Poston ardently continued the fight with help from other influential people. 
In 1939 Poston began a long and productive affiliation with the BBC. Arthur Bliss, director of music for the BBC, appointed her to take charge of music in the European service in Bush House, London. It is believed that her responsibilities included sending coded musical messages under Churchill's orders to resistance movements on the continent (private information). This was a particularly difficult period in Poston's life, and the secrecy of the time and the immense pressure of the task caused her great stress. In 1945, on the verge of an emotional breakdown, she resigned from the BBC and returned home to Rook's Nest to recuperate. During her respite, she spent time travelling and collecting folk-songs in Canada and the USA. 
Poston received an invitation from Douglas Cleverdon in 1947 to return to the BBC in order to help him launch the Third Programme. The two had become good friends during the war, and he believed that her background -- including musical skills, social advantages, and literary tastes -- made her ideal for such an undertaking. For her first project, a score for the first complete radio broadcast of John Milton's masque 'Comus', she incorporated some of the songs by Henry Lawes used in the first production. It featured Dame Peggy Ashcroft, Dylan Thomas, and Heddle Nash. Her literary interests led her to collaborations and friendships with Thomas, Terence Tiller, David Jones, and C. S. Lewis, for whom she produced scores for radio productions. Poston became highly sought after as a composer, and wrote extensively for radio drama. 
In the 1960s Elizabeth Poston turned her energies towards compiling song collections and produced six of these, including her well-known 'Penguin Book of Christmas Carols' (1965). She also revisited a project begun earlier with her friend Vaughan Williams to revise 'The English Hymnal'. This endeavour, which resulted in 'The Cambridge Hymnal' (Cambridge, 1967), involved commissioning over thirty composers including Lennox Berkeley, Arthur Bliss, Benjamin Britten, John Gardner, Imogen Holst, Herbert Howells, and Elizabeth Maconchy. Deeply sensitive to the relationship between words and music, Poston said in a BBC radio broadcast that 'we need as a composer needs, the music of the words themselves... without the great words, we shouldn't have the great settings of them' (Poston, interview). 
Poston was greatly affected by the deaths of Forster in 1970 and of her mother in 1971; she subsequently suffered an aneurysm. After a very difficult convalescence she continued to compose and to work on her collections of folk-songs and carols. Surrounded by friends, Poston celebrated her eightieth birthday with an evening of music that she had composed and selected. She also regaled the audience with stories and musings on her life. In the following year she suffered a fall and spent her birthday in hospital. Poston suffered a massive stroke while working at home on a collection of Christmas carols; she was taken to the Lister Hospital, Stevenage, where she died on 18 March 1987 without regaining consciousness. She was unmarried. 
A meticulous scholar, well respected by her peers for her musical contributions as well as her charming and witty personality, Elizabeth Poston won particular respect as an editor of folk-song and carol collections. She was a self-proclaimed miniaturist, and greatly enjoyed choral settings and solo song. Although she composed some early instrumental pieces, most of her published pieces were vocal. Poston had a passion for educating young musicians: she wrote a wealth of music for them, including choral pieces for festivals and song collections for young children. Her earliest published work was a set of seven part-songs including her popular setting of 'Sweet Suffolk Owl' (1925). Her best-known piece was the carol 'Jesus Christ the apple tree' (1967). Several boxes of unpublished music found in her attic after her death in 1987 indicated that she was a more prolific composer than had been previously imagined. 


@@@@@


doc= 61886


Wrighten, Mary Ann (1751-1796), singer and actress, was born in Hoxton, London, on 14 September 1751, the daughter of William Matthews (died 1797) and his wife, Mary. Her father was variously described as a jeweller or a butcher, and at his death reportedly sold newspapers, but in his will he called himself a 'dealer in coals' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1284, sig. 38). In adolescence she rebelled against the control of her parents and left home to live with an aunt. Wishing to become a professional singer, she was apprenticed to Edward Griffes, organist of St Dunstan in the East and a minor composer. She met the actor James Wrighten (1744/5-1793) when they both appeared at the theatre in Birmingham in the summer of 1769 and they were married at St Matthew's, Bethnal Green, on 9 October. David Garrick engaged her for Drury Lane Theatre where, for her debut on 8 February 1770, Charles Dibdin reworked his comic opera 'Lionel and Clarissa' as 'The School for Fathers', with a demanding high soprano role for her as Diana. The prompter William Hopkins noted: 'a very fine Voice -- Aukward & Clumsy figure -- Well faced' (Stone, 1454). 
Mrs Wrighten remained a leading singer at Drury Lane for over sixteen years, 'the prop of burlettas, and, mistress of mirth' (Pasquin, 41). During this time she played well over seventy different roles in comic operas, musical afterpieces, and plays. A favourite performer at Vauxhall Gardens, she appeared there every summer from 1777 to 1786 under its musical director James Hook, who wrote many songs for her. Her performance of C. T. Carter's rousing hunting song 'Tally Ho' was popular both at Vauxhall and in the theatre. Mrs Wrighten also sang in Handel's 'Messiah' and Felice Giardini's 'Ruth' at the Foundling Hospital in March 1774 and in Lent oratorio seasons at the theatres in 1776 and 1778-80. She composed songs which she sang herself; five of these were published in the 1780s, including two ballads for which she also wrote the words, 'Kiss me Now or Never' and 'Young Willy'. 
James Wrighten became the prompter of the Haymarket summer theatre in 1785 and of Drury Lane in autumn 1786 and was considerably more successful in this role than he had been as an actor. The Wrightens had at least six children, of whom three survived childhood, Sarah and the twins Mary Ann and Charlotte Sophia ('b'. 1778). Childbirth gave Mary Wrighten only brief respites from the stage, and she was seriously ill in May 1784 and January 1786. Her marriage broke down acrimoniously in late December 1786, when she left her husband and daughters, abandoned the theatre and went to live in Tooley Street, Southwark, with Hugh Pownall (died in or after 1807), a manufacturer of oil of vitriol. There was much gossip in the newspapers and her father cut her off with a shilling in his will, made in June 1787. 
In autumn 1792, with Hugh Pownall and their young son Felix (1790/91-1796), she arrived in Philadelphia, and as Mrs Pownall made her debut there with the Old American Theatre Company on 10 October. She remained with the company during their extended seasons in New York and briefer ones in Philadelphia until summer 1795. Having broken her leg in autumn 1793, she appeared on crutches on 26 December at the John Street Theatre, New York, to sing several favourite ballads in an afterpiece written for the occasion. Mrs Pownall was much praised for her serious singing in concerts: 'Her voice was round, full and deliciously sweet, and her manner grand and impressive' ('Euterpeiad', 187). Her New York concerts were organized by James Hewitt, a music publisher, and they collaborated in 'Six Songs for the Harpsichord or Pianoforte, Composed by Mrs. Pownal and J. Hewitt' (1794). Her contributions were 'Jemmy of the Glen', 'The Straw Bonnet', and 'Lavinia'. Two more of her songs, 'Kisses Sue'd For' and 'The Labyrinth of Love', were published in New York by George Gilfert. 
James Wrighten died in April 1793. Hugh Pownall and Mary Ann Wrighten (she seems to have added the extra name in the United States) were married in New York on 17 April 1794. In London, 'the Orphan Daughters of the late Mr Wrighten, prompter' (Hogan, 1542) had been given benefits at both Drury Lane and the Haymarket and the twins sang in the chorus at these theatres in spring and summer 1794. The following year Mary and Charlotte joined their mother in America. In early October 1795 they performed in her concerts in Boston, with their four-year-old half-brother, who made his debut singing 'Little Felix is my Name'. Mrs Pownall and her daughters were then engaged by John Sollee for the City Theatre, Charleston. After a busy and successful winter at the theatre and in concerts, she gave birth to a daughter, Louisa Delia, in mid-April 1796. The Charleston summer theatre season was cut short by an epidemic of yellow fever and the family planned to return to England, advertising their final concert for 6 August. However, on 1 August the seventeen-year-old Charlotte eloped and married the much older acrobat and dancer Alexandre Placide, who had been living with another woman as his wife, and her distraught mother cancelled the concert. 
Mrs Pownall died on 12 August 1796, still at Charleston, South Carolina, reportedly of a broken heart but probably of yellow fever. She was buried at St Philip's Church, Charleston, probably on 13 August. Felix Pownall was buried two days before his mother died and Mary Wrighten succumbed to fever on 24 August. Louisa Delia died the following summer, but Hugh Pownall survived to settle in New York as a druggist, where he was still alive in 1807, and Charlotte Placide became the mother of a famous family of American actors. Mary Ann Pownall was considered 'the best vocalist yet heard in America' (Ireland, 98) and was the first female composer to have music published in the United States. 


@@@@@


doc= 61889


Savage, William (1720-1789), singer and organist, was born probably in London and was a pupil of J. C. Pepusch and Francesco Geminiani. As a boy he sang solo roles for Handel in the opera 'Alcina', in the masque 'Acis and Galatea', and in the oratorios 'Athalia' -- in which his performance as the young king, Joas, 'met with universal Applause' (Dean, 259) -- 'Esther', and 'Israel in Egypt'. He remained a prominent and evidently successful Handel singer and, after a short period as an alto, in the early 1740s was bass soloist in the operas 'Imeneo' and 'Deidamia' and the oratorios 'L'allegro ed il penseroso', 'Saul', 'Samson', and 'Messiah'. He also sang in many of William Boyce's court odes, and was said to have 'a pleasant bass voice of the compass of two octaves: he had a clear articulation, perfect intonation, great volubility of voice, and chaste and good expression. In sacred music particularly, his pathos and feeling were excellent and very impressive' (Farmer, 194). In 1743 he was organist of Finchley parish church, and in 1744 he became a gentleman-in-ordinary at the Chapel Royal. 
Savage was appointed vicar-choral, almoner, and master of the choristers at St Paul's Cathedral in 1748. There his responsibilities included supervising the musical studies of the boys of the choir, who all lived with him at his house in Paul's Bakehouse Court. One of them, R. J. S. Stevens, later defended Savage against Charles Burney's accusations of pomposity and self-importance, and remembered him as a thorough, if demanding, teacher. He could be 'violent and impatient in his temper to the greatest degree: and his impetuosity, sometimes drove him into chastising the boys almost to cruelty' ('Recollections', 13), yet 'by constant attention to their elementary rules every morning before breakfast, he made them correct and ready performers' (Farmer, 195). Stevens was bound apprentice to Savage, as was Jonathan Battishill, who was also a cathedral chorister, and his other pupils included C. F. Reinhold, James and William Evance, and his successors at St Paul's, Robert Hudson and Richard Bellamy. Savage resigned the posts of almoner and master of the choristers in 1773 owing to ill health -- according to Stevens he was asthmatic -- and having on 5 April 1777 resigned also as vicar-choral he went to live in Tenterden, Kent. He returned to London three or four years later and advertised his readiness to take pupils. 
In addition to church music Savage wrote secular songs, rounds, and catches -- he was a member of the Catch Club -- and some violin music. He was a member of both the Academy of Ancient Music and the Beefsteak Club. He was married to Mary Bolt (died 1788), and they had three children: George (died 1816), who became vicar of Kingston and Richmond, Jane, and William. Jane Savage (1752/3-1824), who was a notable keyboard player, published a number of 'galant' keyboard compositions and vocal works. In 1793 she married Robert Rolleston, a merchant. William Savage died in London on 27 July 1789 and was buried at the end of Gray's Inn Lane in ground belonging to the parish of St George the Martyr, Bloomsbury. His library was later bought by Stevens. 


@@@@@


doc= 61893


Tate, Phyllis Margaret Duncan (1911-1987), composer, was born on 6 April 1911 at Lexden Ovalway, Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire, the only child of the architect John Duncan Tate (died before 1932) and his wife, Annie Stewart Holt. The family moved to London after the First World War, and Tate attended a small private school until she was expelled at ten for singing a bawdy music-hall song (taught to her by her father). She had no further formal schooling, but took up the ukelele, started composing foxtrots and blues, and joined a group of musicians who gave concerts for charity as well as playing in hospitals and old people's homes. The composer Harry Farjeon heard her performing and encouraged her to undertake a more formal musical education. 
Tate studied from 1928 to 1932 at the Royal Academy of Music, London, where her principal study was composition (with Farjeon) but where she also took lessons in conducting and the timpani. Several of her works were played at the academy while she was a student, including a symphony and an operetta, 'The Policeman's Serenade' (with a libretto by A. J. Herbert). After leaving the academy she achieved more performances of her work: her cello concerto was given a prestigious premiere by the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra under Dan Godfrey in 1934, and four songs for tenor and piano and a string quartet in A (1936) were played at the Macnaghten-Lemare concerts in London. 
Oxford University Press started publishing Tate's music in 1935. In that year she married Alan Clifford Frank (1910-1994), a clarinettist. Her husband was a music editor, and served as head of music at OUP (1954-75). The couple had two children: a son, Colin, in 1940 and a daughter, Celia, in 1952. During the 1930s Tate published commercial light music under various pseudonyms such as Max Morelle and Janos. An accomplished arranger, she later published numerous arrangements of a wide variety of traditional songs. Always extremely self-critical, Tate felt dissatisfied with her early concert works and after the Second World War destroyed almost all of them. The first work she was prepared to acknowledge was her concerto for alto saxophone and strings (1944), commissioned by the BBC. This was followed by two works which firmly established her reputation as an inventive and imaginative composer: the chamber cantata 'Nocturne for Four Voices' (1945) to a text by Sidney Keyes, for four singers accompanied by string quartet, double bass, bass clarinet, and celesta, and a sonata for clarinet and cello (1947). In 1947 she was featured in a BBC Third Programme series entitled 'Contemporary British Composers'. 
Tate delighted in creating unusual sounds and textures, always presented within a clearly defined structure. She believed that music should entertain and give pleasure, an approach that can be clearly seen in her interest in composing for children and amateurs. But in all her works she was concerned to be directly communicative, while never compromising her very individual musical language and sound-world. 
Tate was apparently not interested in writing large-scale instrumental works, and from the 1950s onwards she turned increasingly to vocal and choral music while continuing to explore the world of chamber music. Her striking cantata to Tennyson's famous poem 'The Lady of Shallott' (1956), for tenor, viola, two pianos, and percussion, was commissioned by the BBC Third Programme as part of its tenth anniversary celebrations. Her opera 'The Lodger', based on the story of Jack the Ripper, was premiered at the Royal Academy of Music in 1960 and broadcast on the Third Programme four years later. Other stage works included the television opera 'Dark Pilgrimage' (1963), 'The What d'ye Call it' (1966), after the play by John Gay, and several works for children. She later expressed interest, unfortunately never realized, in writing a musical based on the life of Mrs Beeton, in which she would set the recipes from her 'Household Management' as songs. 
From 1954 Tate lived in Hampstead, north London, and became involved with local musical groups such as the Hampstead Music Club and the Barnet and District Choral Society. She was president of the latter, for which she wrote the cantata 'St Martha and the Dragon' (1977) for narrator, soloists, chorus, children's chorus, and chamber orchestra. She was also involved in national musical organizations, serving on the executive committee of the Composers' Guild and the management committee of the Performing Right Society's members' fund. She died at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, on 29 May 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 61896


Ann Valentine (bap. 1762, d. 1845), who was baptized at St Martin's, Leicester, on 15 March 1762. She probably received her musical training from her father, and in 1777 she performed a harpsichord concerto at 'Mr Valentine's Annual Concert at Rugby' (Kroeger, 450). William Gardiner, whose writings are entertaining but not always totally reliable, noted that she usually played music by Handel, either an organ concerto or a harpsichord lesson, as the 'wretched little piano fortes of the day' (Gardiner, 67) were not suitable for concerts. About 1785 she was appointed organist at St Margaret's, Leicester, and from 1791 she lived in Belgrave Gate, where she perhaps continued to run her father's music shop. She composed 'Ten sonatas for the piano forte or harpsichord with an accompaniment for the violin or german-flute' op. 1, 'A Collect for the Sixth Sunday after Trinity', a song, 'Ye Gentlest Gales', and seven piano pieces. According to the records of St Margaret's, when she died on 13 October 1845 she was living at Coleshill, presumably in Warwickshire; she was buried at St Margaret's on 20 October 1845. 
Sarah Valentine (1771-1843), Ann's younger sister, lived with her at Belgrave Gate and was also a professional musician. Her only known composition is 'The British March and Quickstep... for the Pianoforte': a copy, bound with a collection of Ann's music, is in the Lilly Library, Indiana University. In 1800 Sarah replaced Miss Greatorex as organist at St Martin's, Leicester, receiving 150 votes against the one vote received by Frederick Hill, the other candidate. Another versatile member of the family was a brother of Sarah and Ann, Thomas Valentine (1757-1800), the eldest son of John, who performed in a concert as a singer and violinist in 1771. In 1774 he advertised in the 'Leicester and Nottingham Journal' as a harpsichord teacher and tuner, and by 1784 an announcement in the same newspaper of a 'musical meeting' at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, where he was to play first violin, described him as a member of the Covent Garden theatre. According to his obituary, also in the 'Leicester and Nottingham Journal', when he died at Wrexham, Denbighshire, he was organist to Sir Watkins Williams Wynn at Ruabon, and his military compositions were particularly admired. 
In March 1773 a concert advertised for Thomas's benefit broke a mutual contract between John and his first cousin Henry Valentine ('b'. 1725), who owned a music shop in East Gate, Leicester, and played the oboe. According to a notice Henry placed in the 'Leicester and Nottingham Journal', he and John had agreed to share all profits of benefit concerts equally, and so he appealed to the 'impartial public' to support him in a future concert of his own. This took place in June 1773, but the conflict was apparently short-lived, as by September Henry and John again organized a joint benefit concert. 
A Mrs Valentine, whose first name is not recorded, frequently took part in Leicester concerts. In 1765 she sang a cantata by John Stanley and a song with guitar accompaniment at a Valentine benefit concert, by 1767 she had her own series of benefit concerts, and in 1774 she performed on the musical glasses. It seems that she was Mary Geary, the wife of Henry: Kroeger surmises that she was probably not John's wife, Tabitha, as she sang at Henry's concert in June 1773 when the cousins were in dispute. 
According to Gardiner, the fortnightly subscription concerts in Leicester were a financial success because the performers were mostly amateurs and 'Misses Ann and Fanny, and Messrs John and Henry Valentine, and Robert jun.' (Gardiner, 67) were paid only 2's'. 6died a night. Works played included 'the concertos of Corelli, Handel, Geminiani, Stanley, and Avison; the symphonies of Martini, Stamitz, Abell, Maldere, Vanhall, and Ditters' (ibid.) and a sinfonia by Haydn, whose music had apparently not been heard in Leicester before. Robert Valentine ('b'. 1762) and Fanny Valentine ('b'. 1770) were children of Henry and Mary: Fanny, who for a short time was also an actress, sang 'grave songs from Handel's oratorios, and now and then a Vauxhall ballad' (ibid., 67-8), and Robert, who became a freeman in 1784, may have been 'Mr Valentine, the professor', who in 1794 took part with William Gardiner and Abbe Dobler in a performance of Beethoven's violin trio in E[flat] 'well before any of Beethoven's works had been heard elsewhere in England' (ibid., 113). 
After Ann's death in 1845 no further Valentines seem to have been important to the musical life of Leicester, but the British Library catalogue contains many works by others who may have been members of the same family, including John, who wrote 'The Elements of Practical Harmony, or What is Generally Called Thorough Base' (1834), and Thomas, who composed over 150 piano pieces, mostly arrangements of popular airs with variations. 


@@@@@


doc= 61897


Finden, Amy Woodforde- (1860-1919), composer, was born in Valparaiso, Chile, the fourth daughter and ninth of ten children of Alfred Richard Ward (1809/10-1867) and his wife, Virginia Worthington, 'nee' Heath (1826/7-1912). Her father was an American merchant acting as United States consul there; her mother was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. On her father's death the family settled in London, where her mother was naturalized a British subject in March 1873. She is said to have begun composing at the age of nine. She was taught privately by several teachers including Carl Schloesser, Amy Horrocks, and a Herr Winter. As a young adult Amy Ward travelled extensively in India, notably in Kashmir. It was there that she met her future husband, Lieutenant-Colonel Woodeford Woodforde-Finden (1844-1916), son of George Caulfield and Melissa Woodforde-Finden; he was a brigadier surgeon in the Bengal cavalry and a widower. They married on 17 September 1893 at St Thomas's Cathedral in Bombay. After returning home on leave in 1896 her husband retired, and the couple remained in England. 
Woodforde-Finden's most celebrated work, the 'Four Indian Love Lyrics', is a collection of songs for voice and piano, set to poems by Laurence Hope from 'The Garden of Kama and other Love Lyrics from India' (1901). Following rejections from several publishers, Woodforde-Finden published them privately in 1902. The music includes many standard nineteenth-century orientalist techniques: ornamentation, unison passages, and syncopated rhythms. It is often rhythmically and harmonically repetitive, with drones in the piano part supporting a chromatic, sometimes pentatonic, vocal line. Her melodies in particular are well crafted and often memorable, a factor that contributed to the collection's success. 
Indeed the 'Four Indian Love Lyrics' were arguably the most successful songs of the early twentieth century. Woodforde-Finden hit the right tone for the Victorian drawing room: at a time when orientalism was in fashion, and music for amateur performance in great demand, she produced music that was both exotic and playable. The songs' success was established by the singer Hamilton Earle, who regularly performed them, and further enhanced by Boosey and Hawkes, who published them in 1903. Hope's poems, originally published in 1901, were well known and popular by the time Woodforde-Finden set them to music. 
It was probably through her husband's acquaintance with Malcolm Hassels Nicolson that Woodforde-Finden met the writer of the Indian love lyrics, Laurence Hope (pseudonym of Adela Florence Nicolson, nee Cory (1865-1904)). The details of their relationship are not known, but rumours surround both women's contribution to the songs. Hope's words to the 'Kashmiri Song', the story of a love affair between a married English woman and the son of an Indian raja, were thought to be autobiographical. It was also said that Woodforde-Finden wrote the music in a mental asylum. 
All Woodforde-Finden's surviving works are songs. She wrote some under her maiden name, Amy Ward. Before 'Four Indian Love Lyrics' she had two works published by Boosey & Co., 'A Night in June' (1896) and 'O Flower of the World' (1897). Later collections of songs include: 'A Lover in Damascus' (1904), 'On Jhelum River' (1905), and 'The Pagoda of Flowers' (1907). The 'Four Indian Love Lyrics' were later rearranged for several instrumental combinations, including violin and piano, salon orchestra, and military band. Most of her work set in such diverse places as the Middle East, north Africa, Japan, and South America where she spent her childhood. No evidence remains of her travelling to these places. The Indian love lyrics have continued to be popular throughout the twentieth century; and words from the 'Kashmiri Song' ('Pale Hands I loved beside the Shalimar') were poignantly evoked by Anthony Powell in 'A Dance to the Music of Time' (Spurling, 241). 
In 1914 Amy Woodforde-Finden gave a concert of her works in the Aeolian Hall in London. It is not known if she sang, played the piano, or both; or if such performances were a regular feature of her life. She died of heart failure on 13 March 1919 at 3 Cork Street, London. Her husband had died three years before on 27 April 1916 in Harrow. She was buried in the village of Hampsthwaite, near Harrogate, Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 61899


Wurm, Mary Josephine Agnes (1860-1938), pianist and composer, was born on 18 May 1860 at 11 Windsor Terrace, Southampton, the first of the ten children of John Evangelist Wurm ('c'.1828-1892), formerly of Oberdorf, Bavaria, and his wife, (Marie) Sophie Niggl ('c'.1838- 'c'.1883), daughter of a village schoolmaster from Denklingen. The couple, both music teachers, had emigrated to Southampton on the advice of one of Sophie's elder sisters, Josephine, herself a music teacher recently settled in the city, who was the wife of Lorenz Herkomer and mother of the artist Hubert Herkomer. The Wurms set up house next door to the Herkomers in Windsor Terrace, but soon moved to Portland Street. Besides teaching German and music peripatetically, J. E. Wurm was organist and choirmaster of St Joseph's Roman Catholic Church, Bugle Street, for more than thirty years. Sophie Wurm taught singing, the violin, the piano, and the zither. Ambitious and well organized, she took the major share in promoting her children's interests. All ten were said to be musical. In addition to Mary, Mathilde Verne (1865-1936), Alice Barbara Verne (1868-1958) and Adela Verne (1877-1952) ['see under 'Verne, Mathilde] had professional musical careers. These three changed their surname from Wurm to Verne late in 1893 and worked chiefly in England, whereas Mary, often known in English sources as Marie Wurm, lived and worked mainly in Germany. 
Mary was taken by her mother to Stuttgart in 1869, becoming a pupil at the conservatory. After returning to London in 1878, she had lessons from visiting pianists including Anna Mehlig, Mary Krebs, Jozef Wieniawski, and Caroline Montigny-Remaury. In 1880 she went to Frankfurt to study with Clara Schumann and Joachim Raff; she eventually made her London debut in 1882 at the Crystal Palace under August Manns, playing Robert Schumann's piano concerto. Two years later she appeared at the St James's Hall 'Popular' concerts (in a Haydn trio) and won the Mendelssohn scholarship, which provided for composition studies with Sir Arthur Sullivan, C. V. Stanford, and Frederick Bridge; in 1886 she studied with Carl Reinecke in Leipzig. From this period solo playing gave way to chamber music, at the Princes' Hall in London as well as in Vienna and Frankfurt. Mary Wurm 'assisted' at concerts of such leading performers as Sophie Lowe, Ben Davies, and Tivadar Nachez, often playing her own works. Meanwhile she established a teaching connection in Germany. Her most remarkable solo appearance was undoubtedly that at the Queen's Hall, London, on 21 February 1895 -- an entirely extempore programme based on musical themes supplied by the audience and in sealed envelopes from 'music professors'. Described as clever but musically dull, the occasion was not repeated, and she returned to composition and teaching in Germany, notably in Hanover, Berlin (from 1911), Munich (from 1925), and later Berlin again. From 1898 to 1900 she conducted and toured with a women's orchestra in Germany. She died in Munich on 21 January 1938. 
Wurm was a fluent composer of parlour songs and light piano works, many of them dances or duets, as well as women's part-songs and children's pieces designed for ready markets in Germany and Britain. These included a children's operetta 'Prinzessin Lisa's Fee' (given in Lubeck, 1890) and two didactic works, 'Das ABC der Musik' (Leipzig, n.d.) and 'Praktische Vorschule zur Caland-Lehre' (Hanover, 1914). She also wrote a piano concerto, a violin sonata (op. 17), a cello sonata, a string quartet (op. 40), works for string orchestra, and a one-act opera after Goethe's 'Die Mitschuldigen' (given in Leipzig, 1921). 


@@@@@


doc= 61901


Porter, David (1746/7-1819), chimney sweep, social reformer, and property developer, was the son of Stephen Porter (1727/8-1766), an itinerant country chimney sweep from Peterborough. His mother was probably Mary Porter, Stephen Porter's wife at the time of his death. According to his 'Considerations on the Present State of Chimney Sweepers' (1792) David worked as a climbing boy between the ages of ten and nineteen, 'trudging the streets... excluded from society', though he 'lost but few opportunities of improving either my mind or my fortune' (Porter, 'Considerations', vii-viii). On 26 April 1770 at Thornhaugh near Peterborough he married Edith ('bap'. 1749, died 1805), daughter of John Glithero, stonemason of Wansford. They moved to the City of London, where Porter worked as a master chimney sweep and where their first two children, Mary and Stephen, were baptized -- at St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street. By 1774 the family had moved westwards to 9 Little Welbeck Street, and later 7 Welbeck Street, in St Marylebone, where they had five more children, all of whom died before their father; an illegitimate son he had with Mary Bates, David Charles Porter, born in 1801, was adopted as his son and 'resides with me as part of my family' (will, Porter). The eldest son, Stephen, attended Trinity College, Cambridge, after Horace Walpole had asked a friend to recommend him to the college (Walpole, 'Corr.' 16.217). 
During the 1770s and 1780s Porter built up his chimney sweeping trade in the newly developing West End, so that he soon 'ran away with the bulk of the business at the West End of the Town' ('Minutes', 107), with a lucrative sideline in selling soot to farmers as a fertilizer, about which he published a pamphlet in 1785. A large and decorative trade card from this period (now in the Banks Collection in the British Museum) describes him as 'Chimney Sweeper to Her Royal Highness the Princess Amelia'. 
In addition to his business interests Porter also sought to reform the conditions of fellow sweeps, providing the social reformer Jonas Hanway with inside information 'about the hardships and cruelties of the trade' ('JHC', 22 April 1788, 405). With Hanway he brought together groups of people to try to regulate the worst practices of the trade and to improve the lot of climbing boys, maltreated as apprentices and afterwards too poorly educated to enter any other trade, and too numerous all to become master sweeps. In 1780 they formed the short-lived Friendly Society to Promote the Interest and Credit of Chimney-Sweepers, for which Porter drew up the articles of agreement. Porter and other friends continued to pursue reform after Hanway's death in 1786; two years later they formed 'a committee in behalf of climbing boys', drawn mainly from the Marine Society, with Porter framing a bill for their relief. 
On 22 April 1788 Porter presented a petition to the House of Commons for the bill entitled 'Better Regulation of Chimney Sweepers' ('JHC', 22 April 1788, 405). This measure, prompted by his 'great Anxiety' at the 'hardships and Cruelties which Boys placed out to Chimney Sweepers generally undergo', sought to limit the number of apprentices to six per master; to prevent children younger than eight climbing chimneys; to end the practice of climbing chimneys on fire; and to demand of masters certain obligations to their apprentices, such as decent clothing, weekly baths, and the provision of Sunday worship. Failure to implement these improvements was to be punishable by a $5-$10 fine. 
Although passed by the Commons, in the Lords the bill 'was so mangled as to destroy its effect... [becoming] only a shadow of protection, a mere mockery'. This spurred Porter to publish his 'Considerations on the Present State of Chimney Sweepers' (1792, with a revised edition in 1801), in which he again presented his and Hanway's ideas for the better regulation of chimney sweeps and their apprentices, with particular attention to the irregularity of their employment and the meagreness of their wages. He estimated that up to 1500 people made their living by chimney sweeping in London (200 master chimney sweeps and 500 apprentices, together with 200 wives and 400 dependent children, 200 journeymen, and 200 maidservants). However, the income was divided unequally, leaving as many as 1300 people ill provided and many 'miserable in the extreme' (Porter, 'Considerations', 30). Porter's study also drew attention to another aspect of the profession, the soot trade to farmers, which was subject to serious abuse. His solution was the formation of a company controlled by London's aldermen and magistrates, with twelve masters to be chosen as guardians of the trade, as well as an office, a secretary, and monthly meetings. In addition Porter recommended that apprentices should on one day a week attend schools opened and run by the company, where boys would receive both instruction and a wholesome meal, and where there would also be a chance to check their welfare. Once apprentices reached sixteen, some were to be placed out to sea, into service, or some other trade. 
Porter's ideas caught the attention of polite society. As early as 1784 Horace Walpole wrote of how he had 'been these two years wishing to promote my excellent Mr Porter's plan for alleviating the woes of chimney-sweepers' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 39.428). Sir Thomas Bernard, who in 1796 formed the Society for Bettering the Condition and Improving the Comforts of the Poor, wrote a paper in 1797 which presented Porter's main ideas and recommended that his plan should be adopted. He also described Porter's exemplary treatment of his own apprentices, who were 'kindly treated and well kept... cleaned and made neat on Saturday night... and regularly attend divine service at Church on Sunday' ('Reports', 1, no. 19, 114). 
In May 1800 Porter drew up the articles of agreement for a new friendly society 'for the Protection and Instruction of Chimney Sweepers' Apprentices' ('Reports', 2, appx 11, 316). Despite the presence of Elizabeth Montagu, the bishop of Durham, Shute Barrington, and William Wilberforce among its officers, this society failed in its objectives. However, three years later another more long-lasting and effective body was formed: the Society for Superseding the Necessity of Climbing Boys by Encouraging a New Method of Sweeping Chimnies and for Improving the Conditions of Children and Others Employed by Chimney Sweepers. Officers again included Wilberforce and Barrington, with Thomas Bernard and Porter among the committee members. 
Porter remained on this committee until 1816, during which time the society's priorities changed from the improvement of conditions for climbing boys to their abolition, following the introduction of new chimney sweeping 'machines'. Yet Porter himself refused to accept this innovation and maintained that climbing boys were the only effective way of cleaning chimneys, while continuing to emphasize the need for careful regulation of the service. In 1818 Porter gave evidence to the Lords' committee considering the bill entitled 'Better Regulation of Chimney Sweepers and their Apprentices' (1817), which paved the way for the abolition of climbing boys. He gave thirteen pages of evidence against the bill, among which was much biographical material about his own life as a chimney sweep, climbing boy, and master, as well as his emphatic restatement that machines could not provide an adequate substitute for a well-trained boy. Many saw this as a betrayal of his life's work. In the event the bill was rejected in the Lords, and it was not until four further acts had been passed that climbing boys were finally abolished in 1875. 
From 1789 Porter had combined his chimney-sweeping and reforming activities with a second career as a builder and property developer, principally in the Marylebone area of London. His name appears on more than 700 property deeds for much of Gloucester Street and Dorset Square in the north of Marylebone; part of Baker Street in the east; York Street and Crawford Street and all of Montagu Square in the centre; Seymour Place in the west; and George Street and Great Cumberland Place in the south. His prominence as a developer also led to his being consulted by the St Marylebone vestry for his specialist knowledge of building work; for example, in 1806 he presented a plan for building a new chapel on the north side of York Street, and in 1814 he outlined five alternative 'propositions' for a new chapel at the western end of the parish. To commemorate his life a small street running eastwards off Baker Street was named David Street (later Porter Street), with its adjacent David Mews. 
David Porter died in London on 31 May 1819, aged seventy-two, at his home, 15 Park Place, Regent's Park, later 29 Park Road ('GM', 1st ser., 89, 1819, 1.587). He was buried on 11 June at St Mary's Church, St Marylebone. This erstwhile climbing boy left a fourteen-page will, showing that he had a considerable fortune in leasehold property throughout Marylebone, and some in Clerkenwell, which he bequeathed to his children and grandchildren. His estate was valued at under $60,000 in the death duty register. 
Suitable epitaphs can be found in the comments of those who worked with Porter in his campaign for reforms in chimney sweeping. Thomas Bernard emphasized his 'extraordinary energy of mind and body' ('Reports', 1, no. 19, 111). For Horace Walpole, writing in 1789, he was 'one of the best and most respectable men upon earth, and one whom I esteem after Mr Howard and Mr Hanway, as one of the apostles of humanity', adding later in the year that 'he [is] one of the plainest, simple good men you ever saw, whose honest, open, comely countenance is the picture of his mind' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 16.219). 


@@@@@


doc= 61902


Morris, Robert (1743-1793), radical, was born in Swansea on 4 August 1743, the elder surviving son, of two sons and four daughters, out of twelve children born to Robert Morris (bap. 1701?, d. 1768), copper industrialist of Swansea, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Jenkins (died 1786), of Machynlleth. Educated at Charterhouse and Oriel College, Oxford (1760-64), Morris enrolled in 1763 at Lincoln's Inn and was called to the bar in 1767. He assisted in the successful defence of Lord Baltimore in a notorious rape case of 1768, but was diverted from his legal career into politics by the Middlesex election episode of 1768-9 concerning John Wilkes, and on 25 February 1769 was elected secretary of the new Society of Gentleman Supporters of the Bill of Rights. Morris was the public face of the society, since all its notices appeared over his name until he resigned eighteen months later, pleading overwork, and he was known in the press as 'Bill of Rights Morris'. It was Morris, Wilkes, and journalist John Almon who in 1771 concocted the scheme of deploying against parliamentary privilege the chartered rights of the City of London in order to provide a refuge there for printers reporting parliamentary debates. Morris played an active part in the plot, which secured that press freedom, contacting various printers and acting as their learned counsel with the advice that the House of Commons had no legal right to order their arrest. The City of London acknowledged his role by giving him a general retainer and bestowing on him the freedom of the City in April 1771. 
Then occurred an escapade that ended both Morris's legal career and his political aspirations. On the death of Lord Baltimore in 1771 Morris was appointed a guardian of his illegitimate children, but in May 1772 eloped to the continent with one of them, twelve-year-old Fanny (Frances Mary) Harford (1759-1832), twice illegally marrying her -- at Ypres on 21 May and at Ahrensburgh on 3 January 1773. Fanny soon decided to end the relationship, and returned to Britain in January 1774, Morris following in April. For a decade he fought to prevent annulment of the marriage, which was pronounced void on 21 May 1784. Morris, meanwhile, debarred from his profession, lived off his wits, gambling with loaded dice and suspected even of being a highwayman. In 1785 he turned over a new leaf, returning to south Wales on marrying a farmer's daughter, Sarah Prichard (died 1789), on 28 June 1785 and inheriting the family estate of Tredegar Fawr, near Swansea, on his mother's death in 1786. Now a small squire, Morris participated in a Glamorgan by-election of 1789, writing several pamphlets to support a candidate successfully challenging the local oligarchy. 
Respectability beckoned, but on the sudden death of his wife in 1789 Morris again threw discretion to the winds. In 1790 he obtained permission from the East India Company to practise law in Bengal, but found on his arrival that the judges there, aware of his unsavoury past, refused to allow him to do so. Morris then visited numerous gaols in Bengal, informing many prisoners that they were being illegally detained and should break out. He died of a liver complaint, and was buried in India on 29 November 1793. 'I do love bustle, variety and disturbance to my very soul', Morris wrote in his diary for 12 May 1774, and that may serve as his epitaph ('Radical Adventurer', 172). His lively and erratic career contrasts with that of his younger brother John, who so well managed the family copper business that Morriston developed as a company town, and he obtained a knighthood in 1806. 


@@@@@


doc= 61903


Willes, Edward (1694-1773), bishop of Bath and Wells and cryptanalyst, was born at Bishop's Itchington, Warwickshire, on 6 March 1694, the son of John Willes (1647/8-1700), rector of that parish, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir William Walker of Oxfordshire. The judge Sir John Willes was his brother. Educated at Oriel College, Oxford, Willes graduated BA (1712), MA (1715), and BD and DD (1726). 
Willes had two interlacing careers, as an ecclesiastic and as the king's chief 'decypherer', both important, both conscientiously fulfilled, but he has been described as 'the only man in history to use crypto-analytic talents to procure ecclesiastical rewards' (Kahn, 170). He had first learned his decoding skills at Oxford from the brilliant young William Blencowe, Queen Anne's decipherer; there he stayed after graduation to perfect his expertise. In May 1716 his competence, coupled with whig credentials proven in violent clashes with Oxford tories, made him a suitable candidate as decipherer to George I, with a salary of $200 a year. He worked both at home and in the secret office, where duties were enveloped 'in clouds and thick darkness' and demanded 'very active, laborious and incessant exertion' (Cassan, 168n.). 
Fluent in Latin, French, Spanish, and Swedish, Willes soon established widespread fame as a highly skilled, meticulous decipherer. In 1716 he intercepted pro-Jacobite messages between Georg Heinrich von Gortz, a wily Swedish diplomat, and Count Karl Gyllenborg, his ambassador in London. Willes cracked the code and translated 300 pages of cipher. In January 1717, despite protesting that he enjoyed diplomatic immunity, Gyllenborg was arrested for conspiracy. The government rewarded Willes with the valuable living of Barton in the Clay, Bedfordshire (1718-30). More was to follow. Between 1719 and 1722 he decoded communications between Bishop Francis Atterbury of Rochester and Jacobites abroad. In the ensuing trial Willes was a prime witness, whom Atterbury himself ruthlessly cross-examined. The bishop was convicted and banished. This major coup earned Willes further promotion, a canonry at Westminster (1724-43), followed by the deanery of Lincoln (1730-43), held 'in commendam' with the two prebends of Weston Paynshall (1730-37) and Milton Ecclesia (1737-44). With a salary now of $500 a year his work as government agent in the 1734 Bedfordshire election yielded yet more fruit, including the livings of Bonsall, Derbyshire, and the recently created St John's, Westminster. 
An acknowledged master decipherer, was Willes equally conscientious in his clerical responsibilities or, as Kahn and others infer, merely a political hack looking for ever wealthier preferments? Despite his frequent attendance at the House of Lords, recent research reveals such innuendoes to be false. Though granted the living at Barton for political services he was no absentee; he made the rectory his home, he brought up his family there, and he even purchased its manorial rights, still retained by his family into the late nineteenth century. Furthermore he regularly and conscientiously fulfilled his duties as canon of Westminster and as dean of Lincoln. At Lincoln he worked to heal disputes between bishop's and archdeacons' officials. He was also active with his cathedral's Oxfordshire peculiars, such as Banbury. In June 1738, for example, he planned, with Bishop Secker of Oxford, for a confirmation there. On 2 February 1719 he married Jane ('bap'. 1695, died 1771), daughter of Henry White of Oxford, a draper, and they had five sons and four daughters. 
Though apparently in line for a bishopric as early as 1736, Willes realized the impossibility of coping simultaneously with that and the secret office. He refused elevation until 1742, when his eldest son, Edward, was experienced enough to reduce some of the burden. In that year Willes was consecrated bishop of St David's. Nor was his promotion to the wealthier bishopric of Bath and Wells in the following year the result of manoeuvring, for he was the compromise candidate after the first choice had proved politically unacceptable and another had refused. 
Despite help in the secret office from three of his sons -- Edward (from 1742), Francis (from 1752), and William (from 1758) -- coded missives still arrived at Wells for deciphering during Willes's long episcopate. Nor was he averse to nepotism in the diocese; three of his family, a son and two sons-in-law, became archdeacons of Wells. However, in his episcopal duties, as in the secret office, he was punctilious. He held most of his ordinations (sixty-four out of sixty-seven) in Bath and Wells, not in London, as did some contemporaries. Visitations too, except in old age, he carried out regularly in person. He began restoring the bishop's palace at Wells but had the redundant one at Banwell demolished so that its materials could be used for a school and the local church. Willes died at his London home, near Berkeley Square, on 24 November 1773 and was buried on 1 December in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 61904


Priest, Josias (d. 1734/5), dancer and boarding-school proprietor, was almost certainly a performer on the London stage from at least 1667, when Mr Priest danced a 'Tony', or fool, in act V of Dryden's comedy 'Sir Martin Mar-All' and the end of the play was 'Crown'd with an Excellent Entry... by Mr. 'Priest' and Madam 'Davies'' (Downes, 62-3). John Downes, the theatre prompter, named 'Mr. Joseph Preist' as choreographer, with Luke Channell, for the spectacular 1673 production of 'Macbeth'. When writing of the great dramatic operas of the early 1690s he credited 'Mr. Jo. Priest' with the dances for 'King Arthur', and then 'Mr. Priest' with those for 'Dioclesian' and 'The Fairy Queen', seeing the dances as second in importance only to Henry Purcell's music. Thomas Bray's 'Country Dances' (1699) includes a tune from act II of 'The Fairy Queen', headed 'An Entry by the late Mr. 'Henry Purcell', the Dance compos'd by Mr. 'Josias Preist'', as well as dances from Purcell's last dramatic opera, 'The Indian Queen' (1695), and the operatic version of Fletcher's 'The Island Princess' (1699), created by 'Mr. 'Preist''. 'The Second Book of Theatre Musick' (1699) tells us that 'Mr Prist' was the performer of the first of Bray's 'Island Princess' dances, and it seems likely that he also performed the second, the dance for the Old Miser in the final masque. It was Priest's skill in 'Grotesque Dancing' that John Weaver remembered in 1712: 'Mr. 'Joseph Priest' of 'Chelsey', I take to have been the greatest Master of this kind of 'Dancing', that has appear'd on our Stage' (Weaver, 166-7). In 1711 'Mr. Preist Sen., of Chelsea' subscribed to Edmund Pemberton's collection of notated dances and contributed his minuet for twelve ladies. Josias's son Thomas ('b'. 1671), who also lived in Chelsea, wrote four dance tunes for Bray's 'Country Dances'. 
In June 1669 a warrant had been issued to arrest Josiah Priest and others for teaching and performing music without a licence, and in 1675 Joseph Priest was paid $100 for work on dances for the court masque 'Calisto'. It is likely, though not certain, that Josias, Josiah, and Joseph Priest were all the same person. The registers of St Mary-le-Bow record the baptism of Frances, daughter of Josiah Preist, in 1665 and the burial of Frances, daughter of Joseph Priest, a year later. The dancing-master husband of Frances (or Frank) Preist (died 1733) was variously called Josias and Josiah in the baptismal registers of St Andrew's, Holborn, between 1668 and 1675. The organist of Bath Abbey was referred to as Joseph Priest and Josias Priest in two subscription lists in 1724 but his relationship to the dancer is unknown. 
On 25 November 1680 the 'London Gazette' announced: ''Josias Priest', Dancing Master, who kept a Boarding-School of Gentlewomen in 'Leicester-fields', is removed to the great School-House at 'Chelsey', that was Mr. 'Portman''s'. This was Gorges House, where the violinist Jeffrey Bannister and the singer James Hart had been running a girls' school. 'The Antiquities of Middlesex' (1705) described the 'large spacious House... in which for many Years past has been kept a famous Boarding School for young Ladies, by Mr. 'Jonas Priest'' (Bowack, 13). Priest appears to have had twelve children before he moved to Chelsea, and seven more were baptized there between 1682 and 1693, where he is named as Joseph Priest in the registers. Early in May 1684 'Mrs Priest the Schoolmistress... had a little girl (one of her daughters) drowned in a Tub of Water' (Thorp, 202-4), presumably Susanna, who was buried on 12 May, aged two. 
Priest is best known for having staged John Blow's 'Venus and Adonis' in 1684 and Purcell's 'Dido and Aeneas' in 1689, at his boarding-school in Chelsea. Both operas were performed by Priest's pupils, but the role of Adonis in Blow's opera was taken by 'Mr. Priest's daughter' (Luckett, 76), probably Katherine, baptized at St Mary-le-Bow in 1666. In May 1691 Mrs A. Buck, who was investigating girls' schools for a friend, expressed her disapproval: 'Preists att Little Chelsey was one which was much commended; but he hath lately had an Opera, which I'me sure hath done him a great injurey; & the Parents of the Childern not satisfied with so Publick a show' (Goldie, 392). By contrast when John Verney's niece Mary became a pupil at 'Mrs. Priest's' (Verney, 220) in 1683, aged eight, the family was pleased with the progress that she made there. She appeared in balls at the school and in 'Venus and Adonis' (of which her affectionate uncle preserved the libretto), and, as an extra, learned to japan boxes. When Priest staged 'Dido and Aeneas' his friend the playwright Thomas Durfey supplied the epilogue, which was 'Spoken by the Lady Dorothy Burk' (Durfey, 'New Poems', 81). Durfey's successful comedy 'Love for Money, or, The Boarding School', performed in January 1691, was set in a Chelsea girls' school, with a sub-plot involving two hoydenish pupils who elope with the dancing-master and the singing-master. Some members of the audience hissed, 'especially the Dancing-Masters, and other Friends to the Boarding-Schools, who supposed themselves, and their Livelihood expos'd' (Gildon, 51). In his preface to the play Durfey denied that he had portrayed any particular school and was particularly indignant at rumours that he had accepted the Priests' hospitality the previous summer and then 'writ this Play ungratefully to expose 'em' (Durfey, 'Love for Money', preface). 
Rate books show that the Priests' school had closed by January 1712, and Chelsea parish registers record the burials, at St Luke's, of Mrs Frank Priest on 20 April 1733 and of Mr Josias Priest on 3 January 1735. 


@@@@@


doc= 61905


Essex, John (d. 1744), dancing-master, is of obscure origins, as the place and date of his birth, and his parentage, are unknown. Nothing is known of his early life or his education but by 1702 he was established as a professional dancer at the Drury Lane Theatre, where his repertoire included serious and comic dances. His stage career ended abruptly in 1703, when he made a complaint against the theatre's manager, Christopher Rich, which apparently resulted in his discharge from the company. He did not try to return to the stage, and by 1707 he had moved to Rood Lane (off Fenchurch Street) in the parish of St Dionis Backchurch in the City of London, where he seems to have taught music as well as dancing. Essex had married by 1703, for he and his wife, Catherine (died 1721), were the parents of a son baptized that year at St Paul's, Covent Garden. Between 1707 and 1715 the registers of St Dionis Backchurch record that John and Catherine Essex had five more children, three of whom died soon after they were baptized. 
By 1706 Essex was closely associated with a group of London dancing-masters working to raise the status and reform the practice of dancing, led by Mr Isaac, Thomas Caverley, and John Weaver. Essex subscribed to 'Orchesography' (1706), John Weaver's translation of 'Choregraphie' (1700), a treatise on dance notation by Raoul Auger Feuillet, and 'A Collection of Ball-Dances' (1706), Weaver's notations of six dances by Mr Isaac. Essex himself produced a translation of the introduction to Feuillet's 'Recueil de contredances' (1706), a treatise on the notation of country dances, entitled 'For the Further Improvement of Dancing' (1710) and containing several notated country dances. A new edition of the work appeared about 1715, dedicated to the princess of Wales, with the notation for a ball dance by Essex entitled 'The Princess's Passpied'. Essex wrote music as well as choreographing dances, for 'A Collection of Minuets, Rigadoons & French Dances' (1721) included some of his compositions. 
Essex's wife was buried on 9 March 1721 but he himself continued to live in Rood Lane, which was given as his address in 1722, when his second book, 'The Young Ladies Conduct, or, Rules for Education' appeared. This treatise on female education was conventional, except for its emphasis on the usefulness of dancing. It discussed qualities desirable in women, such as chastity and industry, as well as those to be avoided or corrected, such as pride and vanity; it also identified music, drawing, embroidery, and housewifery as among the proper employments for young ladies. Essex seems to have drawn many of his precepts from 'The Adventures of Telemachus', a translation of Fenelon's 'Telemaque'. 
Essex maintained his links with other leading dancing-masters, subscribing to Weaver's 'Anatomical and Mechanical Lectures upon Dancing' (1721) and Anthony L'Abbe's 'A New Collection of Dances' ('c'.1725), which consisted of theatre dances recorded in notation. His most important book appeared in 1728 -- 'The Dancing-Master, or, The Art of Dancing Explained', his translation of Pierre Rameau's 'Le maitre a danser' (1725), which for the first time described how to perform many of the steps notated in Feuillet's 'Choregraphie'. Essex added his own preface to the work, in which he provided thumbnail sketches of the dancing-masters Groscourt (to whom the translation was dedicated), Isaac, L'Abbe, Caverley, and the dancer John Shaw, among others; he reserved special praise for John Weaver and the dancer-actress Hester Booth. A second edition of 'The Dancing-Master' was published in 1731 and the work was reissued about 1733 with new illustrations by George Bickham the younger. Another edition appeared in 1744, the year that John Essex died; he was buried, alongside his wife, in St Dionis Backchurch on 6 February. His will included a bequest of $20 for John Weaver and divided the residue of his estate between two surviving children, William and Elizabeth. William Essex, whose date and place of birth are unknown, was also a dancing-master and enjoyed a successful career as a dancer at Drury Lane and other theatres between 1724 and 1746. John Essex has been identified as the dancing-master portrayed in the second painting in Hogarth's series 'The Rake's Progress' but there is little evidence to support this. 


@@@@@


doc= 61906


Tomlinson, Kenelm (b. c.1693, d. in or after 1754?), dancing-master and choreographer, about whose birth and parentage nothing is known, was apprenticed to the respected London dancing-master Thomas Caverley from 1707 until 1714. He also studied under Rene Cherrier of Drury Lane Theatre. Tomlinson's manuscript workbook (now in the National Library of New Zealand) records the treatises and dance repertoire that he studied as an apprentice and also contains six theatrical dances that he created for Lincoln's Inn Fields theatre in 1716 and 1721. Though there is no evidence that Tomlinson himself ever appeared on stage his writings refer to two of his students -- John Topham and Miss Francis -- who both went on to distinguished stage careers. He also wrote theatrical dances for Diane Schoolding (later Mrs Anthony Moreau), Marie Salle, and her brother ('The Submission', 1716), and 'a New Ball Dance', which was performed on stage by M. Villeneuve and Mme Delagarde in 1743. 
Tomlinson is best remembered for his ballroom 'danses a deux' and for his treatise 'The Art of Dancing', which is now the major primary source for the study of early eighteenth-century English dance in the 'belle danse' style. Six of his annual ball-dances were reissued as a set in 1720, dedicated to the 'Ladies, who have done Honour to this Art... by making it a Branch of Education', and for all their beauty and sophistication these dances are clearly pedagogic in intent. His treatise 'The Art of Dancing', begun in 1724, was published in 1735; its thirty-seven illustrative plates of dancers, step notation, and the entire ballroom minuet were the work of seven engravers, including Gerard Van der Gucht, George Vertue, Henry Fletcher, and George Bickham, to designs drawn by Tomlinson himself. The plates alone were considered 'proper Furniture for a Room or Closet... if put in Frames' and sold at 2 guineas a set, plus another half guinea for the text ('Art of Dancing', bk 1, introduction to plates). Tomlinson's treatise is important as the most detailed description of the dance forms and steps current in England by the 1730s, as one of very few eighteenth-century manuals to describe theatrical as well as social dance, and for giving a unique insight into the circles in which Tomlinson was moving; this it achieved by naming in its subscription list 179 patrons, pupils, and professional colleagues, including 33 peers, 107 members of the gentry, and 22 of the leading dancers of the day. The work went to a second edition in 1744, which, like the first edition, was dedicated to Catherine Belasyse, Viscountess Fauconberg. 
Tomlinson married Mary Alston of Aldgate at St Benet Paul's Wharf on 25 July 1717. No record of their having any children has been found but the marriage on 22 February 1782 of 'Kellom Tomlinson, Bachelor, and Mary Bestland, widow' at Portsmouth (parish register, St Mary Portsea) may indicate at least one descendant. According to Musgrave's 'Obituary' Tomlinson may have died in or soon after 1754 but no burial or probate records have been found. 


@@@@@


doc= 61907


Wynne, William (bap. 1692, d. 1765), lawyer and author, was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 7 July 1692, the youngest of the five children, and heir, of Owen Wynne (1651-1700) and his wife, Dorothy (1659-1724), daughter of Francis Luttrell and sister of the political chronicler Narcissus Luttrell. His father was warden of the Royal Mint during the reign of James II, and under-secretary of state to Charles II and James II. Wynne matriculated at Jesus College, Oxford, on 23 January 1709, graduated BA on 14 October 1712 and MA on 24 May 1723. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 12 December 1712, called to the bar on 23 May 1718, and created serjeant-at-law in 1736. 
Wynne benefited greatly in his legal career from his family's ecclesiastical connections. On his father's death the bishop of Bangor promised to assist his children; and he was also a relative of John Wynne, bishop of St Asaph. In 1723, only five years after being called to the bar, he was already senior enough to be retained, along with Sir Constantine Phipps, in the trial of Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester, for high treason. Wynne skilfully exposed the weakness of the evidence produced for the prosecution in that case. 
On 30 September 1728 Wynne married Grace (1700-1779), the daughter of William Bridges, a serjeant-at-law. The couple had six sons and two daughters. Wynne's father-in-law was close to successive bishops of Hereford, and in subsequent years Wynne was 'the trusted adviser of some of the leaders of the Church while he continued to be employed generally in matters of an ecclesiastical nature' (Lemmings, 116). He appeared for the Bathurst family in a case about tithes in 1735-6 and in the 1740s he gave advice to Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, concerning the marriage articles of the latter's daughter. 
In 1746 Wynne appeared with a Mr Clayton for the defence in the trial for high treason of Francis Towneley, who had commanded the Manchester regiment in the Jacobite rising of 1745. Towneley was convicted and executed, the court having rejected Wynne's argument that since Towneley held a commission from Louis XV he owed no allegiance to George II. Wynne's literary gifts were displayed in his 'Observations Touching the Dignity and Antiquity of the Degree of Serjeant at Law' (1756). This book was written to defend the privileges of the serjeants when their exclusive rights of audience before the court of common pleas were threatened. He also wrote 'The Life of Sir Leoline Jenkins' (1724) for which he drew upon family papers. 
Wynne died on 16 May 1765 and was buried in the north cloister of Westminster Abbey on 23 May 1765. His wife survived him. Of his sons, Edward Wynne (bap. 1734, d. 1784), was a barrister and author, and Luttrell (1738-1814), was a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 61910


Massey, Raymond (1896-1983), actor and director, was born on 30 August 1896 in Toronto, Canada, the son of Chester Massey (died 1926) and his wife, Anna Vincent Dobbins (1859-1903). His paternal ancestors had emigrated to America in 1630 and had become one of the most prominent families in Canada: for three years his father was president of Massey-Ferguson, the manufacturers of agricultural implements. His mother, who died during a family visit to Europe in 1903, was American and a graduate of Smith College, and in 1952 his elder brother (Charles) Vincent Massey became the first governor-general of Canada to have been born in that country. The family had been deeply religious and suspicious of, if not actively hostile to, the theatre, but Massey began to develop an interest in theatre-going while still at school in Ontario. 
The outbreak of the First World War found Massey touring France with his brother Vincent. He returned to Canada, enrolled at the University of Toronto, and worked briefly in the family firm before enlisting for military service. Wounded in France, he eventually joined a Canadian expeditionary force to Siberia, where the intention was to support the White Russians against the Bolsheviks. During a period of enforced idleness in Vladivostok he helped to organize a 'minstrel show', which stimulated his interest in stage performance. 
In 1919 Massey was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, where he was distinguished more for his rowing than for his academic prowess. He belonged to a play-reading circle rather than the University Dramatic Society, but after two years he left Oxford without a degree, subsequently admitting that he had frittered away his time. During a holiday in Cornwall he met Margery Fremantle, an art student who in 1920 became his first wife. They were divorced in 1929: he later wrote that 'we both displayed an astonishing lack of judgement, and we were soon aware of it' (Massey, 'A Hundred Different Lives', 14). 
By now convinced that his future career lay in the theatre, Massey found employment at the newly established Everyman Theatre in Hampstead where he remained for several productions before experiencing his first West End success with a small part in the comedy 'At Mrs Beam's' (1923) by C. K. Munro. He was cast in two small roles in George Bernard Shaw's 'Saint Joan' in 1925, and began to appear in, stage manage, and, eventually, direct numerous Sunday night performances, at that time the principal means of trying out new plays. 
In collaboration with Allen Wade and George Carr, Massey entered into the management of the Everyman, directing and appearing in new plays and classic revivals, until financial difficulties following the general strike in 1926 put a stop to the enterprise. By 1926 his position as an actor in the West End was well established, and he used his wider managerial experience in helping to organize the actors' union Equity. He was equally at home playing English and American parts, and scored a success playing the Khan Aghaba in 'The Transit of Venus' (1927). 1929, the year of his divorce, saw his second marriage, to the actress Gladys Allen (1907-1993), whose stage name was Adrianne Allen. His first appearance in New York followed in 1931, as Hamlet, in a spectacular production by Norman Bel Geddes: from then onwards he was to appear regularly in the United States and Canada. 
In 1930 Raymond Massey began his film career, with a brief stint in Hollywood: during his lifetime he appeared in more than seventy films, under directors including James Whale and Alexander Korda, and with actors including John Wayne and William Powell, with whom he formed a close friendship. His career in the theatre continued with the title role in the stage adaptation of Edith Wharton's 'Ethan Frome' at the National Theatre, New York, which he regarded as 'just about the best dramatization of a novel ever to be seen in the theatre' (Massey, 'A Hundred Different Lives', 197). He was best remembered by the American public, however, for his performance as Lincoln in Robert Sherwood's 'Abe Lincoln in Illinois', which began its lengthy run in October 1938 and was subsequently made into a film; the author had asked him to play Lincoln after seeing his performance as Hamlet, impressed both by his abilities as an actor and by the tall, gaunt appearance which fitted him physically for the role. 
Massey was divorced (amicably) from his second wife in 1939, and in that year married Dorothy Ludington Whitney, a lawyer whom he described as 'a Connecticut woman of the same Puritan ancestry as myself' (Massey, 'A Hundred Different Lives', 248). His career was now based in the United States, where his appearances ranged from 'acting one heavy after another' (ibid., 272) in films under contract to the Warner brothers to playing Sir Colenso Ridgeon in the New York production in 1942 of 'The Doctor's Dilemma' by George Bernard Shaw. In the same year he enlisted in the Canadian army, but, finding himself unable to do anything worthwhile as a 'desk warrior' (ibid., 290), he soon returned to the stage. In 1944 he played the stage manager in Thornton Wilder's 'Our Town' to United States troops on service in Europe, and in the same year he became a naturalized citizen of the United States. 
In the post-war theatre, Massey's reputation as a serious and intelligent actor ensured that he was rarely out of work. Although Conservative politically and traditional in his approach to the craft of acting (he distrusted the Stanislavsky-based 'method') he was associated with many of the attempts to enlarge the horizons of the American stage. In 1952 the only play of which he was the author, 'The Hanging Judge', based on a novel by Bruce Hamilton, had a successful run at the New Theatre, London; in America in the same year, Charles Laughton directed him in a dramatized reading of Stephen Benet's poem 'John Brown's Body', whose simple but powerful format proved highly popular. Massey's last Broadway appearance took place in 1958, when he played Mr Zuss in Archibald McLeish's poetic drama 'JB'. 
In 1959 Massey moved from his Connecticut home to Beverly Hills in Los Angeles in order to be closer to the opportunities offered by the expanding television industry, and in 1960 he was invited to play Dr Gillespie in 'Dr Kildare'. Over the next five years he was to become familiar to a vast public in this popular series. Although arthritis was now making it more difficult for him to appear on the stage, in 1970, at the age of seventy-five, he returned to London's West End in Robert Anderson's 'I Never Sang for my Father'. In his final stage appearance, in 1975, he played the 93-year-old Jonathan Coffin in Tennessee Williams's 'The Night of the Iguana'. 
Massey wrote two volumes of autobiography, 'When I was Young' (1977) and 'A Hundred Different Lives' (1979), and was awarded seven honorary degrees from universities in Canada and the United States. Two of his children, Anna Massey and Daniel Massey, followed him into the theatre. Raymond Massey died in Los Angeles in July 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 61912


Scanlan, James Donald (1899-1976), Roman Catholic archbishop of Glasgow, was born on 24 January 1899 at 511 Duke Street, Glasgow, the fifth of the seven children of Joseph Scanlan (1861-1950), medical practitioner, and his wife, Sarah Veronica Walls (1861-1922). Scanlan was born into a Roman Catholic family and, after schooling in the city at St Mungo's Academy and St Aloysius' College, he matriculated in 1915 in the faculty of medicine of Glasgow University. It was, however, wartime, so in November 1916 he entered Sandhurst and the following September was commissioned second lieutenant in the Highland light infantry. After service in Egypt from May 1918 to January 1919 he resigned his commission in July. In 1920 he matriculated at Glasgow once again, this time in law, and graduated BL in 1923. Having studied at St Edmund's College, the seminary at Ware, Hertfordshire, from 1924, he was ordained priest for Westminster diocese on 29 June 1929. That autumn he entered the canon law faculty of the Institut Catholique, Paris, graduating licentiate in 1930, then went on to the Apollinare in Rome and graduated doctor in 1932. 
After returning to London, Scanlan became assistant priest at St James's, Spanish Place. However, his work in the diocesan marriage tribunal took up increasingly more of his time, until at last in 1938 he became chaplain to a convent in Hammersmith (where during the war he and the nuns were twice bombed out). In 1937 he was appointed diocesan vice-chancellor and was created a domestic prelate (colloquially a monsignor). He succeeded as chancellor in 1944. In 1945 he was made vicar delegate for the United States forces in Britain, with merely nominal duties. 
The year 1946 saw Scanlan's return to Scotland. Appointed coadjutor bishop of Dunkeld (with the titular see of Cyme), he received episcopal ordination at Dundee on 20 June 1946. He succeeded as bishop of Dunkeld on 31 May 1949, was translated to Motherwell diocese on 23 May 1955 and finally, on 29 January 1964, was appointed archbishop of Glasgow, a position he held until he resigned on 23 April 1974. His health thereafter declined rapidly. He returned to London but died only three weeks after his arrival there, on 25 March 1976. His body was brought to Glasgow and lay in the cathedral until its interment in Dalbeth cemetery; in December 1979 it was reinterred in the cathedral crypt. 
Although as bishop in Motherwell he oversaw much progress and expansion, it is for his ten years in Glasgow that Scanlan is most remembered. J. D., as he was often referred to, retained great affection for his native city and used to reminisce about the Great Exhibition of 1912, during his boyhood. His recreation as archbishop was to walk round the city and he greatly appreciated the honorary DD he received in 1967 from Glasgow University. His was a striking personality, with apparently opposing traits. His military and legal training showed itself in various ways: a meticulous use of language in all his pronouncements, a punctilious insistence on rules in business dealings with his clergy, a refusal to talk shop outside office hours. In his private life and spiritual duties he was most orderly. Yet he combined this with a liking for ceremonial and full formal dress. A raconteur, with archaic turns of speech, he yet gained the respect and liking of his priests, whose backgrounds and careers were so different from his own. 
In Motherwell and Glasgow he established good relations with civic and other leaders. All doors were opened to him. At Westminster his work had made him widely known; at the Second Vatican Council in the 1960s he took the opportunity to meet eminent churchmen from all over the world. It was this trait that brought about the achievement he is most remembered for. In January 1971 sixty-six Glasgow Rangers supporters were crushed to death at a football match against their local rivals, Celtic. The archbishop at once arranged a requiem mass in his cathedral, to which he invited the city leaders and both clubs, despite the religious bigotry which poisoned their relations, and both accepted. It was a truly historic occasion. 
Physically, though not tall he was broad and strong. Indeed, shortly after his promotion to Glasgow, he vaulted on to the stage at a public meeting, letting everyone see that at sixty-five he was not too old for the job! Academically gifted though he was, he published little. He translated two books from French: one was 'Pastors and People' by Etienne Magnin (1930), on canon law, and the other was 'Judaism' by Auguste Vincent (1934). In the Stair Society's 'An Introduction to Scottish Legal History' (1958) he provided an article on medieval marriage law. 


@@@@@


doc= 61914


Wood, John (1788-1860), naval architect and shipbuilder, was born at Port Glasgow, Renfrewshire, on 10 October 1788, one of at least two sons of John Wood (died 1811), a Port Glasgow shipbuilder. He followed his father into the business and his training included a spell of two years at the shipyard of John Brockbank (died 1822) at Lancaster between 1806 and 1808. Lancaster was then in its brief heyday as a shipbuilding centre and Brockbank was an eminent builder from whom Wood doubtless learned much about naval architecture. 
Wood returned to Port Glasgow and, on his father's death in 1811, took control of the yard with his brother Charles (1790-1847). Their first contract, accepted before their father died, was for the hull of Henry Bell's pioneering steamship, the 'Comet'. Thereafter they built further steamships of increasing size, including a towing steamboat, the 'Tug' (1817), which gave its name to that class of vessel, and the 'Talbot' (1818), which was the first steamer to ply between Dublin and Holyhead. In 1818 Wood experimented with screw propulsion, albeit hand-powered and without any immediate practical application. In 1822 the Woods built the 'James Watt' (140 ft), which inaugurated a steamer service between Leith and London, a measure of how far steamers had come in the space of ten years. 
The brothers diverged in their interests, with Charles travelling to Quebec where he experimented with two raft-ships, the 'Columbus' and the 'Baron Renfrew'. Designed in 1824 to bring timber across the Atlantic, they were both wrecked. He later returned to the Clyde and built at Bowling and at Dumbarton, as well as spending some time in the Netherlands. John Wood worked with both David Napier, who built engines for many of the earlier steamers, and Robert Napier, who was a great friend and admirer. When Samuel Cunard ordered four ships for the north Atlantic service, Robert Napier contracted John Wood to design and build the 'Acadia' (1840), while Charles Wood built the 'Caledonia' to the same design. John Wood also built the 'Europa' for Cunard in 1845, but this was the last of his major contracts. He continued to build small wooden vessels, but more for recreation than business. 
Although Wood had no interest in building in iron himself, in 1839 he had become a partner in the shipyard of John Reid & Co. (Reid was married to Wood's niece). It was on Wood's initiative that the yard undertook the building in iron of a floating church, later moored in Loch Sunart, which the Free Church of Scotland needed for congregations denied sites by hostile landowners. Wood also helped the Free Church of Scotland by providing the plans for a schooner, the 'Breadalbane', which was used to transport ministers to remote locations. 
Awarded the silver medal of the Royal Scottish Society of Arts in 1814, Wood was likewise awarded the silver medal of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1844, for the invention of a self-registering tide-gauge. He was also an astronomer and a student of French. He was of a modest, retiring, and kindly disposition, entirely free of professional jealousy and endlessly generous with his time and knowledge to anyone who approached him. While recognizing the science that went into his construction, John Scott Russell considered him 'remarkable for the great refinement of his taste. He was a consummate artist in shipbuilding, and every line was as studied and beautiful as fine art could make it. John Wood was, in fact, a pattern shipbuilder' (Russell, 145). Wood died peacefully at his home in Port Glasgow on 22 December 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 61915


Jones, (Lewis) Brian Hopkin (1942-1969), musician, was born on 28 February 1942 at the Park Nursing Home, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, the eldest of the three children of Lewis Blount Jones, an aircraft designer, and his wife, Louisa Beatrice, 'nee' Simmonds, a piano teacher. He was a member of the original Rolling Stones line-up, playing on most of their classic 1960s recordings and furthering their teen appeal as the 'pretty boy' of the band. Jones was educated at the Dean Close junior school and Pates Grammar School in Cheltenham. He was academically bright, as well as proficient in playing the saxophone, harmonica, clarinet, guitar, and piano. Early in his musical career he played 'trad jazz' with the Cheltone Six, and rhythm and blues with the Ramrods. After leaving school he worked in a number of jobs without enthusiasm, including junior architect, bus conductor, and coal deliverer. A significant meeting was with the musician Alexis Korner, who encouraged Jones to move to London in 1962. Shortly after that Mick Jagger and Keith Richards spotted Jones playing blues slide guitar in a club, and were impressed by the young man's musical prowess. 
Jones was shy, slightly narcissistic, softly spoken, and with a strong sense of fashion that helped to define the slightly foppish elegance of the quintessential mid-1960s English rock star. Friends have described Jones as psychologically troubled even before his success in the music business, and Jagger has at times characterized Jones as too sensitive to be in the pop world. Jones was certainly sensitive to the spirit of the times, and soon acquainted himself with Jimi Hendrix, Bob Dylan, and other rock luminaries. By 1967 he was a celebrity, introducing Hendrix on stage at the Monterey pop festival, and subject to several prosecutions for drug possession. 
The Stones recorded their first record in 1963, a cover of Chuck Berry's 'Come On'. In the early years it was Jones who was very much the self-appointed musical leader of the group, contributing slide guitar parts influenced by Elmore James and blues harp-playing to give the Stones' initial recordings more authenticity. His broader musical interests did much to widen the band's basic blues-rhythm and blues axis and enable them to progress. The 1966 'Paint it Black' single featured a sitar line from Jones, who was ever conscious of the need for the Stones to keep up with the experiments of their arch-rivals, the Beatles. He added marimba to 'Under my Thumb' and dulcimer to 'Lady Jane'. Such multi-instrumental touches gave significant colour to the sequence of brilliant singles the Stones released between 1965 and 1968, and the albums 'Between the Buttons' (1967), 'Their Satanic Majesties Request' (1968), and 'Beggar's Banquet' (1969). Guitars associated with Jones include the Vox mark VI teardrop-shape and the Gibson Firebird. 
Along with George Harrison and Jimmy Page, Jones deserves credit for introducing into Western popular music the first glimmerings of sensitivity to other musical traditions. He was fascinated by Moroccan music, just as Harrison drew on Indian music, in an era when 'world music' had not been invented. He recorded 'Pipes of Pan at Joujouka' and a film score for Volker Schlondorff's 'A Degree of Murder'. Unfortunately personal problems, an increasing drug intake, and unreliability led to tensions between Jones and the other members of the group, who distanced themselves from him. Matters were not improved when Anita Pallenberg, the German actress with whom Jones had been involved in a tempestuous relationship since 1965, left him for Keith Richards in May 1968. He was given the sack early in 1969. Supposedly his drug convictions were preventing the band from touring America, and he was replaced in the Stones by the guitarist Mick Taylor. 
Jones died at his home, Cotchford Farm, Hartfield, Sussex, on 3 July 1969, apparently by drowning in his swimming pool 'whilst under the influence of alcohol and drugs' (d. cert.): the coroner's verdict was misadventure. 
Jones's premature death was the first of a series (Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, Jim Morrison) which silenced a number of 1960s rock icons between 1969 and 1971. Jagger read an extract from Shelley's 'Adonais' at a free concert at Hyde Park on 5 July, which turned into a requiem for Jones, who was buried at Cheltenham on 11 July. Although portrayed by the establishment of the day as an act of self-destruction typical of rock-star excess, Jones's drowning was always regarded by many as suspicious. New leads in the case were followed up in the 1990s after an apparent deathbed confession from a builder who was working on Jones's home. The mystery surrounding Jones's death is dealt with in detail in Terry Rawlings's 'Who Killed Christopher Robin?' (1994) and Laura Jackson's 'Golden Stone' (1992). 


@@@@@


doc= 61916


Robert Ormston Backhouse (1854-1940) married Sarah Elizabeth Dodgson (1857-1921) in 1884, and two years later moved to Sutton Court, Sutton St Nicholas, Herefordshire. Furthering the Backhouse interest in narcissi, Sarah Elizabeth achieved national fame for her efforts and was awarded the Barr cup in 1916 for her hybridizing work. Together Sarah and Robert had begun to search for a pink-cupped daffodil, but it was not until 1923 (two years after his wife's death) that Robert astounded the horticultural world with the first pink-cupped, white-perianthed variety, which he named 'Mrs R. O. Backhouse'. He died at Sutton Court on 10 April 1940. 
Robert and Sarah Backhouse's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 61917


William Ormston Backhouse (1885-1962), was born on 20 February 1885 and educated at Bradfield College and at Trinity Hall, Cambridge. He worked for five years at the Cambridge Plant Breeding Station and the John Innes Institution, but left Britain to take up a post as an agricultural geneticist with the Argentine government. He established a number of wheat-breeding stations in Argentina, then moved to Patagonia, where on his estates he reared pigs, grew apples and other fruits, and started intensive honey production. He obtained narcissi from his parents, and in South America continued the family tradition set by his grandfather. He specialized in red-trumpeted daffodils, and on his return to England and Sutton Court in 1945 continued to develop these varieties. It was at Sutton Court that William Ormston Backhouse died on 7 August 1962. 
James [ii] Backhouse, founder (together with his father and brother) of the Backhouse Bank, married Mary Dearman of Thorne, Yorkshire. Their sons were Nathan (1788-1805), Thomas (1792-1845), and 


@@@@@


doc= 61918


James [iv] Backhouse (1825-1890), and with his brother Thomas, the latter being responsible for the management and development of the nursery in James [iii]'s absence. James [iv] was born on 22 October 1825 in York. He inherited his father's love of botany, and from 1843 the two men explored upper Teesdale and other mountainous areas of Britain and Europe in search of alpine plants. Father and son jointly directed the growth of the York nursery from 1845 on the death of Thomas Backhouse, supervising its move to a 100 acre site at Holgate, York, in 1853. On 7 June 1855 James [iv] married Mary Robson of Dalton. He wrote a 'Monograph of the British Hieracia' (1856) and in the pages of 'The Phytologist' recorded his botanical discoveries in the upland areas of Teesdale and elsewhere in Britain. His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 61919


James [v] Backhouse (1861-1945), was born on 14 April 1861 in York. 
In addition, James [iv] was a keen archaeologist and geologist; he explored the caves of Teesdale in search of archaeological material and with his son James [v] formed an excellent personal museum. The Teesdale cave was excavated by the two men between 1878 and 1888; these explorations are described in James [v]'s 'Upper Teesdale Past and Present' (1896). James [v] had close connections with the Yorkshire Museum, York, being an active member of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society and an honorary curator of zoology; the museum holds his collection of cave material and 4000 bird skins. However, he is best known as an ornithologist and as the author of the 'Handbook of European Birds' (1890). On 15 May 1890 he married Mabel Grace Robson of Saffron Walden. The following year he formed a new company, Backhouse Nurseries (York) Ltd, which faced considerable competition from other plantsmen. Most of the land was sold in 1921 and the nursery finally ceased trading in 1955, ten years after James [v] died in 1945. 

Edward Backhouse (1808-1879), born in Darlington on 8 May 1808, was a son of Edward Backhouse (1781-1860), Jonathan Backhouse's son. A philanthropist, artist, pioneer photographer, and historian, he is best known for his 'Early Church History' (with C. Taylor, 1884) and other religious works. A younger brother was Thomas James Backhouse (1810-1857), who married Margaret Richardson (1818-1854). Their son 


@@@@@


doc= 61920


Thomas William Backhouse (1842-1920) was born on 14 August 1842. He lived at West Hendon House, Sunderland, and from the observatory he built there began the work which led to his being recognized as an outstanding meteorologist and astronomer. He began in 1858 to compile his 'Astronomical Journal', which eventually extended to thirty-six volumes, and published a series of fourteen maps of stars, accompanied by 'A Catalogue of 9842 Stars Visible to the Naked Eye' (1911); the star maps were completed after his death. Thomas Backhouse's accurate meteorological observations were uninterrupted from 1857 until 1919; his contribution to the science was recognized by the Royal Meteorological Society, which appointed him as vice-president in 1918 and 1919. He died on 13 March 1920. 
For almost 200 years members of the Backhouse family were actively involved in English horticulture, as tree planters, nurserymen, breeders, or botanists. Their name lives on in narcissi such as 'Mrs R. O. Backhouse' and 'Backhouse's Giant'. The remains of their York nursery (auctioned in 1955) later became a park run by York city council. The marriage between Jonathan Backhouse (1779-1842) and Hannah Chapman (coheir of Joseph Gurney, a private banker in Norwich) began a process which ended in 1896 with the Backhouse Bank's becoming a part of Barclay & Co. of Lombard Street (later to become Barclays, one of the 'big five' clearing banks). 


@@@@@


doc= 61921


Napier, David (1790-1869), shipbuilder and engineer, was born at Dumbarton on 29 October 1790, the son of John Napier (died July 1813), an engineer in Dumbarton, and his second wife, Ann McAlister. He was a cousin of Robert Napier (1791-1876), the celebrated shipbuilder, whose younger brother was David Napier (1799-1850), the fifth son of James Napier, John's partner in the Dumbarton engineering business, and Jean Ewing, his wife. A third David Napier (1788-1873), also a cousin, was the son of Robert Napier, blacksmith to the duke of Argyll at Inveraray. All three Davids, who are often confused and sometimes taken for the same person, were trained in the Dumbarton business, which was one of the largest engineering works on the Clyde at the time, and engaged throughout their early years in boring cannon cast by the Clyde Iron Works for the war with revolutionary France. While they remained in the west of Scotland all three continued to work in one of the family's various engineering and iron-working enterprises. 
The least successful was the youngest of the three. He became a partner in Napier Bros., which took over the Camlachie works from Robert in the 1830s, and in 1837 he purchased the Parkhead forge from the Reoch brothers for $2800. He almost certainly made this investment to secure a steady supply of forgings to the family's engineering businesses. He appointed William Rigby, the future son-in-law of the shipbuilder Robert Napier, as works manager. By 1847 his enterprises were in difficulties and he became bankrupt, 'being unable by reason of misfortune of business to meet any of my engagements' (Titles of Parkhead Forge, Glasgow, Biggart Bailie, and Gifford, solicitors). He married Helen, sister of the oldest David Napier, and died at Glasgow in 1850. 
The eldest cousin David Napier, born in 1788, a gifted and original mechanical engineer, left Glasgow for London about 1810. After working briefly for Henry Maudslay he became in 1815 foreman of an engineering shop in Nevil's Court, Fetter Lane, where he specialized in printing machinery. He devoted his spare time to designing new instruments. His first inventions were a folding pocket compass and the Universal Perspective Graph for copying maps and plans. Neither was successful. In 1818 he went into partnership with Francis Baisler, a London stationer, and opened a machine shop in Lloyd's Court, St Giles, repairing and later building printing machines, winning orders from the 'Morning Chronicle' and a number of provincial newspapers. He developed a variety of improvements, most of which were over-elaborate and difficult to operate. Baisler left the partnership in 1822 and Napier continued in business on his own account. In 1825 T. C. Hansard, the parliamentary printer, commissioned him to make a cylindrical press of novel design named the 'Nay-peer'. Sales were slow and did not improve even when steam drive was added in 1832. When Robert Napier visited London in 1827 to promote his marine engines he stayed with David. In 1831 David joined with two of Robert's sons, James and William, in improving a steam carriage designed by David Napier (1790-1869) which had been tested near Dunoon. This second experiment also failed. 
The eldest David Napier married Isabella Murdoch in 1820. The couple had seven children, the second of whom was James Murdoch Napier (father of Montague Stanley Napier), who joined the business in 1834. Two years later larger works were built in York Road, Lambeth, equipped with excellent machine tools. Father and son developed a bullet stamping machine in 1838 (patented in 1840), which was quickly ordered by Woolwich arsenal and later foreign governments. William Cotton, the deputy governor of the Bank of England, invented a machine for weighing and sorting gold coins in 1843 and invited Napier to manufacture them. Thereafter Napier developed a range of other equipment for minting and sorting coins. During the 1840s he also constructed several large hydraulic presses and lifts for Isambard Kingdom Brunel's Great Western Railway. His last invention, in 1848 in collaboration with his cousin Robert, was a registering compass to trace the course and distance covered; these were installed in vessels for the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company and P. & O. as well as those built at his cousin's Govan yard. James Murdoch Napier became a partner in 1847, when the firm became known as David Napier & Son. David moved to Surbiton in 1866; he died at 68 York Road, Lambeth, London, on 17 June 1873. 
The David Napier who is the subject of this article was one of the most inventive of the pioneering Clyde engineers. After working in his father's engine shop, which moved to Glasgow in 1802, he was apprenticed to Duncan McArthur at his Greenhead foundry at Camlachie near Glasgow and in the early 1810s became his partner. At Greenhead he familiarized himself with building land engines and in 1812 made the boiler and produced the castings for the engines for the first steamboat, the 'Comet'. Recognizing the potential of steam navigation, he decided to start his own engine works at Camlachie in partnership with his father, who died in July 1813 before it opened. In 1814 he married Marion Smith; they had fifteen children. While construction of his works was in progress, he continued to work at Greenhead designing the engines for the 'Britannia' and 'Dumbarton Castle' in 1815. Backed by his family's reputation for engineering on the Clyde, his new works (completed early in 1815) were an immediate success. His first marine engine, for the 'Marion', was delivered in 1816 and the following year he began operating her on his own account on Loch Lomond. In 1818 he was contemplating starting his own fleet of ocean-going steamers. After conducting the first experiments using a model and observations of a steamer in heavy seas to achieve an optimum hull design, he built the 'Rob Roy' to provide services between Greenock and Liverpool, and Holyhead and Howth. Napier was accompanied on her maiden voyage by Charles McIntosh, the inventor of rubberized waterproof clothing, who, when they encountered a storm in the Irish Sea, was convinced they would be drowned. McIntosh was proved wrong, and Napier went on to establish a regular service between Holyhead and Howth with three ships each more powerful than the last. In 1820 he began a parallel service to his Loch Lomond steamers down Loch Eck with a steam carriage connection to the Holy Loch, where he built a hotel and holiday villas. Although technically viable, the steam carriage was too heavy and sank into the road. 
Napier leased his Camlachie works to his cousin Robert in 1821 and built a new works at Lancefield, conveniently situated on the banks of the Clyde with its own wet dock. His managers were David Tod and John Macgregor, who later pioneered iron shipbuilding on the Clyde. At Lancefield, Napier introduced a raft of innovations in the design of both marine engines and propelling machinery, including improved surface condensers, feathering paddles, and twin screws. In 1826 he engined the 'United Kingdom', built for the service between Leith and London, in which he was also an investor, and the following year commissioned the 'Aglaia', the first iron steamship to be built on the Clyde for his Loch Eck service. Writing in 1841 John Scott Russell commented: 'We believe that from the year 1818 until about 1830 David Napier effected more for the improvement of steam navigation than any other man.... It is to Mr David Napier that Great Britain owes the establishment of deep-sea communication by steam vessels and of Post Office Steam Packets' (Napier, 31). However, his reputation was dealt a cruel blow on 28 July 1835 when the boiler of his steamer 'Earl Grey' exploded at the quayside at Greenock, killing six people and injuring several more. 
Deeply distressed by the incident Napier in 1836 decided to leave Glasgow and join his elder cousin David in London, both to exploit the potential of investing in shipping in the Thames and the south coast and to begin iron shipbuilding. He leased his Lancefield works to his cousin Robert and at the end of 1837 he purchased an open site on the Isle of Dogs, alongside William Fairbairn's yard. This new enterprise was managed by his sons John and Francis and later a third son, Robert Dehane, leaving their father time to concentrate on innovative designs and to investigate the market. Their first experimental iron steamer, the 'Eclipse', was launched in 1839 for service between Blackwall and Margate. The firm constructed a succession of vessels, some incorporating novel features, notably a rotary engine, developed by David Napier. The yard closed in 1852 as it was no longer possible to compete on price with the Clyde. After spending some time in Australia the three brothers returned to Glasgow to establish the engineering firm of Napier Bros. Their father remained in London, continuing his experiments until his death at home, 8 Upper Phillimore Gardens, Kensington, on 23 November 1869. 
That three cousins of the same name should have made such a contribution to engineering in the first half of the nineteenth century is testimony to the Napier family's long tradition of excellent craftsmanship in metal in the west of Scotland. There were many other families with trade or craft pedigrees as long, but none with so many distinguished members as the Napiers. 


@@@@@


doc= 61922


Napier, David (1790-1869), shipbuilder and engineer, was born at Dumbarton on 29 October 1790, the son of John Napier (died July 1813), an engineer in Dumbarton, and his second wife, Ann McAlister. He was a cousin of Robert Napier (1791-1876), the celebrated shipbuilder, whose younger brother was David Napier (1799-1850), the fifth son of James Napier, John's partner in the Dumbarton engineering business, and Jean Ewing, his wife. A third David Napier (1788-1873), also a cousin, was the son of Robert Napier, blacksmith to the duke of Argyll at Inveraray. All three Davids, who are often confused and sometimes taken for the same person, were trained in the Dumbarton business, which was one of the largest engineering works on the Clyde at the time, and engaged throughout their early years in boring cannon cast by the Clyde Iron Works for the war with revolutionary France. While they remained in the west of Scotland all three continued to work in one of the family's various engineering and iron-working enterprises. 
The least successful was the youngest of the three. He became a partner in Napier Bros., which took over the Camlachie works from Robert in the 1830s, and in 1837 he purchased the Parkhead forge from the Reoch brothers for $2800. He almost certainly made this investment to secure a steady supply of forgings to the family's engineering businesses. He appointed William Rigby, the future son-in-law of the shipbuilder Robert Napier, as works manager. By 1847 his enterprises were in difficulties and he became bankrupt, 'being unable by reason of misfortune of business to meet any of my engagements' (Titles of Parkhead Forge, Glasgow, Biggart Bailie, and Gifford, solicitors). He married Helen, sister of the oldest David Napier, and died at Glasgow in 1850. 
The eldest cousin David Napier, born in 1788, a gifted and original mechanical engineer, left Glasgow for London about 1810. After working briefly for Henry Maudslay he became in 1815 foreman of an engineering shop in Nevil's Court, Fetter Lane, where he specialized in printing machinery. He devoted his spare time to designing new instruments. His first inventions were a folding pocket compass and the Universal Perspective Graph for copying maps and plans. Neither was successful. In 1818 he went into partnership with Francis Baisler, a London stationer, and opened a machine shop in Lloyd's Court, St Giles, repairing and later building printing machines, winning orders from the 'Morning Chronicle' and a number of provincial newspapers. He developed a variety of improvements, most of which were over-elaborate and difficult to operate. Baisler left the partnership in 1822 and Napier continued in business on his own account. In 1825 T. C. Hansard, the parliamentary printer, commissioned him to make a cylindrical press of novel design named the 'Nay-peer'. Sales were slow and did not improve even when steam drive was added in 1832. When Robert Napier visited London in 1827 to promote his marine engines he stayed with David. In 1831 David joined with two of Robert's sons, James and William, in improving a steam carriage designed by David Napier (1790-1869) which had been tested near Dunoon. This second experiment also failed. 
The eldest David Napier married Isabella Murdoch in 1820. The couple had seven children, the second of whom was James Murdoch Napier (father of Montague Stanley Napier), who joined the business in 1834. Two years later larger works were built in York Road, Lambeth, equipped with excellent machine tools. Father and son developed a bullet stamping machine in 1838 (patented in 1840), which was quickly ordered by Woolwich arsenal and later foreign governments. William Cotton, the deputy governor of the Bank of England, invented a machine for weighing and sorting gold coins in 1843 and invited Napier to manufacture them. Thereafter Napier developed a range of other equipment for minting and sorting coins. During the 1840s he also constructed several large hydraulic presses and lifts for Isambard Kingdom Brunel's Great Western Railway. His last invention, in 1848 in collaboration with his cousin Robert, was a registering compass to trace the course and distance covered; these were installed in vessels for the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company and P. & O. as well as those built at his cousin's Govan yard. James Murdoch Napier became a partner in 1847, when the firm became known as David Napier & Son. David moved to Surbiton in 1866; he died at 68 York Road, Lambeth, London, on 17 June 1873. 
The David Napier who is the subject of this article was one of the most inventive of the pioneering Clyde engineers. After working in his father's engine shop, which moved to Glasgow in 1802, he was apprenticed to Duncan McArthur at his Greenhead foundry at Camlachie near Glasgow and in the early 1810s became his partner. At Greenhead he familiarized himself with building land engines and in 1812 made the boiler and produced the castings for the engines for the first steamboat, the 'Comet'. Recognizing the potential of steam navigation, he decided to start his own engine works at Camlachie in partnership with his father, who died in July 1813 before it opened. In 1814 he married Marion Smith; they had fifteen children. While construction of his works was in progress, he continued to work at Greenhead designing the engines for the 'Britannia' and 'Dumbarton Castle' in 1815. Backed by his family's reputation for engineering on the Clyde, his new works (completed early in 1815) were an immediate success. His first marine engine, for the 'Marion', was delivered in 1816 and the following year he began operating her on his own account on Loch Lomond. In 1818 he was contemplating starting his own fleet of ocean-going steamers. After conducting the first experiments using a model and observations of a steamer in heavy seas to achieve an optimum hull design, he built the 'Rob Roy' to provide services between Greenock and Liverpool, and Holyhead and Howth. Napier was accompanied on her maiden voyage by Charles McIntosh, the inventor of rubberized waterproof clothing, who, when they encountered a storm in the Irish Sea, was convinced they would be drowned. McIntosh was proved wrong, and Napier went on to establish a regular service between Holyhead and Howth with three ships each more powerful than the last. In 1820 he began a parallel service to his Loch Lomond steamers down Loch Eck with a steam carriage connection to the Holy Loch, where he built a hotel and holiday villas. Although technically viable, the steam carriage was too heavy and sank into the road. 
Napier leased his Camlachie works to his cousin Robert in 1821 and built a new works at Lancefield, conveniently situated on the banks of the Clyde with its own wet dock. His managers were David Tod and John Macgregor, who later pioneered iron shipbuilding on the Clyde. At Lancefield, Napier introduced a raft of innovations in the design of both marine engines and propelling machinery, including improved surface condensers, feathering paddles, and twin screws. In 1826 he engined the 'United Kingdom', built for the service between Leith and London, in which he was also an investor, and the following year commissioned the 'Aglaia', the first iron steamship to be built on the Clyde for his Loch Eck service. Writing in 1841 John Scott Russell commented: 'We believe that from the year 1818 until about 1830 David Napier effected more for the improvement of steam navigation than any other man.... It is to Mr David Napier that Great Britain owes the establishment of deep-sea communication by steam vessels and of Post Office Steam Packets' (Napier, 31). However, his reputation was dealt a cruel blow on 28 July 1835 when the boiler of his steamer 'Earl Grey' exploded at the quayside at Greenock, killing six people and injuring several more. 
Deeply distressed by the incident Napier in 1836 decided to leave Glasgow and join his elder cousin David in London, both to exploit the potential of investing in shipping in the Thames and the south coast and to begin iron shipbuilding. He leased his Lancefield works to his cousin Robert and at the end of 1837 he purchased an open site on the Isle of Dogs, alongside William Fairbairn's yard. This new enterprise was managed by his sons John and Francis and later a third son, Robert Dehane, leaving their father time to concentrate on innovative designs and to investigate the market. Their first experimental iron steamer, the 'Eclipse', was launched in 1839 for service between Blackwall and Margate. The firm constructed a succession of vessels, some incorporating novel features, notably a rotary engine, developed by David Napier. The yard closed in 1852 as it was no longer possible to compete on price with the Clyde. After spending some time in Australia the three brothers returned to Glasgow to establish the engineering firm of Napier Bros. Their father remained in London, continuing his experiments until his death at home, 8 Upper Phillimore Gardens, Kensington, on 23 November 1869. 
That three cousins of the same name should have made such a contribution to engineering in the first half of the nineteenth century is testimony to the Napier family's long tradition of excellent craftsmanship in metal in the west of Scotland. There were many other families with trade or craft pedigrees as long, but none with so many distinguished members as the Napiers. 


@@@@@


doc= 61923


Schomberg, Reginald Charles Francis (1880-1958), army officer and explorer, was born on 19 September 1880 at 4 Russell Terrace, Lower Walmer, Kent, the elder of two children, and only son, of Reginald Brodrick Schomberg (1849-1932), barrister, and his wife, Frances Sophia (1839-1922), daughter of Thomas Charles Morris, gentleman, of Llansteffan and his wife, Mary. He was descended from the physician Meyer Low Schomberg (1690-1761). His parents were Roman Catholic: his father had converted while a student at New College, Oxford. Schomberg spent a happy childhood at the family home in Upper Richmond Road in south-west London. Educated at the Oratory School, Edgbaston, Birmingham (1892-8), he then went up to New College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1901. In 1901 he was commissioned in the 1st battalion Seaforth Highlanders and from 1902 to 1911 he served in India. He saw action as part of the Indian frontier expedition in 1908, and used every leave to visit remote parts of the Himalayan foothills and central Baluchistan. In 1911 he went home to Chasewood Lodge, Ross-on-Wye, the house to which the family had moved in 1910, before taking up a post with the Malay states' guides. In Malaya he spent his leave trekking across remote parts of the Malay peninsula. 
In 1915 Schomberg returned to the Seaforths in Mesopotamia and in 1916 he was severely wounded during an attack on Turkish positions at Sunnaiyat, an action for which he was awarded the DSO. After a period of recuperation in Britain he returned to Mesopotamia. On the way, his ship was torpedoed 150 miles east of Malta. He was again wounded, less severely this time, during the attack on Tikrit in 1917, an action for which he received a bar to his DSO. From 1917 to 1919 he commanded the 1st battalion in Mesopotamia and Palestine. While in Palestine he took the opportunity to wander round Jerusalem and other sites central to his faith. After the war he returned to Malaya. From 1919 he was commandant, Singapore volunteer corps, and from 1920 inspector of prisons, Straits Settlements. He resigned in 1921, partly for health reasons. The return of the Seaforths to Scotland and a dislike of life in Britain after the war saw him transfer to the 2nd battalion, with the rank of major, and return to India in 1922. After a visit to Changchenmo, Ladakh, in 1923, he revived plans which he had made before the war to visit Central Asia and Tibet. He retired in December 1927. 
The first journey was made in 1926 and was followed by longer journeys in 1927-9 and 1930-31, for which Schomberg received the Royal Geographical Society's Gill memorial medal. He inspired great loyalty in the small group of men whom he often referred to as his 'slaves'. These were led by Daulat Shah, who managed his camp and transport. He enjoyed big game hunting, but there was a more serious side to his explorations. Like many other people at the time, he saw a danger to India if communism were to infiltrate Sinkiang (Xinjiang). He therefore combined intelligence-gathering with his recording of geographical, ethnographical, and botanical information as he wandered over areas rarely, if ever, visited by Europeans. He wrote a popular account of these journeys entitled 'Peaks and Plains of Central Asia' (1933). Travels between 1933 and 1936 in remote areas across the north-west frontier of India, from Afghanistan to Ladakh, were related in three further books: 'Between the Oxus and the Indus' (1935), 'Unknown Karakorum' (1936), and 'Kafirs and Glaciers' (1938). He wrote many articles and reviews for the 'Alpine Journal', the 'Geographical Journal', the 'Himalayan Journal', the 'Journal of the Royal Central Asian Society', and the 'Scottish Geographical Journal'. Schomberg's reports of conditions in Sinkiang in the 1920s and 1930s are at the Public Record Office and in the British Library oriental and India Office collections. Photographs and accounts of later travels are at the Royal Society for Asian Affairs. From 1936 to 1944 Schomberg served in a number of diplomatic posts. During 1936-7 and 1938-41 he was British consul-general in the French establishments in India; from November 1939 he was in addition consul-general for Portuguese possessions in India. He was consular liaison officer, Persia (1942-3), and then customs, Perso-Indian frontier (1943-4). In 1937 he was made a CIE. From 1944 to 1945 he was colonel, force 136 (part of the Special Operations Executive), China. Throughout these years he continued to explore new territory whenever he could: Baltistan in 1937 and Ladakh in 1944, 1945, and 1946. 
Schomberg was 5 feet 8 inches tall and weighed about 10 stone. He was fit and was once described as having walked from Kashmir to Kashgar six times. An honours degree in history and competence in Latin, French, Urdu, Pushtu, Persian, and Turkish were combined with an acutely observant eye and a dry wit which made him an entertaining companion. He was impatient with hypocrisy, pomposity, and what he saw as unnecessary bureaucracy: an India Office memo in 1929 described him as a candid but by no means factious critic. Friends described him not only as tough but also as courteous, considerate, and possessing a natural charm. His army life and what a friend called the spirit of a born traveller, going where the spirit moved him, made Schomberg unsuitable for a settled life. He never married but remained devoted to his parents, his unmarried sister Mary, and his aunts. 
Schomberg was a deeply religious man and in 1947 he decided finally to devote the remainder of his life to his church. From 1947 to 1951 he studied for the priesthood at the Collegio Beda, Rome, and was ordained at the basilica of St John Lateran. Between 1952 and 1953 he assisted with parish work at Ringwood, Hampshire; from 1953 to 1954 he was chaplain to the Assisi Home, Grayshot, and from 1954 to 1957 chaplain to the convent of the Sisters of St Joseph, Boars Hill, Oxford. Shortly after he retired in December 1957, Schomberg had a fall at home and fractured his skull. He died at Hereford General Hospital on 1 March 1958 and was buried at Belmont Abbey, Hereford. 


@@@@@


doc= 61924


Chapman, (Arthur) Percy Frank (1900-1961), cricketer, was born at 21 Addington Road, Reading, on 3 September 1900, the son of Frank Emerson Chapman (died 1941), headmaster of a preparatory school, Fritham House School, Lyndhurst, Hampshire, and his wife, Bertha Finch. He was educated at his father's school, at Oakham School (1910-14), and at Uppingham School (1914-19), where he was in the first eleven. He went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1919. There he won three cricket blues (1920-22), and made 118 against Essex on his debut for the university. In his last year at Cambridge he scored 102 not out against Oxford University, and was selected at the end of the 1922 season for Archie MacLaren's MCC winter tour of Australia and New Zealand. 
On his return from Australia in 1923 Chapman joined H. and G. Simonds of Hythe to learn the brewing business and, ultimately, to qualify for Kent. In the meantime he played for Berkshire in minor counties' cricket. Though he made a few appearances for Kent in 1924, it was while still a recognized Berkshire player that he was selected for the MCC tour of Australia, one of the few players to play for England while participating at that level of the game. He had a moderately successful test match series under Arthur Gilligan's captaincy, but Australia retained the Ashes. At the end of the tour, early in 1925, he married in Okawa, New Zealand, G. H. H. (Beety) Lowry, sister of his Cambridge contemporary the New Zealand cricketer Thomas Coleman Lowry, and daughter of T. H. Lowry, a farmer and racehorse owner. In the following season he qualified to play for Kent in the county championship; he subsequently represented the county as an amateur until his retirement in 1938, captaining the side from 1931 to 1936. 
Chapman took over the captaincy of England, the youngest to hold the position in test history, for the last and, it transpired, decisive test match against Australia at the Oval in August 1926. England won and regained the Ashes; Chapman received a telegram of congratulation from the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin. As a captain he was sometimes criticized for his lack of subtlety and for not being a great tactician, but his record bears favourable comparison with those of his predecessors and successors. He captained England seventeen times, winning nine matches and losing only two. In the 1928-9 tour of Australia, when England won the test series 4-1 to retain the Ashes, his standing was as high as any captain's before or since. That tour was a notably happy one, on and off the field. 
A superb cutter and driver, who enjoyed lofting the ball great distances into the deep field, Chapman could dominate a match by the sheer insolence of his left-handed batting, using power, intuition, and authority against the fiercest bowling attacks. When at the crease he customarily wore the Cambridge quidnunc cap of blue with vertical yellow stripes. During his first-class career he made 16,309 runs at an average of 31.97. An outstanding season for Kent in 1927, in which he averaged nearly 90, included an audacious 260 against Lancashire, the county champions, with thirty-seven boundaries, in three hours. He hit only one century for England, 121 against Australia at Lord's in 1930. That match involved the greatest players of the day and the finest performances in cricket. Despite his century, Chapman finished on the losing side, though he caught Bradman off a catch so magnificent -- even by his own standards -- that Sir James Barrie was moved to say to his companion Neville Cardus: 'What evidence is there that the ball is the same ball which left Bradman's bat?' (G. Howat, 'Cricket's Second Golden Age', 1989, 20). Chapman was surprisingly dropped for the fifth test that year, in which Australia regained the Ashes, when R. E. S. Wyatt replaced him as captain. In the winter of 1930-31 he led MCC's side in South Africa. The South Africans won the rubber and this proved his last series as England captain and the end of his test match career. 
Chapman helped restore confidence to English cricket in the 1920s, bringing to the game a natural greatness based on quick perception, technical assurance, and masterly judgement. Together with his charm and his tall, curly fair-haired good looks, he brought humour to a game in some danger of becoming 'narrow and parochial' (R. C. Robertson-Glasgow, 'Crusoe on Cricket', 1966, 143). His was a leadership which 'removed the chains of routine' (N. Cardus, 'The Playfair Cardus', 1963, 87); he was no dour disciplinarian, and he won or lost with good grace. He and his wife were society figures, but his taste for conviviality was his undoing. As alcohol claimed him, his figure, already tending to girth (he weighed 15 stone in 1930), became bloated and he went into a sad decline. His marriage was dissolved in 1942. After he retired he suffered from ill health brought on by his drink problem, and was eventually unable to watch the game at Canterbury or Lord's. Following a fracture incurred in a fall at his home, he died at Lord Mayor Treloar's Hospital, Alton, Hampshire, on 16 September 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 61925


Richardson, Reginald John (1807/8-1861), political reformer, was born in the Manchester area. Nothing is known of his parents or formative years except that, aged eleven, he witnessed the Peterloo massacre. In 1822 he became an apprentice to a carpenter and joiner, a trade he followed until a workplace injury in the 1830s forced him to give it up. Married about 1833, he and his wife, Elizabeth, opened a newsagency in Chapel Street, Salford. Alongside the newsagency, he also worked as a newspaper editor, lecturer, and pamphleteer. 
Richardson's first public activity was in 1826, when he spoke at meetings in support of striking power-loom weavers; he later achieved national notoriety by moving an amendment for universal suffrage at a public meeting held in Manchester during the 'Reform Bill' crisis in 1832. By January 1838 he was secretary of both the South Lancashire Anti-Poor Law Association and the Manchester Trades Council. In September 1838 he was elected as a Manchester delegate to the Chartists' first national gathering, the General Convention of the Industrious Classes. His speech on the constitutional right to bear arms was reprinted as a pamphlet. By mid-1839 he was at odds with the Manchester Chartists on questions of policy and in July he resigned as a delegate. In particular he opposed the inclusion of a 'national holiday', or general strike, in the proposed 'ulterior measures' to be enacted should the House of Commons reject the national petition in favour of the Charter. He was nevertheless arrested in September 1839 and indicted along with Bronterre O'Brien and others for sedition and conspiracy. In April 1840, after a trial at Liverpool in which he conducted his own defence, he was convicted and sentenced to nine months' imprisonment. 
Richardson served his sentence in Lancaster Castle, where he drew up a plan for a national Chartist body. This was published during the debate leading up to the formation of the National Charter Association in July 1840. He also wrote a pamphlet entitled the 'Rights of Women' which made the case for widows and unmarried women to be given the vote, as well as a series of lengthy essays on the condition of handloom weavers. A prison inspector who interviewed him reported that his 'temper is so low that he began to quarrel with the other Chartists as soon as he arrived' (TNA: PRO, HO 20/10), a pattern that was repeated throughout his stormy public career. While he was undoubtedly an obstreperous individual, his truculence was indicative of fierce independence. 
On his release in December 1840 Richardson declared his unshaken commitment to radicalism in the tradition of Major Cartwright and Henry Hunt. In April 1841 'The Times' published a letter from him in support of the candidature of the paper's proprietor, John Walter, who was standing as a tory at a by-election at Nottingham. Richardson praised Walter's opposition to the new poor law and to centralized government, and hailed him as a defender of the ancient rights and privileges of the people. In June 1841 Richardson was himself nominated as parliamentary candidate for the borough of Perth, but he failed even to secure victory at the show of hands over the sitting whig MP, Fox Maule. His relations with the mainstream Manchester Chartists again soured and, pleading heavy debts, he left Salford in October 1841 to become editor of the 'Dundee Chronicle', a post he held for six months. In April 1842 he further distanced himself from the Chartist majority in south-east Lancashire by his advocacy of an alliance with middle-class radicals and attendance at the complete suffrage conference in Birmingham. He returned to Salford where he established a 'tract library'; he also began writing for Bronterre O'Brien's 'British Statesman'. Although he often clashed with leaders of the Anti-Corn Law League, he remained a staunch advocate of repeal and in 1843 he published an analysis of the parliamentary support for the corn laws, suggesting that the intransigence of the 'monopolist majority' strengthened the case for parliamentary reform. 
Although he remained active in Chartism after 1842-3, Richardson's attention shifted primarily to local affairs. He was elected to the Salford police commission in October 1839 and re-elected in 1842. He was also involved in other local government institutions, including the select vestry, and was a churchwarden. In 1844 he took a leading part in the campaign for public parks that resulted in the creation of Peel Park in Salford, although his attempts to have working men represented on the steering committee were unsuccessful. In June 1854, in his evidence to the select committee on public houses chaired by C. P. Villiers, he attributed the improvement in the sobriety of Manchester's city population over the preceding decade to the movement to establish public parks and institutions such as refreshment rooms, libraries, and museums which provided healthy forms of leisure. 
For a time Richardson had owned a beer house, but by 1854 he was a land and buildings surveyor, carrying out valuations of house property in Salford. After 1848 he participated in a succession of attempts to establish a joint working- and middle-class reform movement but ill health prevented him from being very active. Nevertheless, his claim to have been involved 'in every movement that has taken place amongst the working classes since I can remember' ('Select committee on the regulation of public houses', 196) was not an exaggeration. He died at Newton Heath, near Manchester, on 23 January 1861, survived by a widow, Fanny (probably his second wife), and three young children as well as several older children. 


@@@@@


doc= 61927


Rees, Thomas Percy (1899-1963), psychiatrist, was born in Bwlch, Carmarthenshire, on 16 March 1899, the son of Thomas Rees, a farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Davies, also from a farming family. After leaving school he served in the machine-gun corps during the First World War. He was then a medical student at the Welsh National School of Medicine, followed by clinical training at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. He obtained the conjoint qualification in 1923 and graduated MB in the University of Wales two years later, having previously taken a BSc. He obtained the MRCP in 1926. 
Rees first intended to undertake academic research in psychiatry,but instead he decided upon mental hospital work. From Napsbury Hospital he went in 1927 to Croydon Borough Mental Hospital (later Warlingham Park Hospital) as deputy physician superintendent. In 1935 he became superintendent, and his first act was to throw open the iron gates at the hospital entrance, after which they were never shut again. Over the next few years all ward doors were unlocked during the day, while nearly all restraint and isolation of patients were abolished. 'For Rees, however, the 'open door' policy did not consist in a mere unlocking of doors; it implied a general attitude of enthusiasm, activism, fresh-mindedness, permissiveness and general friendliness, which exerted their beneficient effects not only in his own institution but in widening circles both in his own country and elsewhere. (MacKeith, 311)' Among psychiatrists in other hospitals there was then a good deal of doubt that such a policy could be safe -- even frank incredulity that the ward doors were really unlocked. However: 'He would recall how, when he first went to the hospital, a long row of actively suicidal patients sat unemployed all day long behind a heavy table in the refractory ward with a male nurse at either end. This sight seems to have made a deep impression on him. (ibid.)' Some of the male nursing staff were resistant to his innovations, and Rees did not hesitate to dismiss some on that account. Patients then had greater freedom of movement than was usual in mental hospitals of the time. According to E. H. Hare: 'Although he was inclined to attribute the origins of the new enlightenment in mental hospitals to the introduction of a useful treatment for general paralysis of the insane, Rees had little faith in the efficacy of physical treatment for most mental illness. Patients come to mental hospitals, he used to say, to learn to live with other people. ('The Lancet', 1331)' Yet he gave freedom to his medical staff to pursue their clinical interests, and pioneering work was done at Warlingham Park with insulin coma therapy, electroconvulsive therapy, prefrontal leucotomy, and the treatment of alcoholism; the first specialized alcoholism unit in Britain was established there by Dr Max Glatt in 1953. Rees also became consultant psychiatrist to Croydon General Hospital and the Croydon Child Guidance Clinic. In 1939 he was a member of the Feversham committee on voluntary mental health organizations, and subsequently became consultant to the National Association for Mental Health and to the London Marriage Guidance Council. He devoted much effort to health education, among both his hospital staff and people of all kinds in the community -- in Croydon and more widely -- being especially skilful in explaining psychiatric problems to lay people. 
Following the inauguration of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1948 Rees became a member of the South-West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board, and was appointed OBE in 1949. He was adviser in mental health to the World Health Organization, and in that capacity was a member of an expert committee which produced an influential report on the future of psychiatric hospitals in 1953. It was said that the ideal hospital described there was actually an account of Warlingham Park. This report was fairly negative on the relationship of psychiatry to general hospitals -- a view which Rees held fairly strongly himself. This emerged in 'Back to moral treatment and community care' ('Journal of Mental Science', 1956), the published version of his presidential address to the Royal Medico-Psychological Association and one of the very few papers that he wrote. Nor did he participate in systematic research. 
One of Rees's most significant activities was membership of the royal commission on the law relating to mental illness and mental deficiency, 1954-7. Its report was largely embodied in the 'Mental Health Act' of 1959, which revolutionized the legal and administrative basis of mental health care; it also provided an ideology of moving the emphasis of treatment and care into the community -- a process which remained slow and uneven due to financial limitations. Rees provided the main psychiatric influence within the commission. 
In 1956, the year of his presidency of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association, Rees retired from the NHS and entered private practice in Harley Street. Congratulating him on his presidential address Dr Tom Main said that: 'whilst his work was based on the solid foundations of all that was best in past traditions of mental hospital work, he had not been content merely to follow established custom, but had made his own personal contribution by adventurously adopting the concept of the hospital as a therapeutic community. ('Journal of Mental Science', 24)' In the same year the county borough of Croydon acknowledged his service to the local community by awarding him the freedom of the borough, and the Royal College of Physicians made him a fellow (thirty years after his membership). 
T. P., as he was universally known (distinguishing him from both J. R. and Linford Rees, who were equally well-known psychiatrists of the time), had a Welsh fluency of speech and conversational wit. He also had great energy and a personality which tended to dominate any group in which he was a member. He was acknowledged to be a highly influential figure in mental health care, but this influence was almost wholly administrative and institutional. His belief in the positive power of leadership was to become unpopular in the more egalitarian 1960s and the position of physician superintendent -- which he regarded as essential to the leadership role -- would then disappear in England and Wales. Indeed, the mental hospitals themselves would largely be gone by the end of the century. 
Opinions of Rees as a person vary. His successor, Stephen MacKeith, believed he had 'high intelligence, flexible thinking and an intuitive flair for the management of men and women' (MacKeith, 311-12). For Denis Martin, 'his authority was never oppressive... he was a chief who encouraged ideas and initiative, and gave his staff the freedom to work out any changes in the hospital which he thought might prove valuable' ('The Lancet', 1331). The anonymous obituarist of Munk's 'Roll', however, states that Rees, 'did not always endear himself to his colleagues; he could be dogmatic, and obstinate, give an impression of arrogance and seem to be too interested in his own ideas to listen carefully to another point of view' (Munk, 'Roll', 345). Some of his hospital staff described him as a pocket dictator, because of his style of decision making, but on the other hand, his office door was always open and he maintained that everyone had access to him there. 
Rees was fortunate in his time and place in that they provided an ideal milieu for the positive exercise of his particular gifts. He was rightly critical of university teaching departments who did not concern themselves with the problem of the chronic patient. In 1932 he married Adeline Isabel, daughter of F. J. Stephens of the ink manufacturing family; they had one daughter and three sons. Rees died in the Westminster Hospital, London, on 2 June 1963. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 61928


Scott, Peter Duncan (1914-1977), forensic psychiatrist, the second son of Walter Scott, a brewer, and his wife, Jennie (formerly Troop), was born at 37 Earlsbury Gardens, Handsworth, Birmingham, on 13 June 1914. He was educated at St Cuthbert's preparatory school in Great Malvern, at Bromsgrove School, and at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, followed by clinical training at the London Hospital. He qualified in 1939 and soon joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, in which he had originally intended to serve as a surgeon, but he had to become shore based because of unmanageable seasickness. On 25 October 1940 he married Lilian Ruth ('b'. 1912/13), daughter of Daniel John Lewis, a quarry owner. Following contact with E. W. Anderson (later professor of psychiatry at Manchester), Scott took up psychiatric work, obtained the diploma in psychological medicine in 1944 through a correspondence course, and became a neuropsychiatric specialist. After the war he was recommended to Sir Aubrey Lewis and became a registrar at the Maudsley Hospital, followed by a year at Runwell Hospital, Essex. 
In 1948 Scott returned to the Maudsley to take charge of clinical forensic services, and remained in that post until his death; there were very few specialists in this aspect of psychiatry when the National Health Service began in that year. For the first fifteen years Scott was concerned mainly with juvenile delinquents, both at Stamford House remand home and at the Maudsley out-patient department. This experience influenced his later work with adult offenders, in that he always looked for the former child and adolescent that the adult had once been, in forming his opinion. Scott's reports were marked by their penetrating descriptions and accessible language. Subsequently he took up a joint appointment between the Maudsley and the prison medical service at Brixton prison, turning his attention to major offenders. He held two evening out-patient clinics every week, so that those attending would not have to miss work. He had urged that the medical work of prisons should be taken over by the National Health Service, but this view was rejected by the government. The joint appointment system, however, ultimately failed. 
Scott's enormous clinical experience, together with his personal qualities of integrity, lucid thinking, and clear expression, caused his advice to be sought for many commissions and working parties, for example, on the special hospitals, on murders at Carstairs State Hospital, on the prison medical service, the home secretary's Advisory Council on the Penal System, and the Aarvold subcommittee on dangerous offenders. The only times that his name became known to the public, though, were when he advised the police in the Spaghetti House and Balcombe Street sieges in 1975 -- the origin of a new form of psychiatric skill. His advice to avoid any immediate use of force and play for time had successful results. He opposed the inauguration of a national programme of medium security units, believing that these would simply select out 'nice' patients, and continue to reject those who were most in need. His contribution to the public services was acknowledged by his appointment as CBE in 1974; he had been elected FRCP and FRCPsych. in 1971. 
Although an editor of the 'British Journal of Criminology', Scott wrote relatively little himself, but his few publications were both original and influential. Together with Robert Mark he published 'The Disease of Crime: Punishment or Treatment?' (1972). Though widely read, he considered theories and classifications no substitute for personal understanding of the patient -- a quality he demonstrated to a special degree. As a result his teaching was based on the individual offender, from which he drew both unique and general lessons. Scott evolved his own diagnostic categories for forensic cases which were both original and expressed in non-technical language, but these, regrettably, never entered the published canon. He delighted in teaching and was very popular with specialist trainees, but he did not involve himself in formal research. He was chairman of the forensic psychiatry section of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, 1975-7. 
As an individual, Scott was quiet and reserved, allowing few people to get on intimate terms with him. He was devoted to his wife, Lilian, and their two daughters. His greatest spare time interest was bird-watching, in which he was an expert, and he was accomplished in such do-it-yourself activities as carpentry and bricklaying. 
Although there had been psychiatrists before who examined offenders, wrote about them, and gave evidence in courts, Scott was essentially the founder of forensic psychiatry as a recognized discipline in Britain. He did this particularly in association with his successor at the Maudsley, Professor T. C. N. Gibbens. Furthermore, on the world scale, British forensic psychiatry then attained a foremost position through his pupils, who undertook the research and writing that were not his own forte. Scott exercised enormous influence through his example, his individual teaching, and the impression made by his personal qualities on colleagues, administrators, judges, and politicians. Yet he did nothing to promote his own reputation or propagate his views; others constantly came to him for advice. He 'never deviated from his working attempts to improve the lot of patients who were otherwise despised and rejected' (J. C. G. in 'The Lancet'), continuing to believe that the National Health Service had failed the disturbed offender: 'He was equally loyal to society in believing firmly that compassion did not mean sentimentality, and that the psychiatrist's role was to help the offender to come to terms with society as it is, and not as it should be. He was acknowledged as the foremost forensic psychiatrist of his time. (Munk, 'Roll')' Scott died at his home, 53 Park Road, Chiswick, London, on 6 August 1977 after a short illness. The Royal College of Psychiatrists subsequently established an annual lecture in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 61929


Joseph Foveaux (bap. 1767, d. 1846) took charge of the corps. Foveaux was baptized in Millbrook church, Bedfordshire, on 6 April 1767, the son of Joseph Foveaux, steward to the earl of Upper Ossory at Ampthill Park, Bedfordshire, and his wife Elizabeth, 'nee' Wheeler. He entered the 60th regiment as an ensign on 10 May 1789, but on 5 June purchased a lieutenancy in the New South Wales Corps, advancing to captain on 6 April 1791. He arrived in Sydney in 1792, and in May that year was appointed commandant at Parramatta. By late 1793 he had begun a relationship with Ann Sherwin (died 1840); they had a daughter, Ann Noble Foveaux ('b'. 1801), and eventually married at All Saints, Derby, England, in 1814. Foveaux was acting commanding officer of the New South Wales Corps from August 1796 to November 1799, when Paterson returned to Sydney. During his time in New South Wales he established a flock of 1027 sheep, which he sold in 1800 to John Macarthur on becoming acting lieutenant-governor of Norfolk Island. Foveaux established his reputation as an administrator by harnessing the scarce resources of Norfolk Island to reinforce the small settlement there, but in 1803 he had to apply the British government's order that part of the population of the overworked island be transferred to Van Diemen's Land. On sick leave in Britain from early 1805, Foveaux persuaded the British government to accept his plan by which the entire population of Norfolk Island should be transferred, with all property owners receiving compensation from the government but those of high moral character receiving a second year of convict labour, food, and clothing. Foveaux's plan was adopted by the government and implemented by Governor William Bligh, with resistance from the islanders. Foveaux was sent back to New South Wales in 1807, with orders to assume responsibility for the population that remained on Norfolk Island, but in the event he found the corps in mutiny against Bligh and assumed the government of the colony. 
For the corps marriage was the exception rather than the rule. Grose had arrived in the colony with his wife and sister-in-law, and Paterson, Archibald Bell, William Cox, and William Patullo all brought their wives to Australia, but Nicholas Nepean had left his wife at home, and found a number of consolations in Sydney. Of other officers, Neil MacKellar had a long, loving relationship with Sarah Cooley, with whom he had two sons and three daughters; Adjutant Thomas Rowley had four children with the convict Elizabeth Selwyn; and George Johnston lived for many years with Esther Abrahams, a Jewish convict he met on the voyage to Australia, whom he finally married in 1814. 
The regiment seems to have accepted relationships with convict or former convict women. However, Quartermaster Thomas Laycock suffered badly when his wife left him in 1805 because of a heated dispute over their housekeeper. Laycock threatened to fight his brother officers for calling his mistress 'an infamous strumpet' and urged his son, Lieutenant Tom Laycock, to join him in 'calling them out'. After thirty-three years in the army, Laycock was cashiered. More successful were Anthony Fenn Kemp, who after a number of liaisons married Elizabeth Riley, the sister of the merchant Alexander Riley, with whom he had seven sons and two daughters; and John Piper, who married the daughter of a convict, Mary Jane Shears, in 1816, by which time their family consisted of four boys and Sarah, the result of an earlier liaison. By 1826 the couple was able to commission Augustus Earle to produce two huge portraits, latterly in the Art Gallery of New South Wales. In these the former officer wears a uniform of his own design, while his wife is resplendent in a red dress set off by a crown. 
The officers were nominally Christian but most had little time for religion. William Hill's evangelicalism did not stop him fighting duels. Grose was an Anglican, highly suspicious of Methodists, and William Lawson, one of the conquerors of the Blue Mountains in 1813, was a devout Presbyterian. William Cox, who professed radical views, was sceptical of religion, but most officers saw it as a necessary and useful part of society, something akin to Voltaire's 'social cement'. 
Freemasonry attracted many officers. In 1802, during the visit of the French expedition led by Nicholas Baudin, Captain Anthony Fenn Kemp was received into the Rose Croix lodge, much to the chagrin of Governor Philip Gidley King. The informer against Fenn Kemp was Lieutenant John Brabyn, himself a mason, and a member of the secret lodge within the New South Wales Corps. Brabyn's lodge was loyalist and formally Christian, and opposed the advance of the secular, radical, republican French model of freemasonry introduced by Baudin. There is evidence in 1803 that both Paterson and Sergeant-Major Thomas Whittle were freemasons, and on Norfolk Island in the early nineteenth century Captain John Piper allowed a lodge to operate freely without government interference. 
Politics was of great concern. Most officers mirrored the opinions of their patrons, but a number had well-developed political philosophies. Johnston, Foveaux, and Macarthur were whigs; Macarthur's plans for the economic self-sufficiency of New South Wales were influenced by the ideas of Jeremy Bentham. These opinions balanced the tory beliefs held by Grose and Paterson. Whigs and tories did not hold a duopoly. William Cummings, born in Ireland, was suspected of radical sentiments, and Ensign George Bond, probably a 'friend of liberty', was accused of being involved in a military mutiny on the convict transport 'Barwell' in 1798. 
Sergeant-Major Whittle's egalitarian leanings contributed towards the mutiny that overthrew Bligh from the government of New South Wales in 1808. Bligh had ordered the demolition of Whittle's house as part of his replanning of Sydney. Whittle formed an alliance with Macarthur (who had resigned his commission in the corps in 1804), whose mercantile interests were threatened by Bligh's vision of an agrarian New South Wales. The two fanned opposition to Bligh among the soldiers. Macarthur's trial, for resisting Bligh's attempt to build on his land, asked the six officers who sat on the bench alongside Judge-Advocate Richard Atkins to condemn their former colleague for defending his property rights; the officers refused to condemn Macarthur. Bligh intended to charge them with treason, even though there was no court in New South Wales that could try the officers. The episode confirmed to Macarthur and his allies, who included Lieutenant William Minchin, one of the officers on the bench at Macarthur's trial, that Bligh intended arbitrary government, and legitimized any move to overthrow Bligh. As Macarthur directed the march on Government House on 26 January 1808, he told the troops that 'the Memorable day shall be the most Glorious day the New South Wales Corps ever experienced' (Atkinson, 289). Once Bligh was under arrest, Johnston assumed authority as lieutenant-governor, but real power was in the hands of Macarthur. 
Joseph Foveaux returned to New South Wales on 28 July 1808, and instead of reinstating Bligh assumed the government himself, superseding both Johnston (whom he outranked) and Macarthur. Foveaux's rule enhanced his reputation for efficiency, seeking to reduce expenditure and restricting the liquor trade, but, while the British government's response to the mutiny accepted the end of Bligh's administration, it also envisaged the recall of the New South Wales Corps and its replacement by the 73rd regiment led by the new governor, Lachlan Macquarie. Macquarie was sworn in on 1 January 1810, assuming authority from William Paterson, who had superseded Foveaux as lieutenant-governor in January 1809. Some officers of the corps had feared that Macquarie would put them under arrest, but although Macquarie brought a proclamation communicating the government's displeasure towards the rebels, in the first months of his rule the new governor relied very much on Foveaux. Among Macquarie's early initiatives was one to promote marriage; of the 174 marriages in the first six months of 1810 -- about equal to the number of marriages in the period 1807-9 -- two-thirds were of soldiers of the New South Wales Corps, who had to marry before returning to Britain or transferring to the 73rd regiment or the veteran company. The corps, renamed the 102nd regiment, departed for Britain during 1810. 
Foveaux escaped a court martial and continued to rise through the army, being promoted major-general on 4 June 1814 and lieutenant-general on 22 July 1830. He died on 20 March 1846 at his home, 21 York Buildings, New Road, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London, alongside his wife. Many other officers and soldiers of the corps chose to remain in New South Wales; it is impossible to write the history of early Australia without acknowledging them. 
The officers of the New South Wales Corps have been the subject of myth and legend. Most of the writing about them is antiquarian and anachronistic. Many did use their position to charge high prices for imported goods and employed the legal system in the colony to appropriate large estates, against the interest of the small settlers, but most would not have thought this unreasonable behaviour at the time, given that the soldiers went out to New South Wales to make their fortunes. They did not destroy morality and submerge the convict colonies in rum; it was true that several officers traded in alcohol, but others, such as Foveaux, used their positions of authority to restrict the business. Most were not men of the first rank, but it was they who laid much of the foundation of early Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 61932


Oatley, Sir Charles William (1904-1996), electrical engineer, was born on 14 February 1904 at 5 Badcox, Frome, Somerset, the only child of William Oatley (1860-1944), baker, and his wife, Ada Mary Dorrington (died 1911), schoolteacher. His father was intensely interested in scientific matters, and passed his enthusiasm on to his son. Coincidentally, 1904 was the year mains electrical power was brought to Frome, and William Oatley installed it in his bakery immediately it became available. Thus the young Oatley was surrounded by electrically powered machinery almost from birth, and his natural scientific bent was nurtured from the earliest years. After attending the local council school he went to Bedford Modern School, in 1916, as a boarder, becoming head boy and captain of the swimming and rugby fives teams. From Bedford Modern he won two exhibitions to St John's College, Cambridge, entering in 1922. There he read for the natural sciences tripos, taking a first in part one and a second in part two (physics). In his second year he obtained a half-blue for swimming, and in his final year he captained the university swimming team. His supervisor at St John's was Edward Appleton, who first aroused his interest in electronics. He also became acquainted with John Cockcroft, who was then at St John's reading mathematics. These two men were to have a profound influence on Oatley's life and career. 
In 1925, on Appleton's advice, Oatley joined Radio Accessories, a small company in Willesden manufacturing radio valves. There he gained valuable experience of manufacturing techniques and, as the only graduate in the company, was called upon to tackle a wide variety of physical problems. After two years, however, he was invited to return to academic life by Appleton, who had moved to the physics department at King's College, London. The next twelve years at King's were spent largely teaching and examining, but he produced a number of papers on a variety of research topics, and, with the publication in 1932 of his Methuen monograph, 'Wireless Receivers', he became an acknowledged expert in the field. These years were, as he acknowledged in his writings, among the happiest of his life. He married Dorothy Enid West, the daughter of his science master at Bedford Modern, on 31 July 1930, and their sons John and Michael were born in 1932 and 1935 respectively. 
In the summer of 1939 Oatley received a letter from Cockcroft, acting on behalf of the Air Ministry, inviting him to join a small party of university physicists to spend a few weeks learning about scientific developments which would be important in the event of war. Members of Cockcroft's party were assembled at Bawdsey Manor, where much of the initial work on radar (then known as radiolocation or radio direction finding: RDF) was carried out. Cockcroft later recalled the occasion: 'I arranged hurriedly with Watson-Watt to go to Rye instead, for Bawdsey was evacuated on 1st September. I had with me Oatley, Kempton, Shire, Latham, Ashmead and Dunworth; a very good party. We sat in the sun at Rye and taking the sacred handbook of Chain Home (CH) to pieces, learnt our RDF chapter by chapter from it. (Cockcroft, 3)' Soon afterwards, Oatley joined the newly formed air defence experimental establishment at Christchurch, Hampshire, where in the early years of the war he built up a highly successful group to undertake precision measurements on valves and components supplied by industry and components designed in the establishment. In 1943 he became deputy to Cockcroft, who had earlier been appointed chief superintendent of the establishment. When Cockcroft moved to Canada in 1944 to undertake nuclear work, Oatley was appointed acting superintendent. He was appointed OBE in 1956 in recognition of his outstanding contributions to the development of radar. 
Immediately after the war Oatley was offered a fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge, and a lectureship in the engineering department, which was then under the dynamic leadership of John Fleetwood Baker. With Baker's encouragement, Oatley revolutionized the teaching of electrical subjects in the department, particularly electronics, which culminated in his election to the chair of electrical engineering in 1960 (which he held until his retirement in 1971), and the introduction of the electrical sciences tripos in 1963. 
Oatley's greatest achievement came with the development at Cambridge of the scanning electron microscope (SEM). His interest in the instrument was first aroused when he learned of pre-war work by Manfred von Ardenne in Germany. This had produced inconclusive results, but with his wartime experience Oatley perceived that new techniques and methods were available which could be applied to the scanning concept. His first research student commenced in 1948 and a working instrument was produced by 1951. This incorporated a novel configuration of the electron optical image-forming elements, producing startlingly realistic images of surfaces, capable of interpretation even by the uninitiated. These early results convinced Oatley that the SEM would become an important laboratory tool; however, this was far from being the consensus among microscopists. The new instrument was met with indifference and even, in some quarters, ridicule. Undeterred, Oatley took on more research students and ploughed more resources into the project. Over the following decade new instruments with improved performance were constructed, and new fields of application explored. After many setbacks and disappointments, his persistence was finally rewarded in 1965 with the launch of the world's first series production SEM: the Stereoscan, manufactured by the Cambridge Instrument Company. His book on the subject, 'The Scanning Electron Microscope', was published in 1972. 
Many honours followed from this success, chief among which were Oatley's election to the Royal Society in 1969, and receipt of its royal medal (1969) and Mullard award (1973), and in 1970 the award of the Faraday medal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers. He was knighted in 1974. In 1976 he became a founder member of what was to become the Royal Academy of Engineering. His colleagues and research students held him in great esteem. Over 100 of them attended a one-day seminar held in his honour at Churchill College on the occasion of his ninetieth birthday. He died at his home, 16 Porson Road, Cambridge, on 11 March 1996. He was survived by his wife and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 61933


Margaret Read (1905-1996) was born at 78 Beaconsfield Place, Aberdeen, on 27 March 1905. She was educated at Aberdeen high school before studying music at Edinburgh University under Donald Tovey. She continued her musical education at Cologne before being appointed to a lectureship in the music department at Edinburgh University, where she first met her husband. Ludo, as she was known to her friends, was a gifted viola player; her ambitions to become a composer were sacrificed for her husband. In post-war Yorkshire she revived the Hovingham Musical Festival and made Stonegrave House an unofficial cultural centre in north Yorkshire. It was a marriage of opposites. In particular her ardent Catholicism clashed with Read's liberal agnosticism. But she inspired Read's finest personal writing, 'The Innocent Eye', and the marriage was blessed by 'physical affinity and mutual respect' (King, 150). She died in the Convent of St Nicholas in London on 10 March 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 61934


Hawkes, (Jessie) Jacquetta (1910-1996), archaeologist and writer, was born on 5 August 1910 in Cambridge, the younger daughter and third and youngest child of Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins (1861-1947), biochemist and Nobel prize winner, and his wife, Jessie Ann (1869-1956), daughter of Edward William Stevens, ship's fitter, of Ramsgate. Her eminent father was a distant cousin of the poet Gerard Manley Hopkins. In her imaginative writing style she was to embrace both academic exactness and poetic form, producing work that was ahead of its time in its lyrical synthesis of science and art; she would argue that the two were inseparable. In the range of her published work -- poetry, plays, journalism, fiction, biography, popular guide books, and academic papers -- she communicated, at all levels, her passion for archaeology, and the response of people, and places, to change over time. In a childhood essay she declared that passion. She was already inspired by visits to museums with her mother, and the discovery that her own home, at 71 Grange Road, Cambridge, was built where a Roman road overlapped an Anglo-Saxon cemetery. She attended the Perse School for Girls (1921-8) and then went to Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1929, the first woman to read archaeology and anthropology for the new undergraduate degree. In her second year she took part in her first proper excavation, a Roman site near Colchester, and met (Charles Francis) Christopher Hawkes (1905-1992), a young and already brilliant archaeologist, whose proposal of marriage she preferred over several others. 
Privately surprised at gaining a first, Jacquetta went on to excavate at Mount Carmel in Palestine with Dorothy Garrod. Her work there, unearthing a Neanderthal skeleton, moved her to poetry. On 7 October 1933 she married Hawkes in the chapel of Trinity College, Cambridge, her father's college. It appeared a blissful union of mutual interests, but some fifty years later, recalling the Majorcan honeymoon in her partly autobiographical 'A Quest of Love' (1980), Jacquetta wrote simply and revealingly: 'We enjoyed the sun and visiting antiquities -- and were not unhappy' (Hawkes, 'Quest of Love', 212). Her only child, Nicolas, was born in 1937, and from a marriage at that time 'admirably well-balanced and free' (ibid.), the pair also produced a book together, 'Prehistoric Britain' (1943), largely written by her. They set up home in London, most notably at 39 Fitzroy Road, Primrose Hill, the back garden of which featured in Jacquetta Hawkes's most acclaimed work, 'A Land' (1951). This fusion of geology, archaeology, literature, and art, illustrated by her friend Henry Moore, was hailed for its Donne-ish lyricism. It was a considerable departure from her other solo publications, the second volume of the 'Archaeology of the Channel Islands' (1938), on Jersey, and 'Early Britain' (1945), and its unique appreciation of the past, and the problems of the dawning nuclear age, set its author apart as an archaeologist not shy of offering up a new perspective. Her literary interests also found a place in her private life, in an affair with the Australian poet Walter Turner. Jacquetta Hawkes's only volume of poetry, 'Symbols and Speculations' (1949), was a response to Turner's early and sudden death in 1946. During the war she had also become involved in an affair with a woman which, although platonic, left her emotionally confused. 
Christopher Hawkes's work for the British Museum was successful but all-demanding, and the couple's increasingly separate lifestyles and interests were exacerbated by his wartime employment as a principal in the Ministry of Aircraft Production. Finding her niche as a consummate communicator, Jacquetta also joined the civil service in 1941, working on post-war reconstruction, and for the Ministry of Education from 1943. In her role as editor-in-chief of its film unit she produced 'The Beginning of History', which was a novel attempt at presenting prehistory, then thought unfilmable, in a new format, with an Iron Age site reconstructed at Pinewood Studios. In 1943 she was also made principal and secretary of the UK national commission for UNESCO, and protested vigorously against the inclusion of the playwright and author, John Boynton Priestley (1894-1984), on the grounds that he was not of sufficiently high literary calibre. She only admitted later that she had not read his books. Her objection was overruled, Priestley and Jacquetta met, and at a conference in Mexico City in 1947 began an affair which she held to be the great love of her life and which ultimately led to two much publicized divorces. In July 1953 the couple were married. They lived at the Albany in London, and at Brook Hill on the Isle of Wight, and moved to Kissing Tree House at Alveston, near Stratford upon Avon, in 1960. 
Jacquetta Hawkes gave up the civil service in 1949 to concentrate on writing. As well as producing archaeology books she collaborated with Priestley on two plays, one of which, 'A Dragon's Mouth' (1952), was experimental but well received, as was 'Journey Down a Rainbow' (1955), a series of letters based on their travels in south-west America, dedicated to Carl Jung, to whose works Priestley introduced Jacquetta. Marriage with Priestley was deeply and mutually satisfying, as Jacquetta often pronounced, but she did not neglect her other passion. Her post-war role as archaeology adviser to the Festival of Britain gave her a stage for her own sweeping view of the history of Britain, and in 1952 she was made an OBE. In subsequent years she travelled widely as a correspondent for 'The Observer' and the 'Sunday Times', and maintained a high profile. She wrestled with the hugely ambitious UNESCO project 'The History of Mankind', as co-editor of the prehistory volume, and provoked debate with her 1971 John Danz lecture, delivered in Seattle, in which she urged that science should be complemented by intuition. This was published as 'Nothing But or Something More'. In 1950 she became a governor of the British Film Institute and was instrumental, with Priestley and their great friends Canon John Collins and his wife, Diana, in the founding of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament -- being distinguished at the front of the Aldermaston march by her stature and large hat. In 1971 she was made vice-president of the Council for British Archaeology, and in 1982 produced a biography of her close friend and fellow archaeologist Sir Mortimer Wheeler. Her last publication was the 'Shell Guide to British Archaeology', published in 1986. 
After Priestley's death in 1984, Jacquetta Hawkes, who firmly believed that death was the end, moved to Littlecote in the Cotswold town of Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire. She remained a trustee of the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, and continued her interests in church architecture and ornithology, as well as in such issues as homosexual law reform and education; she was a governor of two grammar schools. She died in Cheltenham on 18 March 1996, and was cremated on 25 March at Warwickshire crematorium, near Chipping Campden. Her ashes were interred near the resting place of J. B. Priestley at Hubberholme, Yorkshire. 
Her death left archaeology bereft of one of its most enigmatic personalities, whose personal life overshadowed her response to a rapidly evolving discipline, as it oscillated between science and humanities. Her life presented a veritable Minoan labyrinth of apparently contradictory paths: she championed Robert Graves's 'mother goddess' theories, but spoke against the champions of women's liberation; she demanded respect as an academic, but courted disaster by the sexual frankness of 'A Quest of Love'. Some never forgave her for breaking up Christopher Hawkes's family life (as noted by Vincent Brome, 'The Guardian', 20 March 1996). Jacquetta Hawkes strove to achieve the Jungian balance; she was a unique woman who, if often haughty and aloof, was also, to those who knew her well, both compassionate and passionate -- 'a mixture of Athena and Aphrodite', as Diana Collins contended ('The Independent', 20 March 1996). As Priestley famously remarked on first meeting her: 'What a woman! Ice without, fire within!' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 61936


Chadwick, Helen Clare (1953-1996), artist, was born prematurely on 18 May 1953 at St Helier Hospital, Carshalton, Surrey, the only daughter and elder child of William Clare Chadwick, estate agent, and his Greek wife, Angeline, 'nee' Bardopoulou, of 4 Richmond Court, Richmond Road, Wimbledon, Surrey: the mother, with her daughter, featured in Chadwick's double portrait 'Lofos nymphon' (1991). Her younger brother, David, became a South Downs shepherd and appeared in her 1987 installation, 'Three Houses', at the Hayward Gallery, London. The family soon moved to 23 St Arvans Close, Chepstow Rise, East Croydon; the nearby Littleheath Woods later provided the source for her Common Ground project, 'The Fox' (1987). Her childhood and adolescence were used in 'Ego geometria sum' (Riverside Studios, London, 1983): images of her body were photographically mapped onto a plywood incubator, pram, wigwam, and vaulting-horse. 
Chadwick attended Croydon high school from 1964 to 1971, studying geography, geology, and art, and was intending to pursue an academic career as an archaeologist. Instead, she followed a foundation course in art at Bristol Polytechnic, from 1971 to 1972. She returned to Croydon for a year and studied at Croydon College of Art, where she became involved in the activities of Fluxus and the Fluxshoe tour: she made self-portraits in jelly and chocolate, and co-authored 'Door to Door' (1973) with David Mayor for the Beau Geste Press. In September 1973 she started to study for a fine art/sculpture diploma in art and design at Brighton Polytechnic, where she was taught by Gwyther Irwin, Richard Wentworth, Alison Wilding, and Derek Boshier. She graduated BA in July 1976 with first-class honours and a commendation in art history: her final exhibition was entitled 'Domestic sanitation', and was influenced by such feminist artists as Penny Slinger and Judy Clark. From September 1976 to September 1977 she worked for the degree of MA in fine art/painting at Chelsea School of Art under Ian Stephenson and Ron Bowen. She also encountered the punk scene of the King's Road, Chelsea. Her final show/performance was entitled 'In the Kitchen', which was again shown at Art Net, London. In February 1977 she moved into 45 Beck Road, Bethnal Green, an East End street of Acme housing for artists, where she lived and worked for the rest of her life. Three sociological works followed: 'Train of Thought' (1978-9) explored tube travel, 'Model Institution' (1981-4) portrayed dole claimants, and a controversial art and industry residency with John Smith's Breweries culminated in the exhibition 'Fine art/fine ale' (Sheffield, 1982). Part-time visiting teaching at Cardiff, Sheffield, Brighton, Portsmouth, and later Chelsea and the Royal College of Art, provided some financial support, while involvement with the London Film Co-op (from 1977) led to her involvement in the selection for the 'Hayward Annual' (1979). 
It was 'Ego geometria sum' (touring 1983-5), which mixed autobiography with feminism, photography with sculpture, that first achieved national recognition for Chadwick and which led to the first purchase by the Arts Council. It also signalled what was to become a preoccupation with the body and identity. Blue photocopies of her body and dead animals surrounding large golden spheres in a faux rococo setting formed the basis for the 'Oval Court' installation in the 'Of mutability' exhibition (Institute of Contemporary Arts, London, and touring 1986-7), which re-addressed the traditional genres of the self-portrait, nude, and vanitas. Another piece, 'Carcass', consisting of a column filled with household waste, which started to smell and then fractured, illustrated an increasing interest in unconventional materials. The exhibition was a critical success, leading to a purchase by the Victoria and Albert Museum, and to her short-listing -- the first woman so honoured -- for the 1987 Turner prize. An installation deploying a helium neon laser, 'Blood Hyphen' (1988), in the Clerkenwell and Islington Medical Mission for Edge '88, became the basis for the exploration of cell structures using computers and microscopes in 'Viral Landscapes' (1989-90). 
Chadwick's major exhibition, 'Effluvia', at the Serpentine Gallery, London (also touring to Barcelona and Essen), opened in July 1994 and proved controversial but immensely popular, breaking the gallery's attendance record: it included a suggestive fountain of molten chocolate, 'Cacao', cibachrome photographs of flowers in Swarfega, Windolene, and Germolene, and 'Piss Flowers', twelve white-lacquered bronzes of casts made by herself and her partner, David Notarius, an American marine engineer whom she had met at the 1990 Fotofest in Houston, Texas, urinating in the snow during a residency at the Banff Centre for the Arts, Alberta, in March 1991. She then undertook a heavy programme of exhibitions and installations around the world, which ranged from the Aperto at the Venice Biennale (1984) to her representation of Great Britain at the Sao Paulo Bienal (1994) and her solo show at the Museum of Modern Art, New York (1995). She was also increasingly involved with the mass media -- producing a film on the Mexican artist Frida Kahlo for the BBC 'Artist's Journeys' series in 1992, a billboard project for the BBC in 1992 (on sites in Birmingham, Bristol, Derry, Glasgow, London, and Newcastle), an AIDS awareness insert for 'Face' magazine in August 1994, and material for inclusion in the CD-ROM 'Eve: the Music and Art Adventure' (1996) made by the musician Peter Gabriel. 
Chadwick was well known on the London and international art scene for her Cleopatra hairstyle, bright red lipstick, rings on every finger, and dapper dress-sense, as well as for her vivacity, commitment, and enthusiasm for art and teaching. She had no commercial gallery until late on in her career, when she was represented by Maureen Paley of Interim Art, London, and the Friedman-Guinness Galerie, Frankfurt. Still working on a project with the assisted conception unit at King's College Hospital, London, which she had called 'Stilled Lives', and unknowingly suffering from myocarditis, she died suddenly of a heart attack at a private view at the Architect's Association on 15 March 1996. Her funeral took place at Randall's Park crematorium, Leatherhead, Surrey, on 23 March 1996. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 21 September 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 61938


Harris, Sir Charles Herbert Stuart- (1909-1996), virologist, was born at 1 High Street, King's Heath, King's Norton, Birmingham, on 12 July 1909, the son of Charles Herbert Harris (died 1913), a general practitioner, and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Parsons; the hyphen between Stuart and Harris was introduced later. He won scholarships to King Edward's School, Birmingham, and later to St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school, London. His ability was clear, and he graduated MB BS with two gold medals in 1931 and MD in 1933; he was admitted MRCP in 1934. He was house physician to Professor Sir Francis Fraser and demonstrator in pathology at St Bartholomew's Hospital from 1933, and he moved with Fraser to become first assistant in the department of medicine at the newly established British Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith Hospital in west London in 1935. 
In 1935 Stuart-Harris was awarded a fellowship valued at $55 a year from the bequest of Sir Henry Royce (of Rolls-Royce) which enabled him to undertake research into the cause and cure of influenza at the National Institute for Medical Research, where Wilson Smith, Christopher Howard Andrewes, and Sir Patrick Playfair Laidlaw had made the first isolation of human influenza virus two years earlier using ferrets which had developed a respiratory tract infection. A laboratory infection enabled Smith and Stuart-Harris to show that influenza A virus that had been through a number of ferret passages was still infectious to man. Stuart-Harris also succeeded in adapting influenza A virus to mice by serial intracerebral passage. In the USA two other researchers, Francis and Magill, had made separate isolations of influenza B virus, and Stuart-Harris next spent a period at the Rockefeller Institute in New York working with Thomas Francis on influenza B virus. After returning to England he continued his influenza virus studies supported by a Foulerton research fellowship of the Royal Society, awarded in 1938. In the previous year, on 4 September 1937, he had married Marjorie Winifred ('b'. 1915), younger daughter of Fred Robinson of Dulwich. 
The outbreak of the Second World War interrupted his active research on respiratory tract infections, and Stuart-Harris next served the Royal Army Medical Corps as a pathologist, by 1945 with the rank of colonel. His laboratory background led to his involvement in the development of a typhus vaccine, during which he contracted the disease, but he made a full recovery and later took part in field trials of the vaccine in north Africa. He contributed to the Medical Research Council's 'Special Report' on typhus, published in 1946. He also served in Italy, India, and the Far East, where he was concerned with the medical problems of released prisoners of war in Singapore. Later, in Germany, the somewhat different problems of survivors of concentration camps came under his care. 
Returned to civilian life, Stuart-Harris in 1946 became the first full-time professor of medicine at the University of Sheffield, an appointment that initially caused surprise that a pathologist should be given a clinical chair. Any reservations concerning his suitability were quickly dispelled, however, as he gradually built up a department with a high reputation for both teaching and research. Somewhat austere by nature Stuart-Harris was quietly spoken, though firm in his dealings with students and staff. He seldom missed a ward round or an outpatient or teaching session. He was nicknamed 'the Smiling Tiger' by medical students, reflecting his intolerance of laziness or loose thinking, but he was immensely supportive of creative ability wherever he found it. The Christmas parties he and his wife hosted for members of staff were warmly remembered as features of the Sheffield year. The Medical Research Council set up a research unit at Lodge Moor Hospital, Sheffield, under his charge. Direct personal involvement in laboratory research evolved into teamwork with a succession of handpicked assistants, several of whom later went on to senior appointments elsewhere. Research on influenza and other respiratory infections, notably chronic bronchitis and pertussis, continued, and one of the first clinical trials of oral poliovirus vaccine was carried out in Sheffield. 
Highly esteemed by both patients and staff in Sheffield, Stuart-Harris's rare combination of broad clinical and laboratory skills meant that his advice was sought far beyond that city. He served on the board of the Public Health Laboratory Service (1954-66); the Medical Research Council (1957-61); and the University Grants Committee (1968-77), being chairman of the medical subcommittee (1973-7). He became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1944 and gave the Goulstonian lecture in 1945, the Croonian lecture in 1962, and the Harveian oration in 1974. He wrote many original papers and contributions to textbooks and reviews, most of them relating to respiratory tract infections. He was much in demand outside the UK and was visiting professor of medicine at Albany Medical College in 1953, and at Vanderbilt University, Tennessee, in 1961. As Sir Arthur Sims Commonwealth travelling professor he visited the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, in 1962. He gave the Henry Cohen lecture at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1966 and was Waring professor at the University of Colorado and Stanford University, California, in 1967. He was president of the Association of Physicians of Great Britain and Ireland in 1971, and honorary member of the Association of American Physicians and of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. He was awarded honorary degrees by the University of Hull in 1973 and by Sheffield University in 1978. He was appointed CBE in 1961 and knighted in 1970. 
After retirement in 1972 Stuart-Harris continued his service to Sheffield University as postgraduate dean of medicine until 1977. Overseas he acted as medical adviser to the new Chinese medical school in Hong Kong, and he also advised the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, on viral vaccines. His wisdom and dedication to his work were clear to all his associates, and he continued with an office in the medical school until he was eighty-five. Less apparent was the strength he drew from the support of his wife and the peaceful family life they enjoyed with their daughter, who became an educational psychologist, and their two sons, one of whom became an accountant in Sheffield and the other of whom became a professor of oncology in Australia. Stuart-Harris died on 23 February 1996, and was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 61942


Learoyd, Roderick Alastair Brook (1913-1996), air force officer, was born on 5 February 1913 at 15 Turketel Road, Folkestone, Kent, the son of Major Reginald Brook Learoyd, retired army officer, and his wife, Marjorie Scott, 'nee' Boadle. The family, of Scottish and Yorkshire descent, had been involved in the Yorkshire textile industry and his father had served in the First World War in the Highland light infantry. Rod, as his family called him, was educated at Hydreye House Preparatory School, Sussex, and Wellington College, Berkshire, before attending Chelsea College of Aeronautical and Automobile Engineering. At the conclusion of his formal education he spent two years on his uncle's fruit farm in Argentina. 
In March 1936 Learoyd returned to England and took a short commission in the RAF. Following training at Hamble and at Wittering, he graduated later that year and was posted to 49 squadron at Worthy Down. In 1938 the squadron moved to Scampton where it became the first to be equipped with the new Handley Page Hampden bombers. 
On the night of 12 August 1940 Acting Flight Lieutenant 'Babe' Learoyd, as he was known to his RAF colleagues because of his impressive physical size, took off with ten other Hampden bombers on a mission to destroy an old aqueduct over the River Ems, north of Munster. Having attacked the Dortmund-Ems canal on a previous sortie, he was well aware of the high risk involved. Success depended on his approaching the canal from a direction that took him through a narrow passage of carefully sited anti-aircraft batteries that were able to deliver devastating fire from point-blank range. Disregarding the loss of two other Hampden bombers, Learoyd, blinded by German searchlights directed from close range, made his attack at an altitude of 150 feet. Flying solely on instruments, with his plane almost shot to pieces, he released his bomb load on target. Despite being wounded in the raid, Learoyd brought his plane home successfully although, with the landing flaps inoperable and the undercarriage indicators out of action, he had to wait until the light of dawn before attempting to land at Scampton. This he did without injury to his crew or further damage to his aircraft. For such conspicuous gallantry, Learoyd was awarded the Victoria Cross, his citation in the 'London Gazette' reading, 'The high degree of courage, skill and determination which this officer had invariably displayed on many occasions in the face of the enemy, sets an example which is unsurpassed'. The award was popular with his fellow officers at Scampton who held Babe Learoyd in the highest regard for his quiet modesty and cool unflappability. Further honours followed when in November 1940 he received the freedom of the borough of New Romney, Kent. 
Following his promotion to squadron leader, Learoyd acted temporarily as personal assistant to Air Chief Marshal Sir Robert Brooke-Popham before rejoining operations in February 1941 when he was appointed officer commanding 83 squadron at Scampton. He took up a new command as wing commander at operational training unit, Cottesmore, in the following June and six months later succeeded to the command of 44 squadron at Waddington, the first Avro Lancaster unit in the RAF. From January 1943 until the end of the war, Learoyd held a number of non-operational postings with the Air Ministry and with officer training units. 
In May 1945 Learoyd returned to operational flying when he joined 48 (Dakota) squadron and moved to west Africa. He returned to England in the following year and was demobilized in October 1946, transferring to the RAF reserve as wing commander. Learoyd then joined the Malayan civil aviation department where he piloted for the colony's governor. On returning to England he was employed briefly in a tractor and construction firm before joining Austin Motor Company as export sales manager. He remained with the company (later British Motor Corporation) for the rest of his working life. In the course of his work he visited the United States and later headed the company's fleet sales, particularly for government departments. His natural charm and wartime reputation led to his becoming involved in British Motor Corporation's public relations division, where he was repeatedly used as unofficial ambassador. 
Learoyd was a shy, unassuming man who rarely spoke about his wartime exploits over Germany. He had a lifelong passion for cars, particularly for Aston Martins, regularly attended the Le Mans 24 hour race, and was a frequent visitor to the Silverstone circuit. Although his later years were marred by diabetes that affected his vision, Learoyd was an active member of the Victoria Cross and George Cross Association. His portrait hangs in the Imperial War Museum. 
On 24 January 1996 Learoyd died suddenly at his home, 12 Fittleworth Gardens, Rustington, Sussex, from a heart attack, survived by a brother and sister. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 61947


Bell, Ronald Percy (1907-1996), physical chemist, was born on 24 November 1907 at Willowfield, Court House Road, Maidenhead, Berkshire, the eldest child of Edwin Alfred Bell (died 1954) and his wife, Beatrice Annie, 'nee' Ash (died 1929), elementary school teachers. He had a younger brother and an adopted younger sister. He was educated at Gordon Road School, Maidenhead, where his father was headmaster; Maidenhead County Boys' School, where he was influenced by Frank Sherwood Taylor; and Balliol College, Oxford, where he read chemistry under the tuition of H. B. Hartley. His Balliol open scholarship was won at the precocious age of sixteen. In 1927 he was awarded the Gibbs scholarship ('proxime accessit' 1926), and in 1928 he took a first-class honours degree. At Hartley's suggestion he then went to work with J. N. Bronsted in Copenhagen, and spent four years there, with senior studentships from Oxford University (1928-30) and the Goldsmiths' Company (1930-32). 
Association with Bronsted determined the main line of Bell's future research: reaction kinetics in solution, especially acid-base catalysis. During his career he published more than 200 scientific papers and three important monographs: 'Acid-Base Catalysis' (1941); 'The Proton in Chemistry' (1959); and 'The Tunnel Effect in Chemistry' (1980). His main achievement was to sharpen understanding over the whole range of reactions involving proton transfer. An ingenious experimentalist, for example using a tape recorder to follow fast reactions, he was also a perceptive theoretician, introducing the quantum mechanical tunnelling concept into chemistry. Languages came easily to him, and he was proficient in many: he translated three major physical chemistry books from Danish and one from German. On 16 April 1931 he married Margery Mary (1905-1999), only daughter of Cornelius West, retired builder, of Maidenhead, and his wife, Elizabeth Martha, 'nee' Last; they had one son, born in 1936. 
Hartley arranged for Bell to take over the physical chemistry teaching at Balliol in 1932, and in 1933 he was elected to a tutorial fellowship. His teaching methods were anachronistic, following Hartley's in starting with essays on the accurate determination of atomic weights. This drew caustic comment from his students, but did them no harm -- at least ten of them were elected later to the Royal Society. When H. C. Longuet-Higgins produced a speculative essay proposing a novel hydrogen-bridged structure for diborane, then a major conundrum, the idea was refined under Bell's guidance, and published jointly while Longuet-Higgins was still a second-year undergraduate. 
In the 1930s Bell was involved in helping academic refugees from Hitler. During the war he worked half time on Scandinavian intelligence analysis -- mostly involving the study of newspapers, but including the debriefing of escapees, one of whom was Niels Bohr, in 1943. His scientific interests became increasingly theoretical at this time, and he initiated a collaboration with C. A. Coulson, who was then in Dundee. This led to Coulson's migration to Oxford in 1945, and was the seed from which the Oxford school of theoretical chemistry grew. 
After the war Bell held many appointments in the university, on government bodies, and in learned societies, most notably the presidency of the Faraday Society (1956). In Balliol he chaired the committee which planned the Balliol-St Anne's Graduate Institution (opened in 1967), the first venture into co-education by any of the traditional Oxford colleges. Historian Christopher Hill was elected master of Balliol in 1965 by a very narrow majority over Bell, who was appointed the first vice-master of the college. Two years later, however, he left to become professor of chemistry at the University of Stirling. The parting with Balliol was amicable: he was elected to an honorary fellowship. Although he enjoyed helping to build up a new university, his later years at Stirling were marred by student unrest, which caused him a lot of worry because he was a member of the disciplinary appeals committee. 
Ronnie Bell was a small man, bespectacled, with somewhat prominent ears, trim in figure and in dress; he had a taste for good cigars, a discerning ear for music, and a love of hill-walking, especially in the Lake District, where he and his wife had a second home by Buttermere. He invariably expressed himself with precision, and was a stickler for accuracy in others, but he had an impish sense of humour. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1944, he acquired many distinctions, but was inclined to be self-effacing. He had abandoned plans to submit for a Copenhagen doctorate on election to his Balliol fellowship, and so for the greater part of his career stood out on official lists as a splendid oxymoron: ''Mr' R. P. Bell 'FRS''. 
On retirement from Stirling in 1975 Bell moved to Leeds, where he was an honorary research professor of the university from 1976 to 1990. He had a disabling stroke on 30 October 1991, and died on 9 January 1996 at the Kingston Nursing Home in Leeds. He was cremated on 22 January at Lawnswood, Leeds. 


@@@@@


doc= 61948


Shepherd, Ian Douglas Dawson- (1915-1996), charity administrator, was born on 23 September 1915 at Port Said, Egypt, the second of four children of John Dawson-Shepherd, an agriculturist in the colonial service, and his wife, Margaret. He had an older brother, Hanbury, and two younger sisters, Pamela and Penelope. Dawson-Shepherd attended London University and in 1939 joined the army where he was commissioned in the King's regiment (Liverpool) and rose to the rank of captain. He was seriously wounded in north Africa and invalided out of the army in 1944. Married twice, he had four daughters with his first wife, Margaret Grigg: Rosemary Hope (1941-1986), Anne, Sarah, and Deborah, and two with his second wife, Margaret Kathleen Johns: Judith and Andraea. 
Dawson-Shepherd's first child, Rosemary, was born on 20 March 1941 with cerebral palsy. It was the family's experience of trying to care for Rosemary against the background of poor or non-existent services and hostile public attitudes to disability that led Dawson-Shepherd, together with two other parents, Alex Moira and Eric Hodgson, and a social worker, Jean Garwood, to found the National Spastics Society. Planning began in October 1951 when Dawson-Shepherd laid a $5 note on the table of the meeting as the starting capital and promised to raise a million pounds in five years, a promise he kept. At the time that he made this promise he privately doubted whether his own wartime injuries, which left him with a permanent impairment and needing to use callipers for a number of years, together with a pre-existing stammer, fitted him for a leadership role in a major national organization. 
On 6 January 1952 the inaugural meeting of the National Spastics Society was held, attended by parents from across the country. The society's main aims were to establish a network of parents' groups and service centres to cater for the largely unmet needs of children and adults with cerebral palsy, to challenge attitudes towards disabled people, and to fund medical research into the cause of the disability. 
Dawson-Shepherd pioneered the application of marketing and public relations techniques, which later became standard in the charity sector, to build the organization's income from $11,000 in its first year to $1,400,000 at his retirement from the chair in 1960. This remarkable growth was achieved by an astute mixture of campaigning, fund-raising, and initiatives to raise public awareness. The marketing strategy focused on donations from ordinary people and culminated in the establishment of the Spastics football pools, an innovation that brought in over $2 million a year. This allowed the organization to expand rapidly in the late 1950s and early 1960s into the largest charity for physical disability in the country, with over thirty major services and a network of local parents' support groups being set up in less than ten years. Another innovation was the use of popular celebrities to attract publicity and help with fund-raising. Together with Wilfred Pickles, then a major BBC radio star, in July 1955 Dawson-Shepherd founded a sister organization, Stars Organization for Spastics (now Stars Organisation Supporting Action for People with Cerebral Palsy). The founding members of the sister organization included such popular entertainers as Vera Lynn, Tommy Cooper, Thora Hird, Harry Secombe, and Peter Sellers. Advertising and fund-raising appeals focused on the needs of young disabled children as public sympathy was more easily aroused for children. 
Dawson-Shepherd brought the needs of disabled people into strip cartoons, comics, and women's magazines. The award-winning 'Jessie', an adventure story for children featuring a child with cerebral palsy, which was based on an idea by Rosemary, and 'Every Eight Hours', a campaigning documentary, both reached wide audiences. The latter was one of the first attempts to combine news and documentary techniques to carry a public-education campaign on prime time television. Made for the BBC by his second wife, Margaret Johns, and personally scripted by Dawson-Shepherd, it was shown in 1960 to critical and popular acclaim. It featured Richard Dimbleby, at that time one of the best-known broadcasters in the country, and was repeated by the BBC because of demand from the public. 
This populist approach was a defining hallmark of the charity in its early years, in a sector dominated by establishment charities. Dawson-Shepherd characterized the organization as 'working class Davids shouting at the state Goliath', and continually strove to position it as the 'ordinary man's charity' in a post-war world that had begun to tire of class distinctions (Dawson-Shepherd, 57). 
Dawson-Shepherd also encouraged research into cerebral palsy. Advised by Dr Ronald MacKeith of the department of child health at Guy's Hospital, who had set up a pioneering clinic for children with cerebral palsy, he recruited Dr Paul Polani to develop a strategy for research into the causes of a number of neurological conditions. The pediatric research unit was established at Guy's in 1960 with a large grant from the organization. The association with MacKeith led to the establishment of the Mac Keith Press with support from the society in 1958. Its journal, 'Cerebral Palsy Bulletin', remained a pre-eminent source for worldwide medical research in pediatric neurology, helping to establish the field as a medical specialism. 
Because of the pressures of his job as international marketing director for Aspro-Nicholas, Dawson-Shepherd resigned as chairman in 1960. It was also becoming clear to him that the skills and entrepreneurship needed in establishing a major charity were not necessarily those most suitable for sustaining it. There had been growing clashes with some members of the board and senior staff, who found his creative but sometimes maverick approach hard to cope with. He continued active involvement with the organization and made a series of films about disability. However, he became increasingly critical of the organization's financial performance, and of what he perceived to be its failure to build on the early public relations successes. He was fully supportive of the change of name to Scope in 1994 and saw this as a natural fulfilment of the organization's early aspirations, arguing eloquently for the adoption of the new name. 
Dawson-Shepherd returned to the issues of medical prevention in 1990 when he used his considerable reputation within the medical establishment and his relationship with Professor Polani to found the Little Foundation, which aimed to reduce the incidence of disability at birth by research into the causes of neurological disorders. Despite his continued involvement and the support it received from some of the most renowned medical experts in the world, the foundation was not able to repeat his earlier fund-raising success. The funding environment had become more competitive and Dawson-Shepherd was still fund-raising for some of the major projects when he died of heart failure at Queen Mary's Hospital, London, on 8 January 1996. He was cremated and his ashes were buried at Girne (Kyrenia) in the old British cemetery in northern Cyprus, in the family plot and in the country where he had spent part of his childhood. 


@@@@@


doc= 61949


Reese, (John) Terence (1913-1996), bridge player and writer, was born on 28 August 1913 in the High Street, Epsom, Surrey, the son of John Reese, baker and confectioner, and his wife, Annie Maria Riddington, 'nee' Hutchings. His parents had met when 'first gentleman' and 'first lady' at a whist drive. He first played bridge at the age of seven, during a family holiday in Dorset. Finding thirteen cards rather a handful, he would dismount from his chair and sort his cards behind a cushion. He was educated at Bilton Grange preparatory school, then at Bradfield College, where he gained his colours at football and cricket. Very much an all-rounder, he won the top classical scholarship to New College, Oxford, and it was there that he first played bridge seriously. In the inaugural inter-varsity match he captained the Oxford team, defeating a Cambridge side led by Iain Macleod, the future chancellor of the exchequer. Unknown to the college authorities, Reese subsidized his lifestyle by running a book at nearby greyhound tracks. After leaving Oxford with a third-class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1935 he worked briefly at Harrods before becoming a full-time professional bridge player and writer. With four leading players of the day -- Macleod, Jack Marx, Maurice Harrison-Gray, and Skid Simon -- Reese invented the Acol bidding system. Still used by most British players, it embraced a variable no-trump, openings of one spade and one heart on a four-card suit, and intermediate two-bids. Joining forces with Hubert Phillips and Harold Franklin in 1936, he hosted early radio and television bridge programmes. 
The tall, balding Reese soon became the dominant figure in the tournament world. He formed a famous partnership with Boris Schapiro, winning the gold cup eight times and the master pairs seven times. Reese was a masterful card player but conservative in the auction; Schapiro was more flamboyant, choosing bids and plays likely to provoke the opponents into error. They were the anchor pair in British teams that won the European championship in 1948, 1949, 1954, and 1963. In 1955 came his supreme achievement, winning the world championship in New York. In 1961 he won the World Par Olympiad (where the hands are pre-set by an expert panel), and in 1962 added the World Pairs Olympiad. His supreme technique, and the consistency of his results, led many to rank him as the world's finest player. 
The 1965 world championships in Buenos Aires witnessed the biggest scandal ever to hit the world of bridge. Reese and Schapiro were accused of exchanging illicit information during the bidding -- signalling how many hearts they held by varying their finger positions. The World Bridge Federation judged them to be guilty. The verdict was not accepted in Britain and a full tribunal, headed by Sir John Foster and Lord Bourne, sat intermittently for many months. The visual evidence of finger signalling seemed convincing, but a detailed analysis of the subsequent bids and plays offered no evidence whatsoever that the pair had benefited from the information supposedly gained. Reese and Schapiro were eventually acquitted -- a verdict rejected by the World Bridge Federation. 
Reese achieved his greatest fame as a writer. Editor of the 'British Bridge World' magazine from 1955 to 1962, he became the game's most prolific author, producing over ninety titles. He combined exceptional insight into the game with a mastery of the English language. His famous classics, 'Reese on Play' (1948) and 'The Expert Game' (1958), dealt with areas of the game that players today still find difficult. He was also bridge correspondent for 'The Observer', the 'Evening News' (later the 'Evening Standard') and 'The Lady'. He made many lifelong friends but not everyone appreciated the way in which he expressed his opinions so openly. His terse book reviews were legendary. He dismissed one new work with: 'This writer knows little about bridge, even less about punctuation.' A book entitled 'Twelve Lessons on Bridge' was treated to: 'The author should hasten to take them!' When asked whether he received many letters from readers of his columns, Reese replied: 'They're not to be encouraged at any cost. I just return the letter with the odd 'yes' or 'no' scribbled on it. I rarely receive a second letter from the same source.' 
Reese married Alwyn Sherrington ('b'. 1939/40), a computer trainer's registrar and daughter of Richard Sherrington, builder, on 23 January 1970, and for many years they lived in Woods Mews, off Park Lane in central London. They then moved to a fine Edwardian apartment overlooking the seafront in Hove. At the age of eighty-three, now very deaf, Reese attended the Macallan International Pairs in London. 'Why on earth did he hold on to the diamonds?' he exclaimed loudly, after a world champion had misdefended a hand. 'It was obvious to keep the clubs.' Two days later, on 29 January 1996, he died at his home, Flat 5, 23 Adelaide Crescent, Hove, Sussex, of aspirin poisoning. An inquest held on 14 February returned a verdict of accidental death. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 61962


Smith, Worthington George (1835-1917), architectural and botanical illustrator and archaeologist, was born on 23 March 1835 at 19 Aske Street, Shoreditch, London, the only child of George Smith (1804-1877), a civil servant from Gaddesden Row, Hertfordshire, and Sarah Worthington (1809-1891) of Laxton, Nottinghamshire. Following an elementary education at St John's parochial school, Shoreditch, he initially wished to become an architect, and was apprenticed to A. E. Johnson of Buckingham Street, London, and later Horace Jones. With the former he designed ecclesiastical fittings for Roman Catholic churches, but the latter expected him to design drains. On 24 March 1856 Smith married Henrietta White (1831-1917), a bonnet sewer from Dunstable, with whom he had seven children, only three of whom survived early childhood. 
In 1861, disenchanted with routine architectural work, Smith became a freelance illustrator. Specializing in wood-engraving and lithography he prepared thousands of illustrations for 'The Builder' and similar magazines. Soon, however, he turned increasingly to botanical illustration: his work appeared in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' (he was its chief illustrator until 1910), the 'Journal of Horticulture', and many others. Mycology became a major interest: he lectured and wrote books for the British Museum (Natural History) on fungi, and sometimes risked his family's life by involving them in sampling edible and poisonous varieties. In July 1875 he was credited with discovering the cause of the devastating potato blight fungus and was awarded the Royal Horticultural Society's Knightian gold medal. Six months later the German mycologist, Anton de Bary, proved that Smith had been mistaken and had not found the cause, but the British scientific establishment ignored his evidence and Smith was lauded for the next twenty years, sitting on several government commissions concerned with plant diseases. 
Stimulated by reading Sir John Evans's 'Ancient Stone Implements of Great Britain' (1872), Smith combined searching for botanical specimens with seeking prehistoric implements. In 1878 he found a Lower Palaeolithic land surface bearing stone tools in commercial excavations at Stoke Newington Common, and soon traced it over a wide area of north-east London. 
Following his heart problems, in 1884 Smith and his family moved to 121 High Street South, Dunstable. Despite the move there was no reduction in Smith's output of botanical drawings, or his work for the Natural History Museum. At that time he also began to observe the local brickearth pits. In 1890 he discovered another Palaeolithic land surface at Caddington, 2 miles from Dunstable, with flint tools lying where they had been discarded between 125,000 and 400,000 years ago. He published his London and Dunstable discoveries in an outstanding book, 'Man, the Primeval Savage' (1894). The discoveries at Caddington were followed by others nearby at Whipsnade, Round Green, and Gaddesden Row. Of the five known British Lower Palaeolithic occupation sites listed in a comprehensive survey by Derek A. Roe (1968), four were discovered by Smith. His work encompassed numerous archaeological discoveries of other periods in the Dunstable area and beyond, as well as research in depth into the history of the town and neighbourhood, described in his 'Dunstable: its History and Surroundings' (1904). 
Ever impecunious, in 1902 Smith was awarded a civil-list pension of $50 per annum 'for services to archaeology' on the recommendation of Lord Avebury and Sir John Evans; on 9 November 1903 he became the first freeman of the borough of Dunstable 'in appreciation of the eminent services rendered to his country in connection with his profession, and his munificent gifts to the Corporation of Dunstable'. 
Smith died of pneumonia at his home, The Hawthorns, 121 High Street South, Dunstable, on 27 October 1917, four months after his wife; he was buried on 2 November at Dunstable cemetery. In retrospect his mycological work was overshadowed by that of his contemporaries, but his archaeological research 'represents a pinnacle of Victorian antiquarian endeavour' (White, 913). In the late twentieth century Smith's work has attracted renewed attention, with re-examination and reassessment of his discoveries. 


@@@@@


doc= 61965


Kelsall, John (1683-1743), Quaker minister and diarist, the son of John Kelsall (1650- 'c'.1684), a tailor and later proprietor of an ale house, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Cragg (1660- 'c'.1685), was born at Hart Street, near Covent Garden, London, on 18 September 1683. His parents died soon after, and with Joseph, his brother, he was 'left fatherless and motherless among strangers, very few or none of our kindred living in the City, but Friends were careful over us' (RS Friends, Lond., S.194/1). In May 1687 his grandmother took charge of the boys and settled them initially at Quernmore, near Lancaster. During 1687-9 Kelsall was locally educated before attending Abbeystead School in 1690. After his grandmother's death in 1699 Kelsall lived with an uncle at Wiersdale, where he continued his education. In April 1700 he briefly taught at a Friends' school at Yelland, but felt he had insufficient appreciation of Quaker doctrines. After this Kelsall went to Lancaster, where he fell into 'many troubles, temptations and exercises' (ibid.), but from June 1700 he underwent a spiritual conversion which was assisted with his removal to Penketh School. He remained here until May 1701 before accepting a teaching post at Dolobran Friends' school, near Welshpool, Montgomeryshire. From 1704 Kelsall became a regular representative to the London yearly meeting, but was not impressed by what he saw as the 'many spacious works and curious contrivances of men.... Pride and vanity are very regent and the glory of this world hath blinded the eyes of many' (ibid.). 
On 3 May 1711 Kelsall married Susannah (1688-1767), the daughter of Amos Davies of Coed Cowryd, and between 1713 and 1733 they had ten children. From 1713 he lived in the Dolobran meeting-house, but it was a difficult time. The school numbers had significantly dropped, and he was forced to sell his stock and equipment. He also considered emigrating to Pennsylvania with other Friends, in spite of his earlier protestations concerning Friends leaving Wales. In late 1713 the Quaker industrialist Abraham Darby offered him the position of clerk at the Dolgyn ironworks near Dolgellau, Merioneth, but Kelsall found that he could not be 'easie in my mind to be too hard and screwing with people in bargaining or agreements' (RS Friends, Lond., S.194/1). Later in 1719 he was dismissed by the works' new owner, Samuel Milner of Bewdley, but was appointed in April 1720 to a similar position at Dolobran by Charles Lloyd. After Lloyd was declared bankrupt Kelsall returned as clerk at the Dolgyn furnace under the Paytons of Dudley, where he remained until the works closed in 1734. During the next year Kelsall taught at Welshpool, but by June 1735, in an impoverished condition, he was forced to seek employment as a teacher in Cork, from where he returned in February of the following year. After another spell in Dublin, Kelsall accepted a teaching post in Chester before moving to Boughton in January 1740. From then until his death in 1743 he sought work wherever he could find it, but his poor health increasingly assisted his fall into poverty. 
Kelsall's diaries, now held at the Religious Society of Friends Library in London, provide insight into the hardships faced by, and lifestyle of, eighteenth-century Quakers in north-west England and Wales. While working for Charles Lloyd at Dolobran, for example, Kelsall commented on his disputes with non-Quakers and the difficulties faced by his employers and his family. Elsewhere, he recorded the numerous visitors to the Dolobran meeting, among them Quaker ministers from Pennsylvania. His religious beliefs were also expressed in his diaries, letters, and in the local meeting minutes. In 1705 he warned members about sleeping in meetings, while in April 1731 he complained that Friends 'unwilling to give... offence' were not testifying against the 'lifeless superstitious ministry of the Priests' (RS Friends, Lond., S.194/1). Kelsall may have also foreseen the rise of Methodism; it was, he wrote, 'my belief God will raise in due time a people out of Friends or others who will be commissioned to strike at the Root and Branch of Antichrist without Regard to the Frowns or Favours of High or Low Clergy or others. (ibid.)' Apart from his journals Kelsall also engaged in a sizeable correspondence and compiled two volumes of unpublished poetry. In 1726 his 'The Faithful Monitor, or, An Earnest Exhortation to Sobriety and Holiness' was published. In June 1737 he penned 'An alarm sounded to the sinners in Sion and all such as hold the truth in unrighteousness' and a 'List of such publick Friends and some others that I have known and had acquaintance withal since the year 1700' (RS Friends, Lond., S.191, 23 May 1736). These brief papers, however, were not published. Kelsall died on 1 August 1743 at Boughton, and was buried two days later at Newton, Cheshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 61967


Harries, John (c.1785-1839), astrologer and physician, was born possibly at Pant-Coi, Cwrtycadno, Carmarthenshire, the eldest son of Henry Jones Harries (1739-1805), and his wife, Mary Wilkins. He was educated until he was ten years old at The Cowings, Commercial Private Academy, Caeo, and then boarded at Haverfordwest grammar school until he was eighteen; when his father died in 1805 he inherited the estate of Cwrtycadno. 
It is not known where Harries studied medicine, but he later established a practice in Harley Street, London, with his astrologer friend Robert Cross Smith 
(alias Raphael; 1795-1832)
, before returning to Caeo to establish a practice there when he was in his forties. He was certainly a popular physician with a large practice: 'The sick and sorrowful came to enquire of his oracles from all parts of Wales, and from the testimony of the oldest people in the district, he was eminently successful in his cures. Lunatics were brought to him from parts of Pembrokeshire and Radnorshire, and he had a wonderful power over them. The course of treatment would include what he would term the water treatment, the herbs treatment, and the bleeding treatment. One of his chief methods was, he would take the afflicted to the brink of the river, and fire an old flint revolver; this would frighten his patient to such a degree that he would fall into the pool. He assumed the power of charming away pain, and was so successful that people believed thoroughly that he was in league with the evil one. (Price, 54)' Harries has been described as being 6 feet 2 inches tall, and well built in middle age, with 'Short dark hair... Mutton-chops sideboards. Medium sized forehead. Very straight nose. Mouth wide, slight jaws. At 53 years of age, beginning of a double chin. Blue, wistful thinking eyes' (Vaughan-Poppy, 4). It has been claimed that he married Elizabeth Emily Lewis, a lawyer's daughter from Fishguard. However, a marriage licence for 8 August 1821, records that John Harries, surgeon, and significantly a bachelor of Caeo parish, was married to a Lettice Rees. 
Their son 
Although the Harries family were recognized as doctors, they gained notoriety with their ability to predict future events, recover lost or stolen property, fight witchcraft, and invoke benign spirits. Henry Harries issued the following proclamation shortly before his father's death describing his work as that of a Dyn Hysbys ('cunning man') in Carmarthenshire. He suggested that he could, without seeing the person, determine: 'Temper, disposition, fortunate or unfortunate in their general pursuits, honour, riches, journeys and voyages (success therein, and what places best to travel in or reside in), friends and enemies, trade or profession best to follow, and whether fortunate in speculation, viz: lottery, dealing in foreign markets, etc. 
Of marriage, if to marry. The description, temper, disposition of the person, rich or poor, happy or unhappy in marriage, etc. 
Of children, whether fortunate or not, etc., deduced from the influence of the sun and moon, with the planetary orbs at the time of birth. 
Also judgement and general use in sickness and disease, etc. (Price, 56)' Tales of supernatural events involving both father and son have long found their way into Welsh folklore and are quite numerous and varied. One of the most famous incidents involving John Harries concerned the disappearance of a local girl and the recovery of her body at Maesyronnen -- the precise location where Harries had informed the police that they would find the corpse of the young girl who had been murdered by her boyfriend. This led to Harries being charged as an accessory to the crime and the penning of a popular verse: '
Awn yn alarus 

At Doctor Harries 

Am ei fod yn hysbys, 

I 'mofyn hanes hon; 

Dywedai ei bod yn gorwedd 

Gerllaw Maes yr on; 

Mae ceu-bren mawr o wenwyn 

Yn tyfu bwys y lle, 

A nant yn rhedeg heibio 

Lle'i lladdwyd ganddo fe. 




We go concerned 

To Doctor Harries 

Because he is 'Hysbys' 

To ask her history; 

He said that she was lying 

Near Maes yr on; 

There is a tree full of bees 

Growing by the place, 

And a stream runs near 

Where she was murdered by him. 
(NL Wales, MS 11119B and translation)' The details of the case were passed on to Llwyd Glansefin and Gwyn Glan Bran, two magistrates at Llandovery, who called Harries before them and accused him of the crime. Harries was prepared to demonstrate his talent for second sight as part of his defence by suggesting to the magistrates 'Dywedwch chwi yr awr y daethoch chwi i'r byd, Mi ddywedaf finnau yr awr yr ewch chwi allan ohono' ('You tell me which hour you came into the world, and I will tell you the hour you will depart from it'; Bosse-Griffiths, 16). The two magistrates not wishing to pursue this line of questioning and possibly unwilling to know their fate proceeded to set Harries free. 
Aspects of the supernatural involving both John and Henry Harries have underlined the importance of these men in Welsh folklore. In the Cwrtycadno collection (Pantcoy MSS) at the National Library of Wales there are various personal items, particularly astrological data, medical ledgers, and a book of incantations, which showed how the Dyn Hybsys could 'obtain the Familiar of the Genius or Good Spirit and cause him to appear' (J. C. Davies, 'Ghost-raising', 328). There are a considerable number of other tales which concern the Harrieses, notably the recovery of lost cows on Carmarthen Bridge and wedding rings, and the punishments meted out to people who had committed an act of ill will. John Harries died on 11 May 1839 aged fifty-four in a fire which also destroyed the family home at Pant-Coi, and on 13 May he was buried at Caeo churchyard. The character of his death, however, was unusual. He had a premonition that he would die by accident on 11 May 1839 and to avoid this happening he stayed in bed throughout the day. During the night, he was awoken by people crying out that the house was on fire. In his haste to dowse the flames he slipped from the ladder he was standing on and was killed. Henry Harries died aged twenty-eight from consumption, on 16 June 1849, and was buried three days later. 
Other family members also had some ability in predicting the future as 'there was also a daughter who was rather clever in the 'art'', as well as John Harries, who 'dabbled in it but never shone' (NL Wales, MS 11119B). These are probably references to Anne and John, the daughter and son or grandson of John Harries. The following letter from J. Williams of The Court, Brecon, on 21 March 1863, addressed to John Harries, shows the continuing role of the Harries family in Welsh social life: 'I have written to ask if you would oblige me by ruling my planet. I have long had a wish to have it done and when I heard of your truly wonderful gift I determined to write. I wish to know something relating to my marriage and particular friends. (NL Wales, MS 11717B)' This was certainly not an isolated case, as the fame of Cwrtycadno spread quickly throughout Wales and led to a number of distinguished visitors. These included the actress Sarah Siddons and her colleagues, and the writer George Borrow, who spent a day at Pant-Coi in 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 61968


Jones, Edmund (1702-1793), Independent minister and author, was born on 1 April 1702 in the parish of Aberystruth, Monmouthshire. His parents, John Lewis and his wife, Catherine Morgan, of Penllwyn, were of dissenting stock, and their son, who was largely self-taught, earned a reputation during his long life as being more Calvinist than Calvin himself. He began preaching as early as 1722 and was ordained at Pen-maen meeting-house in 1734. When his hopes of becoming minister at Pen-maen were dashed in 1740 he moved to Pontypool, where he contributed $30 to the building of a meeting-house at the Transh in 1741. For more than fifty years this pious, modest, and transparently honest man eked out a bare living as an Independent minister, but did more than anyone to ensure that dissent became a living force in south-east Wales. 
Shortly before his death in 1793, Jones had embarked on an autobiography which promised to document 'what occurrences & strange events came to pass in my long life' (Nuttall, 26), but since this work was neither completed nor published we must rely on his unpublished diaries, sermons, and letters, as well as his printed works, for details of his career. He was clearly a local patriot. His 'A Geographical, Historical, and Religious Account of the Parish of Aberystruth' (1779) reveals that he was acutely interested in topography, soil, climate, demography, and 'natural curiosities', and that his depth of local knowledge was a source of wonder in the parish. His knowledge of herbs, plants, and flowers was unrivalled, and an unpublished manuscript entitled 'A spiritual botanology showing what of God appears in the herbs of the earth' is eloquent testimony to his belief that God was at work in the natural world. 
Edmund Jones was also known locally as yr Hen Broffwyd (the Old Prophet). His powers of prognostication were legendary and, as his 'A Relation of Apparitions of Spirits in the Principality of Wales' (1780) indicates, he was vividly conscious of -- and troubled by -- the presence of spirits, ghosts, elves, goblins, and fairies in the world around him. Fired by the same motives that had inspired similar works by Joseph Glanvill and Richard Baxter, Jones despised those 'Sons of Infidelity' who spoke with 'levity and ridicule of Apparitions, as if they were the posterity and Scholars of the ancient Sadducees' ('Account', 68) and remained convinced that the Devil sent evil spirits to ensnare the innocent and the godly. Jones's fund of ghost stories and prophetic utterances became embedded in oral tradition and prompted some nineteenth-century commentators to refer to him rather unkindly as 'Edmund Jones of Ghostly memory'. 
Even though he was in many ways a naive and credulous man, paradoxically Edmund Jones was also thoroughly versed in Calvinist theology and was the nearest thing to a bishop in Welsh Independent circles in the eighteenth century. A compulsive reader, he spent what little money he possessed on the sermons of seventeenth-century puritans, whose works he copiously annotated with pungent references to 'blind malignant royalists'. He abhorred the new spirit of critical enquiry fostered in the Welsh academies, notably at Carmarthen, and loudly denounced the 'blasphemous' tenets of Arminians, Arians, and deists. In order to strengthen the Calvinist tradition he was willing to travel long distances to preach the gospel. As late as 1789, when he was eighty-seven years old, he preached on no fewer than 405 occasions in various parts of Wales, and when he died four years later he proudly declared that he had served as 'a soldier against the spirit of error in this country' (Nuttall, 27). Even Baptists, in his view, were enemies of God, and his diaries are peppered with earnest prayers such as 'Lord, prosper not Anabaptism, but let it wither daily' (NL Wales, MS 7026A, fol. 117). 
Although Jones's published sermons, notably 'Two sermons, first shewing the misery of those who are without the light of Christ; second shewing the felicity of being in the state of the light of grace' (1776), are prosaic, plodding texts, his services were reputedly as warm and animated as any conducted by revivalist preachers. Like several dissenting colleagues in the late 1730s, Jones caught the revivalist fever and began to follow what he called 'the Methodist way'. Captivated by the enthusiasm and energy of the Welsh revivalist Howel Harris, he invited him to Monmouthshire and accompanied him on his preaching tours in the spring of 1738. Although his relations with Harris were subsequently riven with friction, Jones continued to take young Methodists under his wing, to introduce them to potential converts, and to preach regularly at Trevecca College, often in the company of the countess of Huntingdon, one of his greatest admirers. His principal concern, however, was to protect the dissenting inheritance and to strengthen the position and authority of the faith of his forefathers. He rightly chided William Williams (Pantycelyn) for claiming that 'neither priest nor Presbyter were awake' when the Methodist trumpet first rang out (NL Wales, MS 7027A). 
Edmund Jones and his 'beloved spouse' Mary (who predeceased him on 1 August 1770) lived in poverty, largely because Jones was generous to a fault. It was not uncommon for him to hand over his overcoat and shirt to penurious people. His favourite motto was 'Jehova Jireh' ('The Lord will provide') and on his preaching tours householders who were aware of his selfless labours and charitable disposition plied him with shirts, handkerchiefs, wool, bags of wheat, and money to buy books. Jones died, aged ninety-one, on 26 November 1793 in Pontnewynydd, where he was buried in the graveyard of Ebenezer Chapel. When a memorial was raised to 'Prophet Jones' in 1907, a host of traditions still circulated in the locality regarding his prophecies, peculiarities, ministerial labours, and boundless generosity. Regrettably, however, he has been poorly served by twentieth-century historians. 


@@@@@


doc= 61971


Holme, Thomas (1626/7-1666), Quaker missionary, was born at Kendal in Westmorland to parents at present unknown, and was by trade a weaver. In 1652 he was convinced by William Gibson and later became 'the apostle of Quakerism in South Wales' (Braithwaite, 'Beginnings', 92). In 1653 he began his first missionary tour of Cumberland, Westmorland, co. Durham, Lancashire, Staffordshire, and Cheshire where, although he experienced success in gaining converts, he occasionally met violent opposition. In October 1653, while preaching at a conventicle at Durham, he was 'violently pulled downe... from the seat on wch he stood' (Penney, 89), but was rescued by other Friends at the meeting. Similarly on 28 August 1655 while in prison at Chester, Holme wrote to Margaret Fell noting that prior to his arrest he had 'suffered sum percution... stones & durt cast upon mee' (RS Friends, Lond., Swarthmore MSS, 1.197). In a letter of 10 December 1655 Holme observed that William Bell, vicar of Huyton near Liverpool, had threatened to confront the Quakers and 'have our blood' (ibid., 1.194). 
In earlier letters written from Chester between March and October 1654 to George Fox, Thomas Willan, and Margaret Fell, Holme noted that he was in prison along with other Friends, notably 
It was, however, in Wales that Holme made his greatest impact. He held open-air meetings or 'threshing meetings' in Wales and frequently harangued clergymen. As a consequence he was constantly imprisoned and received 'many hardships, as scoffing, scorneing, beatinge, and Imprisonmt' (Penney, 257). On 16 October 1654 he married Elizabeth Leavens, after they had seen visions that this was the will of God. Their marriage and Elizabeth's subsequent pregnancy in 1656 caused Margaret Fell to rebuke the couple as she felt that they were undermining their missionary work and burdening recently 'convinced' members in south Wales. Yet both continued to preach after their marriage and ensured that they conducted separate preaching tours. They had three children who remained with fellow Friends, but who after the death of Thomas and Elizabeth 'walked not in the steps of theire honrable parents' (ibid., 260). 
The preaching of Holmes and his wife quickly converted many Welsh people to Quakerism. In 1655 Thomas Willan of Kendal wrote to Margaret Fell about the success of their missionary work, and on 27 February 1656 Holme himself wrote to Fox that his arrival in Radnor had led to the conversion of many Welsh Baptists and consequently 'many of the Churches ar[e] broken in pecses' (RS Friends, Lond., Swarthmore MSS, 4.247). He had, he continued, held two further meetings in Abergavenny in Monmouthshire, the first at an inn and the second, the following day, in the market place where he 'drew the peopell into A convenient place & spok A prety time to them' (ibid.). Such meetings, he felt, 'cast A sund thoraw the town & country for not any frind had spoken ther before...' and '... the Lord is gathering A peopell in Munmuthshir & Glamorganshir' (ibid.). Similarly he informed Margaret Fell the following April that in Monmouthshire and Glamorgan Friends were able to hold at least ten meetings on a regular basis and 'in many places hear is breakings thorow A peopell the lord... is gathering' (RS Friends, Lond., Swarthmore MSS, 1.203). 
With the assistance of Holme's wife, Elizabeth, and Alice Birkett, another itinerant preacher, further meetings were held throughout south Wales, and among the first attenders were two justices of the peace, one at Newport and Walter Jenkins of Llanfihangel Ystum Llywern. More conversions soon followed. As the meetings increased in size Holme was able to organize small communities of worshippers to meet in family homes or at other suitable venues. 
In 1657 Holme complained about Welsh Friends who had accompanied James Nayler to Bristol. He criticized the constant interruptions of Nayler's devotees to the Welsh meetings and noted their 'tumbling on floors' and their preference for sackcloth and ashes (RS Friends, Lond., Swarthmore MSS, 1.196). In response George Fox visited Wales and, with the assistance of Holme, helped to convince many of 'Truth' and established new meetings. On 16 April 1657 Holme expressed his fervent piety in a letter to Margaret Fell: 'I know that hee that hath delivered me will alsoe deliver mee, from every evell worke, hee hath not left my soull in hell, but hath redemed it by his precious blood, of which I daily drinke, wher by I am dayly refreshed. (ibid.)' The following year Holme was imprisoned at Usk, Monmouthshire, for disturbing a minister during divine service at Caer-went, and continued to preach against 'hireling' ministers throughout the remaining years of the interregnum. Outdoor meetings continued to be held: in March 1660 Holme recorded both that at several meetings in south Wales 'many was convinced of the truth... and unclean spirits are cept down... the power of god is on top of that which would have been on top of it' and the continuing animosity that such meetings generated; soldiers had violently broken up a meeting in Monmouthshire and 'threatened to pistol one or two of us', later imprisoning nineteen Friends at Usk gaol (RS Friends, Lond., Swarthmore MSS, 4.253, 252). He was again imprisoned at Cardiff in 1661. The persecution of Friends had not abated by 1663 when Holme wrote to Fox on 11 June noting the various meetings that had been established in Wales as well as the occasional violence encountered by Friends. 
Holme, along with other missionary Friends from the north of England, was 'instrumentall to the Convincemt of many, and to strengthen in the Truth those that were convinc't before' (Penney, 323). On 10 September 1665 Elizabeth Holme died at Kendal and on 2 October 1666 Thomas died, at St Fagans, near Cardiff, aged thirty-nine. On 4 October he was interred at the Pont-y-Moel burial-ground in Pontypool. According to Friends his death was 'greatly Lameneted... his service amongst them haveing bene so great that he was highly Esteemed & beloved by them above most' (ibid., 257). 


@@@@@


doc= 61973


John ap John (c.1625-1697), Quaker leader, possibly the son of John ap John, was born at Pen-y-cefn in Coed Cristionydd township, Ruabon, Denbighshire. Upon his marriage in 1663 to Catherine Edwards (died 1695), the widow of David ab Edward, John ap John moved to Plas Efa, Trefor, near Llangollen. A yeoman farmer, he also held other freehold properties at Trefor and Rhuddallt. 
It is possible that John ap John was educated at a school at Wrexham and may well have been influenced by the puritan preacher Walter Cradock, who was the curate of the parish in 1635. Puritan influence on him was reinforced during the civil war, and it is likely that he was a chaplain to the parliamentary garrison stationed near Beaumaris during the late 1640s. John was also a member of Morgan Llwyd's congregationalists at Wrexham. In 1653 Llwyd sent John and another member of the congregation to Swarthmoor Hall in Furness, Lancashire, to meet George Fox and investigate the Quaker movement. As a result of this meeting John and his companion were convinced of the Quaker message. After this event John ap John became a notable Quaker preacher throughout Wales, whose ministry was 'very effectuall to the Convincemt. of Many' (Penney, 323). 
After he established his first Quaker congregation at Pen-y-cefn, John ap John proceeded in 1654 to preach throughout south Wales and the borders. As a consequence of this missionary work he was imprisoned in Cardiff and Usk in Monmouthshire during his first year of missionary work. In their accounts of the persecution suffered by Welsh Friends, members recorded that in 1655 at Usk in Monmouthshire John ap John was the first Friend to be imprisoned for disturbing a minister in the county. He was nevertheless eventually released with the assistance of the Quaker magistrate Walter Jenkins. At Swansea in October 1655 John ap John, after disputing with Morris Bidwell, the Independent minister of St Mary's Church, was seized by the collar and confined to 'a close dark prison' before being brought before the magistrates who were intent on having 'him whipt, that the Devil might come out of him' (Besse, 1.735). On 8 October 1655 a mittimus was sent to the keeper of the common gaol at Cardiff stating that 'John ap John of Denbighshire hath misbehaved himself contrary to the Laws' (ibid., 1.736). He was kept in this prison for at least three months. 
During June and July 1657 John ap John accompanied George Fox on his missionary tour around Wales. He was, however, arrested and briefly imprisoned at Tenby, and at 'a great market town' (Norris and Penney, 8), presumably referring to Carmarthen. The two men also visited Dolgellau, Caernarfon, and Beaumaris in north Wales, where John carried the main burden of preaching and bore the brunt of official hostility and popular abuse. It has been conjectured that the imprisonment of John ap John stemmed less from the 'desire on the part of the magistrates to imprison vindictively, than to imprison and send away for the purpose of preserving the peace' (ibid.). Like many other Friends John ap John was in 1658 threatened with physical force when he refused to pay tithes. He was again detained in Swansea in 1658 and imprisoned for twenty weeks in Cardiff for preaching against Evan Griffith, the minister of Oxwich in Gower, who pulled John's hair while he was also 'struck and pulled by the nose' (Great Book of Sufferings, 2, fol. 3) by Morris Bidwell. John was also briefly imprisoned in 1660, along with several other Welsh Friends, in Cardiff after conducting a Quaker meeting. In 1663, 1668, and again in 1670 he was fined by the magistrates at Wrexham and Ruthin for holding Quaker meetings. In spite of these hardships John ap John remained committed to the Society of Friends and secured notable conversions, including William Bevan, a prosperous Swansea merchant, the Lloyd family of Dolobran, and Richard Davies, a felt maker from Cloddiau Cochion near Welshpool. In 1668 John ap John again travelled as itinerant preacher when Fox returned to Wales and he similarly accompanied Richard Davies and John Burnyeat, another Quaker missionary, in their travels throughout Wales in 1669 and 1675. Davies wrote in his 'Journal' that 'We declared the word of the Lord both in Welsh and English. My Friend John ap John was very sound and intelligible in the Welsh language' ('Account of the Convincement', 165). 
In August 1673 John ap John reflected upon his life as a Quaker missionary and wrote 'I have received much and done but little' (Norris and Penney, 6), yet from 1667 he was instrumental in establishing further meetings throughout Wales. He helped to develop the organizational apparatus of Welsh monthly, quarterly, and yearly meetings which enabled the society to survive and prosper, especially in times of persecution or when many Friends in the country sought refuge in America. On 15 September 1681 John ap John and Thomas Wynne, the Quaker barber-surgeon of Caerwys, purchased 5000 acres in Pennsylvania for an initial sum of $100 with the intention of assisting Friends who were prepared to emigrate. He was, therefore, 'the father of the 'Welsh Tract' in Pennsylvania' who first spoke to William Penn about buying some of his land in America. John may have been in Penn's confidence and, having early notice of the royal grant, suggested to the Welsh to secure the best lands (Bebb, 188). In 1683 John published 'Tystiolaeth o gariad ac ewyllys da' -- a translation of John Songhurst's 'Testimony of Love and Good will' (1680) and a call to Friends to be loyal to truth and the light. He also attended many of the Welsh yearly meetings and held the 1693 yearly meeting at his own home. 
On 9 February 1695 Catherine, his wife, died at Rhuddallt and was buried at Trefor. Before his death John ap John went to live with his daughter Phoebe, the wife of John Mellor of Whitehough Manor, Ipstones parish, Staffordshire, where he died on 16 November 1697. He was later buried nearby at Basford. 


@@@@@


doc= 61974


Morgan, David Thomas (c.1695-1746), Jacobite campaigner, was the only son of Thomas Morgan of Pen-y-graig House, Glamorgan, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of David Mathew of Llandaff Court. His father, an under-sheriff of Glamorgan in 1682, was a distant connection of the influential Morgan of Tredegar family, while his mother was the first cousin of Admiral Thomas Mathews. This was a powerful whig connection, but Morgan followed a quite different political path. He was educated at the Middle Temple (admitted 1711, called 1721), and practised at Westminster Hall and probably also on his home Brecon circuit of south-east Wales. He married a London woman (identity unknown), through whom he acquired property in Shoreditch. They had one daughter, Mary. Although he inherited Pen-y-graig House, in the then rural parish of Merthyr Tudful, he spent most of his time in London, albeit not in assiduous pursuit of his profession. 'As to my capacity as one bred to the law, I confess that I never pretended to much knowledge that way', he said at his treason trial. Morgan claimed then to have served in two military campaigns on behalf of the crown, and he was certainly a man of many parts. A devout Anglican, he set out his faith in a book, 'The Christian Test'. He also sufficiently dabbled in verse for Horace Walpole to call him 'a poetical lawyer' at his execution (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.287). But his chief diversion was politics. He wrote a pamphlet attacking Sir Robert Walpole for corruption, and in the 1740s was a member of an opposition organization, the Independent Electors of Westminster, before he took part in the Jacobite rising of 1745. 
Together with Monmouthshire squire William Vaughan of Courtfield, Morgan joined the army of Charles Edward Stuart at Preston. As Squire Morgan he busied himself in Manchester, recruiting and requisitioning arms. He was offered but declined command of the 'Manchester regiment', and was co-opted onto the prince's council as an expert on England, his legal status earning him the nickname 'the Pretender's Counsellor' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.287). He argued that Wales should be the target destination both from Manchester and after the retreat from Derby, where he strongly advocated a bold march on London. Reputedly declaring, 'I had rather be 'hanged' than go to Scotland to 'starve'', he deserted the Jacobite army in Staffordshire on 7 December, and was at once arrested at Stone and put in Stafford gaol. There on 9 December he asked for pardon, denying that he had been a rebel, and took the same line at his trial in London from 18 to 22 July 1746. A succession of witnesses, including his own servant John Barry, there described how he had paraded at Preston with a white cockade and sword, and how on the march to Manchester and Derby he often rode alongside the Pretender. Morgan's defence was that he had been taken prisoner by the rebels while visiting friends in Cheshire, and had escaped at the first opportunity. This was so unconvincing that the jury found him guilty of high treason without leaving the courtroom. Morgan was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, beheaded, and quartered. The execution took place on 30 July 1746, when he was about fifty-one, and his head was stuck up at Temple Bar. His last request was for coffee 'very good and strong'. Posthumous blackening of his character is reflected in this observation from Howell's 'State Trials' (18.389): 'He was a person of a very mean look, and seldom kept company with any gentleman of his neighbourhood; and if it had not been for his estate, he might have starved, for he was so very lofty, and of so bad a temper, that nobody but such as were beholden to him cared to employ him.' 



@@@@@


doc= 61975


Kemeys family (per. c.1570-1747), landowners, were allegedly descended from Stephen de Kemeys who owned land in Monmouthshire about 1234. Between 1576 and 1783 nine members of the Kemeys family were sheriffs of Glamorgan while several represented the borough or the county of Monmouth in parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 61979


Erbery, Dorcas (fl. 1656-1659), Quaker preacher, possibly born in Cardiff, was the daughter of William Erbery (1604/5-1654), puritan minister, and his wife, Mary (died 1667x70), who also became a Quaker preacher. Young female preachers often followed the missionary tradition practised by their mothers. Thus Quaker daughters, it has been suggested, acted as female 'apprentices' and this is indicated in the actions of Dorcas Erbery, who undertook missionary journeys with her mother and suffered with her for her Quaker beliefs. In June 1656, when accompanied by Tobias (Toby) Hodge, she was arrested and imprisoned in Cardiff gaol for disturbing a local clergyman in the market place. In the following month she was again arrested and imprisoned in Exeter, along with her mother and many other Friends, 'among Felons and lay generally in straw by reason of which, and the filth of the place, many of them fell sick' (Besse, 1.149). It is possible that Dorcas could have contracted a disease while in prison but was able to survive it -- unlike her fellow Quaker missionary Jane Ingram. 
Dorcas Erbery, is, however, best known for her involvement on 24 October 1656 as one of the Quaker women who accompanied James Nayler, the leading Quaker preacher, during his symbolic entry into Bristol. She took a leading part in the re-enactment by Nayler of Christ's entry into Jerusalem. During her appearance before the local magistrates on 27 October Erbery told the magistrates that Nayler had earlier raised her from the dead while imprisoned in Exeter between July and August 1656: a claim which Nayler strenuously denied, commenting that only God had the power of life and death. During Nayler's court case for blasphemy at Bristol (5-16 December 1656) Erbery argued that Nayler 'shall sit at the right hand of the Father and shall Judge the world' (Farmer, 19) and claimed further that Nayler was 'the only begotten son of God... I know of no other Saviour but him' (ibid., 18). Erbery's words led to suspicions that she was either mad or bewitched. Such sentiments were given greater credence when she joined Martha Simmonds and Hannah Stranger near the pilloried Nayler in emulation of the women who had assembled at the crucifixion of Christ. 
The Nayler episode nevertheless divided the Quakers, who were now split between those expressing the ecstasy of God's word in ranting behaviour and those who used more conventional Quaker means of proclaiming their message. In 1657 George Fox specifically admonished those Cardiff Quakers who 'had run out with James Naylor' ('Journal of George Fox', 292), notably Dorcas Erbery, who 'seems not to have expressed any remorse for what occurred. Indeed she may well have been among those who continued to be a disruptive influence among Quakers of the 'mainstream' for some months after their release' (Trevett, 'William Erbery and his daughter Dorcas', 37). 
Undaunted by her experience of imprisonment and the ridicule heaped upon her, Erbery remained committed to the Quaker cause. It has been suggested further that 'the country-wide disapproval among Friends of James Nayler's followers had done nothing to dampen the ardour of Dorcas Erbery or her enthusiasm for public ministry' (Trevett, 'William Erbery and his daughter Dorcas', 35). Along with her widowed mother Dorcas Erbery, as an unmarried preacher, had time to devote to the Quaker cause and remained unmarried until at least 1658. She returned to Cardiff, where she and Toby Hodge were imprisoned in the summer of 1658 for berating the local presbyterian minister, Benjamin Flower, at St John's Church. The 'Great book of sufferings' compiled by Friends recorded that, although both Quakers were briefly released, they were nevertheless 'brought in againe by order of Reece Davis bailiffe' ('Great book of sufferings', vol. 2, fol. 3). The protector's council called upon the keeper of Cardiff gaol for an account of their 'commitment and detention' as they had not been brought to trial ('CSP dom.', '1658', 165). The reply from the keeper stated that both Quakers were detained for their disruption of divine service on 19 July, and as no general sessions court had been held since their apprehension they were being held over until the next assize. It is likely that Dorcas had interrupted Flower on a later occasion as her mittimus was not signed until 31 August. Even after these inquiries, which seem to indicate that the Quakers had acted illegally, they were released and 'neverr brought to tyrall' ('Great book of sufferings', vol. 2, fol. 3). 
A further record in 1658 noted that Dorcas Erbery was again arrested and imprisoned in Bristol gaol with many other Friends for 'preaching and declaring the truth to the people in the public places of resort and concourse' (Besse, 1.365). She was again imprisoned in London in 1659 along with her mother and Esther Biddle, another female Quaker missionary, for public preaching. After this date, however, she disappears from the Quaker records and to date there has been little evidence as to her whereabouts thereafter. It is known that in 1658 she was unmarried, but in the will of her mother, proved in 1670, there is a reference to the unnamed children of Dorcas. No provision was made for Dorcas, which would suggest that she had died in the 1660s. Christine Trevett has suggested that, like many of her co-religionists, she may have emigrated to America or the West Indies. Indeed her sister Lydia Erbery had married Henry Fell, a Quaker missionary in the West Indies, and many other Friends Dorcas associated with had made their way there. What became of Dorcas Erbery is difficult to tell and it can only be conjectured that she 'married, embraced sobriety and died' or 'remained a troublesome woman in the eyes of society, and a non-conformist one even in Quaker circles, so that she was sidelined quietly in Quaker records' (Trevett, 'William Erbery and his daughter Dorcas', 43). 


@@@@@


doc= 61980


Worlock, Derek John Harford (1920-1996), Roman Catholic archbishop of Liverpool, was born at 7F Grove End Road, St John's Wood, London, on 4 February 1920, the second of three children of Captain Harford Worlock (1883-1956), journalist, civil servant, and Conservative Party agent, and his wife, Dora Dennis Hoblyn (1881-1953), daughter of Charles Dennis Hoblyn, of Newlyn, Cornwall, a London stockbroker. His paternal grandfather was Thomas Worlock, civil servant; his mother was an organizer for the women's suffrage movement. His parents both became Catholics in July 1913, prior to their marriage in 1914. He was baptized on 12 February 1920, with his twin sister, in the family house, the ceremony being registered at Our Lady's Catholic Church, St John's Wood, on 27 March. He first attended Priory House preparatory school in Swiss Cottage (1926) and then Oakland House preparatory school in Blackheath (1927). In 1929 the family moved to Winchester, as his father, who had fought at the battle of the Somme, became Conservative Party agent for that constituency. There he attended Winton House School until 1934, when he was accepted in Douglass House, at St Edmund's College, Ware, Hertfordshire, as a junior candidate for the priesthood for the diocese of Westminster. From an early age he had shown determination to be a Catholic priest and in this was encouraged by his parents. After studies of philosophy and theology he was ordained to the priesthood in Westminster Cathedral by Archbishop Bernard William Griffin on 3 June 1944, three days before D-day. During his student days he was captain of Douglass House and of the college rugby team, the writer and producer of plays, senior warden responsible for air-raid and fire precautions, and an industrious student. At one point his ordination was in question because of ill health, which also prevented him from pursuing further studies at Cambridge University. 
After ordination Worlock's first appointment, in July 1944, was as a curate in the parish of Our Lady of Victories, Kensington, where he was engaged in ministering to victims of the war bombing. In July 1945 he was appointed under-secretary to Archbishop Griffin and thereby involved in much contact and negotiation with the newly formed Labour government, especially in matters of health, welfare, and education. In 1947 he became first secretary to Cardinal Griffin and, in August 1949, was made a monsignor at the age of twenty-nine. He accompanied Cardinal Griffin on trips to Europe, Canada, and the United States, which were aimed at the social and spiritual rebuilding taking place in the post-war period. From the early 1950s he had virtual responsibility for the administration of the diocese, because of Griffin's ill health. After the death of Cardinal Griffin on 20 August 1956, Worlock became secretary to the new archbishop, William Godfrey, in December 1956. As a former papal diplomat, Godfrey enjoyed good contacts in the Holy See, and personal friendship with Pope John XXIII. When in 1958 the pope announced the holding of the Second Vatican Council, Cardinal Godfrey was made a member of the central preparatory commission. For Worlock this meant numerous journeys to Rome, in support of the cardinal, who at that time was recovering from a cancer operation. By the time of the opening of the Second Vatican Council in October 1962, Worlock was well known in Rome and given advisory and administrative tasks in support of the bishops from England and Wales attending the council. 
On 20 January 1963 Cardinal Godfrey died. John Carmel Heenan was appointed to succeed him that September. During the second session of the council, in the autumn of 1963, Worlock continued his work as an adviser (or 'peritus'), but on his return to London his nineteen years' work in Archbishop's House, Westminster, came to an end. In March 1964 he was appointed parish priest of St Mary and St Michael, Commercial Road, east London. There he combined pastoral duties and innovations with his continuing involvement in the work of the council. He attended the third and fourth sessions of the council during the autumns of 1964 and 1965, helping to draft sections of the council documents, particularly the decree on the apostolate of the laity ('Apostolicam actuositatem') and the pastoral constitution on the church in the world of today ('Gaudium et spes'). At this time he first made the acquaintance of many leading bishops and theologians from around the world, including Karol Wojtyla, the future Pope John Paul II. He also kept frank and detailed diaries of the events of the Second Vatican Council. In 1965 he published 'English Bishops at the Council', an uncontroversial account of aspects of the work of the council. 
In the course of the final session of the Second Vatican Council, on 18 October 1965, Worlock was appointed sixth bishop of Portsmouth, at the age of forty-five. With the ending of the council on 7 December, he was able to return to England and take up these new duties, with episcopal ordination on 21 December. During his ten years as bishop of Portsmouth, he worked endlessly to implement the conclusions of the council in all aspects of the life of the church, its liturgy, education, social mission, in relation to other Christian churches, and in relation to public and political life. Some of his thoughts about this reform were expressed in a book, 'Give Me Your Hand' (1977). During this time he was appointed episcopal secretary of the bishops' conference of England and Wales. As president of the laity council for England and Wales, and as a member of the pontifical council for the laity, he promoted the responsibilities and roles of the Catholic laity. He also became a regular member of the international synod of bishops, a body newly established by the council, which met every few years. He was elected to this task by the bishops' conference of England and Wales. 
On 7 February 1976 Worlock was appointed to succeed Archbishop George Andrew Beck as the tenth archbishop of Liverpool, at the same time as Abbot Hume of Ampleforth was appointed archbishop of Westminster. Derek Worlock took up his new appointment on 16 March, and thus became responsible for one of the largest Catholic dioceses. He was, shortly afterwards, elected vice-president of the bishops' conference which led to the enduring and fruitful partnership between himself and Cardinal Hume. Although different in temperament and talent, with Hume intuitive and charismatic, and Worlock methodical and far-sighted, this partnership gave particular character to Catholic life in England for twenty years. 
Worlock's arrival in Liverpool also established the partnership he enjoyed with Bishop David Sheppard, the Anglican bishop of Liverpool. Throughout the next twenty years they worked closely together on all major issues of concern to the city and their church communities. Often in partnership with the leader of the free churches, they gave a new profile to the Christian presence and gospel in the north-west of England. Together they published two books about their ministry in Liverpool: 'Better Together' (1988) and 'With Christ in the Wilderness' (1990). Together they were able to welcome Elizabeth II on her silver jubilee visit to Liverpool in the summer of 1977, including her attendance at services in both the Anglican and Catholic cathedrals. 
In 1979 Worlock went to Latin America in order to visit some of his priests who were working there. On his return he established the Liverpool archdiocesan missionary project (LAMP) which ensured that the resources of the archdiocese were shared with the poorest parts of the church in Latin America. His skills as a diplomat and organizer were crucial in two major Catholic initiatives at that time. In 1980 the national pastoral congress was held in Liverpool. This major gathering undertook a review of Catholic life and put forward recommendations for the future. Worlock was essential in its planning, execution, and follow-up. He also played a central role in the visit of Pope John Paul II to Britain in May 1982, the first ever visit a pope had made to Britain. With the outbreak of the conflict in the Falklands, the visit came under threat of cancellation, but Worlock played a crucial role in ensuring that it went ahead. The visit of the pope to Liverpool was remembered as a turning point in relationships between the churches in these islands. 
In response to the Toxteth riots of 1981, Worlock became more directly involved in the public life of Liverpool. He took significant steps, at some personal risk, to foster better relationships between the local community and the police, and worked hard for the establishment of the Liverpool 8 law centre. During these years, the well-established church leaders group was involved in a number of important industrial disputes in and around Merseyside, always with the intention of effecting reconciliation between conflicting parties. Worlock and Sheppard were also members of the Merseyside enterprise forum, and, after the successful international garden festival held in Liverpool in 1984, they took the initiative of establishing the Michaelmas group, a forum for up to twenty leaders of industry and enterprise at which ways of revitalizing the city could be explored. At this time Liverpool politics were dominated by the Militant Tendency group, and all Worlock's political skill was required in his attempts, with Sheppard, to foster understanding between the city and central government. In the autumn of 1984 he also took steps to see if there was any scope for further discussion when the national miners' strike had become deadlocked. Although his efforts were not successful, and open to misinterpretation, they were typical of his determination to apply his vision of Christian reconciliation to the most complex of social problems. He also took particular interest in housing issues, sustaining detailed and challenging dialogue with successive government ministers. 
In May 1985 a major disturbance at the Heysel football stadium in Brussels before a match between Liverpool and Juventus caused the death and injury of many people from Turin. Worlock and Sheppard took a major role not only in bringing consolation to many but also in attempting to repair the damaged relationships. They went to Turin with a delegation of Liverpool city councillors, and Worlock celebrated a mass of reconciliation in the cathedral of Turin. A further tragedy occurred on 15 April 1989 at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, in which ninety-six Liverpool supporters died. At the mass held the following evening in the Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral, attended by almost 8000 people, Worlock exercised a unique ministry to a city in a moment of shock and horror. 
Throughout the period after the Second Vatican Council, Worlock also sought to promote better understanding and greater visible unity between the Christian churches, through his tireless work for the establishment of the Council of Churches for Britain and Ireland. The inaugural ceremonies for that new council took place in the two cathedrals of Liverpool in 1989. Earlier, he had worked with the six Merseyside church leaders to establish a covenant to unity, entitled 'Called to partnership', signed on 26 May 1985 in the Anglican cathedral. Growing out of this, the Merseyside and region churches ecumenical assembly (MARCEA) was established as a forum for ensuring Christian partnership wherever possible. From 1973 until 1994 he attended the annual meetings of the national conference of priests of England and Wales. Appointed to this task by his fellow bishops shortly after its establishment, he guided and defended the conference through many difficulties. In this he demonstrated characteristic dedication and loyalty to the priests, courage and astuteness in the advice he gave, and willingness to see through a task once undertaken. 
In July 1992 Worlock was first diagnosed as suffering from cancer. Intensive treatment gave him sufficient remission to continue a public ministry. In January 1995 he and Sheppard were made freemen of the city of Liverpool, a rare honour. In July 1995 he undertook his last public engagement: characteristically the ordination of a young man to the priesthood. In the new year's honours list of 1996 he was made a Companion of Honour, but was unable to travel to receive the award. He died at Lourdes Hospital, Mossley Hill, Liverpool, on 8 February 1996, and was buried in the Metropolitan Cathedral, Liverpool, on 15 February 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 61981


Low, Sir Hugh (1824-1905), botanist and colonial administrator, was born on 10 May 1824 in Clapton, London, the elder son of Hugh Low (1793-1863), a Scot who had developed a substantial horticultural business in London, with a special interest in tropical plants. After attending private schools Low, at the age of nineteen, set off for south-east Asia for botanical study and plant collection. He became closely associated with James Brooke, who was then establishing his regime in Sarawak. Low also travelled widely in north Borneo and acquired exceptional knowledge of the land and people, which he demonstrated in his book 'Sarawak: its Inhabitants and Productions' (1848). He returned to England but set out again in 1848 to take up the post of secretary to Brooke, now governor of Labuan. Low travelled out with William Napier, who was to be lieutenant-governor, and shortly after his arrival in Singapore married Napier's daughter, Catherine (1828/9-1851), whose mother was Malay. They had a son, Hugh Brooke Low (1849-1887), who later made his career in the Sarawak government service, and a daughter, Katherine Elizabeth 
(Kitty; 1850-1923)
. On their mother's death in 1851 of fever the children went home to be brought up by Low's younger brother, Stuart, who had inherited the family business. 
Labuan, a small island off the coast of Borneo, had disappointed British hopes that it would become a busy port and exporter of coal, and survived as a dreary, isolated, and very unhealthy place. As colonial treasurer, his principal post, Low managed the finances of a colony with a total annual revenue of only $4000, including a British subsidy. The persistent quarrels among the small European community degenerated into open warfare during the governorship (from 1867 to 1871) of John Pope Hennessy. Although Hennessy married Low's strikingly beautiful teenage daughter in 1868, relations between the two men became so bitter that Hennessy resorted to habeas corpus proceedings to recover his wife and son from refuge in Low's house and suspended Low temporarily from duty for owning a house occupied by persons 'known to the police' (Low's Malay mistress and their child). The Colonial Office censured both men, and stood firm in its refusal to give Low the governorship in which he had acted for a total of eight years. His main consolation, through the years of tedium and frustration, was his twelve-acre garden with a choice selection of plants, including many improved strains, for Low was always a practical horticulturist. He also travelled, and he climbed Mount Kinabalu, the highest in Borneo, three times, partly to collect specimens. 
When Low returned to London in 1876 he was fifty-two and apparently reaching the end of a disappointing career. But the Colonial Office was in dire need of such a man, with an instinctive empathy for Asian people and proven ability, to fill the post of resident of the Malay state of Perak, since clumsy British action had caused deep resentment among the Malay ruling class, leading to military action that saddled Perak with war debts equal to three years' revenue. In the ensuing twelve years Low evolved, with brilliant and much acclaimed success, the 'Residential system' of government in the Malay states. His success in economic development left Perak free of debt, with a ninefold increase in state revenue between 1877 and 1889. Although the Pangkor engagement of 1874 provided only for British advice (and control of state finances), it had been found necessary, in Low's words, 'to invent the government to be advised' if the advice was to be implemented. Years later Frank Swettenham, who became Low's junior partner in the enterprise, wrote of Low's 'quiet voice and sympathetic manner' combined with his 'rather venerable appearance', his 'belief that it would be a mistake to force the pace of change', and his insistence on 'the strictest economy' (Swettenham, 69). In the Malay regent of Perak (the sultan was in exile) Low had to deal with 'a malcontent of influence' (ibid.). Another observer, Brau de St Pol Lias, a French mining engineer, watching Low pilot contentious business through the state council, paid tribute to his lightness of touch. The Victorian traveller Isabella Bird was Low's house guest in 1879. She noted his courteous and informal relations with Malays, and later, in 'The Golden Chersonese and the Way Thither' (1883), wrote a much quoted description of his elegant, simple but eccentric lifestyle, in which two apes, his pets, sat down to dinner with them. Although Low was denied a governorship, he was signally honoured with appointment as GCMG in 1889 (having been made CMG in 1879 and knighted KCMG in 1883). Botany and zoology continued to absorb him, and he became a fellow of the Linnaean Society and of the Royal Zoological Society, with whom he corresponded. 
On 1 August 1885 Low married, at the parish church in Bradford, Somerset, Anne Penelope Harriet Douglas (1851/2-1927), eldest daughter of General Sir Robert Percy Douglas, fourth baronet, governor of Jersey (1858-63) and lieutenant-governor of the Cape of Good Hope (1863-8). There were no children of the marriage. He retired in 1889 and lived on, with the aura of success, for fifteen years, dying on 18 April 1905, at the Salisbury Hotel, Alassio, Italy. 


@@@@@


doc= 61983


Bruce, Brenda Margaret (1919-1996), actress, was born on 7 July 1919 at 44 Richmond Avenue, Prestwich, Lancashire, the daughter of George Alexander Findlay Bruce, tobacco sales manager, and his wife, Ellen Isabella Dwerryhouse Vowles. Bruce was educated at the convent of the Holy Family of Nazareth and studied ballet dancing with Margaret Saul and, later, the Ballet Rambert. By the age of three she had informed her mother that she was going to become a fairy, and spent much of her childhood tottering up and down corridors in high-heeled shoes imagining she was Marlene Dietrich. By the time she had become a backbone member of the Royal Shakespeare Company in its formative years, she had acquired wide experience in revue, repertory theatre, and in the West End. 
Bruce's first stage appearance was in 1934 at the Theatre Royal, Exeter, in a ballet of 'The Babes in the Wood'. She made her London debut in the following year as a chorus girl in '1066 and All That'. 'Irresistibly sweet and charming' ('The Guardian', 22 Feb 1996), according to a contemporary, she was petite, bright-eyed, button-nosed, with a distinctive mop of shiny red hair that she kept in good order all her life. She joined Sir Barry Jackson's Birmingham repertory theatre for three years in 1936, playing such roles as Lydia Languish in Sheridan's 'The Rivals' and Anne in 'The Brontes of Haworth Parsonage'. She toured in revue with the Entertainments National Service Association during the Second World War and in 1943 played one of her favourite roles, Vivie Warren, in Shaw's 'Mrs Warren's Profession'. She had additional success with Shaw as Eliza Doolittle in 'Pygmalion' at the Lyric, Hammersmith, in 1947. 
Bruce married her first husband, Roy Rich (1911-1970), on 18 January 1946. He later directed her in a season of one-act Shaw plays at the Aldwych. She was soon well-established in the West End, playing a series of leading roles at the Arts Theatre. Her range was exceptional, as she proved throughout the 1950s in plays by authors as diverse as Somerset Maugham, Jean Anouilh, and Sir John Mortimer -- and she played Peter Pan at the Scala in 1952. With Roy Rich, who was a television executive, she presented a television chat show, 'Rich and Rich', filmed in a studio replica of their Bloomsbury flat. In 1962 she was nominated television actress of the year after a series of starring performances. At the end of 1962 she played in the British premiere of Samuel Beckett's 'Happy Days' at the Royal Court, replacing Joan Plowright at short notice. As Beckett's heroine, Winnie, defying mortality while buried up to her waist, then her neck, in the scorched earth of some post-nuclear disaster area, she won critical acclaim for a performance of 'dogged valour' and 'hypnotic power' ('Daily Telegraph', 22 Feb 1996). 
This proved a turning point in her career. Having cut back on stage work to bring up her adopted twin daughters, she began a period of intense activity with the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1964, moving to Wellesbourne, near Stratford upon Avon, where she and Rich ran the King's Head, an eleven-bedroom hostelry. She played Mistress Page in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' on three different occasions for the Royal Shakespeare Company and excelled, too, as the Nurse in 'Romeo and Juliet' and as an unutterably moving Paulina in Trevor Nunn's all-white 'The Winter's Tale' in 1969. 
Roy Rich died of cancer in 1970; later that year, on 24 December, she married fellow Royal Shakespeare Company actor Clement Schuyler McCallin (1913-1977), who died of leukaemia in 1977. Her adopted son, Sam, died of asthma aged fourteen in 1975. She worked tirelessly and unostentatiously for both Asthma Research and Amnesty International. 
Brenda Bruce was as intense as she was reliable as an actress, combining qualities of rough-edged humanity and emotional sparkle, and she was blessed with a voice of great sensuality, crackle, and bite. She always evinced a spirit of enthusiasm and joy rooted, no doubt, in her vast experience as well as in her ability to overcome tragedy in her personal life. She died as she lived, quickly and without fuss, on 19 February 1996, suffering heart failure after entering the Middlesex Hospital, Westminster, London, for tests. Cancer had been diagnosed one month before, though she never stopped working, filming D. H. Lawrence's 'The Widowing of Mrs Holroyd' for the BBC in her final weeks. 


@@@@@


doc= 61984


Laye, Evelyn (1900-1996), actress and singer, was born on 10 July 1900 at 8 Bloomsbury Place, London, the daughter of Gilbert James Lay (stage name Gilbert Laye), actor and theatrical manager, and his wife, Evelyn Stuart, 'nee' Froud (stage name Evelyn Stuart), actress. Her father ran a concert party, The Fascinators, before the First World War, and her mother was an acclaimed principal boy in regional pantomimes. She was educated in Folkestone and Brighton and made her stage debut at the Theatre Royal, Brighton (where her father was briefly manager of the pier), in 1915, playing a mute Chinese servant in 'Mr Wu'. When her father's concert party disbanded she became the family's main source of income and went into several revues and pantomimes before joining the celebrated troupe of Gaiety Girls established by George Edwardes. 
Laye first made her name as 'The Merry Widow' at Daly's Theatre in 1923, and was then to stay at Daly's for two subsequent hits, 'Madame Pompadour' (1923) and 'The Dollar Princess' (1925), which made her the highest-paid star in the West End for most of the 1920s. On 10 April 1926 she married John Robert Hale Monro 
(stage name Sonnie Hale; 1902-1959)
, actor and son of John Robert Hale Monro, actor. In 1928, however, her husband left her for her great and only rival, Jessie Matthews, and for several months Laye went into a decline both privately and professionally, even rejecting the first London production of Noel Coward's 'Bitter Sweet' (1929) because it was to be presented by Charles B. Cochran, who had first brought her husband and Jessie Matthews together in the revue for which they sang Coward's 'A Room with a View'. Rapidly realizing her mistake, however, Laye reclaimed the role of Sari Linden for the Broadway 'Bitter Sweet' (1929) and progressed from there to Hollywood to film 'One Heavenly Night' in 1933. 
Having divorced her first husband in 1931, in 1934 Laye married the actor Frank Lawton (1904-1969), who had made his name as 'Young Woodley' and to whom she was to remain happily married until his death. In the 1930s Laye enjoyed a string of hits on stage, including 'Helen!' (1932), 'Give me a Ring' (1933), and 'Sweet Aloes' (1936), and on screen, including 'Waltz Time' (1933), 'Princess Charming' (1934), and 'Evensong' (1934). During the Second World War she continued to enchant London audiences with 'The Belle of New York' (1942) and 'Three Waltzes' (1945), while making regular Christmas appearances as the principal boy in Palladium pantomimes. 
With the coming of a new, American post-war musical world, it was clear that Laye's middle-European brand of nostalgia and chandeliers was going rapidly out of fashion; in considerable career trouble, she reinvented herself as a straight actress in 'The School for Scandal' (1948) and (replacing Gertrude Lawrence) Daphne Du Maurier's 'September Tide' (1950), but she never entirely recovered from being passed over in favour of Valerie Hobson for the first London production of 'The King and I', by Rodgers and Hammerstein, in 1953. There were still a few hit musicals left for her, however, including 'Wedding in Paris' (1954), 'Charlie Girl' (1969), in which long-running production she replaced Anna Neagle, and 'Phil the Fluter' (1969), in which she sang 'They Don't Make them Like that any More', written by the composer as a tribute to her longevity on stage. 
As late as 1978 Laye was touring as the Countess in Sondheim's 'A Little Night Music', while spending most of the rest of the 1970s opposite Michael Crawford in a long and lucrative run of the West End farce 'No Sex Please -- we're British'. She made a number of television appearances, including in 'The Gay Lord Quex' (1983) and 'My Family and other Animals' (1987). In 1990 she made a remarkable return to New York, singing at Carnegie Hall for its centenary celebration the 'I'll See you Again' she had first sung in 'Bitter Sweet' on Broadway all of sixty years earlier. By 1992 she was Britain's oldest working musical star, touring in an anthology of her old hits, 'A Glamorous Night with Evelyn Laye and Friends'. She was appointed CBE in 1973. A bright, particular star, she remained throughout a long working lifetime professionally dedicated to her work and, as Max Reinhardt once noted, she was 'that rare and holy trinity of the stage, a great singer, a great actress and a great beauty' ('The Independent'). She died at St George's Nursing Home, 61 St George's Square, Westminster, of heart failure on 17 February 1996. There were no children from either of her marriages. Her body was cremated and a memorial service was later held, at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 2 July 1996; she is commemorated by an Evelyn Laye award for musical performance at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art. 


@@@@@


doc= 61986


Veitch family (per. 1768-1929), horticulturists, ran important nurseries in Devon and London and commissioned several notable plant hunting expeditions. The first family member to come to notice was 


@@@@@


doc= 61987


Scheerre, Herman (fl. c.1388-c.1422), manuscript artist, was an illuminator of German or Flemish origin who worked in London 'c'.1405- 'c'.1422. He is probably to be identified with the illuminator Herman of Cologne whose name occurs in the household accounts of Duke William of Gueldres about 1388-9, and who was working for Philip the Bold, duke of Burgundy, in Dijon in 1401-3. His name, in the various forms of Hermannus Scheere, Herman Skereueyn, or Herman, occurs in connection with the rent of a shop in Paternoster Row, London, some time before 1410, and as witness to two wills of Cologne men in London in 1407; it also appears in three illuminated manuscripts of London provenance from the period 'c'.1405-1422 (offices and prayers, BL, Add. MS 16998; the Bedford hours and psalter, BL, Add. MS 42131; the Chichele breviary, London, Lambeth Palace Library, MS 69). The illuminator has also been identified with the Herman of Cologne who was working in Paris for the French queen, Isabel of Bavaria, in 1419. Various manuscripts not signed with his name have been attributed to the artist both on grounds of style and from the occurrence of a motto in the decoration 'Si quis amat non laborat' ('He who loves does not labour'). There is controversy over both the dating and the amount of illumination of these books which can be attributed to Scheerre and it has recently been suggested by Kathleen Scott that the motto was also used by his workshop and does not always imply his personal involvement. 
If Herman Scheerre is indeed identical with Herman of Cologne, there is very little in his art which derives from Cologne painting, except perhaps some iconographic features. Closer parallels with his style of painting and iconographic types can be found in the work of illuminators of Bruges and Ypres. If Scheerre did originate from Cologne it seems his art was formulated mainly within a Flemish context, perhaps at Dijon when he was working for the duke of Burgundy in 1401-2. He came to England 'c'.1405 and remained there until at least 1419, perhaps as late as 1422. While in England he collaborated with other illuminators in London, particularly the leading figure Magister Johannes who, like Scheerre, seems to have been a foreigner, perhaps of Flemish origin. Scott has attempted to analyse more precisely the relative contributions of these two artists, and of the other artists employed in their workshops, in the approximately twenty books illuminated in their styles. The main books whose decoration is mostly by Scheerre himself are: the 'c'.1405 book of hours (CUL, MS Ee.1.14); the book of offices and prayers of about 1405 to 1410 (BL, Add. MS 16998); the Nevill hours of about 1405-10 (Berkeley Castle, trustees of the late earl of Berkeley); the 'c'.1410 book of hours (Bodl. Oxf., MS Gough liturg. 6); the breviary done for Henry Chichele, perhaps when bishop of St David's (1408-14), before he became archbishop of Canterbury in 1414 (London, Lambeth Palace Library, MS 69); the prayer book of Charles, duke of Orleans (who was imprisoned in London), perhaps of about 1415-17 (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 1196); and, finally, the book of hours and psalter of John, duke of Bedford (BL, Add. MS 42131). His authorship of the annunciation with two donors of an unknown family, in the 'c'.1410 Beaufort-Beauchamp hours (BL, Royal MS 2 A.xviii, fol. 23'v'), is not accepted by all. 
Herman Scheerre and Johannes were the leading illuminators of early fifteenth-century England and Scheerre's iconographic compositions and ornamental decoration continued to influence English artists up to the 1440s. 


@@@@@


doc= 61988


George Binns (1781-1836), born at Crawshawbooth, Lancashire, on 8 March 1781, the fourth son of David Binns, a clogger, and his wife, Ann Robinson. The Binns family were Quakers who had extensive links with other Quaker families throughout the north of England. David and Ann, along with their eldest children, began a drapery and later grocery shop in which George learned his craft. The family soon entered the expanding cotton trade, putting out work to local hand-loom weavers and selling finished calicoes in Manchester. After George's marriage on 30 January 1807 to Margaret, the daughter of Joshua and Rachel Watson of Staindrop, co. Durham, he began to look for an opening near by. In 1811 he purchased the woollen drapery and linen shop of Thomas Ellerbury at 176 High Street, Bishopwearmouth, a part of Sunderland, co. Durham, which employed a journeyman and three apprentices. His nephew David Binns, the son of his elder brother Richard, came as apprentice in 1814 and was quickly entrusted with buying for the shop in the Manchester market and travelling around the local mining villages to sell goods. David left in 1822 to manage another drapery business for his uncle at Staindrop and was replaced by George's eldest son, Henry Binns ['see below']. In addition to Henry, there were seven other children, including George Binns (1815-1847), a prominent Wearside Chartist. The whole family were radicals and maintained close associations with local Quaker families such as the Grimshaws, the Richardsons, and the Robsons. The elder George Binns died in Sunderland on 19 February 1836, and the shop was left to Henry. 



@@@@@


doc= 61989


Joseph John Binns (1839-1922), born in High Street, Bishopwearmouth, on 14 October 1839, who married, probably in 1874, Rosa Robinson of Nottingham. The growing prosperity of the north-east allowed him to expand the business, and in 1878 he achieved a turnover of $17,500 and a profit of $3500. In October 1884 the shop moved to larger premises nearer the centre of Sunderland, and it became a proper department store with three floors. In 1897 the business was floated as a limited liability company, whereupon effective control passed out of the family, though Joseph Binns remained as chairman until his death. He died at his home, Bainbridge Holme, Sunderland, on 21 March 1922; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 61990


Binns family (per. c.1810-1897), drapers, originated with 


@@@@@


doc= 61995


Ridout, Alan John (1934-1996), composer, was born at 10 Pickhurst Rise, West Wickham, near Beckenham, Kent, on 9 December 1934, the son of George Alfred Ridout, bank clerk, and his wife, Dorothy Evelyn, 'nee' Gardner. He always knew he would become a composer. Taking up the piano at nine he would 'play with pitches as other children played with blocks or Meccano' ('Composer's Life', 12). He left Haberdashers' Aske's School in Hampstead at the age of fifteen and entered the Guildhall School of Music, where he studied piano under George Rogers. The composition aspect of the course, however, proved disappointing. Consequently Ridout initiated correspondence with Benjamin Britten, seeking advice on his early compositions. In 1951 he entered the Royal College of Music (RCM), where he studied under Herbert Howells, Gordon Jacob, and Thornton Lofthouse. In 1954 he left to become director of music at Holmewood House School, Kent, where he taught 'anything of a musical nature' (ibid., 71). He simultaneously spent many nights at his manuscripts, which predictably took its toll, and he resigned in 1957 having narrowly escaped a nervous breakdown. 
In the late 1950s Ridout studied with Michael Tippett. Despite Ridout's negative attitude to the fruits of Tippett's teaching their friendship left impression enough for Ridout to dedicate his second symphony to Tippett in 1964. In 1958, shortly after the death of his father, Ridout was awarded a Netherlands government scholarship to study under Henk Badings. Badings took great interest in Ridout's work and arranged his first commissions, took him to concerts, and introduced him to electronic and microtonal music. Ridout explored these styles in works such as 'Psalm for Sine Wave Generator' (1959; 'one of the first pieces of purely electronic music by an English composer', Scott, 6), 'Music for 31-tone Organ' (1960), and 'Trio for Strings in 31-tone tuning' (1961). 
Ridout returned to the RCM in 1960 to teach theory and composition, remaining there until 1984. He took up tutelage with Thurston Dart in 1960 and, under his influence, developed a passion for Gregorian plainchant. This manifested itself in works like 'Litany' (1985), where it is juxtaposed with a fuller choral sound. Dart took an active role in publishing Ridout's music and through him Ridout became involved in broadcasting. He presented two educational series for the BBC, beginning in 1961, which covered a wide range of musical topics. The early 1960s also saw Ridout accept teaching positions at Birmingham, Cambridge, and London universities. He was made a fellow of the Worshipful Company of Musicians in 1964, receiving further honours, including a fellowship of the RCM, later on. 
Of all the genres in which Ridout composed his sacred choral music, organ works, and children's operas were those most frequently remembered. This was a product of his position as composer in residence to the Canterbury Cathedral choir and later his work with the gifted pupils of King's School, Canterbury, between 1964 and 1993. At Canterbury Ridout worked closely with the chorus-master Allen Wicks and built a strong rapport with both choir and cathedral. Wicks commissioned many works from Ridout, a number of which remain in the cathedral library, including 'The Seven Last Words' (1965) for organ. Other significant works from this period include 'The Burning of Jan Pallak' (1969, written for Canterbury festival), 'St John Passion' (1962), and the first set of 'Sacred Songs' (1964). Ridout finally settled in Canterbury in 1968. 
The serial and microtonal writings of the early 1960s did not remain Ridout's preferred genre. His eclectic output throughout the 1970s and 1980s saw his music evolving stylistically into something less avant-garde yet distinctly modern and quintessentially English. Ridout's symphonic output gave a clear indication of this development: from the serial techniques and harsh dissonances exploited in the first three symphonies he moved to baroque infusions in the fourth, modal inflections in the sixth, and finally, in the eighth, came to a modal lyricism characteristic of twentieth-century British composers. Works commissioned in the 1970s such as the 'Christmas Oratorio' (1971) and concertino for clarinet (1975) similarly showed a shift towards tonality and the beginnings of a more mature sound world while retaining the rhythmic drive already characteristic of his earlier music. His concerto for flute, harp, and strings (1979) illustrated the modal English tonality on which he settled. The 1980s and 1990s were marked by a more overt lyricism in Ridout's music that subsequently encouraged stronger commercial interest. The year 1984 saw the completion of 'Jacob and the Angel', dedicated to Gordon Jacob, the first of his three superb cello concertos, and the eighth symphony. Between 1987 and 1990 Ridout also held a teaching position at Oxford University. 
In 1989 Ridout suffered a heart attack and consequently reduced his teaching commitments, concentrating on composition and editing. He moved to France in 1993, first to Vitre, and later to Caen. Following a religious experience in 1994 he converted to Catholicism. He became an oblate of the Benedictine order at Ampleforth Abbey, Yorkshire, and later bequeathed all of his manuscripts to their archives. He wrote his autobiography, 'A Composer's Life', later that year. Ridout, who never married, died on 19 March 1996 of a heart attack in Caen, France. Although he remained outside the musical mainstream throughout his life, he was renowned within musical circles for his extensive musical output, teaching, and editorial work. 


@@@@@


doc= 61997


Harvey, Charles Barnet Cameron (1900-1996), army officer and racing administrator, was born on 19 July 1900 in Sarawak, the son of Charles David Harvey, merchant of the Borneo Company. Following his father's death in 1901 he came to England with his mother. She rode to hounds with the Beaufort and Harvey learned to ride at an early age and fox-hunted throughout his youth. Despite inherited myopia which forced him to wear thick spectacles he was an outstanding games player and fine amateur rider. His first ride was at Cheltenham, when he fell off at the last fence while lying fourth. He also took up showjumping and lost the King George V Cup at the royal international horse show only after a jump off. He was known as Charles until one day in 1921 when he rode 2 pounds overweight at an Irish steeplechase; a fellow officer likened him to the film star Roscoe (Fatty) Arbuckle and the sobriquet stuck. 
Educated at Downside, where he scraped through his school certificate, and at Sandhurst, where he required an interview to compensate for his poor entrance exam, Harvey joined the 10th hussars in 1920. After a spell at the Weedon Cavalry School he was appointed regimental equitation officer. On 25 October 1926 he married Iris Daphne (Biddy) Mylne ('b'. 1902/3), daughter of Ernest Mylne, merchant. There was one son and one daughter of the marriage, which ended in divorce. In 1929 Harvey went with his regiment to Egypt, where he spent his leisure time organizing a racing stable. He was then posted to Meerut in India, where he took up polo to international standard, tent-pegging, and pig-sticking, in which he reached the final of the Kadir cup, the blue riband of that sport. Later he was involved in the mechanization of his squadron and, wearing a red hat rather than the official tin one, he proved a dashing, front-line leader of armour in the Second World War, in which he was awarded three DSOs. In May 1940 he embarked for France as second in command of the 10th hussars and fought several brisk actions in tanks which, in his own words, 'wouldn't even stop a rifle bullet' ('The Times', 30 March 1996) before being evacuated from Brest in June. He served in the Middle East in 1941 and for the final stages of the north African campaign he was commander of the 8th armoured brigade. On one occasion his thirty tanks, most of which were destroyed, engaged 160 Panzers of the German Afrika Korps and halted the German advance long enough for the British army to retreat behind the Alamein line. He also found time to organize horse-races in the sands of Tripoli. Later he took the 11th armoured division into France, where it fought its way across the Orne. Despite heavy casualties Harvey's vigorous leadership kept morale high. He spearheaded the recapture of Antwerp and was the British officer responsible for liberating Belsen. His men also captured William Joyce -- Lord Haw Haw -- and Heinrich Himmler, the SS chief. He once told Montgomery that 'being a master of hounds is a damn sight more difficult than being a general' ('Daily Telegraph', 29 March 1996). In Schleswig-Holstein at the end of the war he organized a series of race meetings with commandeered German thoroughbreds. 
At the age of forty-six Harvey decided to leave the army, though he later became colonel of the 10th hussars. He wrote to his friend at the Jockey Club, Sir Humphrey de Trafford, enquiring about becoming a stipendary steward. On leaving the army in 1946 he was appointed a stewards' secretary, becoming senior stewards' secretary five years later. In this position he had a major role in controlling the discipline of British racing for two decades, though generally he aimed to prevent malfeasance rather than to punish it. As in his army days his humour and imperturbability concealed a determined and imposing character. He owned and bred National Hunt horses at Oddington Top, his Cotswold home near Moreton in Marsh, Gloucestershire. For three years he was also a member of the British Boxing Board of Control. On 23 February 1966 he married Betty Stoddard Horn (1905/6-1980), a widow, and daughter of Louis Ezekiel Stoddard, financier. On Harvey's retirement in 1970 he was elected a member of the Jockey Club. Although he modestly claimed that he continued as senior steward for so long 'because he couldn't do anything else', champion jockey Sir Gordon Richards acknowledged him as 'the greatest man racing has known in my lifetime' ('Daily Telegraph', 29 March 1996). He died at his Gloucestershire home, Oddington Top, Oddington, on 28 March 1996 of bronchopneumonia, a few months after taking the salute from his wheelchair at the VJ parade at Stow on the Wold. He was survived by the daughter of his first marriage, Marion Jennefer Matthey. 


@@@@@


doc= 61999


Falkus, Hugh Edward Lance (1917-1996), angler and naturalist, was born on 15 May 1917 at Melton, Cornwall Road, Cheam, Surrey, during a zeppelin raid, the son of James Everest Falkus, bank clerk (shortly bank manager), and his wife, Alice Maud, 'nee' Musgrove. His father retired from the City early and lived on a boat on the Essex marshes and then on another boat in Devon. Falkus, who was educated at the East Anglian School, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, caught his first fish when he was four, learned to shoot when he was six, and was an expert helmsman by the age of fifteen. By eighteen he had learned to fly and at twenty he became a pilot in the RAF. On 11 July 1939 he married Doris Marjorie ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of Harold Walter, garage proprietor. They had two sets of twins (three sons and a daughter). The youngest son died in infancy. 
Falkus was a brilliant and headstrong pilot who had many brushes with death, partly because he insisted on performing aerobatics in all types of plane, including bombers. By 1941 he was flying Spitfires. He was scrambled to intercept enemy bombers, ran out of fuel, and crash landed in France. He was wearing only his pyjamas under his flying suit and the Germans took him for a spy. He narrowly avoided summary execution but for the intervention of an English-educated Wehrmacht major-general, who entertained him to champagne and cigars before he was sent on to prison camps in Poland and Germany. He made numerous attempts to escape, working on thirteen tunnels including the famous wooden horse tunnel. However, he refused to participate in the 'Great escape' of March 1944, trying to dissuade others from doing so; fifty of those who escaped were caught and shot. Falkus finally broke out and reached England ten days before the war ended. 
Falkus's years as a prisoner of war left deep scars. He resolved that 'no one else is going to give me another order, no one is going to shout at me again' ('Daily Telegraph'). His first marriage had ended in 1947 and by the late 1940s he was making documentary films for cinema and television, including the acclaimed 'Drake's Island' (1950). He also gave broadcasts for the BBC, where he developed friendships with Dylan Thomas, Louis MacNeice, and his second wife, Diana Jane Vaughan ('b'. 1922/3), editor of 'Argosy' and daughter of Rowland Vaughan, schoolmaster. They married on 22 December 1950. Five months later, Falkus, with his wife and a crew, was shooting 'Shark Island' (1952) off the west coast of Ireland when his boat hit a rock and went down. He and his boatman collected floating objects for his wife and crewmen to hold on to while they swam for help, but only Falkus survived. He went on to finish the film, which again was received with international acclaim, and donated the proceeds of it to the dependants of the lost crew. On 18 July 1952 he married Lady Margaret Frances Anne Muntz (1910-1966), divorced wife of Frederick Alan Irving Muntz and second of four daughters of Charles Stewart Henry Vane-Tempest-Stewart, seventh marquess of Londonderry. The marriage ended in divorce in 1958 and on 15 November that year Falkus (who was now living at Cragg Cottage, Ravenglass, Cumberland, under Ravenscrag in the Esk valley) married Kathleen Armstrong ('b'. 1931/2), daughter of Benjamin Armstrong, farmer, of Cragg Farm, Ravenglass. There were no children of the marriage, which was a happy one. 
Falkus made several films for the BBC's natural history unit and narrated many programmes, including all forty episodes of Jacques Cousteau's 'The Undersea World of Jacques Cousteau'. In the 1960s he collaborated with Niko Tinbergen, the Nobel prize-winning specialist in animal behaviour, on a series of outstanding wildlife films, including 'Signals for Survival' (1969), which won the Italia prize in that year and the American blue ribbon in 1971. 'The Gull Watchers', 'The Sign Readers', 'The Beachcombers', 'The Riddle of the Rook' (shown at the Venice Film Festival in 1972), and 'The Tender Trap' (awarded a certificate of merit by the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1975) followed. Two highly personal films, 'Salmo the Leaper' (1977) and the semi-autobiographical 'Portrait of a Happy Man' (1982) were highly successful. In 1982, Falkus was awarded the Cherry Kearton medal by the Royal Geographical Society for his wildlife work. He was also a highly successful author. He would write all night, aided by copious doses of whisky. 'Nature Detective' (1978) was a highly regarded study of animal tracks and signs, and 'The Stolen Years' (1965; 2nd edn, 1979) -- 'the best book I've written' ('Daily Telegraph') -- gave a vivid account of his early life. 
Falkus will be best remembered, however, as one of the greatest writers and authorities the world has ever seen on salmon and sea trout fishing. He became fascinated by sea trout which, like salmon, spend part of their lives in rivers and part in the sea. Through years of dedicated study he concluded that sea trout fed mostly at night in the sea, and devised a series of strategies to trigger similar responses in rivers, though, for physiological reasons, they do not feed in fresh water. His book, 'Sea Trout Fishing' (1962, 1975) revolutionized sea trout fishing. He also co-authored, with Fred Buller, 'Fresh Water Fishing' (1975), a book of immense scholarship and charm, which has become the standard work on the subject and ran through nine editions by 1987. His 'Salmon Fishing' (1984) was regarded from its publication as the authority on the subject. His 'Speycasting: a New Technique' (1994) described an advanced method of casting for salmon, and was another best-seller. 
Falkus was a restless and iconoclastic figure, with the stature and looks of a 'Boy's Own Paper' hero and a life to match. He could be intolerant and generous, egotistical and loyal, outspoken and compassionate. He could inspire fear in some, and complete devotion in others, touched by his deep kindness. Despite his share of tragedy, he insisted that his life had been predominantly happy. Through his lucid prose, dedicated research, and piscatorial wisdom he can be considered as one of the greatest angler-writers of the twentieth century. 
In his final years Falkus suffered from cancer. He died of bronchopneumonia at Cragg Cottage on 30 March 1996. He was survived by his fourth wife, Kathleen, by two children from his first marriage -- Malcolm, professor of economic history in Australia, and a daughter who became a nun at Stanbrook Abbey. His oldest son Christopher, publisher, died in 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 62000


Hayward, Ronald George Still (1917-1996), political organizer, was born on 27 June 1917 in Bloxham, Oxfordshire, the son of Ethel Ruth Hayward, milliner. He was brought up by his grandparents. After attending a local Bloxham Church of England school, he was apprenticed at the age of fourteen to a cabinet-maker, a training that was to lead to predictable jokes during the period of the Wilson and Callaghan governments, when he was general secretary of the Labour Party. He served during the war in the RAF. He attended the RAF technical schools at Halton, Cosford, and Locking, and after being appointed a technical training instructor reached senior non-commissioned rank. On 9 October 1943 he married Phyllis Olive Allen ('b'. 1920/21), a corporal in the Women's Auxiliary Air Force and daughter of Charles Allen, publican. They had three daughters. 
At the cessation of hostilities in 1945, Hayward joined the Labour Party agency service and became secretary/agent to the constituency Labour Party in Banbury, an area held for the Conservatives by Andrew Douglas Dodds-Parker, and then, in 1947, agent for Rochester and Chatham, held by Arthur Bottomley, under-secretary of state for the colonies. Bottomley was away negotiating independence for Burma, which meant that unusual responsibility fell on Hayward. Hayward's success in holding a difficult seat in the general election of 1950 led to promotion as assistant regional organizer for the Labour Party in the southern region. He was appointed to the top post in the same region in 1959. 
On the retirement of Dame Sara Barker from the post of national agent of the Labour Party in 1969, Hayward was preferred by a left-wing national executive to the favourite for the job, the assistant national agent, Reg Underhill. Three years later he succeeded Sir Harry Nicholas as general secretary of the party, owing his election to the left in general, and to Tony Benn's casting vote as party chairman in particular. It had been assumed that the deputy general-secretary, Gwynn Morgan, would succeed to the post. Hayward had been a notable opponent of the right-wing bureaucrats who controlled the party machinery in the 1950s and 1960s. Because his regime as general secretary was more open, he was partly blamed for the continual confrontation between right and left, and for the internal warfare that led to the impotence of the party. After defeat in 1979 people tended to forget that it was Hayward, as general secretary, who had delivered two general election victories, against expectation, in 1974. Critics were especially angry that in the wake of Labour's defeat at the general election of 1979, Hayward roundly declared that the election had been lost because the Labour government had failed not merely to carry out conference resolutions and TUC decisions, but even to include them in the party's manifesto; 'I wish sometimes that our prime ministers would act in 'our' interests, as a Tory prime minister acts in theirs', he added ('The Times', 26 March 1996). Asked why there was a 'winter of discontent' in 1978-9, he retorted: 'Because the Cabinet, supported by MPs, ignored Congress and Conference decisions. In my 46 years of membership of this party, I've never yet seen it try Socialism in any sense!' ('Daily Telegraph', 26 March 1996). If in the end the Trotskyite Militant Tendency went too far for Hayward -- one of his last actions before retirement in 1982 was to urge the national executive committee to take action against it -- he remained an idealist of the left. He was wonderfully supported by his equally idealist and committed wife, Phyllis. He was appointed CBE in 1970. He died at his home, 37 Sutherland Drive, Birchington, Kent, on 22 March 1996, of heart failure. He was survived by his wife and their three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 62002


Smith, Simon Harcourt Nowell- (1909-1996), book collector, was born on 5 January 1909 at Southgate Corner, Southgate Road, Winchester, the second of three sons (there was also a daughter) of Nowell Charles Smith (1871-1961), assistant master of Winchester College and previously a fellow of Magdalen and New College, Oxford, and his wife, Cecil Violet, 'nee' Vernon-Harcourt (1875-1961), one of the ten children of Augustus George Vernon-Harcourt FRS, patriarch of a minor Oxford dynasty. Simon and his siblings adopted the form Nowell-Smith instead of the single surname of their father. Nowell-Smith was educated at Sherborne School, where his father had become headmaster, and at New College. His Oxford career was undistinguished, but his book collecting developed there. His large account with Basil Blackwell proved, as he said, to be a good investment for both parties, in spite of his father's strong remonstrations to each. 
His mother's cousin Sir Bruce Richmond found Nowell-Smith a job at 'The Times', where he worked from 1932 to 1940 on general duties but particularly assisting Richmond on the 'Literary Supplement'. He was given the back page of the 'Literary Supplement' for bibliographical news and reviews, assisted anonymously by a circle of well-informed bibliophiles who met in an informal dining club, the Biblios (or Biblioboys). The back page became an important feature of the bibliographical world. 
On 6 October 1938 Nowell-Smith married Marion Sinclair, 'nee' Crichton (1914-1977), the orphaned daughter of W. S. Crichton of a prosperous Liverpool shipping family. Early in the war they found Hill House at Ewelme in Oxfordshire, which was their principal home until they moved to Headington Quarry, Oxford, in 1965. From February 1940, however, Nowell-Smith worked at the Admiralty (his eyesight not being good enough for active service), where he edited a 'Weekly Intelligence Report' digesting press information. He worked alongside the poet William Plomer, whose posthumously published autobiography (1975) he edited; Ian Fleming, then a journalist, was another colleague. Nowell-Smith served there until February 1946, having decided at the end of 1944 not to return to 'The Times'. 
Nowell-Smith had long been an enthusiast for the writings of Henry James (his definitive collection is now at McMaster University Library) and compiled a lively biographical anthology about him: 'The Legend of the Master' (1947). This enhanced his own literary reputation and in 1950 was influential in his being invited to become librarian of the London Library. He started there in October 1950. It was not an easy time to take over, not least because his predecessor, C. J. Purnell, had been retained to complete a further volume of the printed catalogue. Nowell-Smith had the full support of his committee, which soon felt the presence of a distinctive personality as their librarian: 'he is an odd crotchety little man', the chairman Harold Nicolson wrote in his diary, 'but I like him.' He revived an institution that was still recovering from the war, acquisitions were given a clearer focus, and the printed catalogues were brought up to date. The Nowell-Smiths enjoyed living in London, but he found the job unsatisfying and resigned after only six years, leaving the library in much better shape than he had found it. 
Nowell-Smith was short in stature (some friends knew him as 'the Bantam'); he dressed with flair, and there was a sharp and quizzical look behind his round horn-rimmed glasses. He wrote much in bibliographical journals under his own name or as Michael Trevanion. Though he insisted he was an amateur, his combination of detailed technical knowledge and exacting literary taste proved otherwise. In the 1960s he started work on 'Martin Chuzzlewit' for the Clarendon edition of Dickens's novels but did not find the effort satisfying: his notes were passed on to another editor. He had a sustained interest in publishing history, anticipating later views of its importance. His main contribution was 'International Copyright Law and the Publisher in the Reign of Queen Victoria' (1969) based on his Oxford lectures as Lyell reader in bibliography in 1965-6. It is a concise but authoritative guide to a complex subject. He advised Macmillans on the disposal of the firm's archives, now in Reading University and at the British Library: 'Letters to Macmillan' (1967), a well-constructed anthology, is the by-product of his investigations. 
From 1956 Hill House at Ewelme again became Nowell-Smith's main home, until he moved to Oxford in 1965, and he wrote of his own library as 'The Ewelme collection'. From the very start he had not been a retentive collector. As with Henry James, he collected Robert Bridges in depth; the latter group is now at the University of South Carolina. He keenly collected what he termed 'the four Georges' (Borrow, Eliot, Meredith, and Gissing). His most sustained interest, however, was in English poetry from Landor to the First World War. He relished rarity but valued readability even more. Latterly he sold many minor items to concentrate on inscribed first editions or association copies of the greatest English poets of his chosen period. A loan exhibition, 'Wordsworth to Robert Graves and beyond', was shown at the Bodleian Library in 1983. 
Nowell-Smith's wife died in 1977, and in 1986 he married, second, an art book dealer, Judith ('b'. 1944/5), daughter of the American bibliophile Frederick Baldwin Adams. The marriage did not succeed, and Nowell-Smith and his second wife latterly lived apart. He died of Alzheimer's disease on 28 March 1996 at St Luke's Nursing Home in Oxford where he had spent his final three years. His remaining collection was sold to the London dealers Bertram Rota Ltd, and formed their substantial catalogue number 300 in 2002. 


@@@@@


doc= 62010


Snagge, John Derrick Mordaunt (1904-1996), radio broadcaster, was born at 72 Burton Court, Chelsea, London, on 8 May 1904, the second of three sons of Sir (Thomas) Mordaunt Snagge (1868-1955), barrister, and later county court judge, and his wife, Gwendaline Rose Emily, younger daughter of Sir John Charles Ready Colomb, of Dromquinna, co. Kerry, Ireland, one of the founders of the Imperial Federation League. His paternal grandfather was Judge Sir Thomas William Snagge. After an undistinguished education at Winchester College and Pembroke College, Oxford (where he rowed for his college, but did not gain a blue), he started work in 1924 as assistant director of the BBC's relay station in Stoke-on-Trent. He made the tea, announced, was an Uncle in 'Children's Hour', organized programmes, wrote scripts, and sang duets on the air with the engineer-in-charge. In 1928 he became an announcer at the Savoy Hill headquarters of the BBC. With a robust manner and a clear, authoritative voice -- a voice that gradually mellowed into polished mahogany -- he was a natural choice as an announcer in an era when it was taken sufficiently seriously for those who practised it to wear dinner jackets for the evening bulletins. He also showed a growing aptitude for outside broadcasts, then in their infancy. 
Professionally competent and knowledgeable about rowing, Snagge was regarded as the obvious candidate to take over the Oxford-Cambridge boat race when Gerald Cock, the BBC's first director of outside broadcasts, decided in 1931 that it needed fresh blood. Cock said in a private letter that recent commentaries had been 'rotten' -- they had neglected to tell listeners who was leading, or what the winning margin was -- and that 'violent efforts' were needed to improve matters (Cock to Charles M. Pitman, 10 Nov 1930, BBC WAC, R30/138). Snagge was put on board the motor yacht 'Magician', following the progress of the crews from Putney to Mortlake, and provided a live running commentary. He was deemed to have been a success and continued to be hired every year (except 1940-45, when the boat race was not held) until he bowed out in 1980. The race was televised from 1938, though it was still Snagge's commentary that was used. Some felt he spoke too quickly and chanted the strokes ('in-out, in-out, in-out') too much. In the intensely exciting 1949 race, when Cambridge won by a few feet, he genuinely did not know and could not see who was ahead because his BBC launch, badly piloted, slid broadside-on into the wash of another launch. His on-air comment, 'I don't know who's ahead -- it's either Oxford or Cambridge' ('75 Years of the BBC', CD2, track 4) was subsequently acclaimed as a classic of its genre. There were other dramas, too: in 1948 the press and BBC launches collided and several people fell into the Thames, and in a snowstorm in 1952 the BBC boat ran out of petrol and narrowly avoided being rammed by pursuing vessels. 
During the Second World War Snagge was the BBC's presentation director, running an area that embraced continuity and newsreading and which he aptly described as the shop window of the BBC. He also read many (though by no means all) memorable bulletins. It was Snagge who told the nation about the invasion of north Africa, the fall of Rome, Arnhem, the D-day landings in 1944 (in which year he was appointed OBE), and VE-day. He read many of Winston Churchill's great speeches and announced the deaths of both George VI and Queen Mary. 
The year 1953 provided the pinnacle of Snagge's career, when he was the main commentator at the coronation of Elizabeth II. High up in a soundproof box in the triforium, he described the rite and pageantry unfolding under his eyes -- the shining gold of the Westminster Abbey plate, the dazzle of the crowns -- for four hours. Complementing the words and music of the service that listeners could hear for themselves, his commentary was relayed all over the world. 'John Snagge's description, with those of Howard Marshall and Audrey Russell, had many Americans damp-eyed before their radio sets', reported one newspaper the following day ('Daily Mail', 3 June 1953). Though the event was a watershed in turning Britain from a nation of listeners into a nation of viewers, it was still via radio that most people worldwide were able to follow it. Snagge's contribution was vital to their enjoyment and understanding. 'Mr Snagge's interjections had the economy, the precision, and at times, it may be added, almost the dignity, of liturgical stage direction', said 'The Times'. 'None will regret the one intrusion of human interest which he permitted, a brief reference to the expression of the Duke of Cornwall [that is, Prince Charles, aged four] as he watched the ceremony' ('The Times', 3 June 1953). Snagge himself summarized the event as 'once in a lifetime' and added: 'After that, one is quite content if one never broadcasts again' ('Desert Island Discs', broadcast 31 Aug 1959). 
Snagge did, of course, broadcast again, despite administrative tasks as head of presentation for the Home Service until 1957, and head of presentation for all BBC radio thereafter. After his retirement in 1965 he was busy freelancing for another fifteen years, taking modest jobs such as reading the 'Epilogue' on Radio 4 for $10. He even did a voice-over for a Sex Pistols track, 'Pistols propaganda', the B-side of 'Stepping stone', which reached number twenty-one in the British chart. Very occasionally he appeared on television, including once with Noel Edmonds, though radio was his first love. He was nearly seventy when he began a series called 'John Snagge's London' on BBC Radio London, making more than 100 editions over a period of seven years. He also did much for the Lord's Taverners, the charity he helped found in 1950 and of which he was three times chairman. 
Snagge, who enjoyed fishing and rowing, was twice married: first, on 19 September 1936, to Eileen Mary Josceylyne ('c'.1905-1980), daughter of H. P. Josceylyne, a dentist, and second, on 6 January 1983, to Joan Mary Wilson ('c'.1921-1992), a retired contracts assistant whom he had known at the BBC, and daughter of William Wilson. There were no children of either marriage. Snagge died of throat cancer on 25 March 1996, at Thames Valley Nuffield Hospital, Wexham Street, Wexham, Buckinghamshire, not far from his home in Dorney, near Windsor. He was survived by a brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 62016


Garson, (Eileen Evelyn) Greer (1904-1996), film actress, was born on 29 September 1904 at 88 First Avenue, Manor Park, Essex, the daughter of George Garson (1865-1906), a commercial clerk, and his wife, Nancy Sophia (Nina), 'nee' Greer (died 1958), who claimed descent from Rob Roy McGregor. Her father died when she was two and as her mother was preoccupied with managing a row of inherited townhouses the sickly child spent much time in the care of her aunt, Alexina Logie, and her maternal grandparents in Castlewellan, northern Ireland; hence the popular misconception that she was Irish. Always a loner at both Essex Road elementary school and East Ham secondary school, she entered the University of London in 1921 after her mother refused her permission to apply for the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. She considered herself 'The Girl Least Likely to Succeed' (Troyan, 3), although she was listed in a college yearbook as 'a unique blend of La Belle Dame Sans Merci and Goldilocks' (ibid., 19). An academic career seemed likely until she began acting in amateur productions while studying at the University of Grenoble. 
After a spell working in Lever Brothers' advertising department Garson made her professional stage debut in the Birmingham Repertory production of Elmer Rice's 'Street Scene' on 30 January 1932. She was billed as Greer Garson for the first time in George Bernard Shaw's 'Too True to be Good' at the New Theatre, London, in September 1932, stirring the playwright to opine she would be 'the new Ellen Terry! Never leave the theatre. I shall be very disappointed indeed if you go to Hollywood to work with magic lanterns' (Troyan, 30). On 28 September 1933 she married Edward Alec Abbott Snelson (1904-1992), then a junior judge in India, only to realize on honeymoon that she had made a mistake. (The marriage ended in divorce in 1940.) Remaining in London, she continued to act, finally making her name opposite Laurence Olivier in Sylvia Thompson's 'The Golden Arrow' (1935). Despite being of the opinion 'she is so piss-elegant that it hurts. Too mannered. Too old. Too tall. And her voice is too deep' (ibid., 51), Noel Coward offered her the lead in 'Mademoiselle' in 1936 and prevented her from accepting Douglas Fairbanks Jr's offer of a film contract. 
Garson broke into television with 'Twelfth Night' in May 1937, becoming the medium's highest-paid star when she earned about $100 to appear in 'How she Lied to her Husband' that July. But it was Hollywood that beckoned, after MGM boss Louis B. Mayer saw her in Keith Winter's 'Old Music' at the St James's Theatre in August 1937. An instant fan, he later wrote: 'if she were a man, she could be prime minister of England' (Troyan, 367). Yet she refused the many supporting roles Mayer suggested, before finally agreeing to play Kathie in 'Goodbye, Mr Chips' (1939), a performance that brought her an Oscar nomination and prompted 'Time' magazine to describe her as 'a goddess sculptured in butterscotch' (ibid., 169). A spinal injury sustained in a riding accident caused MGM to cancel her contract, but it was swiftly restored after she received the nomination. 
A reunion with Olivier in 'Pride and Prejudice' (1940) was followed by a second Oscar nomination for 'Blossoms in the Dust' (1941). Yet it was the lead in 'Mrs Miniver' (1942) that secured the Garson legend. Winston Churchill considered her performance as a village housewife surviving the blitz to be worth more than six divisions, while Queen Elizabeth thanked her for making 'us feel more brave than we actually were' (Troyan, 1). Greer Garson dolls sold healthily, and she was voted 'the woman we'd like to spend the rest of our lives in the nose of a bomber with' (ibid., 151) by British troops. An Oscar duly followed, only for her to gain an unwanted place in the award's history by giving the longest-ever acceptance speech, at an unscripted five and a half minutes. 'Miniver' had other consequences, including an introduction to her second husband, the actor Richard Ney, whom she married on 24 July 1943. Moreover, it established her screen partnership with Walter Pidgeon, with whom she would co-star in a further seven features, landing Oscar nominations for 'Madame Curie' (1943) and 'Mrs Parkington' (1944). 
Further performances in 'Random Harvest' (1942) and 'The Valley of Decision' (1945), for the latter of which she was again nominated for an Oscar, reinforced Garson's reputation as a statuesque sophisticate whose red hair betrayed a deeper passion. Yet she was keen to debunk this wholesome image and nicknamed herself 'the walking cathedral' and 'Metro's Golden Mare' (Troyan, 176). She longed to do comedy or play a villain, but instead found herself saddled with Clark Gable's post-war return to movies, 'Adventure' (1945), which bore the grisly advertising slogan 'Gable's Back and Garson's Got Him' -- although this was infinitely preferable to the alternative, 'Gable Puts the Arson in Garson' (ibid., 194). 
The disappointing box-office showing of 'The Miniver Story' (1949) convinced MGM that Garson's star was waning. Moreover, her second marriage having ended in divorce in 1947, on 15 July 1949 she married the Texan oil billionaire Colonel Elizah E. (Buddy) Fogelson (1908-1987), and became more interested in cattle, with her 'white short-horned Greers' becoming a prize-winning crossbreed. She also later successfully bred racehorses. Disillusioned with the new MGM regime of Dore Schary, she left the studio in 1954. Few of her freelance films were worthy of her talent, although she did draw her seventh Oscar nomination for playing Eleanor Roosevelt in 'Sunrise at Campobello' (1960). Taking only occasional stage and television assignments, she retired after starring in 'The Madwoman of Chaillot', at the Greer Garson Theatre, Santa Fe, in June 1975. Poor health dogged her following a heart attack in 1980 and she lived quietly in Dallas until her death, at the Dallas Presbyterian Hospital, from congestive heart failure, on 6 April 1996. She was buried at the Sparkman Hillcrest Memorial Park, Dallas, on 9 April. She was survived by a stepson from her third marriage. She had been appointed honorary CBE in 1993. 


