@@@@@


doc= 62017


Crombie, Alistair Cameron (1915-1996), historian of science, the second son of William David Crombie (died 1949) and Janet Wilmina, 'nee' Macdonald (died 1975), was born on 4 November 1915 in Brisbane, Australia. His parents, who were of Scottish extraction, had established a farmstead at the remote Maranthona, near Longreach (precisely on the tropic of Capricorn, in Queensland). After school at Geelong grammar school Crombie began his university career at Trinity College, University of Melbourne, as a medical student, graduating in zoology in 1938. Continuing his studies in England at Jesus College, Cambridge, he proceeded to a doctorate in 1942 with a dissertation on population dynamics -- a fact that helps to explain his lifelong interest in the history of Darwinism. By this time he was occupying a temporary research position with the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries in the Cambridge Zoological Laboratory. He married on 3 December 1943 Nancy Hey (1914-1993), a graduate of Girton College who undertook war work in Cambridge collecting statistics for the Ministry of Agriculture; she was the daughter of Donald Hey, a wool manufacturer, of Helperby, Yorkshire. In 1944 they both became converts to Roman Catholicism, she first and he later 'with difficulty'. 
At Cambridge, Crombie studied philosophy informally with C. D. Broad, who helped to turn him in the direction of the history and philosophy of science. In 1946 he was appointed to teach and direct research in those subjects at University College, London, then one of the main centres in Britain for the teaching of the history and philosophy of science. While there he helped to found the British Society for the History of Science (1946), of which he was made president in 1964. He was also a founder of its Philosophy of Science Group, which later became an independent body as the British Society for the Philosophy of Science. He was the first editor of its journal, the 'British Journal for the Philosophy of Science' (1949), and was later a joint founder and editor of another influential journal, 'History of Science' (1962). 
In 1953 Crombie was appointed lecturer in the history of science at Oxford, where there were already plans afoot to teach the subject to undergraduates in science, history, and philosophy. He moved to Oxford in 1954, after a year as visiting professor at the University of Washington, Seattle. He soon established an influential seminar in the history of science; although originally intended for philosophy undergraduates, it quickly became the centre of gravity of the subject for people from other faculties. It was always well attended by a number of notable senior scholars, several of them visitors to Oxford from elsewhere. First held in the Old Ashmolean building, and later in All Souls, the seminar was moved in 1969 to Trinity College, when Crombie was made a fellow there. 
The ambitions that had prompted the rapid growth of the history and philosophy of science in the 1950s changed in many respects during the following decade. Crombie found himself faced with the disparate wishes of three very different social groups, for whose needs it was impossible to cater simultaneously. Some of the most regular attenders at his weekly seminar (for many years run jointly with J. D. North and later Wilma Crowther) were from the natural sciences. They valued the subject for its bridging function between 'the two cultures', one of the reasons why the intellectual net was cast very wide. Crombie's broad outlook did not, however, always fit comfortably with the needs of the various honour schools that called on his services. He established successful undergraduate courses for the faculties of history and the natural sciences, but he left the teaching to others. The scientists, the historians, and the philosophers all had very different interests and expectations, and -- despite the efforts of such enlightened colleagues as Friedrich Waismann, William Kneale, George Temple, and his nearest colleague in the philosophy of science, Rom Harre -- it proved impossible to hammer out the notion of a single discipline that could hold the allegiance of those in the university whose support he most needed. 
Some opposed the subject on the grounds that it was an administrative inconvenience. Crombie's earlier concern with medieval science, combined with his low-key Catholicism, was presented by some as a sign of a Catholic plot to infiltrate the curriculum. Others had their own plans for academic dominion, and Crombie was not always a good judge of the territorial ambitions of his colleagues. He was happiest creating a focus for research at an advanced level and was not greatly attracted to undergraduate teaching, nor was he successful at that level. His idea of a diploma in the history and philosophy of science, meant as a prior qualification for doctoral work, had limited success. It introduced many now senior historians of science to the field; but again there arose the problem of enforced breadth, and not a few students from the direction of history and the then fashionable social sciences made known their displeasure at the idea that they should be obliged to study philosophy of science. When the Oxford chair in history of science was eventually created and filled (1971-2), the part Crombie had played in building up the subject counted for little on a committee that had a narrower view of the field than his. To the great surprise of most outsiders, he was passed over. He nevertheless continued to act as a magnet to scholars from elsewhere who knew him either personally or through his writings, and, as far as reputation was concerned, the subject in Oxford continued to be associated with him more than any other person. 
As a historian of science Crombie's central interest was in the methods and modes of scientific thinking and reasoning as these developed within the intellectual context of medieval and early modern Europe. This was his outlook when writing his first book, 'Augustine to Galileo: the History of Science, AD' 400-1650 (1952, expanded in 1959). Translated into seven languages, it became one of the world's most widely used textbooks in its subject. He took a similar approach in his 'Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental Science, 1100-1700' (1953), where he made an analysis of the question of continuity and change in the European scientific tradition from the middle ages to the seventeenth century. Crombie's view of his subject is nowhere more evident than in his monumental 'Styles of scientific thinking in the European tradition: the history of argument and explanation especially in the mathematical and biomedical sciences and arts' (3 vols., 1994). In this he made a detailed comparative analysis of the forms of scientific reasoning developed within European intellectual culture, beginning with the Greek search for the principles of nature and argument, and adopting a similar approach to an ever wider variety of historical material. 
This three-volume summary of a lifetime's work and ideals, which was well received within his profession, reveals also Crombie's abiding interest in the history of theories of the senses -- echoing his earlier work in biology -- and in particular the physiology and epistemology of vision and hearing, and their relation to the visual and musical arts. These are subjects touched upon in his numerous other publications -- for example, in the two published volumes of his collected essays -- but they run through another of Crombie's studies, one that occupied much of the last thirty years of his life. Awarded the Galileo prize by the Domus Galileana in Pisa in 1964 for an essay on Galileo, Crombie became a leading authority on that crucially important figure. His Galileo interest also made Oxford a natural place to set up the Harriot Seminar in 1967, which was done with the collaboration of several distinguished Harriot scholars and the financial support of the London mathematician Cicely Tanner. 
Crombie long planned to publish two other books, 'Galileo's arguments and disputes in natural philosophy' and 'Marin Mersenne: science, music and language'. His final illness took him unawares, and they were never completed. He became involved in much invigorating controversy in the course of writing on Galileo, with the result that his main theses are well known to a wide scholarly public. The essence of most of his unpublished material may be found in one form or another in his published writings. Throughout he treats of science as a rational and not merely a social activity. 
Alistair Crombie was a writer of vision who influenced an entire generation, and he left his signature on the practice of the history of science in the world at large, as well as in Oxford. His circle of friends was great, nationally and internationally. He was president of the Academie Internationale d'Histoire des Sciences from 1968 to 1971. After retirement he took up a half-time appointment as professor of history of science and medicine at Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts. He held several other visiting professorships and lectured in many countries. He was a fellow of the British Academy and held honorary doctorates of the universities of Durham, Paris X, and Sassari. Shortly before his death he was awarded the prestigious premio europeo Dondi (jointly with his old friend Marshall Clagett) for his life's work. 
Crombie was a warm-hearted and unstinting friend to a large number of younger scholars, and a generous supporter of causes that he thought worthy. Among his recreations was landscape gardening, which he and his wife put into practice over forty years in the garden of their home, Orchard Lea, Boars Hill, Oxford. He died at home on 9 February 1996, and was buried beside his wife on 19 February at Ramsgill church in Yorkshire. He was survived by a daughter, three sons, and six grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 62020


Beynon, Sir (William John) Granville (1914-1996), physicist, was born on 24 May 1914 at Pen-y-bryn, Dunvant, a suburb of Swansea, Glamorgan, the youngest of the four children of William Beynon, a colliery checkweighman, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Thomas. His parents were both Welsh and his father was a tall, sandy-haired, good-humoured, courageous man of impressive personality, a pillar of the community, with his manipulative skills as an 'ambulance man' being in great demand. When nine-year-old Granville fell from the parapet of Oystermouth Castle during a Sunday school outing and broke both his arms, his father set the bones and made the splints that resulted in a complete healing. 
On completing his primary education at the village school Beynon entered Gowerton Boys' Grammar School, and, in 1931, the University College of Swansea, a constituent of the federal University of Wales. There he graduated with first-class honours in physics in 1934, and proceeded to research under the supervision of Professor E. J. Evans. In his early teens he tinkered with clocks, bicycles, and radios, took a keen interest in rugby football, and was sent by his parents for violin lessons. Later in his teens he and his father built a crystal radio; using it, he heard a Saturday night broadcast on science by E. V. (Edward) Appleton, with whom he later worked. At twelve he became a member of a band of young musicians called Urdd y Pobl Bach (the guild of young people) organized by the wife of a local solicitor, Arthur Morgan James, whose daughter, Megan Medi James, was also a member. Megan James also graduated with first-class honours in physics at Swansea. She and Granville Beynon were married at Ebenezer Congregational Chapel, Swansea, on 31 July 1942. They had a daughter and two sons. 
Although E. J. Evans was not himself a distinguished researcher, he knew how to inspire and encourage promising students, several of whom became fellows of the Royal Society. After Beynon's death his wife found among his papers a much folded letter written in 1938 by Evans shortly after Beynon had started working at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL): 'I believe you have the ability to go far if you persevere. Always look for the unexpected. E. J.' (private information). Following graduation Beynon's PhD studies at Swansea under Evans were concerned with the natural and magneto-optical dispersions of organic liquids, mainly alkanols. They demanded painstaking measurement and quantitative analytical treatment, which Beynon took in his stride. Three of the four publications to emerge from his thesis work appeared in his own name in the 'Philosophical Magazine'. 
This work was, however, far removed from, and quite unrelated to, that which Beynon pursued upon his appointment in January 1938 to the radio division (based at Ditton Park, Slough) of the NPL. By the late 1930s measurements of the ionosphere had revealed much; but there was an exigent need to understand the manner in which radio waves (of various wavelengths) were transmitted through the ionosphere to varying distances over the earth. This was the investigation on which Beynon, in conjunction with Edward Appleton, was first engaged at the Slough laboratory of the NPL. Two definitive papers under their joint authorship were published in the 1940s, dealing with theoretical and practical investigations of the reflection of radio waves incident obliquely on the ionosphere. These papers formed the basis for the UK method of predicting the conditions for radio-wave propagation. Although his collaboration with Appleton continued to be strong Beynon also discovered (at Slough) in work that was exclusively his own the earliest indication of horizontal motions in the ionosphere: in the so-called F2 layer of the ionosphere between 200 and 350 km above the earth there is an east-west flow with a velocity of 430 km per hour. 
After his return to a lectureship post at Swansea in 1946 (the year before Appleton received the Nobel prize for work on the physics of the upper atmosphere) Beynon continued to collaborate with Appleton on radio-wave absorptions and lunar tidal oscillations in the ionosphere. Both at Swansea, where he was assisted from 1947 by a younger colleague, G. M. Brown, and at Aberystwyth (another constituent college of the University of Wales), where he became professor and head of department in 1958, Beynon studied the 'winter anomaly' in ionospheric absorption, a phenomenon first reported in the mid-1930s. Collaboration with Brown, who also joined the staff at Aberystwyth, flourished. Their joint editorial work -- including the production of the forty-eight volumes of the 'Annals of the International Geophysical Year' (1957-8), arising from a major geophysical study over the sunspot maximum period, and the single volume 'Solar Eclipses and the Ionosphere' (1956) -- made them key figures in the ionospheric literature. 
One of Beynon's great strengths as an experimentalist was the speed with which he identified and applied the potential of new techniques. This was exemplified by his use in the period 1968 to 1974 of the available Skylark, Skua, and Petrel rockets, launched from Australia and the Hebrides, for the refined measurement of radio-wave transmissions. His extraordinary effectiveness in designing and orchestrating international collaborations using rocket experiments throughout the 1970s involved experiments undertaken by his own group at Aberystwyth with teams from the NPL at Slough, Queen's University, Belfast, the Swedish Meteorological Institute at Stockholm, the University of Saskatchewan, and the Max Planck Institute of Heidelberg. 
Of even greater significance was Beynon's early appreciation of the versatility of the incoherent radar scatter technique and its future value to his research programme at Aberystwyth and other centres in the UK. When J. J. Thomson (discoverer of the electron) showed in 1906 that electromagnetic waves were incoherently scattered by electrons he also showed that the extent of the scattering (its so-called cross-section) was minute. What Beynon was quick to appreciate nearly sixty years later was that, with the availability of powerful radar sources and ever more sensitive means of detecting scattered photons, a vital role could be played in ionospheric research by the incoherent scatter technique. A national incoherent scatter radar facility was established initially in 1970 by collaboration between the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth, and the NPL at Slough. This trio was the first to measure three components of the plasma velocity in both E and F regions of the ionosphere. The emergence of the enlarged body (involving the research councils of six nations) that constituted the European Incoherent Scatter Radar Facility (EISCAT), of which Beynon was regarded as the father, culminated in its official inauguration in 1981 in the presence of King Karl Gustav of Sweden. 
Beynon's persuasive qualities, sense of humour, clear-headedness, and sheer ability appealed to scientists from widely different cultures. It explains why he was 'persona grata' as much in Moscow as in Washington, and why he was elected to so many key committees: he was president of the International Union of Radio Science, and of the Special Committee for the International Years of the Quiet Sun, and a member of the national committee for space research of the Science and Engineering Research Council; he was also a member of Antarctic Research, Geodesy and Geophysics, and the International Council of Scientific Union. His role in international co-operation in solar-terrestrial physics was further enhanced during his editorship from 1976 to 1989 of the 'Journal of Atmospheric and Terrestrial Physics'. He was also vitally interested in secondary and tertiary education. For eleven years he chaired the schools council committee for Wales and he also served as president of the education section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. From 1972 to 1974 he was vice-principal of the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. He was appointed CBE in 1959, elected FRS in 1973, and knighted in 1976. He received many honours and awards, including the Goddard prize of the National Space Club of America, and the Chree medal of the Institute of Physics. 
Beynon was a devoted family man who greatly enjoyed music-making with his wife Megan and three children: Margaret, Meurig, and James. He also had a strong sense of community. During the depression of the 1930s, while still a student, he founded a social club and helped organize summer camps for the unemployed in his village, Dunvant. While a lecturer at the university in Swansea he trained his village chapel choir, which for several years performed Bach's 'St Matthew passion' on Palm Sunday. At Aberystwyth in the early 1970s he was co-founder of, and an accomplished first violinist in, the Philomusica Orchestra of Aberystwyth, made up of musicians from 'town and gown'. Among his enormous circle of friends he was admired for his open personality, story-telling gifts, sense of humour, and prodigiously energetic gardening. Countless thousands of undergraduates taught by him at Swansea and Aberystwyth remembered him as one of the best lecturers they ever heard. He died of heart failure at the Abermad Nursing Home, Llanilar, Aberystwyth, on 11 March 1996. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 62022


Rickett, Sir Raymond Mildmay Wilson (1927-1996), educationist, was born on 17 March 1927 in Fulham, London, the only son and younger of the two children of Mildmay Louis Rickett (1894-1967), barrister's clerk and later civil servant, and his wife, Winifred Georgina Ann, 'nee' Hazell (1900-1974). He spent his formative years at Whitstable in Kent and was educated at Faversham grammar school. He suffered from a severe hearing defect which affected his early education and dogged him throughout his life, but such was his character and determination that he effectively overcame it. He left Faversham grammar school in 1946 and then served in the Royal Navy, on minesweepers, for his two years' national service. An ex-servicemen's grant enabled him to study at Medway Technical College, Chatham, between 1948 and 1953; there he took a London external degree in chemistry, followed by two years' research. From 1955 to 1959 he studied in the USA at the Illinois Institute of Technology, where he was awarded a PhD in physical chemistry. While there he met and on 1 February 1958 married Naomi Nishida ('b'. 1930), a state-registered nurse of American-Japanese descent. They had two daughters, Kimiyo Megan ('b'. 1960) and Vanessa Reiko ('b'. 1963), and a son, Guy Masami ('b'. 1961). 
Following his return to the United Kingdom, Rickett held a series of lecturing posts, at Plymouth College of Technology (1959), Liverpool College of Technology (1960-62), West Ham College of Technology (1962-64), and Wolverhampton College of Technology, where he was head of department (1965-6). In 1967 he was appointed vice-principal of Sir John Cass College. Following its amalgamation with the City of London College to form the City of London Polytechnic (later to become London Guildhall University), he was appointed vice-provost of the new institution (1969-72). In this post he enabled the City of London Polytechnic to become the first institution in the country approved to run a modular degree. 
In 1972 Rickett was appointed director of Middlesex Polytechnic, a post he held until his retirement in 1991. What he found at Middlesex was a medley of six different further education institutions on twenty-three separate sites spread over 100 square miles across three London boroughs, which had just been designated a polytechnic. During his period of tenure he moulded it into one of Britain's leading polytechnics. His background (he was the first of his family to enter higher education) and his experience in the United States inspired him with three major objectives: first a belief that there should be opportunities for wider participation in higher education (through part-time courses); second, to adopt modular degrees based on credit accumulation (enabling students to cover a number of different subjects in one degree and to accumulate credits which could be transferred to other higher education institutions); and third to achieve international educational links. As director of Middlesex Polytechnic and also through the posts he held in the wider field of higher education, he had the opportunity to put these ideas forward. It was his belief that because of the existing system society wasted very valuable educational potential. 
When Rickett retired in 1991 all three of his major objectives had been achieved. Under his leadership Middlesex took a leading role in introducing modular degrees, which were subsequently adopted by nearly all the other polytechnics. Many part-time courses were introduced, which enabled mature students to benefit from higher education. Middlesex also entered into agreements with a number of foreign higher education institutions, which enabled joint European degree courses to be established in conjunction with French, Spanish, and German institutions. In 1990 Rickett was awarded the Unilever prize for 'successful innovation and development in the setting up and improvement of undergraduate and post graduate programmes which require students to achieve operating competence in a European language, complimentary to a vocational education in the field of industry and commerce' (private information, Middlesex University press office). In December 1989 the 'Times Higher Education Supplement' described him as an outspoken director who 'has observed -- and often influenced -- the Cinderella-like transformation of Polytechnics from poor cousins to... the higher education success story of the 1980s'. 
Rickett opposed the binary system of higher education which distinguished between universities and the polytechnics, and fought to get equal funding for equal levels of work. He was twice chairman of the committee of the directors of the polytechnics, from 1980 to 1982 and again from 1986 to 1988. While in the post he advocated allowing polytechnics to award their own degrees and be known as universities. He had the satisfaction of seeing this achieved the year after he retired. After retiring from Middlesex he became the last chairman of the Council for National Academic Awards (1991-3), an organization which he had served for many years as a member of several committees, chairman of its policy committee and of its subcommittee on early entry qualifications, and a member of the advisory board for the accredited accumulation scheme. He was a member of the UNESCO advisory committee on higher education in Europe (1974-83) and was chairman of the UK advisory committee of the European Community Action Scheme for the Mobility of University Students, which provided grants for students to study in other EC countries (1988-91). He also had strong links with the British Council, being a member of the council board (1988-91), chairman of its committee for international co-operation in higher education, and a member of its inter-university and polytechnic council for higher education overseas and of its Gulf States committee. He was a member of the Council for Industry and Higher Education (1985-91), of the higher education review group for Northern Ireland (the Chilver committee) (1978-82), of the working group on management of higher education in the maintained sector (the Oakes committee) 1977-8), of the board of the National Advisory Body for Public Sector Higher Education (1982-7), and of the Open University council (1983-93). Among his outside interests were being a governor of the Hosting of Overseas Students Organisation and of the Yehudi Menuhin Live Music Now Scheme. He was chairman of the Mid Kent Healthcare Trust from 1992 until his death. 
Rickett powerfully influenced the direction of higher education for twenty years. Kenneth Clarke, secretary of state for education from 1990 to 1992, described him as: 'one of the major advocates of the ending of the binary system, with its illogical separate status and funding systems for polytechnics and universities. He played quite a part in persuading me that this division was no longer relevant to a sensible system of higher education in this country.' In 1988 the German government awarded him the officer's cross of the order of merit of the Federal Republic of Germany. He was knighted for his services to education in 1990, having been made CBE in 1984. He died at the London Hospital on 6 April 1996 following a heart attack, and his ashes were interred in the cemetery of All Saints' Church, Whitstable, Kent; he was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 62027


Gregory, Sir Augustus Charles (1819-1905), explorer and surveyor in Australia, born on 1 August 1819 at Farnsfield, Nottinghamshire, was the second of the five sons of Joshua Gregory (1790/1792-1838), an army officer from an old Nottinghamshire family, and his wife, Frances (1794-1859), the sister of Charles Blissett Churchman of London. His father retired after having been wounded in action, and received in lieu of pension a grant of land in the Swan river settlement in Western Australia; he arrived there with his wife and family on 6 October 1829. 
After being privately educated in England and Australia, Gregory worked from 1841 to 1854 in the survey department of Western Australia. He proved a skilful surveyor and organizer, and an alert observer of the bush. In 1846, having obtained leave of absence, he began exploring the interior of the continent, starting on 7 August from Bolgart Spring, 60 miles north-east of Perth, accompanied by his brothers Francis ['see below'] and Henry Churchman. Their progress eastwards was soon stopped by an immense salt lake. This compelled them to turn north-west, where, after travelling 950 miles in forty-seven days, they discovered some good grazing land and a coal seam at the headwaters of the River Irwin east of Geraldton. In September 1848 Gregory led a party northward. He revealed the pastoral wealth of the Murchison and Champion Bay (Geraldton) districts and discovered a lode of galena in the bed of the Murchison River, 350 miles north of Perth; the journey of 1500 miles had taken ten weeks. 
After seven years of routine surveying, in 1855-6 Gregory undertook an expedition under the auspices of the imperial government, via the Royal Geographical Society, to explore the unknown interior of the northern territory and search for traces of the lost explorer Ludwig Leichhardt. The party, which included the distinguished botanist Ferdinand von Muller and the artist Thomas Baines, ascended the Victoria River in the Northern Territory from its mouth to its source, found that the south-flowing Sturt Creek ended in desert, and then made its way to the Gulf of Carpentaria and thence across the northern peninsula and down the east coast to Rockhampton. The expedition shed much light on the drainage of the region, discovered the watershed formed by the Newcastle and Gregory ranges at the northern end of the Great Dividing Range, and charted 5000 miles of hitherto unknown territory. No certain traces of Leichhardt were found and the natural resources discovered were disappointing, but for this expedition Gregory was in 1857 awarded the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society. His report of 1857 stimulated considerable pastoral settlement but did not establish him as a heroic explorer, as he understated his role as an inventive and thorough organizer. 
In 1858 Gregory was sent by the New South Wales government to renew the search for Leichhardt. He started from Sydney on 12 January and reached the Barcoo River in April. At latitude 24 degree 25' S and longitude 145 degree E, he found a tree marked L and some stumps of others which had been felled with an axe. In May he reached the Thomson River, and followed it upstream until it ran out. He then pushed down Cooper Creek, which he found to be the lower reaches of the Barcoo River and then on south to Adelaide. He had solved the problem of the north-east inland river system and found that south-west Queensland had pastoral possibilities, but the fate of Leichhardt was as much in doubt as ever. 
Gregory was then employed in defining the southern boundary of Queensland. From 1859 to 1863 he was the colony's first commissioner of crown lands, and from 1859 to 1875 he was its surveyor-general. Charged with allocating the new colony's lands, its greatest resource, he favoured large-scale squatters over smallholders, and in 1867 he handed over much of the Darling downs to pastoralists. In 1875 he was appointed Queensland's geological surveyor. In 1882 he was nominated to the legislative council, where he was prominent in debate, his intimate knowledge of the country and its resources and his fund of scientific information securing him a hearing even from those whose opinions differed from his. He always sat with the opposition in order to be free to criticize government measures, and generally allied himself with reactionary squatter interest. 
Gregory was one of the first members of the Toowong shire council, and in 1902 became its first mayor. He was a trustee of the Queensland Museum from 1876 to 1899, and from 1876 to 1883 sat on the commission to inquire into the condition of the Aborigines. In 1895 he was president at Brisbane of the Australian Association for the Advancement of Science, and devoted his opening address to a sketch of the geological and geographical history of Australia. He was created CMG in 1874 and KCMG on 9 November 1903. He was an active freemason for fifty years and was a devoted member of the Church of England. He died unmarried, of pneumonia, on 25 June 1905 at his home, Rainsworth, Rosalie, Brisbane, and was buried after a masonic funeral in Toowong cemetery. 
Gregory was one of Australia's foremost explorers, but in person and in his writings lacked the panache of the pioneer, and his reputation suffered as a result. In 1884 the Queensland government published 'Collected Journals of Australian Exploration', his collected papers and those of his brother Francis Thomas Gregory (1821-1888). The latter was employed in the survey office of Western Australia from 1841 to 1860 and took up land in the Avon district. He accompanied Augustus in his first expedition in 1846, and led two expeditions himself in 1858 and 1861, when he traced a number of rivers from the Shark Bay and Nickol Bay areas, some 400 and 800 miles north of Perth respectively. On the latter journey he discovered the Hamersley ranges, and was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1863. After going to Queensland in 1862, he was appointed commissioner of crown lands, and on 11 May 1865 he married Marion ('b'. 1841), the daughter of Alexander Hume. He was nominated to the legislative council in 1874, and was briefly postmaster-general in the first McIlwraith ministry in 1883. He died on 23 October 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 62034


Kitching, John Alwyne (1908-1996), cell physiologist and marine ecologist, was born on 24 October 1908 in York, the younger child of John Nainby Kitching (1845-1914), joint managing director of an engineering firm in Leeds, and his wife, Alice Edith, daughter of the Revd George Yeats, vicar of Heworth church in York. His elder sister died in infancy, and his father died of a heart attack when Alwyne, as he was known as a child, was five. His mother moved to Bournemouth, where Kitching attended preparatory school before moving on to Cheltenham College in 1922. During his early life he travelled widely in Europe with his mother, who was a watercolour artist and described her travels in a series of radio broadcasts in 1924. In these years Kitching developed strong interests in natural history and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1927 to study zoology, botany, and geology in the natural sciences tripos, graduating with a degree in zoology in 1931. 
As a Cambridge undergraduate Kitching encountered the two principal topics which dominated his later career. An interest in cell physiology was aroused principally by Carl Pantin, and in marine ecology by G. A. Steven at Easter classes at the Marine Biological Association in Plymouth. These interests were consolidated during his appointment as lecturer at Birkbeck College, London. There he gained his PhD in 1933 through studies of the physiology of contractile vacuoles of protozoa. He also pioneered research in sublittoral marine ecology, with H. C. Gilson and T. T. Macan, as probably the first biological researcher to use a diving helmet. Kitching married Evelyn Mary Oliver, of Hendon, Middlesex, a biology graduate from Birkbeck, on 24 March 1934, and one son and three daughters were born over subsequent years. 
After a brief lecturing appointment at Edinburgh, Kitching, now known to all as Jack, moved in 1937 to lecture at the University of Bristol. During a Rockefeller fellowship at Princeton University in 1938-9 he collaborated with Daniel Pease in research on the effects of high pressure and modified gas concentrations on cells. He was to return to this interest after the war, but more immediately it may have led to his wartime work at the University of Toronto on problems associated with lack of oxygen at high altitudes and exposure of ditched aircrew to cold water. In 1947 he was appointed OBE for services to the RAF. 
Kitching returned to his lectureship in Bristol in 1945, was promoted to a readership in 1949, and was elected to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1960. In 1963 he was appointed to a chair in biology at the newly established University of East Anglia, where he acted as dean of the school of biological sciences from 1967 to 1970, and remained active there well after formal retirement in 1974. At both universities he pursued productive research in cell physiology. Using ingenious techniques, described in fourteen papers, he demonstrated the role of contractile vacuoles in removing excess water and controlling cell volume of protozoa. He and his students also performed studies on the effects of high hydrostatic pressures on protozoan cells, and especially on structures formed from microtubules, as well as studying the mechanism of suctorial feeding in suctorian ciliate protozoa and the effects of anaesthetic gases upon cell structures. 
Kitching's summer vacations throughout were devoted to marine ecology, with support from numerous colleagues, most consistently F. John Ebling. They formed an effective pair, Kitching a shy but single-minded scientist and Ebling a gregarious organizer. Together they led annual expeditions, largely manned by students, to study the ecology of Lough Ine (or Hyne) in co. Cork. Sea water flows into and out of the fully saline lough through a narrow rapids channel, exposing marine organisms to strong currents. In earlier years many techniques including diving were used to investigate the physico-chemical features and the distribution of littoral and sublittoral organisms in the rapids, the lough, and the nearby coast. Later experimental work examined the dependence of the distribution of organisms on physico-chemical factors and predation. The results of this ground breaking research were described in thirty-four papers over more than forty years, earlier work being summarized by Kitching and Ebling in 'Advances in Ecological Research' in 1967, and later work by Kitching in the same journal in 1987. 
Kitching was a tall, impressive man, somewhat aloof, but most conscientious. He was interested in all aspects of the natural world, an enthusiastic gardener, an energetic traveller, and prolific photographer. He saw a pre-publication copy of his final work, 'The Biology of Rocky Shores' (1996), jointly written with Colin Little, shortly before he died in Norwich on 1 April 1996. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 62035


Morten, (Violet) Honnor (1861-1913), nurse and journalist, was born at Mayfield House, Cheam, Surrey, on 13 November 1861, the only daughter among the four children of John Garrett Morten (1833-1900), a wealthy solicitor, and his second wife, Wilhelmina Milroy, 'nee' Black (1837-1907). She was a niece of the novelist William Black. She had two half-siblings by her father's first marriage. As a child she enjoyed playing billiards with Herbert Spencer, a family friend. She reached adulthood in 'an old Stuart palace', Ivy Hall, Richmond, Surrey, but eventually rejected the life of 'a fine lady with nothing to do but pay great attention to dress, fashion, and society' (Friedrichs, 304). 
Aged twenty, Morten began nurse's training at the London Hospital under Eva Luckes, practised as a volunteer from 1885 to 1888, and came to accept nursing as her central calling. She gained the midwifery diploma of the London Obstetrical Society. In 1895 she began a course in scientific hygiene at Bedford College, London, and qualified for the certificate in 1896; her highest mark was her physics paper, reflecting her study of astronomical physics just after leaving school. In her later 'Who's Who' entry she listed only astronomy and socialism as her recreations. 
A steady schedule of journalism, speaking, and international travel characterized Morten's life. She contributed to 'The Hospital', 'Daily News', and other periodicals. She also published several classic nursing manuals: her 'Nurse's Dictionary of Medical Terms and Nursing Treatment' (1891) reached an eighth edition by the time of her death. In 1889 she founded the Women Writers' Club with offices in Fleet Street. In the early 1890s she founded a nurses' co-operative and the Association of Asylum Workers. About this time she began to lecture widely on infant care, first aid, family health, and women's rights. Her audiences ranged from Women's Co-operative Guild chapters to the London Ethical Society, and even women prisoners at Wormwood Scrubs -- prison reform being another of her causes. 
About 1896 Morten took up residence in the inner London district of Hoxton. Here she and two college friends established a small settlement along 'unsectarian and socialist lines'. The settlers, both male and female, lived like their neighbours, and kept house for themselves. In her autobiographical 'From a Nurse's Notebook' (1899) she exulted at the local curate's terror of her Chianti, cigarettes, and unorthodox religious views. During these Hoxton years Morten stood, in 1897, for election to the London school board, a powerful body responsible for educating about 660,000 pupils and employing 15,000 teachers. Only twenty-nine women (of a total membership of 326) served on the board during its existence from 1871 to 1903. She came in first among the candidates in her district of Hackney but wisely switched to represent the City when one of her constituents spotted her publicly smoking and raised an outcry. On the school board she advanced radical positions: equal pay for women employees, school nurses in the poorest schools, and better facilities for retarded children. She founded the School Nurses' Society to provide free nursing care for London children. Morten's vigorous campaign to abolish corporal punishment in the schools earned her adverse coverage in teachers' publications. 
About 1905 Morten established Oakdene, a Tolstoy-inspired settlement in Rotherfield, Sussex, which was partly funded by donations from Aylmer and Louise Maude, the English translators of Tolstoy's 'Resurrection'. According to a friend the house followed a rule that 'insisted on silence at the breakfast table -- on the principle that people are never amiable at breakfast' (Porritt, 136). The settlement was both a country holiday home for disabled children from inner London, each of whom was cared for by an adult settler, and a retreat for adults. 
Like others of her generation devoted to serving the poor Morten caught 'the St. Francis spirit' in the 1890s (Porritt, 135). Her religious faith was that of a high-church 'firm Protestant', but she was rather secretive about it. She started writing a life of the Catholic martyr Edward Colman and published anonymously a 'little devotional book' entitled 'The Enclosed Nun', only revealing its authorship in a later book on St Francis's friend and disciple, 'St Clare' (1912). 
Morten, 'militant in spirit' ('Votes for Women', 18 July 1913, 621), was a non-militant suffragist. She protested against the disenfranchisement of women by refusing to pay taxes, suffering instead the confiscation and public auctioning of some of her property. According to her friend the journalist Arthur Porritt, Morten submitted to more than one of these auctions in the months just before her death, of throat cancer, at Oakdene on 11 July 1913. 


@@@@@


doc= 62036


Clive, Robert George Windsor-, first earl of Plymouth (1857-1923), politician and philanthropist, was born in John Street, Berkeley Square, on 27 August 1857, the only son of the Hon. Robert Windsor-Clive (1824-1859), Conservative MP for Ludlow (1852-4) and South Shropshire (1854-9), and his wife, Lady Mary Selina Louisa (1829/30-1889), daughter of George Augustus Frederick Bridgeman, second earl of Bradford. In 1869 he succeeded as the fourteenth Baron Windsor, on the death of his grandmother Lady Harriet Clive (who in 1855 took the surname Windsor-Clive), Baroness Windsor, daughter of Other Windsor, fifth earl of Plymouth (second creation). 
After schooling at Eton College (1870-4) Windsor was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1875, graduating BA in 1878 (MA 1891). He took his seat in the House of Lords in December 1878. On 11 August 1883 he married Alberta Victoria Sarah Caroline (1862/3-1944), daughter of Sir Augustus Berkeley Paget, British ambassador in Austria-Hungary and Rome, and his wife, Walburga Ehrengarde Helena de Hohenthal. They had three sons and one daughter. His mother-in-law was the doyenne of the expatriate community in Florence, who acquired in 1893 the celebrated villa Torre di Bellosguardo; visits to her houses and gardens partly accounted for his love of Italy and its art. 
Windsor inherited 37,000 acres of family estates in Glamorgan, Shropshire, and Worcestershire, and was proprietor of three stately homes: St Fagan's Castle, Cardiff; Oakly Park, Ludlow; and Hewell Grange, Tardebigge, Worcestershire, which he had built in elaborate Jacobean style by Bodley and Garner (1884-91), and where he mainly lived. In 1899 he had a town mansion built in Mount Street, Mayfair, to the design of Fairfax Wade. He had a genuine and informed interest in art; he painted in watercolours and was an authority on stained glass. In 1887 he became the founding president of the South Wales Art Society and Sketching Club, and continued as an active president until his death; he and his wife frequently contributed watercolours to exhibitions held at St Fagan's Castle. In 1903 he contributed a study of John Constable RA to the popular 'Makers of British Art' series, showing his considerable knowledge of artists of that period and of the French school, and a subtle appreciation of Constable's art. 
Windsor was known to his tenants as a good landlord, paying higher than average wages and taking a keen practical interest in the welfare of his employees and the public. In Glamorgan he was connected with the industrial developments at Penarth and Barry docks; he chaired the Barry Dock and Railway Company, which began work on constructing the Barry Dock in 1884, which was opened by Lady Windsor in July 1889. He was lord lieutenant of Glamorganshire from 1890 until his death, and mayor of Cardiff in 1895-6. As lieutenant-colonel (1893-1906) commanding the Worcester yeomanry cavalry in 1899 he selected 129 men from 3021 volunteers for active service in the South African War with a newly formed Imperial yeomanry cavalry. 
In the House of Lords, Windsor was a tory politician 'of the old school' and a zealous imperialist. For many years he was president of the National Union of Conservative Associations. He held office under Lord Salisbury in 1890-02 as paymaster-general, and was appointed a member of the privy council in 1891. In August 1902 he was made first commissioner of works (though without a seat in the cabinet) in the government of Arthur Balfour, for which his artistic and architectural interests were seen as particular qualifications. One of a series of effective holders of that office in the early twentieth century, he displayed his talent for large-scale metropolitan improvements and public works, often in association with the architect Sir Aston Webb. 
From 1901 Windsor had been a member of the committee of the national memorial to Queen Victoria, which made plans for a new approach to Buckingham Palace, realigning and laying out the Mall as a splendid ceremonial avenue, culminating in the Queen Victoria memorial. As first commissioner he carried through the construction of the new Mall, which was used as a processional route for the first time in February 1904 when Edward VII opened parliament in person. He left office following the fall of the Balfour administration in December 1905, and on 18 December 1905 was created first earl of Plymouth in Devon, of the third creation, the title having lapsed on the death of the eighth earl in 1843. At the same time he was promoted Viscount Windsor of St Fagan's in the county of Glamorgan. He remained on the management committee of the Victoria memorial committee until the transformation of the Mall was completed by Admiralty Arch, as the terminal point of the Mall at the Trafalgar Square end in 1910, and the Queen Victoria memorial by Sir Thomas Brock in 1911. Plymouth's interest in architecture was reflected by his position as first president of the Concrete Institute (later the Institution of Structural Engineers) on its foundation in 1908. 
In the coronation year of 1911 Plymouth was chairman of the committee which organized an ambitious Festival of Empire at the Crystal Palace, Sydenham. The palace had already become a patriotic and imperial arena through previous exhibitions, functions, and entertainments, but now the entire site was employed, with three-quarter-size replicas of the parliament buildings from the dominions erected in the park and an 'All Red Route' scenic railway with panoramic backcloths, animated by both people and animals, showing the landscapes, life, and enterprises of the British empire. Plymouth contributed the entire cost of the South African parliament building, when the dominion declined to pay for it. He declared that the festival, opened by King George and Queen Mary, was for knowledge and not 'self-glorification'; as 'the social gathering of the British family' its aim was to teach the 'gospel of Empire' ('Festival of Empire, Imperial Exhibition, Pageant of London', 1911) to the average Briton. The imperial sports meeting, a forerunner of the Commonwealth games, was held at the festival on 24 June 1911, when the United Kingdom, Australasia, and Canada competed for the empire trophy. A highly elaborate 'Pageant of Empire', directed by Frank Lascelles with a cast of 15,000, chronicled its history and moreover celebrated Britannia's right to rule her territories; Plymouth's son Ivor, Lord Windsor, played St George, his wife Queen Elizabeth, and his daughter a Wagnerian damozel of death. 
In November 1911, when the Crystal Palace Company was declared bankrupt and the court of chancery ordered its sale by auction, Plymouth saved it for the nation, lending $230,000 to allow a Mansion House committee to raise the money. A public fund for the $9000 still lacking was started; it was found in a fortnight, $5000 of it given by Plymouth. The assumption that local authorities would contribute their agreed share proved wrong, and in December 1913 he himself made up the $30,000 outstanding. 
Plymouth was a leading member and the first president of the London Society, founded in 1912 to keep a watchful eye on planning, development, and conservation. His public service was notably generous and wide in scope: he served as chairman of the trustees of the Tate Gallery and as trustee or committee member for the National Gallery, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the National Trust, the Shakespeare Memorial Trust, and the British Pacific Science Expedition for New Guinea. During the First World War he raised troops in Wales and equipped them, helped to bring about the creation of the Welsh Guards in 1915, and was instrumental in setting up the north Wales heroes' memorial of 1923. He gave much help and advice to the British Italian League, and was a leading light in the British Red Cross. In 1919 he became high steward of Cambridge University. Known as a keen sportsman and encourager of sports, he was a good shot and keen golfer. 
Plymouth appeared to have recovered after a long illness in 1921-2, but on 6 March 1923 died of a haemorrhage at his house in Great Cumberland Place, when taking off his uniform on his return from a king's levee. He was buried in the parish churchyard at Tardebigge. Two of his three sons predeceased him: the eldest died in 1908 at Agra of enteric fever when ADC to the viceroy of India; the third son was killed in action at Landrecies in 1914. The second son, Ivor Miles (1889-1943), briefly MP for Ludlow and later a junior minister in the National governments of the 1930s, succeeded as second earl of Plymouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 62038


Handl, Irene (1901-1987), actress and novelist, was born on 28 December 1901 at 13 Leith Mansions, Paddington, London, the second daughter of Frederick Handl, a bank clerk originally from Vienna, and his French wife, Maria Schiepp. She grew up in nearby St John's Wood, and later characterized herself as a fiercely affectionate and rather naive child who, until she was 'quite old', actually believed that her name was Dolly (television interview, 18 June 1985), because that is what her family had dubbed her in reference to the popular South African War song 'Goodbye, Dolly Gray'. An ardent bookworm in later childhood, she was educated locally, and left the Maida Vale High School for Girls at fourteen. For the next twenty years she helped to run her father's household until, at his instigation, she decided in her mid-thirties to embark on an acting career. 
Handl promptly enrolled on a short course at the Embassy School of Acting. During her audition for the school she managed to reduce the panel of interviewers to helpless laughter with what was intended to be a serious Shakespearian set piece, and it thus became apparent from the very first that her talent lay in comedy. Having completed her training, Handl made a show-stopping West End debut at Wyndham's Theatre, as the maid in Gerald Savory's drawing-room comedy 'George and Margaret': she played her comical 'below stairs' role with relish for the duration of the play's two-year run, and in doing so established a reputation for outstanding character acting which dominated her entire career. 
For the next fifty years Irene Handl, who had come to her vocation so relatively late in life, was never out of work. She made her first screen appearance in 1937, playing a chambermaid in the film 'Missing, Believed Married', and this led to a seemingly endless succession of cinematic roles which she undertook in tandem with her theatrical work. From rather modest beginnings (she notched up many cameo appearances in the films of the 1940s, and actually appeared uncredited as an organist in the 1946 cinema classic 'Brief Encounter'), Handl went on to become a familiar figure in popular British comedies of the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. She featured in almost every well-known film series from 'St Trinian's' to 'Carry On', and also gave notable performances as Peter Sellers's wife in 'I'm All Right, Jack' (1959) and Tony Hancock's 'The Rebel' (1961). Through the increasing popularity of television she became better known to an even wider audience, starring in a number of sitcoms, including 'Hancock's Half Hour' (1956), 'The Rag Trade' (1961), 'For the Love of Ada' (1972), 'Maggie and her' (1978), and 'In Sickness and in Health' (1985), and in 1980 she endeared herself to yet another generation of viewers when she played the grandmother figure in the hit children's television series 'Metal Mickey'. On both stage and screen Handl was best known for what she herself diffidently termed 'the usual old girl in the crossover apron'. Pleasantly plump and always with a twinkle in her eye, she made colourful cockney chambermaids, charladies, housewives, and matrons her dramatic forte and, as she advanced in years, eccentric old ladies of all kinds became an additional speciality. Many of her characters were based on the servants around whom she had grown up in her father's house, but Handl had what can only be described as a great comic presence, which transformed what could so easily have been workmanlike, two-dimensional character performances into something far more memorable. A fan of music-hall humour from an early age, she had an impeccable sense of comic timing, but at her very best she could bring something more to the roles she played: a curious and almost tragicomic blend of mettlesomeness, personal warmth, and childlike innocence that was uniquely hers. 
Ever the late developer, Irene Handl astonished the literary scene when, at the age of sixty-four, she published her first novel, 'The Sioux' (1965), a work which she had first envisaged in her teens and had, out of boredom, taken up again in the 1960s during an exceptionally long stage run as the eponymous heroine in Arthur Lovegrove's 'Goodnight, Mrs Puffin'. A frenetic present-tense account of the neurosis-laden and increasingly tribalistic behaviour of a family of French aristocrats, 'The Sioux' not only reflected Handl's own affluent and exclusively continental roots; it also made obvious an eloquence, an acuity of intellect, and a depth of intuition on her part which were generally masked by the kind of characters she played. She came to view the book as one of her finest and most enduring achievements and published a sequel, 'The Gold Tip Pfitzer', in 1973. 
Apart from acting and writing, Handl's interests were many and eclectic. She had a passion for fishing, and was a fellow of the National Geographical Society, as well as a staunch member of the Elvis Presley Club. She was also a devoted animal lover and was for some years president of the British Chihuahua Club, a role which reflected the great affection she always felt for her own pets. She never married and her only full-time companion during the later years of her life was her dog, Rosie. During 1987 Handl was as busy as ever, and completed work on a Channel 4 sitcom entitled 'Never Say Die', in which she played an elderly medium. Towards the end of that year, however, she became unwell, and although she remained confident that 'Dr Theatre' ('The Guardian', 30 Nov 1987) offered the best available cure, and continued to honour all her previous work commitments, her condition deteriorated. 
After a short illness, Irene Handl died in her sleep on 29 November 1987 at her home, 31 Viscount Court, 1 Pembridge Villas, Kensington, London. When asked in an interview by Mavis Nicholson two years before whether she felt she would like 'to be remembered', Handl had chucklingly and with typical self-effacement replied that indeed she would 'because I am an ass' (television interview, 18 June 1985). Her considerable achievements both within and outside the sphere of British stage and screen comedy ensured, of course, that she was and will continue to be remembered as anything but. 


@@@@@


doc= 62040


Triplet, Thomas (1603?-1670), philanthropist, was born in or near Oxford, of unknown parentage, and educated at St Paul's School, London; he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 16 March 1621, and graduated BA on 27 June 1622 and MA 20 June 1625. At Oxford he became a distinguished Greek scholar, wit, and poet. Bishop Morton presented Triplet in 1630 to Woodhorn vicarage, Northumberland, and in 1631 to Whitburn rectory, co. Durham. On 10 April 1640 he was inducted to Washington rectory, co. Durham, holding three parishes in plurality. He was proctor for the archdeacon of Northumberland in the convocation of 1640, and became prebendary of Fenton in York Cathedral in 1641. In October 1645 he was appointed prebendary of Preston in Salisbury Cathedral; he was collated to the ninth stall in Durham Cathedral on 20 March 1649, but parliament sequestrated his ecclesiastical preferments. Following ejection from Washington on 10 September 1644, he fled to Ireland; in 1649 he was keeping a school in Dublin. He edited the 1651 edition of Lord Falkland's 'Infallibility of the Church of Rome'. In 1656 he was resident teacher at the Dutch embassy, and he was mentioned in John Evelyn's diary in May. 
At the Restoration, Triplet petitioned for the livings of Whitburn and Washington, regaining Washington rectory in 1660, but resigning in 1662. In April 1661 he proceeded DD by diploma. On 13 March 1662 Triplet established a school at Hayes, Middlesex. Among his pupils was George Ent who, according to Aubrey, was kicked downstairs by Triplet in anger at the boy's cheek. His father, the physician Sir George Ent, took the boy away; 'an accident' that 'did well-nigh breake Dr Triplett's schoole' ('Brief Lives', 299). The school survives in the form of Dr Triplett's Church of England primary school, Hayes, Middlesex. 
By deed dated 18 November 1664 Triplet named ten life trustees, including John Sudbury, William Sancroft, Isaac Basire, and local gentry, to administer his gift of capital to invest in property, first in Ryton, the annual rents to be divided proportionally between his three former parishes for binding out poor children as apprentices. In 1686, after selling the Ryton property, the trustees bought a 42 acre farm at Stockton-on-Tees. As apprenticeship fees died out, much income remained unused. Rents increased, and an acre of land sold to the North Eastern Railway Company yielded $1000. The surplus was invested in 4 per cent navy stock. As new trustees had no local interest, irregularities occurred in applying funds: some parents apprenticed their children to themselves, and others made up the balance of higher premiums for entrants to occupations not intended by the charity. When no children in Woodhorn were eligible in the early nineteenth century, the rector temporarily ceased to participate in the scheme. The trustees refused the charity commissioners' proposal to take advantage of section 30 of the 'Endaved Schools Act' of 1869 to use funds for educational purposes; but in 1895 they were obliged to seek permission to offer grants other than for apprenticeships. From 1898 the charity, like others, was controlled by the charity commissioners. They were then permitted to award scholarships and sums below $10 each to deserving children. In 1943 the charity was re-established in three independent trusts, with new rules for appointing trustees, who were to include local authority representatives. 
Triplet died on 18 July 1670. His will bequeaths 20 shillings to buy a ring for each of thirty of his previous scholars, and lists his extensive library, which he disposed of among his friends. He was buried later in July 1670 in Westminster Abbey 'near the Vestry', formerly St Faith's Chapel. In the distant south transept, his wall memorial is surmounted by his uncoloured coat of arms in a circle: a doe statant regardant, transfixed at the neck by an arrow, a chief indented. The tinctures are unrecorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 62042


Mickleton, James (1638-1693), antiquary and lawyer, was born in Durham on 19 April 1638, the eldest son of Christopher Mickleton (bap. 1612, d. 1669), attorney, of Durham, and his first wife, Mary King ('c'.1615-1644). He was educated at Durham School, admitted to Gray's Inn in 1652, and to Christ's College, Cambridge, and the Inner Temple in 1656. He was called to the bar in 1663. He was appointed keeper of the seal of the county palatine of Durham in 1689. 
Mickleton was married on 29 April 1660 to Frances Hall ('bap'. 1634, died 1690). His father, Christopher, marked the occasion by transferring to him the ownership of the family home of Crook Hall, on the outskirts of Durham, but friction soon arose between father and son over the right to occupy the property, resulting in rancorous litigation. James was totally excluded from his father's will, which described him as 'ungratefull, unthankfull, abusive and disobedient' (will of Christopher Mickleton). 
Like many lawyers, James Mickleton collected manuscripts both for their practical value as legal records and for their absorbing antiquarian interest. As he himself expressed it, 'There is a certain pleasure & delight in hearing & discoursing of Matters that have been in old times before us wch mightily provoked me to look into Antiquity' (Mickleton and Spearman MS 1, fol. [3]). He had a circle of friends with similar interests to his own, among whom was John Davies of Kidwelly, who dedicated to him his edition of 'The Ancient Rites... of Durham' (1672), an important account of the pre-dissolution regime and buildings of Durham Cathedral. Mickleton probably became acquainted with Davies through his brother-in-law John Hall, Davies's patron. 
Mickleton died on 3 August 1693, and was buried in Durham Cathedral on 4 August. The value that he attached to his manuscript collections can be judged from his will, in which he left detailed instructions as to how they were to be cared for. Certain major compilations were left to trustees, in the hope that they could eventually be published, while the remainder of his local history collection was left to his only surviving son, Michael (1663-1711). His collection of printed and manuscript law books he left to James ['see below'], the eldest of Michael's ten children. Michael seems to have been a disappointment to his father. He was called to the bar in 1684 and married Elizabeth (1667-1704), the daughter of John Spearman, a prominent Durham lawyer. However, he did not pursue a legal career or share in his father's antiquarian pursuits, and it was the younger James Mickleton who continued the family interest in manuscript collecting. 


Ownership of his grandfather's legal and antiquarian manuscript collections, together with an easy social manner, gave Mickleton ready access to antiquarian circles, and although he undoubtedly made some effort to study law he gradually became preoccupied with social life and historical studies. His acquaintances included Humfrey Wanley, library keeper to Lord Harley, and John Anstis, Garter king of arms. He assisted Wanley in tracking down works suitable for the Harleian Library, and gave help to Anstis in his researches into heraldry. Meanwhile he continued to add to his own collections, and in 1716 acquired, as a gift from a great-uncle, the library of his great-grandfather Christopher Mickleton. In July 1717 he was one of twenty-three members present at the inaugural meeting of the Society of Antiquaries at the Mitre tavern. 
Mickleton's income was not equal to his social aspirations, and by November 1719 he was in deep financial difficulties. The bookseller Richard Sare described his state in a letter to Wanley: 'he was... surrounded with Dunns, running into every ones Debt that wou'd lend him money; the Thoughts whereof made him fly to Drinking, so that he was seldom sober' (BL, Harley MS 3781, fol. 25). According to Sare, he had met with a repulse in his courtship; probably he had unsuccessfully attempted to extricate himself by the well-established expedient of an advantageous marriage. On 25 November 1719 his drowned body was found in the Thames. The verdict of the inquest was the charitable one of 'accidental death', but all the circumstances suggest the likelihood of suicide. He was buried in St Clement Danes, Strand. 
On James Mickleton's death the family manuscript collections were bought by his uncle, Gilbert Spearman, also an antiquary, who added his own family's manuscripts. The combined collection passed down the Spearman family until 1817, when it was presented to Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham. Barrington caused the collection to be divided. The legal manuscripts were given to the library of the Inner Temple, where they became known as the Barrington manuscripts, and the antiquarian material was presented to the dean and chapter of Durham, and eventually passed to Durham University as the Mickleton and Spearman collection. 
The volumes that the elder James Mickleton wished to be published were never printed in the form that he envisaged. However, his manuscripts and those of his grandson continue to be used as a source for legal and historical research in a way that amply fulfils his intention in forming the collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 62044


Calvert, Frank (1828-1908), archaeologist, was born on 3 September 1828 at strada Zecca, Valletta, Malta, the youngest of seven children of James Calvert (1778-1852), civil servant and grain merchant, and his wife, Louisa Ann (1792-1867), daughter of John and Mary Campbell Lander. 
Educated in Valletta until the age of sixteen Calvert moved, in 1845, to the Dardanelles, where his uncle Charles Lander was British consul. The family engaged in a number of agricultural and commercial ventures in the Troad, with Frank's brother Frederick, who took over as British consul in 1846, playing the leading role. Frank assisted in these enterprises but spent much of his free time developing an unrivalled expertise in the topography of the Troad, through exploration, avid reading, and small-scale excavations. Between 1859 and 1865 he published a series of six articles in the 'Archaeological Journal'; he was clearly preparing himself to tackle the problem of the location of Homeric Troy. Most contemporary scholars regarded Pinarbasi/Balli Dag, at the south end of the plain of Troy, as the most likely candidate but Charles Maclaren, who stayed with the Calverts in 1847, had championed Hisarlik, 4 miles further north. 
Trial excavations on Balli Dag persuaded Calvert that Troy was not located there. Between 1863 and 1865 he dug four small trenches on the eastern part of Hisarlik, which he had purchased in 1855. By October 1863 he had uncovered part of the temple of Athena and was convinced that Homeric Troy lay underneath. In a letter to Charles Newton of the British Museum he proposed that the museum sponsor large-scale excavations and offered to donate all finds and the site itself to the museum, provided that he be given direction of the excavations. This generous proposal was not accepted, however, apparently because Frederick Calvert was at that time implicated in a major insurance fraud scandal. 
When Heinrich Schliemann was leaving the Troad in August 1868, after disappointing soundings at Pinarbasi/Balli Dag, Calvert suggested that he excavate at Hisarlik; despite later claims Schliemann appears not to have realized, in 1868, that Hisarlik was a possible site of Troy. During Schliemann's early excavations at Hisarlik (1870-73), Calvert provided expert advice and ready assistance in countless practical matters, but Schliemann shamelessly cheated him out of a fair price for the Helios metope in 1872 and for inscriptions in 1873. Calvert's perceptive observation, in 1873, that the strata so far excavated were either far earlier or far later than the Trojan War, angered Schliemann, who ridiculed Calvert in 'Troy and its Remains' (1875) and misrepresented the extent of his 1863-5 excavations at Hisarlik. 
In 1874 Calvert succeeded his brother James as US consular agent at the Dardanelles, an unsalaried post which he held until his death. Relations with Schliemann remained cool for some years but improved when Schliemann resumed work at Hisarlik in 1878 and 1879. Calvert allowed Schliemann to excavate on his own land; in return Schliemann funded Calvert's excavation (1879-80) of Hanay Tepe, then held to be another possible site of Troy. Calvert's account of his careful excavations forms an appendix to Schliemann's 'Ilios' (1881). Throughout his life Calvert acted as host and guide to scholars visiting the Troad; he also had a sophisticated knowledge of the region's geology and botany, on which scholars, such as Rudolf Virchow, gratefully drew. 
Over the years Calvert accumulated an important collection of antiquities from various sites in the Troad. Parts of this collection are now in the British Museum, at Boston, and at Worcester, Massachusetts. The bulk, however, was donated to the Canakkale Museum. 
Calvert's view, that the stratum held by Schliemann to be that of Homeric Troy (Troy II) was too early, was vindicated in the 1890s, when Dorpfeld acknowledged that the recently discovered Troy VI level was a much more likely candidate. On 12 August 1908 Calvert died, unmarried, either at Calvert Mansion, Canakkale, or at the family farm, Thymbra, at Akca Koy; he was buried a few days later in the consular cemetery Canak at Canakkale. 


@@@@@


doc= 62046


Graefer, John Andrew (d. 1802), horticulturist and landscape gardener, was born in Vienna but at an early age came to England, where he became a pupil of the gardener Philip Miller. He was subsequently employed as a gardener by the earl of Coventry, and then by James Vere at Kensington Gore. About 1776 he established a nursery at Mile End, London, in partnership with another gardener and a seedsman. According to W. Aiton, in the 'Hortus Kewensis' of 1810, between 1783 and 1784 Graefer introduced in England, possibly with seeds provided by the Swedish botanist and medical doctor Carl Peter Thunberg (one of the few foreigners who had been allowed to visit Japan), the 'Aucuba japonica', the 'Ophiopogon japonica', the 'Orontium japonica', and the 'Eucomis punctata'. He also reintroduced in England the 'Eleagnus angustifolius orientalis'. 
In 1786 Sir William Hamilton had persuaded the queen of Naples, Maria Carolina, to have an English garden laid out at the royal palace at Caserta. Graefer, whose name had been suggested by Sir Joseph Banks, thus entered the service of the queen, and moved to Naples with his three sons, John, Charles, and George. On his journey, while his ship was obliged to halt in the harbour of Ponza, Graefer had the opportunity to spend some time on the island, and drew up a detailed 'Flora insulae Ponza'. In Caserta, Graefer laid out a charming (although rather small) English garden and stocked it with a large variety of plants. As Loudon says: 'Every exotic, which at that time could be furnished by the Hammersmith nursery, was planted.... Among these the Camellias, Banksias, Proteas, Magnolias, Pines, etc.' (Loudon, 19). At the same time Graefer, according to Loudon, also laid out several other gardens in Naples, including one for the duca di San Gallo. In Caserta, however, he met with many unforeseen difficulties; the Neapolitans did not seem to appreciate his work and his subordinates cheated him shamelessly. In 1788 the queen became tired of the project and the English garden was taken over by the king, Ferdinando IV. As a result Graefer had to accept a drastic cut in salary and was obliged to work under the supervision of the architect Carlo Vanvitelli. 
In 1789 Graefer published 'A descriptive catalogue of upwards of eleven hundred species and variations herbaceous and perennial plants', which was reprinted at least four times (4th edn, 1804). In its foreword the 'Editor' informed the reader, among other things, that 'the Author of the following Catalogue is publicly celebrated, in the Annals of the Admiralty, for his 'Invention of Prepared Vegetables''. This consisted of the preparation of dried vegetables, which permitted ships' provisions of greens, such as broccoli, to be preserved for over a year. According to a 1793 work by N. Hadrawa, Graefer also drew up a 'Flora dell'isola di Capri' and sent it for publication to a natural history society in Berlin. The book apparently was not published and the manuscript was lost (Norman Douglas made an extensive, but unsuccessful, search for it in 1930). 
In 1791 Graefer (who by then must have been a widower), married Elizabeth Dodsworth, a young woman from Chester. In 1792 she gave birth to a son, Ferdinando, who died shortly afterwards; a second child, Maria Carolina, was born in 1794. In December 1798, when the French invasion became imminent, the royal family and the Neapolitan court escaped to Sicily. Graefer was taken along with them and became employed by Lord Nelson as steward of his estate, Bronte. Unfortunately Graefer's competence as an administrator did not match his skill as a gardener. After complaining about the squandering and prodigality of his steward ('Graefer thought that I approved giving to the poor'), Nelson, in 1802, felt somehow relieved by Graefer's death: 'I have lost Graeffer ['sic'], my Governor of Bronte: he died August 7. It embarrasses me a little, but I endeavour to make the best of things, and it may possibly turn out to my pecuniary advantage' ('Dispatches and Letters', 30). 


@@@@@


doc= 62047


Magennis, James Joseph (1919-1986), submariner, was born on 27 October 1919 at 4 Majorca Street, west Belfast, the second son and third of the five children of William McGinnes and his wife, Mary Jane Murphy. His father was a Scottish-born itinerant musician who soon abandoned his wife and children, leaving Mary to survive on a series of temporary sewing jobs. James attended St Finian's School, Falls Road, Belfast, until 1935, when he enlisted in the Royal Navy, at which point he adopted the surname Magennis. From 1936, as a first-class boy seaman and later ordinary seaman, he served on several warships before being posted to the destroyer HMS 'Kandahar' in October 1939. In May 1940 he saw action in the North Sea when the sister-ship HMS 'Kelly', commanded by Lord Louis Mountbatten, was disabled by German torpedoes. He later served in the Mediterranean, and in December 1941, when 'Kandahar' struck a mine and sank off Tripoli, he had to swim to safety. 
In December 1942 Magennis was drafted into the Submarine Service, and in March 1943 volunteered for special service in X-class 'midget' submarines. He trained as a diver, and in September 1943 took part in the first major use of the X-craft. Two submarines penetrated Kaafjord, north Norway, and disabled the German battleship 'Tirpitz'. For his part Magennis was mentioned in dispatches. 
In 1944 Magennis was promoted to leading seaman and began training on a new class of XE submarines designed for use in tropical waters. Early in 1945 his unit was sent out to Australia and trained to cut enemy undersea telegraph cables. In July 1945 they were deployed to attack two Japanese cruisers, 'Myoko' and 'Takao', moored in the Johore Strait. Magennis's submarine, XE3, was given the 'Takao' as target, and on 31 July Magennis attached limpet mines to the vessel under particularly difficult circumstances. He first had to squeeze through a partly open diving hatch directly below the target and then, handicapped by leaking breathing apparatus, scrape barnacles from the surface of the ship. Having returned exhausted to the submarine he volunteered to go outside again to release a limpet mine carrier that had failed to jettison correctly. For their part in the operation Magennis and the commander of the submarine, Lieutenant Ian Fraser, were each awarded the Victoria Cross. 
Magennis's award led to a period of great celebrity just after the war, but the ultimately shabby way in which he, Northern Ireland's only holder of the VC in the Second World War, was treated by his home city formed a painful coda to his story. Although he was given a civic reception in December 1945 and the $3000 proceeds of a public subscription, the Belfast city fathers, perhaps believing that such an honour could not be bestowed on a working-class Catholic from the inner-city slums, refused to grant him the freedom of the city. In 1946 Magennis married Edna Skidmore, with whom he had four sons. He left the navy in 1949 and returned to Belfast, where he found it hard to make a living and at some point sold his Victoria Cross. In 1955 he moved to Yorkshire, where he worked as an electrician. His final years were marred by chronic ill health, and on 11 February 1986 he died of lung cancer in the Royal Halifax Infirmary. 
Magennis was commemorated by a memorial in his adopted home of Bradford. In October 1999, following a lengthy local campaign, a 6 foot-high Portland stone and bronze memorial to him was unveiled in the grounds of Belfast city hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 62050


Anderson, Louisa Garrett (1873-1943), surgeon and suffragette, was born at the house of her paternal uncle, 9 Lyndhurst Road, Hampstead, London, on 28 July 1873, the eldest of the three children and the only surviving daughter of James George Skelton Anderson (1838-1907), shipowner, and his wife, the pioneering physician Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, nee Garrett (1836-1917). Louisa spent her childhood at family homes at 4 Upper Berkeley Street, London, and West Hill, Aldeburgh, her parents being as involved with their children as their respective jobs permitted. She was educated privately, but at the age of fifteen went to St Leonard's School at St Andrews, in Scotland. Her letters home reveal that she had decided to do medicine by her second term, but was unimpressed by the science teaching. After leaving there in 1891, she went briefly to Paris to learn French before attending Bedford College, London, to prepare for entry to medical school. In the autumn of 1892 she entered the London School of Medicine for Women (LSMW), of which her mother was by then dean. 
A bright student, Anderson was awarded a number of LSMW prizes before qualifying MB in 1897 and BS in 1898. She did postgraduate jobs at Plaistow Maternity Charity and the Camberwell Royal Infirmary before submitting her MD and becoming house surgeon at the Royal Free Hospital in 1900. At the end of 1901 she went for six months to North America, to attend Dr William Osler's clinics in Baltimore and follow the Chicago surgeon Dr Nicholas Senn. On her return in 1902 she was appointed clinical assistant at her mother's New Hospital for Women, in London, where she remained on the staff until 1921. 
Anderson's active participation in the suffrage movement began after her return from America. By 1903 she was a subscriber to and prominent in organizations affiliated to her aunt Millicent Fawcett's National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS). However, she became increasingly impatient with the lack of progress towards women's franchise, and in 1907 joined Emmeline Pankhurst's Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), of which she remained a generous supporter until 1914. In 1908 she persuaded her mother to join the WSPU -- an important 'catch' for the militant organization -- and in 1909 hosted the inaugural meeting of the Women's Tax Resistance League. As an active committee member of the Kensington branch of the WSPU Anderson took part in the great suffrage processions of May and July 1910 and was briefly arrested in November that year, in the fracas surrounding the visit of a women's delegation to Downing Street. 
Anderson was much in demand as a speaker at WSPU meetings in and around London, and it was during the course of her suffrage work that she met Dr Flora Murray, with whom she was to form a friendship and working relationship that was to last until Murray's death. Murray was a prominent campaigner against the practice of forcible feeding, organizing a petition to the home secretary in 1909 which Anderson signed and then followed with two letters to the 'British Medical Journal', one of the relatively few doctors to protest individually. 
Anderson became convinced that militant action was the only way of making progress, and on 4 March 1912 took the decision to join a group of suffragettes descending on the West End to break windows, and herself threw a stone through the window of 47 Rutland Gate, in Knightsbridge. She was arrested and the following day at Westminster magistrates' court pleaded guilty to wilful damage, for which she was sentenced to six weeks' hard labour in Holloway. Letters smuggled out to her mother (who had by this time resigned her membership of the WSPU) describe daily prison life for the suffragettes. One fellow inmate recorded in her diary that Anderson participated enthusiastically in impromptu sports events organized by prisoners, and that her unexpectedly early release on 4 April -- largely engineered by her brother Alan Garrett Anderson -- left her fellow inmates feeling bereft. 
In February 1912, a month before she went to prison, Anderson had founded a small hospital with Flora Murray, the Women's Hospital for Children, at 688 Harrow Road, London. The hospital had only seven in-patient beds, but attracted large numbers to its outpatient clinics: over 5000 children were treated in the first eighteen months. After her release from Holloway, Anderson went back to her work there and at the New Hospital for Women, where she was now assistant surgeon. Her participation in the suffrage movement became less high-profile, but when war broke out in 1914 she realized that it could bring new opportunities for women. So with Flora Murray she founded and equipped a women's hospital unit, the Women's Hospital Corps (WHC), to run a hospital in Paris. The French Red Cross assigned them the Hotel Claridge on the Champs-Elysees, where they rapidly set up 100 beds, and in a matter of days found themselves swamped with wounded men, many requiring urgent surgery. As chief surgeon, Anderson had had a reasonable amount of surgical experience both in London and during her time in Chicago, but most of the medical staff had not worked since qualifying. Gradually the unit began to acquire a name for professionalism and efficiency. So rapidly did their reputation spread that a few weeks later, when Anderson and Murray offered to run another hospital on the Channel coast, the Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC) accepted with alacrity, offering to fund it for them. Anderson moved with some of the staff to run the new hospital, at Wimereux, while Murray and the rest remained at 'Claridges'. 
The Wimereux hospital opened in early November 1914, and was immediately full of casualties; but fewer patients were going to Paris hospitals, and eventually dwindling fuel supplies forced the closure of the cavernous Hotel Claridge. Anderson and Murray then discovered that large numbers of new hospital beds were being planned in England, and suggested they might be of more use running a unit there. They were invited to meet Sir Alfred Keogh, director-general of Army Medical Services, who offered them the opportunity to take charge of a regular military hospital in London. His acknowledgement that they had shown themselves competent to do so was taken as a significant victory by the two veteran campaigners, who realized that by accepting his offer they would be able to demonstrate very publicly that women could do their patriotic duty as competently as men. They returned to London in early January 1915. Their hospital was to be in Covent Garden, in the premises of a recently vacated workhouse. In May 1915, after hectic preparations which included supervision of renovations to the building, recruitment of like-minded staff, and training in army procedures, the WHC opened the Endell Street Military Hospital, the only British army hospital ever to have been founded and run by women. Murray was the doctor in charge, Anderson chief surgeon. 
Though women did not have commissioned rank, Murray was graded for pay as a lieutenant-colonel, Anderson as a major, and the two were referred to by staff and patients as the 'COs' (commanding officers). The work was punishing. Anderson and Murray led by example, keeping exhaustingly long hours -- a letter home from a young doctor describes them 'working like slaves' (Scantlebury-Brown, letter-diaries, 10 May 1917) -- and the fact that many in the RAMC expected the women to fail was a source of additional pressure. But recognizing that some of the younger doctors were also vulnerable to stress, the two women frequently offered the use of Paul End, the house they owned together in Penn, Buckinghamshire, to members of staff to give them a much-needed break from hospital routine. One woman who went there for a weekend with a colleague found an idyllically situated and comfortable cottage, the contents puzzlingly at odds with the rather austere personae of her COs at Endell Street. 
The hospital had 573 beds, 500 of them surgical, and most of the operations were performed by Anderson -- about 7000 procedures by the time the hospital finally closed. There is evidence that she was a careful surgeon, with a conservative approach to the treatment of wounds, and also a methodical clinician: with her brilliant pathologist, Helen Chambers, she managed also to carry out some of the first clinical research by a British woman doctor, publishing the results in 'The Lancet'. 
In a letter to her mother from Paris, Anderson had described military medicine as 'suffrage work -- or women's work -- in another form' (papers of Louisa Garrett Anderson, 7LGA/2/1/09), and there is no doubt that the feminist agenda was fundamental to Endell Street. No opportunity was lost to proselytize to all and sundry; towards the end of the war Keogh himself wrote to Anderson: 'I think your success has probably done more for the cause of women than anything else I know of' (Murray, 166). The passing of the 'Representation of the People Act' in 1918 was celebrated enthusiastically at Endell Street. 
Anderson and Murray were created CBE in 1917 for their work. Anderson continued at Endell Street during its final months in 1919, as well as at the Harrow Road Hospital, now renamed the Roll of Honour Hospital, which was eventually forced to close in 1921. She sold her London house, 60 Bedford Gardens, and retired with Murray to Paul End, where they lived together until Murray's death in 1923. In 1928 Anderson went to Australia for a visit and after her return became active locally as a magistrate. In 1939, after hearing that a disliked cousin was planning to write a biography of her mother, she produced her own version from a voluminous archive of family letters, 'Elizabeth Garrett Anderson' (1939), after which she destroyed all her parents' most intimate correspondence. 
At the start of the Second World War Anderson went to London as a volunteer at the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital, as the New Hospital had been renamed, helping there in the aftermath of air raids, but was forced to give up this work in 1943 when she was diagnosed as having a retroperitoneal sarcoma. After a palliative operation by the young Diana Beck she moved to a nursing home at Brighton, and died there on 15 November 1943. She was cremated, but is commemorated on Flora Murray's grave at Holy Trinity, Penn. 


@@@@@


doc= 62054


Pascal, Roy (1904-1980), German scholar, was born at 60 Herrick Road, Saltley, Birmingham, on 28 February 1904, the third of four sons of Colin Sydney Pascal (1866/7-1949), master grocer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Edmonds (1866/7-1953). As a foundation and a King Edward's scholar he attended King Edward's School, Birmingham, where he excelled as a sportsman as well as academically. He was then awarded a scholarship to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he studied modern languages. On the whole he found the teaching at Cambridge uninspiring, the one shining exception being E. K. (Francis) Bennett, who introduced him to the study of imaginative literature and encouraged him to develop his own critical judgements (however controversial they might be). In 1924 he attended a summer school in Berlin. That summer was to prove decisive. His literary interests (especially his love for Goethe's poetry), his quickened sense of the interplay of ideas and socio-historical reality, and his political awakening, above all to the dangers of fascism, convinced him to devote his professional life to Germany and to things German. He returned to Cambridge, graduated with a first in 1927, and was subsequently awarded a Tiarks scholarship. He spent the winter semester in Berlin and the summer semester in Munich. On his return to Cambridge he began teaching and became a fellow of Pembroke College. On 27 June 1931 he married Feiga (Fania) Polianovskaya (1901-1985/6), whom he had met in Berlin; she was of Ukrainian Jewish descent, the daughter of Moses Polianovsky, timber merchant, and later taught Russian in Cambridge (to Ludwig Wittgenstein among others). They had two daughters, Rachel ('b'. 1932) and Susan ('b'. 1935). Fania had a delightful sense of humour and was a wonderful emotional and intellectual support to him throughout his life. 
Pascal's first book, 'The Social Basis of the German Reformation' (1933), gave primacy to the interplay of religious ideas, economics, and social change, and bore the imprint of his conversion to Marxism. As a newly appointed lecturer he attended his first meeting of the Conference of University Teachers of German in 1936 (he was later to become its chairman in 1960-61). At the meeting in 1936 he urged his colleagues to send a formal resolution to the German government protesting at the victimization of Jewish and democratically minded academics at German universities. The resolution was not adopted; some colleagues were suspicious of his close links with the Communist Party, and a number felt that some kind of contact with Germany and German institutions should be kept open. Throughout the early years of his career Pascal felt that historical and political analysis had to take precedence in his scholarly work -- hence his study 'The Nazi Dictatorship' (1934), 'The German Ideology', his translation and edition of the work by Marx and Engels (1938), and his books, published in the immediate aftermath of the war, 'The Growth of Modern Germany' (1946) and 'The German Revolution of 1848' (1948). He was also active in the lecturers' professional association, the Association of University Teachers, of which he was president in 1944-5. 
In 1939 Pascal moved to the chair of German at the University of Birmingham which he held for the next thirty years. Birmingham allowed him (in a way that Cambridge had not) to reform the curriculum of the undergraduate course in German, achieving an interplay between linguistic, literary, cultural, and historico-political concerns. He created a formidable department by appointing such scholars as William Burley (Bill) Lockwood, Richard Hinton Thomas, and Siegbert Prawer. The hum and buzz of that German department bore witness to the magnificent intellectual range and reach that animated all his subsequent publications. 'The German Sturm und Drang' (1953) and 'From Naturalism to Expressionism' (1973) combined richly perceptive analyses of literary styles, genres, and forms with a revelatory ability to relate those aesthetic matters to social and moral concerns. His 'Design and Truth in Autobiography' (1960) was wonderful in its generosity of reference and argument; at its centre was the existential question of the interplay of coherence (on the one hand) and contingency (on the other) in the human personality and in the individual's perception of that personality. Three major monographs revealed the full extent of his acuity as a literary critic -- 'The German Novel' (1956), 'The Dual Voice' (1977), and 'Kafka's Narrators' (1982), the latter published posthumously. Particularly the last two of these studies showed him engaging with theoretical (and at that time heavily theorized) issues -- and yet, characteristically, he wrote not in order to produce some rebarbatively schematic taxonomy but rather to highlight the sheer complexity of what happens in the human act of storytelling. 
It was one of many bitter ironies that as Pascal distanced himself more and more from the extreme left, and as his scholarly work moved increasingly towards literary questions, he found himself confronted in the late 1960s by a group of students in his own department who (like himself many years earlier) had been radicalized by their time in Germany. The turmoil of that time was inseparable from Pascal's anguish at confronting his own past. Yet he had never been a mere ideologue, and while a few colleagues in German studies continued to regard him with suspicion, he was admired and loved by the generality of the profession. The respect in which he was held was confirmed by the award of the Goethe medal (1965) and the Hamburg Shakespeare prize (1969), by his election to a fellowship of the British Academy (1970) and to an honorary fellowship of Pembroke College, Cambridge (1976), and by the conferral of honorary doctorates by the universities of Birmingham (1974) and Warwick (1977). He was a superb translator -- 'Iphigenia in Tauris' was a beautiful verse translation of Goethe's drama that was twice performed on BBC radio -- and a remarkable teacher -- patient, unemphatic, never inhibiting. He always related the complexity of the literary text to his readers' common humanity. 
Roy Pascal was a man of rich gifts and capacities. He was a skilled angler, and his knowledge of the countryside and of the towns and buildings of the midlands was astonishing. He loved taking friends and colleagues for walks, pointing out features of interest and beauty that might otherwise go unremarked. His years of retirement, which began with a very happy spell at McMaster University in Canada, were serene and productive until his health began to fail him. He died at his home, 102 Witherford Way, Selly Oak, Birmingham, of heart failure on 24 August 1980. He was survived by his wife, Fania, and their two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 62062


Jacopo Amigoni (c.1680x85-1752), whose name also appears as Giacomo Amiconi in various sources, is recorded as 'abroad' in 1711, and, according to Vertue, who may have had the information at first hand, he was a pupil of Bellucci at Dusseldorf. Certainly Amigoni's career was made in Germany, particularly at the court of the elector Max II Emanuel von Wittelsbach; he worked at Nymphenburg, Schleissheim, and the abbey of Ottobeuren from 1716 to 1729, visiting Venice, Rome, and Naples in 1728-9. His pupil Joseph Wagner (1706-1780) was to join him in London in 1732. Receptive to both French and Venetian influences, Amigoni's art evolved from a lightened Bellucci-like manner to a delicate, cosmopolitan style, with cool, powdery colours and a finish evoking the softness of pastel. In late 1729 Amigoni travelled to London with his sister Carlotta (a painter and engraver) and an Italian opera singer, presumably one engaged by Handel on his trip to Germany in that year. 
Amigoni decorated the staircase of Lord Tankerville's house in St James's Square, London, in early 1730 (des. by rebuilding 'c'.1753), collaborating with the Lombard 'quadraturist' Gaetano Brunetti (died 1758). He worked elsewhere with Brunetti (who was also a scene-painter) including the staircase of the duke of Chandos's new residence at Cavendish Square in 1735 (des.). His paintings, generally on canvas rather than plaster, attracted fashionable attention: the queen visited Lord Tankerville's house to view his work in 1732, while the staircase decoration for the Spanish ambassador at Powis House (des.) provided the catalyst for controversy in 1734. Amigoni was attacked by James Ralph in the 'Weekly Register' as a foreigner who painted in an overblown and superficial manner, compared with the more wholesome and realistic qualities of English art. Although this attack was held up for ridicule by Bavius in the 'Grub Street Journal', Ralph's views were shared if not encouraged by Hogarth, whose animosity towards Amigoni in particular was inflamed by the action of Benjamin Styles in publicly rejecting Thornhill's history paintings for the hall at Moor Park. Styles turned to Amigoni instead in 1732 for some light-hearted Ovidian scenes, with grisaille paintings by Sleter in the upper level, the whole set amid elegant stucco-work by Bagutti. Another possible bone of contention was Amigoni's decoration of the rebuilt Covent Garden Theatre for Hogarth's friend John Rich in 1732 (lost in renovations, 1782). Hogarth prevented Amigoni from obtaining the commission for the staircase at St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1734 by volunteering himself for the task. Amigoni was identified with Italian opera through his close friendship with the famous castrato Farinelli, in London from 1734, and his marriage on 17 May 1738 to Maria Antonia Marchesini (La Lucchesina), the opera singer who made her London debut at the King's Theatre in 1737. He may have collaborated with George Lambert on the scenery for Handel's opera 'Atalanta' in 1736. Meanwhile, Amigoni set up a print studio with Wagner (a business partnership that was to continue until his death) which produced prints after Amigoni's paintings, including portraits and a group, 'Cries of London', while prints after Canaletto were planned. Doubtless competition with Hogarth and Arthur Pond fuelled the studio's energies; moreover, as the taste for allegorical and mythological decorative paintings was receding, Amigoni's activities diversified. However, he continued to work as a history painter, painting a ceiling for Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, in 1735 and probably collaborating with Sleter at Mereworth Castle in 1736-9, although payments are recorded only to Sleter. Charles Howard negotiated with Amigoni in 1731 and in 1736-7 for four paintings, 'The Labours of Hercules', for Hawksmoor's Tempietto at Castle Howard (which were apparently never executed): knowing his patron's tastes, Amigoni cited Pellegrini's prices. Amigoni painted small-scale histories exquisitely on copper for 'The Temple of the Four Monarchies of the World' (Royal Collection), the complex musical clock designed by Charles Clay, with sculptural ornament by Rysbrack and Roubiliac, and music by Handel, Geminiani, and Corelli, which was purchased by Augusta, princess of Wales, in 1743. 
Although Amigoni was more successful in some ways as a portraitist of fashionable society than Hogarth, the limitations of his elegant, courtly style were recognized. Queen Caroline and the prince of Wales sat to him, and apart from painting other members of the royal family he portrayed sitters such as the young Charles Frederick, subsequently an important patron of Andrea Casali, while his allegorical portrait of Farinelli (National Museum, Bucharest; repr. Scarpa Sonino, 'Amigoni', 88) was admired in his studio in 1735. Amigoni and Wagner returned to Venice in mid-1739. There he painted altarpieces and decorative works for an international clientele, remaining in contact with Farinelli, who had left London for Madrid in 1737. At Farinelli's instigation Amigoni was invited to become first painter to Fernando VI: from 1747 until his death on 22 August 1752 in the Calle del Barquillo, Madrid, he worked on fresco decoration, court portraits, and stage designs. He was buried on 23 August in the church of San Jose, Madrid. 
Amigoni may have encouraged Antonio Canal, called Canaletto, to visit England, and 


@@@@@


doc= 62063


Brown, John (1749-1787), miniature painter and draughtsman, was born on 18 June 1749 in Edinburgh, the eldest of five children of Samuel Brown (1722-1787), and his wife and cousin, Agnes Fyfe Scoular (1716-1787). His father was a watchmaker and deacon of the Hammermen of Edinburgh and a free burgess of Peebles and Edinburgh, and his uncle James Scoular was a musical instrument maker; his cousin James Scoular or Scouler (1740-1812) was also a miniaturist. John Brown studied at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh, probably under William Delacour and then Charles Pavillon. By 1769 he was in London, where he ordered a camera obscura, an instrument which he regarded as 'useful and even necessary to a landscape painter' (Pressly, 55). On 15 October 1769 he was ready to set sail from Falmouth for Italy in the company of David Erskine, who was well connected in Rome. 
Brown was fortunate in not only having connections to Roman society through Erskine's cousin, Charles, later Cardinal Erskine, but also to its artistic circle through friendship with his fellow Scot Alexander Runciman, who was there from 1767 and who was part of the circle of artists around Henry Fuseli. By spring 1772 Brown was travelling as draughtsman to the antiquary and collector Charles Townley and his companion William Young. Their extensive tour of the lesser-known parts of southern Italy, Sicily, and Malta was documented by Young in his 'Journal of a summer's excursion by the road of Montecasino to Naples, and from there over all the southern parts of Italy, Sicily and Malta, in the year 1772' ([1773?]), and by Townley, in his personal papers. However, neither Young nor Townley provides a record of Brown's activities and few of the drawings of antiquities made on this tour survive. It was during this tour that Brown contracted malaria. 
Townley and Brown enjoyed a warm relationship, and Brown was far from intellectually inferior to his more privileged companions. He was later described by John Burnett, Lord Monboddo, as 'more learned in the Italian arts of painting, sculpture, music and poetry than any man I ever conversed with' (Brown, iii). On his return to Rome in 1773 Brown, probably through Runciman, became involved with Fuseli and his circle; his intellectual interests no doubt found resonance with the Swiss artist's. In Rome, Brown made numerous studies of Roman life as well as sensitive portraits. He worked in pencil, and pen and ink, and like other members of the circle developed 'a more emotionally expressive and dramatic approach' which evolved into 'a homogeneous style' through artistic exchange (Pressly, ix). 'The Stiletto Merchant' ('c'.1775-80; Pierpont Morgan Library, New York), a scene of sinister dramatically illuminated nightlife, and carefully observed character, is one of Brown's most potent images. The same threatening atmosphere is also found in 'Woman Standing among Friars' (Cleveland Museum of Art), which employs similar dramatic techniques of strongly contrasting dark and light, forcefully observed character bordering on caricature, and a sinuous line in drawing, typical of Fuseli's circle. Brown also drew the antiquities and landscape of Rome, including 'A View of the Coliseum at Rome', which he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1774, and 'The Basilica of Maxentius [and Constantine]' ('c'.1774-6; NG Scot.), and continued to work for Townley, producing drawings of antique sculpture. 
Brown was in Florence by 31 August 1776, where he drew in the Uffizi: its director described him as 'esatto e diligente, modesto, quiete' (Ingamells, 138). Thomas Jones met him at the English Hotel in November 1776, and with Christopher Ebden, the architect, the artists visited the collection of Lord Cowper. Brown seems to have remained in Florence for the rest of his time in Italy, continuing to work for Townley and visiting Venice in 1779. 
Brown was probably in London by March 1780 and thereafter returned to Scotland. His most important commission there was for a group of thirty-one small-scale portrait drawings (Scot. NPG) of the members of the Society of Antiquaries, commissioned by David Steuart Erskine, eleventh earl of Buchan, between 1780 and 1781 at the cost of 1 guinea each. He may have visited London shortly after this date but was certainly in Edinburgh in 1784 when he sat for a remarkably animated double portrait with and by Runciman (Scot. NPG), for Erskine. He married Mary, daughter of Charles Esplin, variously described as a merchant, painter, and limner, of New Kirk parish, Edinburgh, on 2 February 1786; they had one son, Charles. In that same year he travelled to London; however, the malaria he contracted in Italy forced him to return home, and after making the voyage by sea he died at Leith on 5 September 1787. He was buried on 6 September at Greyfriars burial-ground, Edinburgh. In 1789 his 'Letters upon the Poetry and Music of the Italian Opera; Addressed to a Friend' were published by their recipient Lord Monboddo, who in the introduction acclaimed Brown as 'one of the greatest artists that ever was in Scotland' who, on the subject of this work, was 'more learned... than any man in Great Britain' (Brown, iii). 


@@@@@


doc= 62064


Burney, Edward Francisco (1760-1848), artist, the son of Richard Burney (1723-1792), a dancing-master, and Elizabeth Humphries ('c'.1720-1771), was born in Worcester on 7 September 1760. He was an accomplished amateur violinist, while his brother Charles Rousseau Burney (1747-1819) was a distinguished if impecunious professional on violin and keyboard. He was the nephew of the music historian Dr Charles Burney (1726-1814) and a favourite cousin of the novelist Frances (Fanny) Burney (1752-1840). 
Burney enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools in 1776, studied there from 1777, lodged with his Burney cousins while there, and left in the 1780s. He exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1780-1803, showing portraits of family and friends (he was too shy to paint other sitters) and history pieces. (A watercolour drawing of his brother playing the violin is in the National Portrait Gallery, London.) He made good copies after Sir Thomas Lawrence and Sir Joshua Reynolds (for example, the fine 'Miss Mary Horneck', ex Sothebys, London, 9 July 1980, lot 114). His best portrait in oils is probably 'Fanny Burney' (1782; NPG), which uses a bright rococo palette and flat tones to striking effect. He worked chiefly, however, as an illustrator, and exhibited stained drawings for Fanny Burney's 'Evelina' at the Royal Academy in 1780, in which year he is described as living in York Street, Covent Garden, probably at Gregg's (or Grigg's) Coffee House, which seems to have been part owned by Dr Burney, whose two sisters, Becky (Rebecca) and Nancy (Ann), ran it. Illustrations for 'Paradise Lost', in a manner of controlled reflection of the style of Henry Fuseli, are in the Huntington Library, California, and a pleasant group of drawings, chiefly landscapes, is in Nottingham Castle Museum. 
Burney's most original works are four remarkable large-scale watercolour compositions of a sharply satirical nature: 'The Waltz' and 'The Elegant Establishment for Young Ladies' (V&A), and 'Amateurs of Tye-Wig Music' and 'The Glee Club, or, The Triumph of Music' (Yale U. CBA). A version in oil of 'Amateurs of Tye-Wig Music' ('c'.1820; Tate collection) with the particular theme of modern versus traditional taste in music, is painted with verve and precision, and the group suggests that Burney had formed plans to develop his satires and their publication along the lines pioneered by Hogarth. Burney relies upon caricature to a degree which Hogarth would never have allowed, although his targets -- society in general and musical life in particular -- are similar. Burney exploits an extravagantly swooping line that lends his works a distinctive edge. For whatever reason, the other compositions in this group appear not to have been painted, and none was published as an engraving. 
Another group of drawings now firmly attributed to Burney (BM, 1904-1-1-1 ff.) shows the hang of the Royal Academy exhibition in 1784, and the pictures thus predate the famous 1787 illustration by J. H. Ramberg, to whom these drawings were previously given. Another important record of contemporary life is Burney's drawing of De Loutherbourg's famous Eidophusikon (1782; BM). Even slight sketches by Burney can provide rare insights, and 'A Tragic Actress' (Tate collection) reveals more than many verbal records about contemporary theatrical style. Burney died in London on 16 December 1848; he was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 62065


Canal, Giovanni Antonio (1697-1768), painter, was born on 17 October 1697 in the district of San Lio, Venice, and was baptized on 30 October in the church of San Lio, the eldest of four children of Bernardo Canal (1674-1744), painter, and his wife, Artemisia Barbieri ('fl'. 1694-1739). The Canal family, whose lineage is traceable in Venice from the mid-sixteenth century, were 'cittadini originari', a class immediately below the patrician, which permitted them to use a coat of arms. 
Canaletto, as the artist came to be known at an early stage in his career, was presumably trained by his father, who seems to have been employed primarily in the production of stage scenery. It is as an assistant to his father in this activity that Canaletto is first recorded, in Venice and also subsequently, in 1719-20, in Rome. The statements of Orlandi and Zanetti that it was on this -- his only -- visit to Rome that he was first inspired to paint and draw his surroundings are borne out by the earliest works attributable to him. An album, later broken up, of twenty-three drawings of views of Rome (of which one sheet is in the Hessischen Landesmuseum, Darmstadt, and the remainder in the British Museum) and a group of a dozen views of Rome and 'capricci' (imaginary assemblages of buildings, often incorporating real elements) reflect Canaletto's training in scenography. Their authenticity has, until recently, often been questioned (but see the catalogue of Christies, London, sale 16 December 1998, lot 76, for a documented example). 
Canaletto probably returned to Venice in 1720, when he was inscribed in the Venetian painters' guild, and after a modest start his work shows a remarkably rapid development during the 1720s. His first dated painting, a very large 'Capriccio of Classical Ruins and a Pyramid', signed and dated 1723 (priv. coll., Italy), and its pendant (priv. coll., Switzerland), painted for the Giovanelli family's villa at Noventa Padovana, already surpass in technical skill, inventiveness (and size) anything in this genre produced by contemporaries. They were closely followed by two allegorical paintings to which Canaletto contributed architectural elements: 'Capriccio: Tomb of Lord Somers, with Ruins and Landscape' (priv. coll., England) and 'Capriccio: Tomb of Archbishop Tillotson' (priv. coll.). These were executed in collaboration with G. B. Cimaroli and G. B. Piazzetta (in the former) and G. B. Cimaroli and G. B. Pittoni (in the latter). By this time, however, he had begun to appreciate, as had his predecessor Luca Carlevarijs (1663-1730), the first of the great Venetian view painters, now nearing the end of a long career, that the demand for views of Venice among foreign visitors to the city offered far greater market potential than did any local interest in 'capricci'. The two allegorical tombs had been painted for the Irish impresario and agent Owen McSwiny, and were preceded by six large views of the piazza and piazzetta San Marco (Royal Collection) executed 'c'.1723 for the English merchant banker Joseph Smith (for some years British consul there) and by a set of four Venetian views of 'c'.1724 presumably painted for Prince Josef Wenzel von Liechtenstein (Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza, Madrid, and Ca' Rezzonico, Venice). His earliest documented Venetian views, a set of four supplied for Stefano Conti of Lucca in 1725-6 (priv. coll.), are the last major commission he was to execute for an Italian. These and the roughly contemporary 'Venice: Santa Maria della Carita from the Campo San Vidal' ('The Stonemason's Yard', National Gallery, London) display a mastery of perspective and skill at defining form and texture, combined with an acute sensitivity to atmospheric effects of light, rendered with a vivacity of brushwork completely new to Italian view painting. These qualities, and the small, bustling figures, show why contemporaries were already praising Canaletto's work as truer to nature than Carlevarijs's. All, however, include distortions intended to 'improve' reality for pictorial effect, a feature of the artist's approach at all stages of his career, and one which would seem to refute the often-repeated assertion that he relied heavily on the use of the camera obscura. 
By the end of the 1720s Canaletto had demonstrated his ability to paint with equal success on a small scale, in nine views executed, exceptionally, on copper. There are pairs at Goodwood, Sussex, Chatsworth, Derbyshire, Holkham Hall, Norfolk, and in a Belgian private collection; and a single plate in the Musee de Strasbourg. These show his native city bathed in sunshine, delineated with considerable attention to detail and populated by townsfolk going about their everyday business, all characteristics of his mature style which was crystallizing in these years. In 1729-30 Canaletto added to his repertory the depiction, pioneered by Carlevarijs, of ceremonial events and festivals, in two pairs of large canvases celebrating the visits to Venice of the French comte de Gergy (Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg, and Pushkin Museum, Moscow) and the Spanish conde de Bolagnos (priv. coll., Milan). He had also gained a reputation for being complicated. Owen McSwiny, writing to the duke of Richmond in 1727, noted that: 'The fellow is whimsical and varys his prices every day: and he that has a mind to have any of his work, must not seem to be too fond of it, for he'l be the worse treated for it, both in the price and the painting too. (MS letter, 28 Nov 1727, W. Sussex RO, Chichester)' One of the few people who seems not to have found him difficult to deal with was Joseph Smith, with whom Canaletto's fortunes are inextricably bound up from the late 1720s to the early 1750s. Consul Smith, himself one of the foremost collectors in Venice, acquired over three decades no fewer than fifty paintings by the artist, which he housed in his palace on the Grand Canal and eventually sold 'en bloc' to George III in 1762, along with 142 drawings, over a quarter of Canaletto's surviving work in that medium. He was a superb draughtsman, whether making rough sketches on the spot or executing finished compositions intended for the use of engravers or as finished works. It was the more finished type of drawing which appealed to Smith and the sale fortunately ensured the preservation of Smith's collection intact to the present day as the single most important group of Canaletto's works (Royal Collection). Another large collection of his drawings is in the British Museum. An album of engravings by Antonio Visentini of fourteen of Consul Smith's collection of paintings was published in 1735. This served to disseminate Canaletto's compositions widely and to enhance his fame, as well as providing, on the frontispiece, the only reliable record of the artist's appearance. A second edition followed in 1742, augmented by engravings of a further twenty-four paintings which had been handled but not retained by Smith. Smith was already acting as an agent and intermediary in the sale of Canaletto's work to English collectors by 1730, when he supplied pairs of canvases to Hugh Howard and Samuel Hill (Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, and Tatton Park, Cheshire). These were followed by a constant flow of commissions throughout the 1730s, the decade which marks the peak of Canaletto's career, including the two large series of (relatively small) Venetian views now at Woburn Abbey and formerly in the Harvey collection. The masterpiece of these years, 'Venice: the Riva degli Schiavoni Looking West' (Sir John Soane's Museum, London), was, however, painted not for Consul Smith but for the other great foreign collector resident in Venice, Marshal von der Schulenburg. With the demand for Canaletto's work came a need to delegate to assistants, who included in the late 1730s and early 1740s his nephew Bernardo Bellotto, the only artist to rival him as the greatest Italian view painter of the eighteenth century. The involvement of assistants contributes to an increasing hardening of the delineation of the architectural elements of his views, while the treatment of the figures is increasingly calligraphic. 
The outbreak of the War of the Austrian Succession in 1741 restricted travel to Venice and helped to diminish the number of commissions for paintings of Venetian views. Canaletto had, however, shown an appetite for new challenges from the onset of the decade, making a tour of the Brenta Canal in 1740-41 to gather fresh subject matter and working on a series of thirty-one etchings. He also turned back to ancient Rome and to 'capricci' for the subjects of series of paintings executed for Consul Smith in 1742-4, years in which many pictures are, exceptionally, signed and dated. His style shows a new coldness of light, similar to that characteristic of Bellotto's paintings from the outset, above all in the masterpiece of these years, 'Venice: the Upper Reaches of the Grand Canal with San Simeone Piccolo' (National Gallery, London). 
The greatest challenge was provided by Canaletto's move to London in May 1746. There he was to remain for ten years, resident at 16 Silver Street (now 41 Beak Street), north of Golden Square, except for an eight-month return to Venice in 1750-51. Although his English paintings, for which he adopted a lighter tonality, vary in quality, they amount to a definitive depiction of eighteenth-century London (as in 'London: the Thames from Somerset House Terrace towards the City' and 'London: the Thames from Somerset House Terrace towards Westminster', both Royal Collection), and many country seats, and Canaletto soon found himself as busy as he had been in the 1730s. Groups or pairs of pictures executed for the dukes of Richmond, Northumberland, and Beaufort and Prince Lobkowicz are still in the possession of their descendants, while groups painted for Lord Brooke, later earl of Warwick (five views of Warwick Castle), Baron King, and Thomas Hollis (views of London including Westminster Bridge, St Paul's Cathedral, and a 'capriccio' of buildings in Whitehall), have been dispersed. Large views of St James's Park (presumably the painting owned by the Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber Art Foundation) and of Chelsea College (its canvas divided at an early date into two parts; one now in the Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, Havana, Cuba, and the other at Blickling Hall, Norfolk), were apparently executed as speculations in 1749 and 1751 respectively. Canaletto's activity in England had a stimulating effect on local topographical painters, most notably Samuel Scott and William Marlow. 
Four large Venetian views executed shortly after his return to Italy for the German businessman Sigmund Streit (Gemaldegalerie, Berlin) show Canaletto's powers undiminished, but many works of his later years are small, dark in tone, and populated by exaggeratedly calligraphic figures. One of the very few recorded personal encounters between the artist and English clients took place in 1761 or 1762, when John Crewe, later first Baron Crewe, and the Revd John Hinchliffe encountered him in the piazza San Marco 'making a sketch of the Campanile', according to Hinchliffe's grandson (Links, 'Canaletto', 195-7). Only in 1763 did he receive official recognition, being elected to the Venetian Academy and appointed prior of the Collegio dei Pittori. Canaletto died in Venice, of fever, on 19 April 1768, possibly in the house in which he had been born. He was unmarried. Despite his modest lifestyle he left his three sisters almost nothing except for a small investment in property made on his return visit to Venice in 1750. Canaletto was buried in the communal tomb of the confraternity of the Santissimo Spirito in the church of San Lio, Venice. 


@@@@@


doc= 62066


Hewetson, Christopher (1737/8-1798), sculptor, was born at Thomastown, co. Kilkenny, Ireland, the son of Christopher Hewetson JP (died 1744) and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Hewetson of Cloughsutton, co. Carlow. The Hewetson family can be traced back to Christopher Hewetson, an Elizabethan gentleman who settled in Ireland. His son, also Christopher, was MP for Swords, 1642-61, and served Charles I during the civil war, for which he was awarded a grant of the watermills, fairs, and markets at Thomastown, co. Kilkenny, and 500 acres in 1666. The Hewetsons continued in public service: Christopher Hewetson's father served as a lieutenant in the troop of horse before becoming justice of the peace for co. Kilkenny. The death of Hewetson's father in June 1744 seems to have precipitated a decline in the family's fortunes, and the family estate was inherited by Amyas Hewetson, Christopher's half-brother from his father's first marriage to Eleanor Bushe. In September 1745 Christopher Hewetson enrolled at Kilkenny College, giving his age as eight years. His uncle, the Revd Thomas Hewetson, was master at the college, which may explain the privileged education despite the financial problems within the family. He is said to have then studied under John van Nost the younger ('c'.1712-1780), the leading monumental sculptor in Dublin at the time. Nothing more is known of his early training. 
Hewetson is recorded as arriving at Rome in 1765 with the American painter Henry Benbridge (1743-1812). He was to remain in the city until his death, leaving only for brief visits to Naples in 1766 and 1797. With the assistance of Thomas Jenkins, by then established as the most influential art dealer and agent active within the British community at Rome, Hewetson attracted the patronage of the most fashionable and famous British and Irish grand tourists. His earliest busts included Charles Townley (1769; BM), Frederick Hervey, bishop of Derry and earl of Bristol ('c'.1770; NPG), and Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (1769; NG Ire.). His terracotta portrait of the duke of Gloucester was reported in the London press ('London Chronicle'). The bust is now in the Royal Collection at Windsor. These early pieces exhibit the highly refined technique, and the naturalistic treatment of the sitters' features within a classical format, that were hallmarks of his work. 
In 1771 Hewetson received the commission for his best-known work, the monument to Provost Baldwin for the examination hall of Trinity College, Dublin. This occupied him for twelve years, and the monument was finally erected in Dublin in 1784, having been exhibited in Rome the previous year. This was the sculptor's only large-scale monument. During these years, Hewetson's reputation as a maker of portrait busts rose among a truly international clientele, which included the papal authorities. His most notable commissions included the monument to Cardinal Giambattista Rezzonico (1783-6; San Nicolo in Carcere, Rome) and portrait busts of Pope Clement XIV (the earliest version, dated 1771, at Beningbrough Hall, Yorkshire), the Spanish ambassador Don Jose Nicolas de Azara y Perera (1779; Bibliotheque Mazarine, Paris), and the Scottish painter Gavin Hamilton (1784; Glasgow University). In 1786 he exhibited the bust of Hamilton at the Royal Academy in London, and in 1790 he exhibited a bust of 'A Nobleman' at the same institution. The bust of Hamilton appears in the portrait of Hewetson by Sefano Tofanelli (Wallraf Richartz Museum, Cologne). 
Although at first considered a serious rival to Antonio Canova (1757-1822), who started working in Rome in 1779 and quickly became the most acclaimed sculptor of the period, Hewetson's practice seems to have declined in later years. In 1789-90 he produced a colossal marble bust of Leibniz (Leibniz Haus, Hanover) and he received commissions from Prince Augustus and Frederick Hervey, now fourth earl of Bristol, in the 1790s. He continued to play an active part in Rome's artistic community, signing the letter of thanks addressed to Prince Augustus by British artists in Rome in 1794, following his part in arranging tax relief for artists' imports into Britain. His name appears in the lists of artists circulated in Rome at the time. In 1796 he was commissioned by Lord Bristol to produce a statue of William Pitt, Lord Chatham. This was never completed. With the threatened invasion of Rome by the French, Hewetson fled to Naples in June 1797 where he enjoyed the protection of Sir William and Emma Hamilton. He returned to Rome at the end of that year and died there in 1798. He was recorded as a bachelor at death and was buried near the tomb of Caius Cestius at Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 62068


Antonio Joli (c.1700-1777) was able to benefit from the latter's popularity with the English. A talented painter of stage scenery and 'vedute', Joli was born in Modena, where he studied perspective under Raffaello Rinaldi before becoming a pupil of Giovanni Paolo Panini in Rome. He worked for the theatre in Modena, and in Venice from 1732 until 1742, where he married. After travelling to Germany he settled in London from 1744 to 1748 or 1749. Joli was taken up by Heidegger, working for him at the King's Theatre and decorating his house in Richmond with landscapes and capriccios. Farinelli must have known Joli's theatrical work, for he was invited to the Spanish court in 1749. Joli left Madrid for Italy in 1754, and was a founder member of the Venetian Academy in 1755, but by the late 1750s was in Naples, working on a large group of topographical views for John, Lord Brudenell. He worked in Naples from 1762 as a painter of scenery, of court life, and of sparkling 'vedute'. Joli died on 29 April 1777 in Naples, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 62069


Giovanni Antonio Pellegrini (1675-1741) was born on 29 April 1675 in the parish of San Polo, Venice, the son of Antonio Pellegrini, a glove maker. Montagu's secretary, Christian Cole, a close friend of Rosalba Carriera, whose sister Angela (died 1760) had married Pellegrini in early January 1704, may have suggested their names. By 1708 Pellegrini was a painter of high repute who had made use of Marco Ricci's services as a landscape specialist. Already well travelled, Pellegrini had worked with his master Paolo Pagani (1661-1716) in Moravia and Vienna in the early 1690s, and had visited Rome from 1699 to 1701. His free, spirited handling and vivid colouring were indebted to his study of the late baroque of Luca Giordano and Giovanni Battista Gaulli. Marco Ricci was an eccentric, unstable character, whose career is poorly documented, but he worked in Florence and probably visited Rome. He painted classical landscapes, picturesque Veneto scenes, capriccios, and tempestuous landscapes indebted to Salvador Rosa and Alessandro Magnasco. 
When he invited Pellegrini and Marco Ricci to London, Manchester's concerns were for the renovation of Kimbolton Castle, Huntingdonshire, by Vanbrugh, and the success of the new opera house in Haymarket, London, to which he hoped to attract first-rate Italian singers. After their arrival in late October 1708, the pair worked on the decoration of the hall and staircase at Manchester House (des.) and on scenery for two opera productions of 1709 under the management of Owen McSwiney. In 1709-10 Charles Howard, third earl of Carlisle, employed them at Castle Howard in Yorkshire, recently completed by Vanbrugh, together with the north Italian stuccoists Giovanni Bagutti and Plura. The extensive decoration, largely destroyed by fire in 1940, included scenes from the 'Iliad', an unusual choice which may owe more to the tradition of theatre and opera than to conventional baroque iconography. Pellegrini and Ricci also worked for the young Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington (or for his mother, Juliana), probably then painting the scenes from the 'Metamorphoses', now at Narford Hall, Norfolk, which were apparently presented to Sir Andrew Fountaine after Colen Campbell's reorganization of Burlington House. Fountaine also independently commissioned paintings from Pellegrini. About 1711-12 William Henry Bentinck, second duke of Portland, employed Pellegrini at his house in St James's Square, London, for a fee of $800 according to Vertue, suggesting that the decorations (des. 1748 during rebuilding) were substantial. Pellegrini's last major commission before he left for Dusseldorf in early summer 1713 was at Kimbolton Castle, where he painted the chapel, the grand staircase, and another room. Here and in the Narford canvases his radiant colour, sensuous brushwork, and often Veronese-inspired designs reveal his strengths as a virtuoso late baroque artist. The relative freedom allowed by his whig patrons, who were unencumbered by rigid patterns of patronage, together with his new-found interest in the work of Van Dyck and Rubens, had a dynamic effect on his style. For the first time Pellegrini painted family portraits, for Manchester and Carlisle and perhaps for the dramatist and dealer Peter Le Motteux, and he produced many cabinet pictures of biblical and mythological heroines for what must have been a demanding market. 
While Marco Ricci had worked independently on theatre decoration in 1710, there is no evidence in the Carriera correspondence to support Vertue's account that the two painters had quarrelled. Marco Ricci travelled to Venice in summer 1711, accompanying the singer Catherine Tofts, and he returned with his uncle in the winter. 


@@@@@


doc= 62073


Bentley, Charlotte Eliza (1915-1996), nurse and nursing activist, was born on 15 December 1915 at 63 Portland Court, Great Portland Street, London, the daughter of John Richard Bentley, hosier, and Charlotte Emma Redard. After education at a Swiss convent school and secretarial training Bentley trained as a nurse at the Royal Free Hospital, London, from 1943 to 1946, and there became a student political activist at a time when nursing was considered a vocation above politics. As national chairman of the Student Nurses' Association she campaigned for probationer nurses studying for the state registration examinations to be recognized as students rather than as hospital employees. This did not endear her to the hospital authorities, for whom probationers were a valuable supply of cheap labour on the wards. In 1948 she was appointed sister-in-charge of a new outpatients' department at Lambeth General Hospital, a former London county council hospital, to which she brought the different standards and practices of the teaching hospitals. 
Bentley's attention soon turned to raising the status of state-enrolled nurses, a grade of assistant nurses created by the 1943 'Nurses' Act', who were widely regarded as inferior to their state-registered colleagues. In 1955 she was elected general secretary of the National Association of State Enrolled Assistant Nurses, despite the concern of some members that a state-registered nurse should be appointed to the post rather than an enrolled nurse. An appeal to members for funds ensured that her first year's salary was paid, but she accepted the challenge of making the association financially viable, as well as ceaselessly campaigning on behalf of her members. While often finding it necessary to adopt a confrontational approach to those hospitals and matrons whom she considered unjust to enrolled nurses she also attempted to build bridges between senior figures in the nursing hierarchy, nurse educators, and state-registered and state-enrolled nurses at all levels. For many years she organized 'all-grade' tours for nurses to the Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland, during which social contact could help to break down professional barriers. On such social occasions she was considered an erudite companion whose learning was tempered by a keen sense of humour. 
Bentley enlisted the support of Dame Irene Ward, MP for Tynemouth, to sponsor successfully a private member's bill in 1961 to remove from the title of state-enrolled nurses the word 'assistant', which she considered demeaning and derogatory. National conferences of enrolled nurses were organized to raise their professional profile. She also argued that enrolled nurses should be allowed to manage hospital wards. With sponsorship from the 'Nursing Mirror' she established a scholarship for enrolled nurses to encourage practical nursing skills. She herself was appointed MBE for her services to nursing. 
In 1970 the National Association of State Enrolled Nurses was absorbed by the Royal College of Nursing, despite the prejudice previously shown by the college towards enrolled nurses. Bentley became an official of the college, still dominated by an ethos that saw the nursing profession as a vocation and enrolled nurses as belonging to an inferior grade. Although herself a state-registered nurse Bentley continued to champion enrolled nurses in her new role as section secretary of the enrolled nurses' section of the Royal College of Nursing. Her outspoken, sceptical, strongly held views were not always popular with her colleagues at the college; an avowed agnostic, she alienated many by her principled refusal to attend college religious services, just as previously she had refused to attend church services held at the annual conferences of the National Association of State Enrolled Nurses. On retiring from the Royal College of Nursing in 1977 she became secretary of the nursing sub-committee of the Edwina Mountbatten Trust, charged with administering project grants to advance nursing, midwifery, and health-visiting in the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth. 
Though a campaigner for the rights of enrolled nurses Bentley was keen to preserve the distinction between state-registered and state-enrolled nurses, as she believed that there was a place for the more practical, skills-oriented nurse alongside the more academically trained nurse. While welcoming the setting up in 1983 of one register for all nurses under the aegis of the United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting she did not support the later cessation of enrolment of pupil nurses for the enrolled sections of the register, nor the encouragement given to enrolled nurses to convert to registered general nurses. Nevertheless she had done much toward breaking down the barriers within the nursing profession that ultimately tended towards the extinction of the enrolled nurse. 
In retirement Bentley suffered from Parkinson's disease. She remained unmarried, and died of old age on 20 March 1996 at 37 Elsworthy Road, Camden, London. Her body was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 62076


Stewart, Allan (fl. 1745-1752), Jacobite sympathizer and accused murderer, was the son of Donald Stewart, also known as Vic Ian Vic Allister, sometime of Inverchomrie in Rannoch. He was probably born in Rannoch but was brought up not by his father but at Appin in the household of his kinsman James Stewart of the Glen ('b'. before 1700, died 1752). An allegedly dissolute youth ended with his enlistment in George II's army. Having survived the battle of Prestonpans (1745) on the government side, he was a willing prisoner of the Jacobites, for whom he fought at Culloden in the following April. Later that year he escaped to France where he joined Lord Ogilvy's regiment, one of three Scottish regiments in French service. In 1749, 1751, and early 1752 Stewart returned to Edinburgh and Rannoch as a courier for the rents of his kinsman Stewart of Ardsheil and as a recruiter to the French service. 
On 14 May 1752 Colin Campbell of Glenure, crown factor for the Ardsheil estate, was murdered by a gunman as he returned home from Fort William. Suspicion immediately fell on Allan Stewart. Warrants were issued for his arrest (with a reward of $100), though he was never apprehended and was eventually tried 'in absentia'. That trial resulted in the conviction of Stewart's former guardian, James of the Glen, as an accessory in what has become known as the infamous Appin murder, for which James was executed in November. Allan Stewart's culpability in Glenure's assassination -- his desire to be 'fitsides' with the victim -- was acknowledged even by his friends, as was his concern to know of Glenure's whereabouts before the murder and his presence in the area at the time of the shooting. Against this it has been suggested that his 'in-kneed' gait in flight would have betrayed his identity to the surviving eyewitness, Mungo Campbell. 
Stewart's status as a deserter from the British army may account for his immediate flight following the murder. He was reported to have returned to France, where he may have been the officer listed in Bouillon's regiment in 1757 who was pensioned as a second captain in 1763. This Allan Stewart then enlisted in the Lyonnais regiment, which he left in 1777, receiving the military medal cross. Alexander Campbell, younger of Ardchattan, great-nephew of Glenure, met a man claiming to be Allan Breck Stewart in Paris in 1787. A friend of Walter Scott supposedly met Stewart in Paris around 1789, clad as a Benedictine, although there is no record of an Allan Stewart among the English or Scots Benedictines in France at that time. Scott wrote up the incident in the notes to 'Rob Roy' (1817), arguably heavily embroidering it and presenting Stewart as an elderly nostalgic exile. Stewart could have been the 'Stuart d'Artoury (allan)' listed in a book of French military pensioners in 1790. Stewart's reputation endures through the fictional account of his actions, as Alan Breck, in Robert Louis Stevenson's 'Kidnapped' (1886). The fictional Alan resembles his namesake in the pockmarked complexion which gave him the Gaelic description 'breck' (at least two other Appin contemporaries had the same style) and in a vanity of dress (his French uniform) beyond the quality of his clothes, which were 'shabby with an inclination to be genteel' ('Edinburgh Evening Courant', 28 May 1752) or what Stevenson described as 'costly clothes, though somewhat soiled with... being slept in'. But where Stevenson's Breck is 'smallish in stature, but well set', and indeed has something of the sprite about him, Allan Stewart was 'tall' at 'about 5 feet ten' and 'a little in-kneed'. 
Stevenson's 'Kidnapped' draws on the tradition in which the murder and the injustices of James Stewart's trial and execution have been romanticized in terms of both an atavistic Campbell-Stewart clan animosity and of the post-Jacobite pacification of the highlands, a tradition which has assigned to James Stewart the role of sacrificial victim without condemning his more closely implicated kinsman. An excellent and informed corrective was set out by Sir James Fergusson in his essay 'The Appin murder case' in the 'Scottish Historical Review' for 1952. Fergusson relieves Glenure of his reputation as an oppressor of Jacobite tenants, while aspects of James Stewart's trial which have fed the traditional emotive picture are shown to be less sinister. What is demonstrated is the alarm which the Appin murder provoked among a Westminster administration by no means confident of its dealings with Scotland. 

'Kidnapped''s charismatic but significantly childlike protagonist made Alan Breck an enduring fictional creation. Stevenson's portrayal, like Scott's cameo in 'Rob Roy' before it, was informed by a depiction of Jacobitism as the Parthian response of a decaying highland culture; the future lies with David Balfour. Though written with less flair, more recent examples of Jacobite historiography, such as G. P. Insh's socio-economic model of Scottish Jacobitism, have secured a perennial shelf-life through the influence of Stevenson's novel. After May 1752 the real-life Allan Breck Stewart disappeared into the exigent, diasporic world from whence he came; arguably, his subsequent fictional reinvention remains as significant and worthy of consideration as its shadowy reality. 


@@@@@


doc= 62078


Lyon, Elizabeth (fl. 1722-1726), prostitute and thief, was born at Edgware, Middlesex, from which her alias was derived. Nothing is known of her parentage or early life, not even whether Lyon was a maiden or married name. She may, however, have been the Elizabeth Miller, alias Lyon, convicted at the Old Bailey and branded in the hand in October 1721 for stealing a piece of silk and 5 yards of cambric from the house of John Davenport, where she lodged, in the parish of St Peter Westcheap, London. Lyon acquired contemporary notoriety as the mistress of the celebrated criminal John (Jack) Sheppard (1702-1724). They met at the Black Lion alehouse in Lewkenor's Lane, St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, in 1722 or 1723, when Sheppard was an apprentice, and it was Lyon who first induced him to steal. She became a confederate in many of his robberies and escapes. On 25 May 1724 they escaped together out of New prison in Clerkenwell, and on 31 August she assisted him to escape from the condemned hold in Newgate. 
After Sheppard's execution on 16 November 1724 Lyon exercised a similarly profound influence over other youths. In March 1725 she was committed to the Westminster house of correction, Tothill Fields, for 'seducing a shopkeeper's son to go a thieving with her' ('Parker's London News', 31 March 1725). In the following summer she was cohabiting with a young painter named James Little (1708-1725). Lyon is said to have 'hurried him headlong to his destruction' (Guthrie, 4), but he had already turned to crime before their relationship. On 29 August, after robbing Lionel Mills, a button seller, in a field near Montague House, Little was arrested in Lyon's house off Lewkenor's Lane. He was convicted at the Old Bailey in October and executed at Tyburn on 3 November 1725. In March 1726 Lyon was herself indicted at the Old Bailey for robbing the house of Edward Bury, a butcher, in Allen Street, Clerkenwell. The principal witness was her accomplice, John Smith, an employee of Bury. 'She persuaded me to rob my master's house', he told the court, 'and said she'd go with me, and put me in the way, for I was a mere ignoramus at such sort of business' ('Select Trials', 1.469). 
Lyon was convicted of felony and sentenced to seven years' transportation. She was transported on the 'Loyal Margaret' (Captain John Wheaton) and a landing certificate, dated 1 October 1726, records her safe arrival at Annapolis in Maryland. Her subsequent career is unknown. A 1732 account described her as 'a large masculine woman' (Hayward, 182), but the little we know of her suggests a beguiling as well as a forceful personality. 'A more wicked, deceitful and lascivious wretch there is not living in England', Sheppard allegedly said of her after they had quarrelled ('Narrative', 14). A woman of loose morals she undoubtedly was, but Lyon sometimes placed herself at personal risk to assist Sheppard to escape from captivity. As a figure in romances such as William Harrison Ainsworth's 'Jack Sheppard' (1839), the anonymous 'Edgeworth Bess, or, Shephard in Danger' (1867), and Joseph Hatton's 'When Rogues Fall Out' (1899), as well as in numerous Sheppard stage plays, Lyon acquired some fame in the Victorian period. 


@@@@@


doc= 62079


Hitchen, Charles (c.1675-1727?), thief-taker and marshal of the City of London, is of unknown parentage and background. He was apprenticed as a cabinet-maker and practised that trade for some years. In 1703 he married Elizabeth, the daughter of John Wells of King's Walden, Hertfordshire, and they subsequently came to live in a house on the north side of St Paul's Churchyard in the City of London. Hitchen was fortunate in his marriage, for Elizabeth inherited property from her father when he died in 1711 and that property (which Hitchen persuaded his wife to sell) enabled him to purchase the office of under-marshal of the City for $700 in the following year (CLRO, repertories of the court of aldermen 116.60; journals of the common council, 57.207). 
Hitchen wanted the office for a purpose. The two City marshals, with their small force of six men, carried out policing duties that centred principally on keeping the streets clear of vagrants, prostitutes, and illegal traders. Fees accruing for this and other work carried out at the behest of the lord mayor, as well as an annual salary and allowances of about $100, repaid the purchase price of the office over time. But Hitchen was clearly interested in the more corrupt possibilities that the authority of the marshal's office provided. Soon after assuming office he began to extort protection money from brothel- and tavern-keepers. But he particularly used his powers of arrest to threaten young pickpockets with prosecution, not to discourage them from thieving but to coerce them into bringing him the goods that they stole so that he could negotiate with their victims for the return of their belongings for a fee. 
Thief-takers of this kind, acting as middlemen between thieves and their victims, were well known in Anne's reign; indeed, their activities may have been increasing then because of efforts made by parliament and the magistrates of the City to seek out and punish receivers of stolen goods. It was safer in those circumstances, and perhaps more profitable, for thieves to return the items they stole for a portion of their value. On the other side many of their victims were willing to pay to recover their goods -- particularly merchants and tradesmen who lost pocketbooks and valuable commercial papers to pickpockets and other thieves. Hitchen may well have been involved in arranging such transactions before he invested his wife's money in the office of under-marshal. But he became more active with the authority of the office behind him. He openly bragged about controlling dozens of young pickpockets and sought out their victims to pressure them to use his services as a middleman. His tactics were so aggressive and crude, and so many respectable men in the City complained about him, that in September 1712 -- barely ten months after taking up the post -- the court of aldermen investigated his activities, interviewed his accusers and several of the young pickpockets he had dealt with, and in June 1713 suspended him from office (CLRO, Misc MS 105.8; papers of the court of aldermen, 1712-13; repertories 117-18). 
Hitchen survived as under-marshal. The aldermen were clearly reluctant to discharge him from an office that he had so recently purchased, fearing perhaps to devalue the post, since the City treasury benefited from a portion of the sale price. He was reinstated in April 1714 (CLRO, repertories, 118.219), in part because he claimed to be developing a plan to diminish crime in the City, and at that moment -- in the months after the end of the War of the Spanish Succession and the demobilization of Marlborough's continental army, and the discharge of large numbers of sailors -- violent street crime was a pressing issue for the government of the City. Hitchen's dealings as a middleman almost certainly continued but in the meantime he had inadvertently encouraged a powerful rival by engaging Jonathan Wild as his assistant during his suspension from office. They were soon to fall out when Wild -- seizing the opportunities to profit from the increase in serious offences in the post-war years -- set out to construct a more ambitious system of thief-taking than Hitchen had operated, a system that combined the return of stolen goods with the prosecution of street robbers and other offenders whose conviction brought handsome rewards. Their rivalry became public knowledge when Hitchen sought to enlarge his own reputation and win the support of the court of aldermen for his plan to eliminate crime by publishing in 1718 an attack on Wild as the 'regulator' of the criminal world -- charging him with manipulating evidence to convict and hang minor offenders while protecting greater villains and profiting from the return of stolen valuables (C. Hitchen, 'A True Discovery of the Conduct of Receivers and Thief-Takers in and about the City of London'). Wild replied with an account of his work as Hitchen's assistant and of the marshal's conniving at, and profiting from, the thefts carried out by numerous young pickpockets in the City. Even more damagingly, perhaps, he included evidence of Hitchen's homosexuality by telling how the marshal had taken him to a molly house, one of several such clubs for homosexual men established in London in the early decades of the eighteenth century (J. Wild, 'An Answer to a Late Insolent Libel', 1718, 30-31). 
Hitchen made a feeble attempt to turn these charges aside by reissuing his condemnation of Wild, in a slightly enlarged version, under a new title ('The Regulator, or, A Discovery of the Thieves, Thief-Takers and Locks', 1718), but he appears to have been very largely silenced by this exchange. He no doubt continued to profit corruptly from his office, but he only came to public attention again a decade later because of his alleged homosexuality, when he was caught up in a campaign conducted against 'sodomitical practices' by the Societies for the Reformation of Manners. Hitchen was tried at the Old Bailey in April 1727 for the capital offence of sodomy, and although acquitted of that charge he was convicted on a second indictment of attempted sodomy (Old Bailey sessions papers, April 1727, 5-6). He had been saved from the gallows but, along with a fine of $20 and six months' imprisonment, his sentence included an hour on the pillory -- a frightening prospect for men convicted of homosexual offences, particularly in his case, for, as the newspapers revealed, he had particularly targeted young men. He was to be pilloried, it was reported, 'at Katherine-Street End in the Strand, near the Place where he made his vicious Attacks upon young Youths' ('Parker's Penny Post', 26 April 1727). In the event he was badly mauled by the large crowd that came well prepared to torment him -- pelted with missiles, stripped of his shirt and breeches, and 'cruelly beaten'. The under-sheriff took him down long before his appointed hour had passed ('London Journal', 6 May 1727; 'Evening Post', 29 April-2 May 1727). He was taken back to Newgate prison to serve out his term. In September, as his six-month sentence was coming to an end, Hitchen was dismissed as under-marshal by the court of aldermen for his 'notorious and wicked practices' and -- as though that would not be sufficient justification -- for neglecting the duty of the office for the previous six months (CLRO, repertories 131.408, 421-2). He died shortly thereafter in poverty, leaving his long-suffering wife to petition the common council of the City for help; she was granted an annuity of $20 for her support (CLRO, journals 57, 207). 


@@@@@


doc= 62088


Barr, (Sarah) Venie (1875-1947), political activist and philanthropist, was born at Abbeyleix, Queen's county, on 3 October 1875, the daughter of James Moyles, a trader, and his wife, Eliza Jane Pratt. On 2 July 1901 she married Ainsworth Barr (died 1935), son of James Barr. Her husband, a rugby international, who as part of the Irish fifteen won the triple crown in 1899, was a solicitor and later a prominent Belfast stockbroker. They had two sons, Bruce and James. Marriage brought Venie Barr to Belfast, where she embarked upon what was to prove a lifelong involvement in Unionist politics. 
In 1910 Venie Barr was appointed honorary secretary of the South Belfast Women's Unionist Association, a post she held until 1918, when she became chair of the St Anne's Women's Unionist Association. She was active in anti-home rule agitation between 1910 and 1914, and was one of the founder members of the Ulster Women's Unionist Council (UWUC), formed on 23 January 1911. The UWUC was intended to act as an auxiliary to the all-male Ulster Unionist Council (UUC), formed in 1905. Largely content to remain in the shadow of the UUC, the women's organization was nevertheless active on a broad range of fronts, taking a vigorous role in social welfare, propaganda, and fund-raising, during and after the war. In 1912 Barr was prominent in the organization of the 'women's declaration' against home rule. This petition, the female counterpart to the male-only solemn league and covenant, collected 229,000 signatories in Ulster, an excess of 10,000 over the male petition. Barr was also a keen supporter of the Ulster Volunteer Force, a military organization formed in January 1913 to resist home rule. Although women were excluded from the ranks of the force, they were active as propagandists, clerks, fund-raisers, and nurses. She was appointed postmistress to the force, a position she held throughout the war years. These were among the busiest of her life, and she became deeply involved in charitable initiatives connected with the Ulster troops. She was one of the driving forces behind the Ulster women's gift fund, which sent parcels of food, clothing, and small gifts to prisoners of war and men at the front, and acted as the organization's honorary secretary from 1914 to 1918. She was appointed CBE (1920) in recognition of her work with the fund. 
The post-war years brought no lessening of commitment to Unionist causes. In 1921 Barr became assistant honorary treasurer of the UWUC, and in 1923 she was elected vice-chair of the organization. In 1931 she became honorary treasurer, and she subsequently held both posts until her death. From 1919 she was a delegate to the UUC, presenting the Unionist women's perspective to the central male organization. Her addresses were noted for their confidence and fluidity. As a result of her war work Barr was concerned for those former servicemen and their families who suffered hardship after 1918, and she encouraged the co-operation of the UWUC with organizations such as the Soldiers' and Sailors' Families' Association during and after the war. She was also one of the Ulster representatives at the unveiling of the memorial to the 36th (Ulster) division at Thiepval on the Somme. She also acted as honorary secretary of the Belfast Council of Social Welfare, president of the Toc H Women Helpers (Belfast branch), and honorary treasurer of the Ulster Girl Guides. In the uncertain years following partition she assisted many young Ulster women to emigrate, mainly to Canada, and she travelled there in 1930 to both check on the progress of thirty-three women whom she had helped to move, and explore the possibilities for others. 
The final years of Barr's life were dogged by ill health, although she continued her political work almost until the end, and resigned from the UWUC only a few months before her death. She died on 1 November 1947 at her home, Ravenna, 13 Malone Park, Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 62097


Booth, Evangeline Cory (1865-1950), world leader of the Salvation Army, was born at 1 Cambridge Lodge Villas, Hackney, London, on Christmas day (25 December) 1865, the seventh of eight children of William Booth (1829-1912) and his wife, Catherine Mumford (1829-1890) ['see 'Booth, Catherine], founders of the Salvation Army. Her name at birth was registered as Eveline. Educated at home, she was brought up like the other Booth children in a theology of 'practical religion' (her father and mother both wrote tracts) and in the ways of an active religious life. 'Bible' readings and dramatizations were at the core of the household's daily programme, along with music. Like many of her siblings she went on to compose a number of well-known Salvation Army hymns. Catherine Booth also believed in the benefits of fresh air (as well as hydropathy), and Evangeline Booth became an accomplished swimmer and horsewoman. 
Evangeline Booth said she found her vocation, aged ten, when she visited a London exhibition of Gustave Dore with her mother and the family's housekeeper, and saw his paintings of the crucifixion. Following her older siblings she formally entered the Salvation Army as a girl, becoming a sergeant in London in 1880 (aged fifteen), where she worked among the poor in east London slums and preached at the Salvation Army's Great Western Hall in Marylebone. In 1887 she was promoted to lead the Salvation Army's work in London, and in 1892 to manage the International Training Centre in Clapton. After a brief period leading the American Salvation Army in 1896 she was appointed national commander of the Salvation Army in Canada (1896-1904). 
Booth was commander of the Salvation Army in the United States from 1904 to 1934, and became naturalized as a US citizen. Her period of office coincided with the American Salvation Army's institutional expansion and popularity. Publicity about the Salvation Army's social work during the First World War -- especially the role of the Salvation Army 'donut girls' who supported the troops in France -- triggered a newly patriotic and positive image for the movement in America. Building on this evidence of popular appeal, in 1919 Booth launched a successful fund-raising drive (the Thirteen Million Dollar campaign) for the Salvation Army's social work in America. A silent film, 'Fires of Faith' (1919), was commissioned as part of the campaign, and produced by Famous Players-Lasky; she self-starred, conducting official business at the territorial headquarters in New York. Her administrative acumen was a key part of her reputation in the 1930s, and the American business psychologists Ewing Webb and John Morgan discussed her strategies to 'interest and convince people'. In the 1920s and 1930s she also became a noted speaker on women's suffrage and teetotalism, promoting women's role in the home and society as a model of heartfelt devotion. She described her mother in 'Woman' (published in 1928 in America and Britain) as the archetypal example, 'the summation of the woman's movement', equal in status to men in 'social and spiritual and intellectual responsibility'. 
During the 1920s Evangeline Booth was a leading figure in the movement for constitutional reform within the Salvation Army. Amid increasing discontent with the autocratic leadership of her brother General (William) Bramwell Booth, she wrote him a letter in October 1927 listing fifteen points for constitutional change. The key issue focused upon the process of appointing a general: while the founding constitution (1878) had decreed that an outgoing general should nominate his own successor the reformers argued it should be an elected position. The debate gained momentum throughout 1928, causing a widespread controversy. In December 1928 leading Salvation Army men and women met in London at the inaugural meeting of the high council of the Salvation Army, where the reformers ultimately triumphed. In February 1929 Edward Higgins was elected the new general of the Salvation Army. Evangeline Booth, who had stood for the position, came second and it was said that American Army officials celebrated her defeat because it meant she remained 'their' commander. 
On the retirement in 1934 of Edward Higgins, another leadership election was called. Evangeline Booth, who had stood as one of five candidates, was this time successful; she was elected fourth general of the Salvation Army on 3 September 1934 (aged sixty-nine). She remained in office for five years. Her visibility was one of the central markers of her generalship. She was known throughout her career for her theatricality in addressing audiences, and as general her activities were reported frequently on international newsreels as well as in British and international newspapers. 
Booth's tenure as world leader of the organization was characterized by her promotion of the Salvation Army's internationalist creed. She campaigned in Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Finland, North America, Holland, France, Denmark, Switzerland, India, Ceylon, Singapore, and the Netherlands Indies. She claimed that her wide experiences of travel had convinced her that people across the world 'desired above all else that there should be a unifying and abiding friendship between all nations' ('The Times', 22 Feb 1939). This emphasis dovetailed with the rhetoric of the League of Nations about friendly co-operation and working across national borders. For a sincerely religious woman crossing these boundaries was also a spiritual exercise, an endeavour recognized by the International Missionary Council in the 1930s when they invited her to reflect upon the meanings of evangelism within a world church. 
Booth retired as general of the Salvation Army in 1939. An elaborate celebratory pageant at Earls Court, London, was planned in her honour in September 1939, but was abandoned on the outbreak of the Second World War. Instead in October 1939 she undertook her final public engagement in London at the Regent Hall, and a pilgrimage to her father's house, in Notintone Place, Nottingham, and the Broad Street Methodist Chapel (the place of his conversion), where she unveiled a memorial to him. Towards the end of November 1939 she boarded a ship at Liverpool to return to her home in Hartsdale, New York. 
Booth never married, although the story of her 'many suitors' was reiterated throughout her life. In London in the 1880s she adopted four children, who moved with her to Canada. Three of the children married and remained there, but Pearl Hamilton travelled with Booth to America and in 1914 began her own career in the Salvation Army, holding positions in the women's social service department and within the executive office, before becoming secretary of the divisional home league on her marriage in 1922 to a Salvation Army captain, Arthur Woodruff. 
Booth received many honours throughout her life, including the American distinguished service medal (for war-time services); honorary degrees from Tufts College, Massachusetts (1921), and the University of Columbia (1939); the Fairfax medal for eminent patriotic service (1928); Vasa gold medal (Swedish, 1933); and the gold medal of the National Institute of Social Sciences (1933) and of the Humanitarian Society (1945). She remained active in Salvation Army work until her death in New York on 17 July 1950. A public sale of her estate, held at O'Reilly's Plaza Art Galleries, New York, on 13 April 1951, contained only twenty-seven lots (including thirteen books), and revealed how simple her life had been in material terms. 
Of the eight siblings, Evangeline Booth was one of five who remained active in the service of the Salvation Army throughout a working life. The eldest sister, Catherine Booth-Clibborn, left the movement in 1902, but three sisters remained active in it. Like Evangeline Booth, Emma Moss Booth-Tucker ['see below'] and Lucy Milward Booth-Hellberg ['see below'], progressed from domestic to international work. Marian Booth (1864-1937), who was disabled in childhood, was given the permanent rank of staff captain. 
The second daughter in the family, Emma Moss Booth-Tucker (1860-1903), Salvation Army officer, born at Normanby Place, Gateshead, on 8 January 1860, was an extremely popular figure. In May 1880, aged nineteen, she was appointed manager of the first training home for Salvation Army women in Hackney, London, and became known within the Salvation Army as 'the Consul'. In 1887 she travelled to India. She married at the Salvation Army meeting hall, Clapton, on 10 April 1888 Frederick St George de Latour Tucker (1853-1929), a widower, son of William Thornhill Tucker, of the Indian Civil Service. Frederick Tucker had resigned a position in the Indian Civil Service to work for the Salvation Army in India. They both took the surname Booth-Tucker, and after their marriage they returned to India where they directed the Salvation Army's work, adopting Indian dress and names. A diagnosis of anaemia forced her to return to England in January 1891 with her husband and their two children. The couple went on to have another four children. From early 1891 to spring 1896 the Booth-Tuckers worked as foreign secretaries of the Salvation Army's international headquarters in London, overseeing work outside Great Britain. Thereafter they took up command of the Salvation Army in America. The Booth-Tuckers initiated an extensive welfare reform programme to address poverty in New York, including workingmen's hostels, orphanages, and homes for unmarried mothers. Drawing on her earlier experiences in east London, she organized the Cellar Garret and Gutter Brigade, a group of women who dressed in working-class clothes and did social work while living alongside the poor. She and her husband also established Salvation Army farm colonies, which aimed to relocate the unemployed urban poor on rural farms in California, Colorado, and Ohio. She was at the height of her popularity when she was killed in a train accident at Dean Lake, Missouri, on 28 October 1903, when travelling back from a tour of the Colorado farm colony. 15,000 people attended her memorial service on 1 November 1903 at Carnegie Hall in New York, and a further 4000 were present at a service at the Congress Hall, Clapton. 
The youngest sister, Lucy Milward Booth-Hellberg (1868-1953), Salvation Army officer, born at 1 Cambridge Lodge Villas, Hackney, on 28 April 1868, worked in Ceylon from 1889, and in India from 1891. On 18 October 1894, at the Congress Hall, Hackney, she married Emanuel Daniel Hellberg, son of Johan Hellberg, of independent means; her husband had joined the organization in Sweden in the early 1880s when a student at the university of Uppsala. They took the surname Booth-Hellberg. For two years they commanded the Salvation Army in India where, following the example of Emma Booth-Tucker and her husband, they used the names Ruhani and Raj-Singh. The couple had five children. In 1896 the couple were sent to command work in France and Switzerland and, after his death in Berlin in 1909, Lucy Milward Booth-Hellberg led the movement in Denmark, Norway, and South America. She retired from active service in 1934, and held the rank of commissioner. She died in Bromma in Stockholm on 18 July 1953. 


@@@@@


doc= 62099


Robinson, Sir Kenneth (1911-1996), politician and public servant, was born on 19 March 1911 at Latchford House, Warrington, Lancashire, the son of Clarence Robinson, medical practitioner, and his wife, Ethel Marion, 'nee' Linnell. Robinson himself was a forlorn 'medecin manque'. He was devotedly ambitious to follow his father's work, although he knew the disruptive effects on family life of a GP's professional obligations. But that dedicated hope was cruelly destroyed when his adored father died while he was still at school, at Oundle, aged fifteen. His mother could not afford for him to go to university, and he was forced to take a job as an insurance broker at Lloyds, where he developed an understanding of financial affairs, but did not enjoy the work. In a freak of fortune the war released him from his unloved desk. He enlisted in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve as an ordinary seaman. He served in the Mediterranean and Far East and emerged as a lieutenant-commander. On 18 April 1941, while on leave, he married Helen Elizabeth Edwards (died 1993), daughter of Frederick Hartnoll Edwards, an interior decorator. She was at that time working as a claims examiner in the War Damage Commission. There was one daughter of the marriage. 
Robinson had long been concerned with the inequalities of life, and had joined his local Labour Party in St Pancras. But he was surprised to receive a telegram while in service in India from St Pancras asking him if he would agree to be a candidate for the local council in 1945. This was the cusp of his life. He arrived at the first post-war statutory meeting of the St Pancras borough council still in his service uniform, and he stayed in public service for ever. His main contribution as a councillor was the setting up of the St Pancras Arts Council (now Camden Festival). He had a passion for sharing the good life -- he wanted the engine drivers from King's Cross, Euston, or St Pancras, who either left or arrived in the dawn (while their wives were setting off to clean the lavatories in the trains before they took their children to school), to have fair access to some enjoyment and a lift to their minds and spirits. The area had endured a tough, damaging war and the new councillors faced many problems and demands. 
Robinson had gone back to daily work as a company secretary, and had never referred to any other political ambitions. But there was no surprise in the area that when George House, MP for North St Pancras, died in 1949, Robinson was nominated as Labour candidate. On 10 March 1949 he polled 16,185 votes to the 11,118 of the Conservative candidate, and thus started the next phase of his life. At first in parliament he was modestly quiet. He was made a whip and looked on as a safe pair of hands. However, that was not for long. Because he joined Aneurin Bevan in a revolt in 1954 of sixty-four MPs against the British manufacture of the H-bomb without parliament's consent, he was temporarily in disgrace and expelled to the back benches. Freed from the whips' rules of silence in the chamber, he became noticed as one of the most liberal and progressive members, who took on many of the least popular causes. He was chairman of the mental health committee of the North-West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board. In the house, when he obtained time for a private member's motion, he introduced the first debate in over twenty years on mental health. He and others continued to crusade for improvements, which led to the passing of the 'Mental Health Act' of 1959. He worked successfully for a bill which ended suicide or attempted suicide being a common-law crime. In 1961 he introduced his own bill to reform the abortion law. Although it was talked out, it was one more step on the way. He was also active in debates on the Wolfenden report in 1960. He spoke movingly on the plight of homosexuals. He called for the government to legislate for the reforms recommended in part 2 of the report. He was defeated; but he collected ninety-nine votes, twenty-two of them from Conservatives. It was another step on the way to another liberalization. 
It was no surprise when Gaitskell, who did not always agree with him, appointed Robinson number two to Dr Edith Summerskill, the shadow minister of health, in 1961. In 1964 Wilson appointed him minister of health (after Summerskill had gone to the Lords), but without a seat in cabinet. He worked hard and was admired and popular both in the house and with the medical profession -- not an easy achievement. He was always courteous, with a quiet wisdom and an independent mind. But machinations were under way in the Labour Party. Richard Crossman, ambitious and arrogant at times, persuaded the cabinet that it would be a good idea to combine the ministries of Health and Social Security, with himself as minister of both. Robinson was of course aware of the proposals. His good manners and even temper prevailed -- on the surface. But he was bitterly disappointed, and so were his friends and many colleagues. He invited Crossman to the twentieth anniversary of the National Health Service, held in the Banqueting Hall in July 1968. Crossman wrote in his 'Diaries': 'He [Robinson] did have the courtesy to introduce me to the Secretary of the BMA and one or two other bigwigs. When I get into my new job I shall find myself in a completely new world, nothing like local government. Nobody knows me by sight and I don't know them. What's worse, they all know that I am working Kenneth Robinson out of a job and by all their tests he was an excellent Minister. (Crossman, 118)' Wilson created a job for Robinson as minister for planning and land under Tony Greenwood, but it was obviously an ungracious sop. Within a few months the new job was abolished by mutual consent and he spent his last few months on the back benches, often reading in the library between divisions, and enjoying the leisure time for the arts and various charities. 
In 1969 Robinson left parliament. He took a job on the board of the British Steel Corporation, first as director of social policy and then as managing director of the personnel and social policy division, which he felt was a real and demanding position at a time when the industry faced many growing pains. In 1975 he was offered the chairmanship of the London Transport executive and he stayed until 1978, when he was forced to retire ten months early, following a bitter controversy with Horace Cutler, leader of the Conservative majority on the Greater London council, over the level of subsidies. Meanwhile, in 1977 he had become chairman of the Arts Council of Great Britain. The wheel had come full circle from the St Pancras arts festival. He had long managed much voluntary work -- he had assisted the National Trust and the Carnegie Council on Arts and Disabled People, and had been chairman of English National Opera and the Young Concert Artists Trust. He had also written 'Policy for Mental Health' (1958), 'Patterns of Care' (1961), and 'Look at Parliament' (1962), as well as an elegant life of Wilkie Collins (1951). He was also a much appreciated trustee of the Imperial War Museum. He was its commissioner for works of art and had the job of obtaining paintings of British forces on duty all over the world. He was often helpful in advising the museum how to deal with Whitehall. Robinson was happy in his last job. His interests were shared by his wife, Elizabeth, who was also a councillor in St Pancras at the same time and was a talented amateur artist. 
After he retired in 1983 Robinson was knighted. Many people -- not only friends -- hoped he would be elevated to the House of Lords. He deserved it more than some, and would have been more use than many. With his caring, sympathetic concern for other people's disadvantages, and his sense of the personal responsibility of everyone to do something about the deprivations which disfigured society, he contributed a civilized element to public life -- in or out of parliament. But the selfishness of politics does not often reward the unselfish. Robinson's enjoyment of his retirement was marred by the death of his wife in 1993. Robinson himself died of a heart attack at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, on 16 February 1996. He was survived by his daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 62100


Quill, Jeffrey Kindersley (1913-1996), aviator and military aircraft marketing executive, was born on 1 February 1913 at Belle Croft, 72 South Terrace, Littlehampton, Sussex, the third son and fifth of the five children of Arthur Maxwell Quill (1864/5-1925), civil engineer, and his wife, Emily Molesworth (1870-1938), daughter of Captain Edward Molesworth Kindersley JP. His father was Irish and his mother English. 
Inspired by flying from the age of five after seeing aeroplanes land near his birthplace, Quill was educated at Lancing College before entering the Royal Air Force in 1931 as a pilot officer on a short service commission. He went solo after only five hours twenty minutes' dual instruction at 3 flying training school, Grantham, and passed out the following year as a flying officer with the rating of 'exceptional'. He then served with the crack 17 (fighter) squadron at Upavon. 
In November 1934, aged only twenty-one, Quill was posted to command the RAF meteorological flight at Duxford, near Cambridge. He was rated 'exceptional' again; and in the ensuing thirteen months made two flights a day in all weathers (in open-cockpit, unheated Siskin IIIAs) with 100 per cent reliability. For this achievement he was awarded the Air Force Cross in 1936. 
Hearing that Joseph (Mutt) Summers, chief test pilot at Vickers (Aviation), needed help with the demanding flight test programme at Weybridge and at Vickers Supermarine, Eastleigh -- in particular with Reginald Mitchell's new type 300 fighter, later named 'Spitfire' -- Quill applied for release from the RAF, and on 6 January 1936 became Summers's principal assistant. 
After Summers had made the maiden flight of this prototype fighter K5054 at Eastleigh on 6 March 1936 Quill first flew it himself on 26 March 1936. Sadly this was the only example of the 22,749 Spitfires and Seafires subsequently built that Mitchell saw: he died only three months after Summers and Quill had pronounced it an unqualified success. On 9 October 1937 Quill married Patricia Ann ('b'. 1915), daughter of Colonel John Stuart Campbell; the marriage was dissolved in 1945. 
After transferring full time to Vickers Supermarine in 1938 Quill took complete charge of Spitfire test flying; but with the outbreak of war and the fall of France he felt it his duty to return to a fighter squadron. Forestalling opposition from his employers, he successfully argued the need to gain frontline operational experience, and returned to the Royal Air Force during the battle of Britain in 1940, serving with 65 (Spitfire) squadron. He shot down two enemy aircraft before returning to his own hazardous job. In the same year he became chief test pilot for Vickers-Armstrongs (Supermarine Works). In January 1943 he was awarded the OBE, and he served for five months of that year with the Fleet Air Arm as a lieutenant-commander, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, helping to develop better carrier-deck-landing with the Seafire, the naval version of the Spitfire. 
Quill made the first flights and masterminded the development and production test flying of all fifty-two variants of the Spitfire -- the only allied fighter to remain in full production and frontline service throughout the Second World War. He also made the first flights of the Dumbo, an experimental variable-incidence wing torpedo bomber; the Spiteful; the Seafang; and ultimately, in July 1946, the Attacker, the Royal Navy's first jet fighter. Quill's second marriage -- to (Eirene) Pamela Acland Allen (1921-1969), daughter of Captain Cecil Charles Acland Allen RN, on 24 February 1945 -- produced two daughters, Sarah ('b'. 1946) and Virginia ('b'. 1948). The marriage was dissolved on 21 March 1967. 
In 1947, after sixteen years of arduous flying had taken their toll on his health, Quill had to retire from active flight testing, having logged more than 5000 flying hours in ninety aircraft types. Undaunted, he stepped immediately into another demanding career, initially as sales manager of Vickers-Armstrongs (Supermarine Works) in 1948 during the pioneering transition into the jet age; he returned to Weybridge in 1957 as head of the military aircraft office of Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft). As military aircraft sales manager of British Aircraft Corporation (formed in 1960) he became deeply involved in development of the TSR2 supersonic bomber until its cancellation by the Labour government in 1965. Meanwhile he kept his aerobatics well honed, flying the aptly registered Spitfire QJ-J at air displays, and he made his last Spitfire flight in June 1966, thirty years after his first flight in the prototype in 1936. 
In 1966 Quill was appointed sales director of the Anglo-French company set up to develop the Jaguar supersonic combat aircraft. Later he became marketing director of Panavia, the Anglo-German-Italian consortium developing the Tornado swing-wing fighter. His third marriage, on 3 October 1969, was to (Theodora) Claire (1918-2000), daughter of Alfred Reginald Legge. She was a retired WRAF wing commander. Quill retired in 1978 after forty-seven years in the aviation industry, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1980. He also served as president of the Spitfire Society, and was a distinguished member of the Royal Air Force Club in London for sixty-four years. 
A keen sportsman, Quill had interests that included sailing (he was shortlisted for the British Olympic-class sailing team) and in 1962 he won the Daily Express offshore powerboat race in 'Tramontana', designed by Peter Du Cane. Passionately interested in English literature, he spent his initial retirement in north Wales reading and writing, and published two highly regarded books: 'Spitfire: a Test Pilot's Story' (1983) and 'Birth of a Legend: the Spitfire' (1986). Later he and his wife, Claire, moved to the Isle of Man. He died at his home there, Reayrt House, Andreas, near Ramsey, on 20 February 1996, and was buried on 27 February at Andreas church. 
One of the finest British test pilots of his era, whose name will remain forever linked with the Spitfire, Jeffrey Quill showed outstanding professionalism and a courteous manner in everything he did. Sir George Edwards OM said of him: 'Jeffrey Quill was one of the most articulate test pilots I ever encountered; and to him goes much of the credit for turning Mitchell's brilliant concept into a great fighting machine'. 


@@@@@


doc= 62105


Browne, Kathleen Anne (1876-1943), politician and historian, was born at Bridgetown, co. Wexford, on 31 October 1876, the eldest daughter of Michael Browne, landowner and farmer, and his wife, Mary Eleanor Stafford, of Rathronan Castle, Wexford. She was educated at the Bridgetown national school and at the Loreto convent at Wexford. Her political background was strongly nationalist, her father having been an organizer in 1898 of the centenary celebrations of the United Irishmen rising and a nationalist member of the Wexford county council. 
Kathleen Browne became a close associate of Arthur Griffith and an active member of the Gaelic League, serving as secretary of the Wexford county committee. A committed nationalist, she was a member of Sinn Fein (1912-27) and the Irish Volunteers from 1914. She lived most of her life at her family home, Rathronan Castle, from which she flew a tricolour during the Easter rising of 1916. She attempted to reach Dublin during the rising, but was arrested at Bray and incarcerated in Kilmainham and Mountjoy prisons. 
Browne sided with the pro-treaty faction during the Irish civil war, becoming a member of the national army. In common with a number of other pro-treatyites, she became a member of Cumman na nGadeheal, representing the party in the senate of the Irish Free State from her election in June 1929. She went on to join the Army Comrades Association in 1933, an organization which upheld the Irish Free State and sought to commemorate the fallen of the Irish civil war. Its members were popularly known as Blueshirts and became strongly associated with anti-communism. Browne underlined her dedication to this organization by her insistence on wearing a blue shirt in the Irish senate. In 1934 she provoked a quarrel between the speakers of the senate and the Dail when she sought permission to bring visitors wearing blue shirts into the senate. 
Browne was strongly associated with various aspects of Wexford life, where she was an active farmer. She served on the Wexford county council and was the county's peace commissioner from 1923. As well as her political work, Browne wrote on historical matters, focusing particularly on the history of Wexford. Her history of the county, published in 1927, became a standard primary school textbook. She was an acknowledged expert on the county's Yola dialect, and published widely in historical journals. A regular speaker in the senate on agricultural topics, she also lectured on dairying under the department of agriculture and was a member of the Wexford Agriculture Society, the Irish Countrywomen's Association, and the Irish Farmers' Union, whom she represented at the World Poultry Congress, held in London in 1930. Kathleen Browne died of cardiac failure at her home, Rathronan Castle, Bridgetown, co. Wexford, on 9 October 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 62108


Butler, Kathleen Teresa Blake (1883-1950), Italian scholar, was born at Bayview, Bardsea, Urwick, Lancashire, on 26 September 1883, the eldest of the four daughters and three sons of Theobald Fitzwalter Butler (1845-1914), iron merchant, deputy lieutenant for Lancashire, and mayor of Barrow in Furness (1906-11), and his wife, Catherine Elizabeth Barraclough (died 1946). She was proud of her descent from a Norman baron in Ireland in the twelfth century and revelled in stories of her ancestors' wild exploits. Her father took an enthusiastic interest in the languages and cultures of the countries he visited, both for business and on family holidays. Most of his children were educated abroad. Kathleen began with a Norwegian governess. At the age of fourteen she moved on to schools in Hanover, Saxony, and Paris. In 1907 she entered Cambridge Training College for Women and taught at Stamford high school for a year. She then became a student at Newnham College, Cambridge (1909-13), following her younger sister Eliza Marian Butler. Here her exceptional intellectual qualities were quickly recognized by her dons, but she made her friends among the less intellectual students, who are said to have envied greatly her green silk tartan stockings from Paris. 
From Newnham, where she gained a first in the medieval and modern languages tripos (French and German) in 1911 and a second in 1913 (Italian and Romance philology), Butler went straight to a lectureship in French at Royal Holloway College and again made her mark with her red hair, emerald green jacket, and small scholarly handwriting. It was said of her that she had no time for students who would not think but much patience with those who could not. Girton College, Cambridge, claimed her in 1915 as director of studies in modern languages, a post she held for twenty-three years. She soon became known among her new colleagues as Blazing Butler, the redhead whose impatience with bureaucracy and rigid rules was liable to boil over at staff meetings: a tendency which her professionalism and sense of duty tamed over the years, making her an excellent and restrained chairman. Her prodigious capacity for work was boosted by her ability to catnap. She created a fellows' garden at Girton and for many years served with her friend Lady Stephen on the curators' committee of the college, where her flair for flower arranging and interior decorating contributed much to the new fellows' rooms built in 1932. 
From 1926, when Cambridge opened its lectureships to women, until 1948 Butler was university lecturer in Italian. In 1919 and 1935 she organized a summer school for Italian studies. She helped to found the journal 'Italian Studies' (1937) and chaired the Italian committee of the Modern Languages Association for many years. Her scholarly works included 'A History of French Literature' (2 vols., 1923) and, jointly with her Girton colleague Henriette Bibas, 'Les premieres lettres de Guez de Balzac, 1618-27' (2 vols., 1933-4). She was joint editor with Barbara Reynolds of 'Tredici novelle moderne' (1947). 
In 1942 Butler was elected mistress of Girton. At the vice-chancellor's request, she postponed her retirement to pilot through the measure by which, in 1948, Cambridge finally conceded to women full membership of the university. KTB, as she was affectionately known, took great and deserved delight in representing the college at this time, particularly when the queen, later the queen mother, the college visitor, came up in October 1948 to receive an honorary doctorate, the first woman to be so honoured by Cambridge. Kathleen Butler died from renal failure in Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 2 May 1950. Between bouts of pain she had worked for months to complete her final work: ''The Gentlest Art' in Renaissance Italy: an Anthology of Italian Letters, 1459-1600' (published posthumously in 1954). She was buried in Girton churchyard, Cambridgeshire, on 8 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 62109


Padmore, Sir Thomas (1909-1996), civil servant, was born on 23 April 1909 at 193 Shirebrook Road, Sheffield, the elder son of Thomas William Padmore, steel merchant, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Handley. Educated at the central secondary school, Sheffield, he won a scholarship to Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1928, graduating with first-class honours in French and German. After entering the civil service in the Inland Revenue in 1931 he was transferred to the Treasury in 1934 as having potential for high office. In the same year, on 22 December, he married Alice (died 1963), daughter of Robert Alcock, of Ormskirk, Lancashire. They had three children -- a son, John ('b'. 1937), and two daughters, Margaret ('b'. 1939) and Katherine ('b'. 1944). 
In the Treasury, Padmore's advancement was rapid; an able administrator, and a powerful advocate in both speech and writing (though on his own admission less of an originator of policies), he was principal private secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer, Sir John Anderson, from 1943 to 1945. Very much the protege of Sir Edward Bridges, then permanent secretary to the Treasury and head of the home civil service, Padmore was selected to succeed Sir Norman Brook as cabinet secretary when the latter moved to the Treasury on Bridges' expected retirement in 1952. But the change of government after the October 1951 general election led to the new prime minister, Winston Churchill, countermanding these moves, and Padmore (who had already moved to the Cabinet Office as deputy cabinet secretary) returned to the Treasury. He took this major check to his career philosophically, and was promoted second secretary (equal in rank to permanent secretary in other departments) in 1952. In 1953 he was made a KCB. Until 1962 he was for the most part in charge of personnel and management matters for the civil service. Though he was considered for the top posts of permanent secretary to the Treasury and head of the civil service, in the event these went elsewhere. During this period the death of his son in 1956 at the age of eighteen from a long-drawn-out cancer was a great grief to him and his wife. 
In 1962 Padmore went to the Ministry of Transport as permanent secretary, doubtless glad to have his own department after ten years as no. 2 at the Treasury. The ministry had been substantially changed in the previous three years under Sir James Dunnett; the main lines of the motorway programme had been set in hand, and new policies for inland transport, particularly the railways, had also been developed and were the subject of legislation just enacted. While this had certainly raised the profile of the ministry it had created a good deal of turmoil among the senior staff, some of whose hopes had been set back in the new conditions. Padmore, with his long experience in staffing matters in the civil service, made it a main objective to try to assuage this; and he was the more able to devote himself to this as the principal lines of policy had already been laid down. This period of his career was beset by another personal loss in the death of his first wife, like their son from a lingering cancer, on 30 September 1963. On 1 May 1964 he married Rosalind Culhane (died 1995), a former colleague as chief welfare adviser at the Treasury, and for some years a close friend. 
The advent of the Labour government in 1964, with its not thoroughly worked out aspirations for co-ordination of the country's transport system, required a firm policy input from the top. Unfortunately Tom Fraser, the first minister of transport in Wilson's government, was a somewhat weak minister, unable to give the necessary lead. It is certainly a criticism of Padmore's leadership that he did not organize in the department the development of policies in line with the new government's aspirations, so as to allow the minister to put before his colleagues proposals with some prospect of cabinet approval. It was no surprise that in the first government reshuffle Fraser was replaced as minister by the much more dynamic Barbara Castle; and it is clear that, from the outset, she intended to replace Padmore as permanent secretary. There is contradictory evidence as to whether this was because he was thought to have opposed the government's co-ordination objectives, or because he was thought to have been more in favour of the motorway programme than of the development of public transport -- neither of which opinions was well-founded -- or because he was thought to have run out of steam, which might have had some justification. The minister's intention to dispose of Padmore was leaked to the press. His reaction was instant -- he told her he would fight to stay, believing that it was hardly proper for ministers to try to change their permanent secretary in such a manner when they came into a department. Stay he did (though other posts were mooted for him they came to nothing) until after Castle had herself left the department, when he retired some months before he was due to go. It is fair to say, however, that in the last three years of his career in the Ministry of Transport he played a distinctly muted role as a formulator of policy. 
Padmore had been promoted GCB in 1965. In retirement he took a number of directorships; he also continued his long-standing interest in music as chairman of the Handel Opera Society from 1963 until 1986. His second wife died on 4 March 1995; he himself died at his home, 39 Cholmeley Crescent, Highgate, London, on 8 February 1996. He was survived by the two daughters of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 62112


Cameron, Charlotte (1872/3-1946), traveller and author, was born in Portsmouth, the daughter of Jacob Wales-Almy (died in or before 1901), a captain in the Royal Navy. Nothing is known of her upbringing and early life. She was married to Major Donald Cameron (died in or before 1901) of the 42nd Highlanders. After being widowed, she married again, aged twenty-eight, on 29 May 1901; her second husband was Auguste Ernest George Jacquemard de Landresse ('b'. 1872/3), gentleman, son of Seraphin Jacquemard de Landresse, gentleman, but this union may have been short-lived for she did not use her second husband's name. 
By the time of her election to fellowship of the Royal Geographical Society in 1913 (when she was among the second cohort of women members), Cameron, who was living at 36 Carlton Hill, London, had been twice around the world. She had also published a travel account, 'A Woman's Winter in South America' (1911), with a further volume, 'A Woman's Winter in Africa: a 26,000 Mile Journey' (1913), in the press. Her two novels -- 'A Passion in Morocco' (1911) and 'A Durbar Bride' (1912) -- were based on her travels, including her time in India (1911), when she acted as foreign correspondent for the 'Ladies Pictorial' and other periodicals. She was also a member of the Lyceum Club (where she was vice-president of the geographical circle), the Author's Society, the Society of Women Journalists, and she was a fellow of the Colonial Institute and fellow of the Royal Empire Society. 
During the First World War Cameron travelled throughout the United States (1917-18) giving lectures in support of the allied cause. After the war she was awarded the OBE. She travelled over 250,000 miles between 1910 and 1925, largely by sea and railway, taking in Alaska and the Yukon (1919), Australasia and the Pacific (1921-2 and 1922-3), and Mexico (1924), each resulting in a travel account: 'A Cheechako in Alaska and Yukon' (1920), 'Two Years in Southern Seas' (1923), 'Wanderings in South-Eastern Seas' (1924), and 'Mexico in Revolution' (1925). She wrote three further novels and continued to travel in the 1930s, but did not publish any further travel accounts. An avid collector of local curios and souvenirs, she presented a collection of indigenous handicraft to Liverpool Museum (1938) and a further collection of oriental items to the Royal Scottish Museum in Edinburgh (1945). Latterly she was resident at the Hyde Park Hotel, Knightsbridge. She died at 95 Howards Lane, Putney, London, on 9 December 1946. 
Cameron was a keen proponent of the British empire. In 'Two Years in Southern Seas' she chronicled the virtues of colonial expansion and the work of colonialists, including a brief hagiography of Thomas Stamford Raffles and British oil drilling in Miri. Her outlook reflected a genre of her time, particularly in Anglocentric cultural and social judgements of race. However, her admiration for Prince Yumar's physique in her novel of 1911 (albeit that his character has been modified by an Oxford education) and her praise of the sultan of Jahore and admiration of 'native grace and beauty' (Cameron, 'Wanderings', 47) suggest that her attitudes were not uniform, but were cut across by class and individual experience. Similar complexity can be seen in her horror of British vulnerability to the threat of German expansion in the Americas (1911) and her appreciation of the kindnesses she received from Germans living in and travelling around Africa (1913). Other recurring themes in her books are the rights of women, harsh penal codes (including Britain's record in Tasmania), and the refrain of 'East is East, and West is West'. 
Cameron was described by an obituarist as a 'woman explorer' ('The Times', 11 Dec 1946), but could arguably be considered more of a sightseer or globetrotter, 'determined to get to the end of the beaten track but never off it' (Robinson). Critics appreciated her practical advice on travelling and her lively style, but were intolerant when this became gushing or melodramatic and, in the case of her African travels, included her 'alter ego', the 'imp of travel' who added 'his' own comments to the text. While her novels were credited with accurate settings in foreign countries, her travel writing is often pedestrian, including well-known information and secondhand accounts. 
In her later work Cameron moved away from cataloguing hotel bills and attempts to include historical and political context to places visited (although not always accurate), as well as geographical information on matters such as trade and population, including her own photographic record. Cameron adopted for herself the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century discourse of intrepid adventurer: 'Travel has been my comrade, Adventure my inspiration, Accomplishment my recompense' (Cameron, 'Wanderings'), crediting herself with the bloodline of military, naval, and pioneer ancestors. However, she coupled this self-image with that of vulnerable woman alone, obliged by ill health to travel. She did experience a dramatic exit from revolutionary war-torn Mexico, for example, but for the most part her travels were perhaps more socially brave in setting out for six months at a time without a companion. In doing so she transgressed class and gender expectations, but in other respects her travel was socially (and racially) circumscribed, travelling by established means of public transport and largely confined to European contacts along the way. Her work is of value not only for its insight into the colonial outlook of the time but also as a social exploration of the places she visited and the people she met, albeit largely via a network of European colonial ports and expatriates. 


@@@@@


doc= 62116


Clarkson, Mabel Maria (1875-1950), local politician, was born at The Priory, Calne, Wiltshire, on 1 June 1875, the daughter of Richard Clarkson, a solicitor, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Prince. She had an elder brother and three elder sisters. She was educated at a private school in Reading, but by the early twentieth century had settled in Norwich, which led to a lifetime of social, philanthropic, and political service. 
In 1904, standing as a Liberal, Clarkson was elected a member of the Norwich board of poor-law guardians for Ber Street ward, which she continued to represent until 1925. In 1911 she joined Norwich's distress committee, where she took a particular interest in the problems of unemployed women, who were often neglected in relief programmes. Elected in 1913 a Liberal councillor for Town Close ward of Norwich borough council, she was the first and for some time the only woman in the council chamber. Her election addresses, which highlighted the effects on infant mortality and public health generally of overcrowding, supported municipal housebuilding. She went on to chair the city's public assistance committee (later to become the social welfare committee). In 1922 she was appointed a magistrate, soon after that office was first opened to women. 
Clarkson lost her council seat in 1923 but was re-elected in 1926 for Heigham ward, having joined the Labour Party, one of many progressive women to make this transition from Liberalism in the 1920s (Hollis, 68). Appointed to the ancient office of sheriff of Norwich in 1928, she was the first woman and first member of the Labour Party to be given this honour. In 1930 she became lord mayor of Norwich, the second woman to hold the office (Ethel Colman having been the first, in 1923), and in 1932 she was made an alderman. Failing health forced her retirement from the council's aldermanic bench in 1948. In 1931 she was made CBE. 
Clarkson, who never married and was described as having independent means, also took part in numerous voluntary bodies, including the Norwich district visiting association, the League of Nations Union, and the local branch of the National Council of Women. She was for many years responsible for the Norwich schoolchildren's boot fund, which raised thousands of pounds to provide 'necessitous children with adequate footware'. This piece of service was typical of a woman who dedicated her life to the welfare of others, and who realized that the only effective means of accomplishing her ideals was through local politics. After her death at her home, 5 Mount Pleasant, Norwich, on 20 March 1950, it was said in tribute that 'The public life of Norwich was the poorer when Mabel Clarkson left it. It is not given to many women, or men for that matter, to achieve such an enduring place in the history of their city' ('Eastern Evening News'). 


@@@@@


doc= 62121


Conti, Italia Emily Stella (1873-1946), actress and founder of the Italia Conti academy of theatre arts, was born on 9 September 1873 at 265 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London, the eldest child of Luigi Conti (died 1884), lyric singer, and his wife, Emily Mary (1844-1914), daughter of Henry James Castle (1809-1891), professor of civil engineering at King's College, London. Luigi Conti was born in Italy and had sung in opera there before going to Paris. When the Germans invaded France in 1870, he made his way to England, where he gave singing lessons to earn his living. After Italia's birth the family moved to Duncannon House, Brighton. Five more children were born there: Ferdinand ('b'. 1875), Arthur Catalani ('b'. 1876), Evelyn Martheze (1877-1931), Adele Bianca ('b'. 1879), and Guy Benevuto (1881-1906). 
Following their father's death in 1884, Italia Conti became a boarder at Kensington Academy; the boys, through their father's masonic lodge, received scholarships to Emmanuel School and Clapham grammar school, while Evelyn went to the Royal Masonic School. Their mother, needing a source of income, acquired a private school, Eversley, in Clapham Park Road, where she took in a dozen or so pupils as boarders. Her own children returned for the holidays and here Italia, aged fifteen, recruited her siblings and other children as actors, and their parents as audience, for her first stage performance -- of Shakespearian tableaux, followed by a children's play. 
Now determined to become an actress, Italia Conti frequented the theatres and she became so enthralled with the productions of Ellen Terry and Henry Irving at the Lyceum Theatre that she wrote to Terry, and to her great delight was invited to call on the star in her dressing-room. Terry was impressed by Italia's enthusiasm and arranged for her to have lessons with Macklin, a former member of the Lyceum company. When the Lyceum was taken over by Augustin Daly and his American company, Italia secured a small walk-on part in 'The Last Word'. It was her first paid role. She also learned about voice production from the comedian Adah Rehan. After a part in 'Diplomacy' on tour, she spent the next few years appearing at venues around the country with various companies. 
In 1911 the actor-manager Charles Hawtrey, impressed by Italia's handling of children in the fairy scenes of 'The Two Hunchbacks', invited her to train children for the first production of 'Where the Rainbow Ends', a Christmas play for children, set to Roger Quilter's incidental music. The play was a great success, and after its run the children begged Italia to continue their training. She gave up most of her own acting, and recruited her sister Bianca to help her. Thus, informally, the Conti stage school came into being, its first studio being in a basement room under a public house. The children thrived on her teaching, and she found them employment. A second 'Rainbow' season was equally successful, and the school moved to a gymnasium at the Passmore Edwards settlement in Tavistock Square. Overwork and pleurisy drove her into a nursing home in 1918, but she was able to sit on a government advisory committee dealing with regulations affecting children on the stage. At her urging, under the act of 1921 licensing was transferred from the magistrates to the local authority, and this enabled travelling licences to be granted to children working in touring companies. 
Between the wars the Conti school expanded. Bianca was joined by the ballet teacher Therese Heyman and Grace Seppings, a former pupil; other friends and relatives joined the staff, while Italia dealt with auditions, contracts, rights, and arrangements for care of her charges while they were on tour. An operation for breast cancer in 1921 slowed her down only briefly. When Hawtrey died penniless in 1923 she bought his rights in 'Rainbow', which brought her a continuing income. She moved it to the Holborn Empire, installing her brother Ferdinand in a small office there as her business manager. Bertie Murray, husband of her sister Bianca, was stage manager. Bianca took classes at a studio in Paddington Street; Evelyn kept the accounts at Great Ormond Street. 
In 1925 the Conti school moved to 15 Lamb's Conduit Street, where it occupied several rooms under the meeting place of the Ancient Order of Druids. Ruby, a young dancer who had been at the school since the age of nine, moved in as a companion to Italia and ran the household. In 1931, after Ruby left to get married, Italia moved to a modern house, named Evelyn Cottage after her recently deceased sister, on the clifftop at Southbourne, near Bournemouth. During the summer months her child pupils came down from London to enjoy the house and garden and her private beach. To replace Ruby, Arthur Conti's daughter Ruth, who was keen to take singing lessons, lived with her. Italia enjoyed an extremely busy social life, invited to every theatrical occasion: birthdays, presentations, first nights, and other celebrations. In 1937 she took a flat at 6 Russell Mansions, in Southampton Row. But with the outbreak of war and the mass evacuation of children, her world fell apart. The school closed, though a few of the children were taken to Bournemouth. Ruth and some of her other younger assistants were called up. In May 1940 bombs fell on Lamb's Conduit Street, destroying the studio; a few weeks later the Holborn Empire suffered a similar fate. With no income from pupils or rights, Italia faced financial ruin. 
Within months, however, matters improved. Rooms were taken at Tavistock Little Theatre. Children began to return, classes restarted. Italia managed to keep 'Rainbow' on the provincial road from 1941. In 1943 Ruby, whose daughter Hilary was now at school, was enticed back, to share teaching with Bianca. It was Ruby's idea to start an educational side, to harmonize all the teaching and theatre work, although Italia was not in favour of this. Touring the thirty-fifth production of 'Rainbow' during the winter of 1945-6, Italia caught a cold, which failed to respond to nursing. It progressed to pneumonia and she died, unmarried, at Evelyn Cottage a few days later, on 8 February 1946. She was cremated, and her ashes were scattered at Southbourne. 
Italia Conti was a lady of immensely strong character, passionately fond of children, and able to discern and develop their nascent abilities. Her pupils included Noel Coward, Gertrude Lawrence, Anton Dolin, Jack Hawkins, Hermione Gingold, Richard Todd, and Roger Livesey. The school continued to prosper after her death, in the hands of Bianca (who inherited the 'Rainbow' rights), Ruth, and Hilary. Now the Italia Conti academy of theatre arts, it includes a school as well as performing arts studios and has links with the South Bank University. 


@@@@@


doc= 62122


Cosgrave, Mary Josephine (c.1877-1941), local administrator and social worker, was born in Naas, co. Kildare, the daughter of James William Daly and his wife, Jane. She was educated at the Convent of Mercy in Naas and later studied at St Andrews University, where she was awarded an LLA. From 1896 she taught in the training college of Our Lady of Mercy in Baggot Street, Dublin. She also worked as an examiner in English under the intermediate board of education, Ireland. On 9 July 1901 she married the barrister and journalist Maurice Joseph Cosgrave. 
In 1922 Mary Cosgrave was elected to Rathmines urban district council, and she was a member of Dublin corporation from 1933 until her death. She sat on numerous committees, including the housing committee, the City of Dublin welfare committee, and the City of Dublin vocational education committee. She was also a committee member of the Cheeverstown Convalescent Home for Little Children and the National Children's Hospital. She was chairman of the Meath Hospital committee and the county libraries committee, and vice-chairman of Dublin county council until 1930. She also played a leading role in the Civics Institute. Cosgrave was a key figure in the Irish Women Citizens' Association, of which she was also chairman. She represented the National Council of Ireland at international congresses. 
Cosgrave was interested in social work, particularly maternity and child welfare work. She was active in the Women's National Health Association of Ireland and served as president of that association from 1939. The association's campaign against TB led to her association with Peamount Sanatorium and she became president of the sanatorium committee in 1939. Cosgrave died at her home, Woodside, 17 Park Drive, Cowper Gardens, Rathmines, Dublin, on 17 November 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 62129


Crowdy, Edith Frances (1880-1947), travel agent and member of the Women's Royal Naval Service, was born on 25 August 1880 at 79 Victoria Road, Wandsworth, London, one of the four daughters of James Crowdy, solicitor, and his wife, Mary Isabel Anne Fuidge. Educated at home, in 1912 she joined her younger sister Rachel Eleanor Crowdy in the Voluntary Aid Detachment (VAD), a nursing organization affiliated to the Red Cross, becoming deputy to Katharine Furse, commandant-in-chief. When Furse was appointed director of the newly formed Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS) in 1917 Crowdy also left the VAD and joined Furse as deputy director. In this role she was deeply involved in drafting and implementing new regulations for the WRNS. In her tribute written after Crowdy's death in 'The Wren', the magazine of the Association of Wrens which Crowdy had helped to found in 1920, Dame Katharine Furse acknowledged Crowdy's contribution to the success of the WRNS in its brief existence, commenting that Crowdy had instilled confidence in everyone by her bold but calm behaviour. Crowdy had been made an honorary serving sister of the order of St John of Jerusalem in recognition of her work with the VAD; in 1919 she was appointed CBE for her services to the WRNS, which was disbanded at the close of hostilities. 
Between the wars Crowdy worked for the travel service created by Sir Henry Lunn, and from 1926 she acted as secretary of the Hellenic Travellers Club, enjoying many voyages to the Mediterranean. Although she liked this work, Crowdy left Lunn in 1928 to become the general secretary of the World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts, founded that year, and in 1930 she helped to organize the association's first world conference. But these duties did not fully occupy her, and she soon rejoined Lunn's travel business and took up again the secretaryship of the Hellenic Travellers Club. She also renewed her association with Katharine Furse, who had also joined Lunn's company. 
With the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, Crowdy joined her sister Isabel who was working as a secretary of the Children's Country Holiday Fund. She helped to organize holidays for children, especially from London, who would not otherwise have the opportunity to visit the countryside. At the same time she advised the government on evacuation plans for children under the age of five. She was still a special case worker for the fund in 1947, with a London address at 100 Beaufort Street, Chelsea, but had been living near Blandford, Dorset, when she suffered a heart attack and died at Herrison House, Charminster, Dorset, on 23 July 1947. She was buried at Blandford on 26 July 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 62130


Barlas, John Evelyn (1860-1914), poet and anarchist-communist, was born in Rangoon, Burma, on 13 July 1860, the third and only surviving son of John Barlas (1826-1861), a merchant in the East Indies, and his wife, Elizabeth Anne (1835-1878), the daughter of William Davis, a civil servant of the mint in Calcutta. Barlas was a direct descendant of the fifteenth-century Scots heroine Kate Douglas, who was known as Barlass, and also a distant relative of George Gilfillan on his mother's side. Barlas was barely a year old when his father died suddenly of apoplexy, and his mother took him back to Glasgow. By 1874, however, mother and son were living at 8 Belsize Crescent, London. Barlas first briefly attended St John's Wood School and then, in December 1874, entered the Merchant Taylors' School, where he stayed for three years, winning the Sir James Tyler English history prize for 1875. After his mother's death in 1878, Barlas took rooms in Great Russell Street, London, to study by himself. His earnest study of Marxist literature at the same time led to his conversion to socialism. He then went up as a commoner to New College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 16 October 1879. 
Barlas was conspicuous at Oxford for his uncompromisingly radical views, for his extremely handsome and athletic personality, and for his histrionic talents. He was self-respecting and independent-minded in thought and action, and, although he characterized himself as 'one of those horrid proud people', in a letter of 1885 to Andre Raffalovich, he was a humane person and a gentleman. He was thought to be an aristocrat in those days, possessing some $20,000, with which he often assisted friends in need. Robert Harborough Sherard, his contemporary at New College and a lifelong friend, admits that he himself was saved by Barlas from death by starvation on more than one occasion. It was while Barlas was still an undergraduate that, on 25 June 1881, his early and romantic marriage took place, by special licence, to the beautiful Rangoon-born Eveline Honoria Nelson Davies (1861-1934), a great-grandniece of Admiral Lord Nelson and fourth daughter of Horatio Nelson Davies, assistant commissioner at Thayetmyo, Burma. According to an unsubstantiated rumour, Barlas had literally carried away his future wife from a ship at Southampton bound for Burma, to which country she had been summoned by her father. Their first child, Evelyn Adelaide Isabella, was born in May 1882. In the same year he also entered the Middle Temple to become a barrister, but after keeping only four terms abandoned the idea of a legal career. 
Having obtained his BA (a second class in 'literae humaniores') in 1884, Barlas went to Ireland, as professor of languages -- he was widely read in classical literature and in Hebrew, French, German, and Greek -- to St Stanislaus Roman Catholic College at Rahan, Tullamore. Here life was tranquil and he continued to write verse, a passion that had begun in 1876 while on a summer holiday in Yarmouth. However, in June 1885, three-year-old Evelyn died, and he and his wife returned to England, where Barlas obtained the post of assistant classical master at the local grammar school in Chelmsford, Essex, where he was regarded as a brilliant and inspiring teacher. He also made his presence felt in a different way, when he started a socialist society in Chelmsford, and was often seen distributing anarchist literature and preaching the socialist creed in public places, sporting a red ribbon in his buttonhole. He still found time to write poems or sonnets every day. In November their son Ernest Douglas Montague was born in his maternal grandparents' home in Lee, Kent. 
Barlas left Chelmsford in December 1886, and apparently went to Crieff -- by now his family home. The months he spent in Perthshire were enlivened by his friendship with a fellow Scottish poet, John Davidson, the music critic and composer Frank Leibich, and E. T. Peberdy -- all of whom were teachers at the local Morrison's academy. His sixth book, 'Bird-Notes' (1887) was dedicated to Peberdy and Davidson in memory of 'Happy days in the Highlands gladdened by the two best things in life -- Music and Literature'. It is not known exactly when Barlas arrived in Egham, Surrey, where briefly he coached students in the army examination, but he was to remain at Vine Cottage, in nearby Englefield Green, until mid-1891. It was while he was there that a correspondence began with the poet John Gray, later Canon Gray, which continued until the end of 1892 and which saw the regular exchange of letters and their latest poems in manuscript. 
As a socialist and supporter of the working classes, Barlas toured the country after leaving Chelmsford, preaching socialism, and offering help in getting up demonstrations in support of striking workers. Reputedly, Barlas was a good speaker and an able organizer. He was one of the demonstrators at Trafalgar Square on 'bloody Sunday', 13 November 1887, and received a severe blow to the head from a police truncheon and fell unconscious, bleeding profusely, at the feet of fellow-demonstrator Eleanor Marx. The blow caused permanent damage -- lifelong bouts of delirium and depression, and it was during one such bout of depression that, on the morning of 31 December 1891, Barlas fired a number of revolver shots near the Speaker's Green, at the House of Commons, announcing himself as an anarchist whose action had been to show his contempt for parliamentary democracy. He was promptly taken into custody by the police and a fortnight later his friends Oscar Wilde and H. H. Champion of the Social Democratic Federation stood surety for him, when Barlas was bound over to keep the peace. However, his mental state deteriorated and by September 1892 he was an inmate of James Murray's Royal Asylum, Perth. In March 1893 he was discharged, cured, but about a year later he was admitted to Gartnavel Royal Asylum near Glasgow, where he died twenty years later. According to a letter written to R. H. Sherard on 18 July 1914, during this period he wrote twenty-three dramas, twenty volumes of lyrics, an unspecified number of novels, and other writings. The present whereabouts of these manuscripts, however, as well as that of an unpublished autobiography, which A. J. A. Symons had seen about 1930, remain a mystery. 
Of Barlas's eight known volumes of verses and dramas, seven appeared under the pseudonym Evelyn Douglas, and 'Holy of Holies: Confessions of an Anarchist' (1887) was published anonymously. His first two volumes were issued through Trubner & Co., London, but the rest of his works were printed at provincial presses in Chelmsford and Dundee, at his own expense and mostly for private circulation. They were reviewed neither widely nor well. However, in 1895 George Meredith praised Barlas's sonnets for their 'nobility of sentiment' and maintained that they placed him in 'a high rank among the poets of his time'. The first major writer to appreciate Barlas's work in print was the humanitarian and socialist author Henry S. Salt, contributing 'The poetry of John Barlas' to 'The Yellow Book' (vol. 11, October 1896, 79-90). It appears that Salt knew Barlas from the early days of the Social Democratic Federation, either personally or through his writings, since he included a selection of Barlas's poems in 'Songs of Freedom', an anthology he edited in 1893. Barlas's correspondence with Salt (some seventy letters) led Salt to declare that Barlas was also a thinker. He also visited Barlas at Gartnavel Asylum and, in 1925, edited a selection of his poems. Remembering Barlas in an autobiographical volume, Salt called him 'the Keats of the Socialist movement' (Salt). Other admirers of Barlas's work include Oscar Wilde; the American writer Hamlin Garland; the poet Ralph Hodgson; and Ramsay MacDonald, the future prime minister. 
The most remarkable feature of Barlas's work is the conspicuous absence of his socialist and anarchist beliefs, which he so fervently preached in public life. Love -- of natural beauty, of a woman, of liberty and intellectual freedom -- and a notion of universal brotherhood are his chief themes. He possessed a fresh lyrical gift, an intense imagination, and original thought, with a masterly flair for painting word pictures. His shorter poems are delicate and simple, written with an effortless ease and admirable skill. His longer and descriptive poems are picturesque and fascinating. 
Barlas died on 15 August 1914, of valvular disease of the heart. He was buried four days later in Glasgow necropolis. His widow died in 1934, and his only son, Ernest, died in 1952, after a successful career as a solicitor. His grandson, Richard Douglas, who died in 1982, retired as senior clerk in the House of Commons, having been knighted in recognition of his services to that very parliamentary democracy for which his grandfather had such great contempt. 


@@@@@


doc= 62131


Horniblow, (Emilie) Hilda (1886-1950), chief controller of Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps and educationist, was born at Sheep Street, Charlbury, Oxfordshire, on 24 June 1886, the daughter of Frederick Thomas Horniblow, stationer, and his wife, Sarah Ellen, 'nee' McCulloch. She was educated at Oxford high school from May 1901 until July 1902 and at University College, Reading, from 15 October 1907 to 1 July 1908. By 1914 she was assistant mistress at the municipal school, Westwood, Scarborough. 
Horniblow temporarily left teaching during the First World War, joined the Women's Legion, and in August 1915 became superintendent of three kitchens, each catering for 1000 men, at Sommerdown convalescent camp, Eastbourne. After demonstrating her 'able leadership' there (Cowper, 11) she took over the running of the officers' mess at Lydd, Kent, in September 1916. By February 1917 she had been made deputy to Florence Leach, controller-in-chief of the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps (WAAC), which subsumed the women's legion, and became assistant controller of cooks. The WAAC was renamed Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps (QMAAC) on 9 April 1917, when the queen accepted the title of commander-in-chief. Later in that year Horniblow was promoted chief controller of the QMAAC, on secondment to the American expeditionary force in France. She arrived at Le Havre on 9 July and on 11 July went from a new base depot at Harfleur to Tours. There, on 29 July, she and her detachment were inspected by General Pershing. On 23 September she took charge of her camp at the American record office, Bourges, where she commanded what was ultimately a 1000-strong detachment assigned to the United States army. In July 1918 she was recalled to London to replace Mrs Long, chief controller in England of the QMAAC, who had been killed when the Red Cross ship on which she was travelling was torpedoed. Horniblow was appointed OBE (1918) and CBE (military, 1919). 
After the war Horniblow became headmistress of Fair Street (London county council) women's evening institute and then, in 1935, was made staff inspector for women's subjects in technical institutions. On 20 December 1941 she married a widower, John Edwin Dalton ('b'. 1875/6) OBE, a retired inspector of schools, of Menston-in-Wharfedale, Yorkshire. Hilda Dalton retired in 1942, and died at her home -- 5 The Crescent, Menston, Ilkley -- on 2 January 1950. She was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 62138


Dugdale, Blanche Elizabeth Campbell (1880-1948), author and Zionist, was born on 23 May 1880 at 32 Addison Road, Holland Park, London. Generally known as Baffy, she was the eldest of the five children of Eustace James Anthony Balfour (1854-1911), an architect and the youngest brother of the prime minister Arthur James Balfour, and his wife, Lady Frances Campbell (1858-1931), daughter of George Campbell, eighth duke of Argyll. 
In her memoir, 'Family Homespun' (1940), Baffy describes her family: on her mother's side the Campbells at Inveraray, ducal, Celtic, and feudal, on her father's the Balfours at Whittingehame, logical and tolerant, revering accuracy as much as the Campbells scorned it. It was at Whittingehame, where Arthur Balfour lived, adored by his numerous relations -- including Baffy -- that she spent much of her childhood. Her family spent half of the year at 32 Addison Road and half in Scotland. They felt very consciously Scottish: on their way north when exactly half-way across the Tweed they all cheered. On the southbound journey they 'hissed like serpents' (Dugdale, 'Family Homespun', 65). 
Baffy had no formal education; but her mother read to her, mainly from the novels of Sir Walter Scott, and she learned to read by puzzling out the words in Macaulay's 'Lays of Ancient Rome', which she knew by heart. As she grew up 'the multiplication tables might remain a sealed book but if you had asked me the difference between a Conservative and a Liberal Unionist I could have told you by the time I was ten' (Dugdale, 'Family Homespun', 143). According to her difficult and passionately political mother, conversation was the one essential accomplishment: it was a high priority both at Whittingehame and at Hatfield, where she often stayed with her Cecil cousins. 
Baffy 'came out' and was presented at one of Queen Victoria's last drawing-rooms in March 1898. On 18 November 1902 she married Edgar Trevelyan Stratford Dugdale (1876-1964), an underwriting member of Lloyds, the second son of William Stratford Dugdale of Merevale Hall, Atherstone, Warwickshire. They had two children, Frances and Michael, and lived at 1 Roland Gardens, South Kensington. 
Baffy was jolted into public life by the First World War. From 1915 to 1919 she worked in the department of naval intelligence at the Admiralty. After the war, enthusiastic for international co-operation, she joined her cousin Robert Cecil in founding the League of Nations Union and was head of the union's intelligence department from 1920 to 1928. In 1932 she was a member of the British government delegation to the assembly of the League of Nations. 
Meanwhile 1 Roland Gardens became well known for amusing, often political lunch parties; good conversationalists like Bob Boothby, Harold Nicolson, and Robert Cecil were frequent guests. Tall, with wide-apart eyes and a generous mouth, Baffy was excellent company; her enthusiasms were infectious, though she was also 'capable of deflating pretension with deadly effect' ('The Times', 18 May 1948). 
When Arthur Balfour retired from public life Baffy encouraged him to write his memoirs (published as 'Chapters of Autobiography', 1930), organizing his papers and acting as his secretary. When he died she wrote 'Arthur James Balfour' (1936), his authorized biography. 'The Times' described it as 'penetrating' and 'the most intimate since Boswell'. It is a magisterial work in two volumes and is a standard work for students of Balfour's life. As well as describing his political career it gives a sensitive, entertaining, and of course well-informed picture of his life at Whittingehame, his friends the Souls, and his passion for golf. Baffy also wrote numerous political articles for newspapers and journals, and her perceptive and entertaining memoir 'Family Homespun' was published in 1940. 
Baffy had been deeply impressed by the Balfour declaration. The idea of the British government helping to establish a national home for the Jewish people fired her imagination, and as a woman of action she started working for the cause. By 1936, the year in which her diary (edited by N. A. Rose as 'Baffy', 1973) begins, she was working at the headquarters of the Jewish Agency and Zionist Federation at 77 Great Russell Street, promoting the Jewish viewpoint and drafting articles and speeches with the historian Lewis Namier, also a dedicated Zionist. She became an effective speaker, especially to Jewish audiences. 
Baffy thought of Palestine as her second country and often stayed with Chaim Weizmann, leader of the Zionists, and his wife, Vera, at Rehovoth, their house near Jerusalem. Weizmann, a charismatic figure whom she much admired, made her one of his team: the only gentile on the inner circle of his policy making group. He respected her political judgement, but perhaps for him her greatest asset was that she knew several members of the British government well and had friends in the cabinet, where the decisions about Israel were made. She could act on diplomatic missions trusted by both sides. She was, for instance, able to give Weizmann a synopsis of the contents of the Peel report concerning the partitioning of Palestine a fortnight before it was published in July 1937. Walter Elliot, minister of agriculture (1936-8) and then of health (1938-40), was her greatest friend in the government and the member of the cabinet who was most willing to give her information. 
Baffy was a Conservative, but she was also a convinced non-appeaser, and she became so disillusioned by the government's attitude to Hitler that in 1937 she joined the National Labour Party and was adopted as its candidate for Central Southwark. However, when National Labour did not oppose the government on the issue of Czechoslovakia she resigned. The diary as it is edited is mainly a day-by-day account of her work for the Jews, but it includes brilliant snapshots of the great political events of the day as seen by someone on gossiping terms with those involved. The Mrs Simpson drama unfolds, and she and Walter Elliot and Colin Coote, then leader writer for 'The Times', and his wife settle down to a game of poker as the Munich crisis accelerates. 
Blanche Dugdale loved the young and was devoted to her four grandchildren, and if one of her nieces was in London on leave during the Second World War she would sweep her off to a pub in William IV Street where Baffy and her friends met, all paying for their own lunches, and where conversation sparkled. 
When war broke out Blanche Dugdale continued to work for the Jewish Agency, helping to persuade the British government to allow a Jewish fighting force but frustrated by how little could be done about the atrocities in occupied Europe. In 1942 she wrote of the Jews in Poland: 'It is an extermination policy now, but what can one do?' ('Baffy', 198, 28 Nov 1942). She supported the National Committee for Rescue from Nazi Terror led by Victor Cazalet and Victor Gollancz. She fought against the indifference of the Foreign Office, and she brought pressure to bear on the Colonial Office to allow Jews, particularly children, in the refugee ships to disembark in Palestine. 
Blanche Dugdale hated the in-fighting that occurred between the Jewish leaders, and when Weizmann lost the leadership in 1946 she realized her work was done; her health also was declining. She died on 16 May 1948 (the day after she heard that the state of Israel had been established) at the house of her daughter and son-in-law Sir James Fergusson of Kilkerran House, by Maybole, Ayrshire. She was buried on 22 May. Undoubtedly she would have considered her work for the Jews her most important achievement, and she is still honoured in Israel, but in Britain she is best remembered as an author. 


@@@@@


doc= 62139


Murray, Jane Elmslie Henderson, Viscountess Dunedin (1885-1944), journalist, was born on 25 December 1885 at 50 Victoria Street, Aberdeen, the daughter of George Findlay, hat merchant, and his wife, Jane Elmslie Henderson. Both her parents were recorded as deceased on 11 January 1886, when her birth was registered, and nothing is known of her early life. 
Jean Findlay first came to public notice as a contributor and translator associated with the journal 'Everyman' in 1914. This began in 1912 as a literary review, and was being edited at the outbreak of the First World War by Dr Charles Sarolea, the Belgian consul in Edinburgh. At that time it concerned itself with fund-raising and publicity on behalf of Belgium, and Jean Findlay contributed to this. She acted as a war correspondent, reporting from Flanders, and for example, in 1916, on Belgian children as refugees in Switzerland. In 1915 she made a fund-raising lecture tour to Canada. Her translation 'The Barbarians in Belgium' (1915), from the work by Pierre Nothomb, appeared in support of the cause. She also helped to start a YMCA for the Belgian army and was an honorary member of the Belgian government committee of propaganda. In recognition of the large sums that she helped to raise for Belgium and other services she was made a member of the order of Queen Elizabeth of Belgium. 
From late 1916 until early 1917 Jean Findlay was acting editor of 'Everyman'. After giving up this position she continued writing and in 1918 she published 'Three Aspects of the Russian Revolution', from the work by Emile Vandervelde. In late 1916, at the suggestion of Baron Strathclyde, she became involved with the work of the savings movement in Scotland. Serving as the director of Scottish Savings from 1916 until 1923, she was a leading figure in various savings campaigns, which included wartime visits to British troops in France and public meetings throughout Scotland. Her abilities as a platform speaker were of great use in helping to build up this largely voluntary movement; in 1920 she was made a CBE in recognition of her efforts. 
On 12 July 1923 Jean Findlay married Andrew Graham Murray (1849-1942), first Baron Dunedin, lord of appeal-in-ordinary, at a ceremony in the private chapel of Lambeth Palace. They had no children. As the second Lady Dunedin she reportedly encouraged her husband to broaden his interests beyond the law and his existing recreations. Her striking good looks attracted comment until the end of her life ('The Times', 22 March 1944). In 1926, on her husband's elevation, she became the first Viscountess Dunedin. 
Between December 1933 and September 1934 Viscountess Dunedin renewed her association with 'Everyman', this time as its editor. By her own account she returned as a result of a request to guide the paper back to stability and revive its coverage of varied interests. Her network of contacts was useful in providing a range of distinguished contributors who suited the readership. 
In addition to those honours already mentioned Viscountess Dunedin was a lady of grace of St John of Jerusalem; she was also the first honorary secretary of the Scottish League of Nations Union. Her husband died in an Edinburgh nursing home in August 1942, after a long illness. She survived him by almost two years, dying of cancer at her home, 42 Lower Sloane Street, London, on 20 March 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 62141


Durham, Frances Hermia (1873-1948), civil servant, was born at Aldwick, Pagham, Sussex, on 15 August 1873, the youngest of the nine children of Arthur Edward Durham (1834-1895), a surgeon at Guy's Hospital, London, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Ellis. (Mary) Edith Durham was her elder sister. She was educated privately in London and Rugby, attended Notting Hill high school, and then studied from 1892 to 1896 at Girton College, Cambridge, where she was a college scholar. She played hockey for Girton. One contemporary recalled her love of a funny story, but also 'how sternly' she once kept a college reading party to its agreed schedule of seven hours' work a day ('Girton Review', 29). She gained a second class in the historical tripos in 1895, and a second class in part one of the moral science tripos in 1896. After completing her studies she trained in palaeography and spent three years, from 1897 to 1900, in cataloguing private collections of family archives. She was awarded the Alexander medal of the Royal Historical Society in 1898. 
On leaving Cambridge Durham also undertook social work with the Women's University Settlement. In 1900 she became co-founder and co-secretary of its Southwark registry and apprenticeship committee. Having gained valuable experience of social and working conditions in London, she was appointed in 1907 as an inspector and organizer of technical classes for women and trade schools under the London county council education committee. She was also a member of the consultative committee at the Board of Education from 1908 to 1913. In 1915 she entered the civil service as chief woman inspector in the insurance and unemployment department of the Board of Trade. In the following year she transferred to the Ministry of Labour, and in 1918 she was promoted to assistant secretary. During the First World War Durham was 'largely responsible' for the organization of women's services in the army, munitions, and agriculture ('The Times', 19 Dec 1933, 14e). In 1919 she was appointed CBE in recognition. She afterwards served on the central committee for employment and training of women (1919-35). 
After 1916 increasing numbers of women were admitted to the higher grades of the civil service, and Durham and her Girton contemporary Isabel Dickson (1872-1922) were the first to reach the rank of assistant secretary. Women civil servants were not, however, employed on the same terms as men. They enjoyed neither equal pay nor equal opportunities. In 1920 some of them formed the committee of higher women in the civil service, which later became the council of women civil servants. Durham was its first president. A 'fearless advocate' of women's progress in the service, she was nevertheless cautious in her approach, 'always temperate in her judgments, always sure to present the women's case in moderate and judicial language' ('Girton Review', 27). One contemporary described her as 'statesmanlike' (ibid.). 
Determined that women should make their presence felt, Durham led the committee of higher women in organizing a series of highly successful receptions, which were well attended by heads of department and distinguished outsiders. In 1931 she took the chair at a dinner given by the committee to celebrate the findings of Lord Tomlin's royal commission on the civil service. This had concluded that as far as possible all posts should be open to men and women equally. But while the commission openly recognized the prejudice that women civil servants faced, it gave no clear lead on the key issue of equal pay. It also recommended the retention of the rule whereby women civil servants were expected to retire on marriage. When the Tomlin commission was appointed, in November 1929, Durham was one of only three women to hold the rank of assistant secretary or above. She was a survivor of a period of post-war optimism, when it seemed that women were about to make real inroads in the civil service. By the time of her retirement, in 1933, this optimism had dissipated. In 1939 the number of women at the rank of assistant secretary or higher remained what it had been a decade earlier. 
In retirement Durham went to live in the house that she had built with her sister, Florence, at Hawkern, on the edge of the village of Otterton, near Budleigh Salterton, south Devon. She was soon co-opted on to Devon county education committee, on which she served from 1934 to 1939. She surprised her colleagues by visiting schools in remote villages and roundly condemning the poor conditions that she found in some of them. Her sister, who too had been at Girton and who had a career in medical research, shared her social concern. Together they took a keen interest 'in the welfare of their own village folk' ('Girton Review', 28), and battled with landlords and local authorities for basic improvements to cottage dwellings. During the war they opened their home to soldiers billeted nearby, offering hot baths, cups of tea, and the tranquillity of their garden. Frances Hermia Durham, who remained unmarried, died of heart failure at her home at Hawkern on 18 August 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 62144


Smythe, Patricia Rosemary (1928-1996), showjumper, was born on 22 November 1928 at 24 Shotfield Avenue, East Sheen, London, the only daughter and youngest of three children of Captain Eric Hamilton Smythe (1886-1945), civil engineer and businessman, and his wife, Frances Monica (1904-1952), daughter of the Revd Frank Curtoys. Both parents were from families of well-established lineage, and Eric Smythe, an executive director of an electrical engineering firm, had been decorated in the First World War. The Smythes' first child, Dickie, had died in infancy, and Pat grew up with her parents and elder brother, Ronald. In the early 1930s the family moved a short distance to a larger house, Beaufort, on the edge of Barnes Common, where under her mother's tuition Pat learned riding skills on her pony Pixie. She attended several schools: Oakhill, Wimbledon; Downe House, Newbury; Ferne House, Dorset, and later Fonthill Abbey, Wiltshire; Pate's Grammar School, Cheltenham; St Michael's, Cirencester; and Talbot Heath, Bournemouth. Though she later claimed that the family was 'far from wealthy' (Smythe, 'Jump for Joy', 21), they enjoyed a comfortable middle-class life until her father's deteriorating health and eventual death early in 1945 brought on more straitened circumstances. 
Through the enthusiasm and knowledge of her mother, a trainer of polo ponies, Pat Smythe developed the understanding and love of horses that determined her career. An outstanding junior showjumper, who tied for first place in her group at the Royal Richmond show of 1939, she became fully immersed in the world of horses and showjumping during the Second World War, when she moved to the west country to live with farming friends and relatives. Her parents subsequently settled at Crickley Lodge near Cheltenham, an area with which Pat maintained connections for the rest of her life. The war years were a formative period that served so to develop her riding skills at local horse shows and gymkhanas that by 1947 her performance at the first international horse show at the White City won her selection to the British team, a status she maintained throughout the remainder of a career that continued until 1963. Riding initially her own horses, Finality, Tosca, and Prince Hal, which she trained with her mother, and then other owners' horses -- Flanagan, Mr Pollard, and Scorchin' being the most celebrated -- Pat Smythe, assisted by her groom Pauline Sykes, won a succession of showjumping's prestige individual and team events throughout the world. Among her many honours were leading showjumper of the year (1949), the European championship on four occasions between 1957 and 1961, the celebrated gold button of Algiers (1955), and the British Jumping Derby championship at Hickstead (1962). She was the first woman showjumper to represent Great Britain at the Olympic games in 1956, the year in which she was appointed OBE, and was a member of the British team again at the Rome Olympics in 1960. This, together with her autobiography 'Jump for Joy' (1954) and her writing for the 'Daily Express', ensured that she was a household name, both in Britain and in much of the rest of the world, during the 1950s. 
The peak of Smythe's career coincided with the emergence of television. Her youth, charm, physical courage, and conventional good looks gave her an appeal that was decisive in transforming a previously elite and largely male sport, with strong military associations, into a popular media spectacle. Her success made it possible for other women riders to progress in the sport, so that what had been an exception when she herself was first making her way was to become commonplace by the late 1960s. She possessed few material advantages or privileges. In spite of help from wealthy family and friends, after her father's death she and her mother earned their living by teaching riding and taking in guests at their home in Miserden, a house with stables on which her mother took a lease in 1949. The early death of her mother in a road accident in 1952 left Pat to manage and finance her showjumping career single-handedly. Her progress became an object lesson in surmounting obstacles through hard work, self-discipline, and determination, a central theme in her final autobiography, 'Leaping Life's Fences' (1992). She thus became not only an icon of a more egalitarian Britain, but a precursor of the liberated female of the 1960s. Completely devoid of airs and graces -- 'she had absolutely no side', according to BBC executive Peter Dimmock ('The Guardian', 29 Feb 1996) -- she seemed to embody the triumph of the 'ordinary woman'. Her popularity was especially marked among countless young girls, for whom she wrote popular adventure stories (the 'Three Jays' series) about children and horses. 
In 1963 Pat Smythe gave up her sport to marry, on 10 September, a friend she had known since her late 'teens, the divorced Swiss lawyer and businessman (Alphons) Samuel (Sam) Koechlin (1924/5-1985), son of Hartmann Koechlin, chemist. They set up home in Switzerland and had two children, Monica and Lucy. For some twenty years Pat accompanied her husband, a representative of the chemical firm Ciba-Geigy, on business trips around the world, during which she promoted the causes of wildlife and environmental protection. Connections with showjumping were maintained. She served as 'chef d'equipe' of British teams, and from 1983 to 1986 as president of the British Showjumping Association. Before the age of forty, however, she had suffered severe hip problems, partly as a consequence of riding accidents; she developed the osteoarthritis that had afflicted her father and, subsequently, osteoporosis and heart problems. Following the death of her husband from cancer in 1985 she returned to live at her English home, Sudgrove House in the Cotswolds, maintaining her activities in the fields of conservation, travel, and the arts until her death at Standish Hospital, Standish, Gloucestershire, from heart failure on 27 February 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 62147


Trevelyan, Sir George Lowthian, fourth baronet (1906-1996), educationist, was born on 5 November 1906 at 14 Great College Street, Westminster, the eldest of three sons and the second of seven children of Sir Charles Philips Trevelyan, third baronet (1870-1958), politician and landowner, and his wife, Mary Katharine Trevelyan (1881-1966), youngest daughter of Sir Hugh Bell, second baronet. He was the grandson of Sir George Otto Trevelyan, second baronet, and the nephew of George Macaulay Trevelyan. His father was Liberal MP for Elland (1899-1918) and Labour MP for Newcastle upon Tyne Central (1922-31), and president of the Board of Education in Ramsay MacDonald's two Labour administrations. George Trevelyan grew up on the family estate at Wallington, Northumberland, attended school at Sidcot, in the Mendips, and in 1925 followed the family tradition by going up to Trinity College, Cambridge, to read history. There he was master of the lake hunt, a chase over the lakeland fells that had been founded by his historian uncle, George Macaulay Trevelyan, and his friend George Winthrop Young, in 1898. 
Trevelyan's first interest on leaving Cambridge was making furniture, and he gained experience at the workshops of Peter Waals at Chalford, Gloucestershire. He then spent four years learning and teaching the F. M. Alexander re-education method. Subsequently he moved to Scotland to teach history, literature, woodwork, and outdoor pursuits at Gordonstoun School, when Kurt Hahn was headmaster. He then took up a post at Abinger Hill Preparatory School, near Dorking, Surrey. It was there that he met a fellow schoolteacher and artist, (Editha) Helen Lindsay Smith (1900/01-1994), daughter of Colonel John Lindsay Smith, of the Indian Army Service Corps. They married on 14 August 1940 and later adopted a daughter, Catriona ('b'. 1944). Trevelyan returned to Scotland for most of the Second World War, when, as a captain in the rifle brigade, he was engaged in training home defence forces. 
Trevelyan apparently had visions of making Wallington into a centre for adult education. This seemed thwarted when, in 1941, his father announced that he would be handing over the estate to the National Trust (Cannadine, 169); Trevelyan was always reticent in later life in speaking about his ancestors. Nevertheless, on demobilization he gained skills in teaching adults at the army college at Dalkeith, and in 1947 he was appointed first warden of Shropshire Adult College, established at Attingham Park, the eighteenth-century mansion 4 miles east of Shrewsbury that had been the home of the Hill family, barons Berwick, and had formed part of a military base during the Second World War. The college was one of many initiatives launched by H. Martin Wilson, secretary for education for Shropshire county council. Trevelyan proved an inspired appointment. The volume published in 1965 to mark Wilson's retirement commented that Attingham had been 'born of the wartime sense of the unity of the community' and that Attingham was 'an essential part of adult education in the county, particularly reflecting the enthusiasm and devotion of its first and only Warden, Sir George Trevelyan' ('Education in Shropshire', 77-8). 
Attingham was one of more than twenty similar colleges founded in the late 1940s with the aim of providing short courses that would be open to all. Several of these colleges, including Attingham, had a profound, if informal, influence on the development of scholarship. This type of institution effectively disappeared from the educational scene in the last quarter of the twentieth century. Trevelyan promoted the college with much energy. It became a centre for music-making, drama, and film appreciation. Mid-week it was used for teacher training, for business conferences, and by university departments as a base for fieldwork. It was most influential as a location for weekend courses that were open to the public, the first of which began on 21 August 1948 and the last concluded on 25 November 1975, some four years after Trevelyan retired. The college was an independent foundation supported by the local educational charity, the Walker Trust, the University of Birmingham, and Shropshire county council, the organization of courses being part of the duties of some of the staff of the two latter bodies. Trevelyan responded with enthusiasm to suggestions from colleagues for courses of many kinds, often far outside his own spheres of interest. He encouraged courses that stimulated awareness of new directions in scholarship in botany, forestry, the needs of gifted children, film and television studies, folk-song, and the workshop approach to theatre. Attingham proved influential in the development of social history, historical demography, industrial archaeology, and garden history. 
Trevelyan had a strikingly handsome appearance and resonant speech. His manner was both welcoming and patrician, and some students at the college gained the impression that Attingham was his ancestral home. He himself dispensed cider to students at dinner and conducted short, non-denominational religious services before the start of teaching on Sunday mornings. He was an exuberant participant in field trips and delighted in scrambling up steep slopes. He may have been disappointed that he did not inherit Wallington but found satisfaction, as he wrote in the college prospectus, that 'Attingham has found one of the happiest solutions to the problem of full use of a country house'. 
Many of Trevelyan's beliefs sprang directly from Trevelyan family traditions and can also be seen in the life of his uncle the historian. His reading in poetry was wide and deep, and he could quote readily and at length. He had strong commitments to craftsmanship, to the countryside (which he loved to explore on foot), and to adult education. He was also interested in spiritual matters, and in 1942 had been attracted to the ideas of Rudolph Steiner. While he encouraged colleagues to run courses on many subjects he had particular interests of his own about which he permitted no debate during programme planning. Some related to craftsmanship; several of his own, elegantly crafted chairs adorned the college, and for many years he gave great encouragement to the making of mosaics. Such courses were uncontroversial but his courses on spiritual topics did raise some concerns among academic colleagues, particularly when, as with a course entitled 'The significance of the group in the new age', a Michaelmas festival in 1965, it was acknowledged in publicity that they were intended for 'a small and mainly invited group'. Subsequent courses included 'Man know thyself', in 1966, and 'Towards light and love', in 1967. Such topics embarrassed the governing body, which insisted that Attingham would no longer be available for such activities after Trevelyan retired in 1971. 
As warden of Attingham Trevelyan facilitated developments in many disciplines. In retirement he came to be regarded as a prophet in the studies that are perhaps best summarized in the title of one of his courses, 'The primal oneness in diversity'. He founded, and from 1971 to 1992 was director of, the Wrekin Trust, whose gatherings carried further the themes of his Attingham courses. He encouraged responsible attitudes to the planet, sought common elements within the great religions of the world, and found spiritual values in literature. Though smitten by arthritis, he travelled extensively, addressing conferences (including an annual gathering of 'Mystics and Scientists'), helped to set up many groups in Britain and overseas, and readily conversed with many who saw themselves as 'New Age' thinkers and acknowledged him as a prophet. He published a succession of books, which included a trilogy entitled 'The Aquarian Redemption', comprising 'A Vision of the Aquarian Age' (1977), 'Operation Redemption' (1981), and 'Exploration into God' (1991), and 'Magic Casements: the Use of Poetry in the Expanding of Consciousness' (1980). He was closely involved with the Findhorn Foundation, the Gatekeeper and Open Gate trusts, the Teilhard de Chardin Society, and the Essene Network. In 1982 he was awarded the Right Livelihood award -- established by the Swede Jacob Von Yxkull -- for his work in 'educating the adult spirit to a new non-materialistic vision of human nature' and for his contribution to 'healing the planet'. He died, of rheumatoid arthritis and renal failure, on 7 February 1996 at his home, the Old Vicarage, Hawkesbury, near Badminton, Avon. He had succeeded his father as fourth baronet in 1958, and in turn was succeeded by his younger brother, Geoffrey Washington Trevelyan ('b'. 1920). He was survived by his adopted daughter, Catriona, his wife, Helen, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 62150


Marshall, Walter Charles, Baron Marshall of Goring (1932-1996), physicist and public servant, was born on 5 March 1932 at 15 Tymawr Road, Rumney, Newport, Monmouthshire, the last of three children of Frank Marshall (died 1939), a baker, and his wife, Amy, 'nee' Pearson. His father died when he was seven years old. There was no record of academic ability in his family; his exceptional mathematical gifts were recognized at his grammar school, St Illtyd's College, Cardiff, and he won a scholarship to study mathematical physics at the University of Birmingham. He also became Welsh junior chess champion. He graduated with first-class honours at Birmingham and was awarded a PhD degree at the early age of twenty-two for his thesis, 'Antiferromagnetism and neutron scattering from ferromagnets'. 
Marshall joined the theoretical physics division at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, Berkshire, in 1954. He first investigated the behaviour of shockwaves in magnetically confined plasmas, but soon returned to his interests in solid state physics and magnetism. On 12 April 1955 he married Ann Vivienne Sheppard ('b'. 1933/4), a schoolteacher, and daughter of Ernest Vivian Sheppard, a commercial traveller; they later had a son and a daughter. Marshall then had two periods of study leave in the USA, at Berkeley, California, in 1957-8, and Harvard, in 1958-9, where he made a great impression and formed many lifelong friendships. He remained strongly pro-American in outlook. On his return to Harwell he was promoted to group leader and then, at the age of twenty-eight, to be head of the theoretical physics division, a powerful group of forty outstanding scientists covering a range of subjects. It was a remarkable opportunity for an able, ambitious, and supremely confident young man, and Marshall exploited the situation brilliantly. The Harwell laboratory became known as a centre of excellence in materials physics and attracted a number of researchers from Britain, Europe, and the USA. 
Marshall's major personal contributions were to the theory of the solid state related to magnetic properties, but his interests were wide and he developed, with many colleagues, experimental programmes to expand the theoretical understanding of materials. In particular he sought to expand and promote the use of the new technique of neutron diffraction for the study of the structures of solids and liquids, which had become possible with the generation of beams of neutrons from research reactors. He was the author or co-author of more than sixty papers between 1956 and 1969, and his book 'The Theory of Thermal Neutron Scattering' (1971), written with Stephen Lovesey, remained the standard text on the subject for many years. In 1964 Marshall delivered the Kelvin lecture to the British Association for the Advancement of Science, entitled 'The study of solids and liquids using thermal neutrons'. In the same year he was awarded the Maxwell medal for outstanding contributions to theoretical physics by the Institute of Physics, and in 1971 he was elected to the Royal Society, becoming the youngest fellow at that time. He continued to work on problems in magnetism and superconductivity for mental relaxation, recording the results in a series of handwritten notebooks, but he published no papers on theoretical physics after 1971. 
Marshall's demonstrated capacity for scientific leadership and his ability to inspire the work of others led to his appointment as deputy director of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell in 1966 and director in 1968. At this time the laboratory was seeking new objectives. Many of the scientific questions that had been vitally important to the early development of nuclear power had been met, and some subjects pioneered at Harwell were being moved to independent organizations. Marshall first attempted to institute at Harwell a high field magnetic laboratory and a research reactor producing high-flux neutron beams, in order to further the scientific leadership he had won in these areas, but the proposals failed to win government support because of lack of funds and because they did not promise the early industrial applications sought by the Ministry of Technology (the responsible department). Marshall accepted that the days of academic freedom at Harwell were over, and that a large, multidisciplinary laboratory like Harwell had to be seen to contribute to the national welfare. He argued for and later implemented a policy of diversification aimed at assisting British industry in specific areas and meeting government objectives outside the nuclear-energy field. 
There were formidable difficulties, both internal and external. Legal permission to pursue topics that were not covered by the original nuclear remit of the Atomic Energy Authority (AEA) had to be obtained from the Ministry of Technology, and any government funding through the requirement boards set up by that ministry. In addition, nuclear work for external organizations, mainly the exploitation of irradiation facilities and the provision of radioactive sources, now had to be charged for and the work given a commercial edge. Success depended on gaining funding from an initially uninterested and even hostile industry. The internal problems were also severe. Turning the Harwell of the early 1960s into an organization earning a large fraction of its income from sources outside the AEA involved a cultural revolution. Marshall introduced a project system, cutting across the traditional divisional structure, and gave the main responsibility for making industrial contacts and earning industrial money to the project managers themselves, supported by a contracts and marketing organization. This key decision forced a large number of Harwell staff into close contact with industrial firms and other potential customers, with the result that external hostility fell away as the quality of the scientific support on offer was appreciated. 
By 1976 the new 'industrial programmes' accounted for 50 per cent of the total effort at Harwell, and the laboratory had a new lease of life. The staff had been reduced by 25 per cent over the previous ten years, but numbers had stabilized by 1975. Marshall was awarded the Glazebrook medal of the Institute of Physics in 1975 for his outstanding administrative achievement. The pattern of work for external customers established at Harwell was followed by other national laboratories, and paved the way for later reorganizations of the AEA. 
Marshall was appointed to the board of the UK Atomic Energy Authority in 1972. He became deputy chairman in 1975 and chairman in 1981, and was knighted for distinguished public service in 1982. Over this period he became known in Britain and other countries as a consistent, strong supporter of nuclear power. 
Paradoxically, a task which brought Marshall to wide public notice concerned energy policy but not nuclear power. He was appointed as part-time chief scientist to the Department of Energy in 1974, with a remit to reorient and expand the department's research programme in the light of the 'oil shocks' of the early 1970s. To this end he chaired the Advisory Council on Research and Development for Fuel and Power, and the new Offshore Energy Technology Board. He organized studies of the potential value of new energy technologies against different scenarios of supply projections, and inaugurated the energy technology support unit at Harwell to encourage schemes of energy conservation and to evaluate the potential of renewable sources of energy. He also led a group of academics and members of the electricity supply industry in a study of the feasibility of introducing into Britain large-scale schemes of combined heat and power linked to district heating. The conclusions were that such schemes would not be viable unless gas prices in Britain increased substantially, though a majority favoured building a lead scheme. At the same time Marshall was vigorously pursuing nuclear interests, and he engaged in several attempts to sell British nuclear services in countries starting nuclear power programmes. A clash between him and Tony Benn, who as secretary of state for energy was increasingly suspicious of the nuclear lobby, was, perhaps, inevitable. In 1977 Marshall was asked abruptly to return to full-time duties at the AEA. 
Marshall's work on energy policy and projections of fuel supply only strengthened his enthusiasm for nuclear power. He considered that a growing nuclear-power component backed by an efficient nuclear industry was essential both to the long-term stability of energy supplies in this country and to meeting the energy requirements of an expanding world population. He played an important part in the debate in the 1970s about reactor choice. He became convinced that the UK should follow most of the rest of the world and build pressurized water reactors (PWRs), because of the advantages of increased factory fabrication, international technical support, and possible entry to foreign markets. But there were doubts about the safety of high-pressure systems. The most serious criticism, voiced by the government's chief scientist (Sir Alan Cottrell), was that the steel pressure-vessel surrounding the reactor core might fracture under operational or accident conditions. Marshall saw that this concern could be addressed only by a comprehensive analysis of all relevant features of design, fabrication, fracture analysis, non-destructive testing, and quality assurance. He assembled a group of theoreticians and materials scientists, including many academic members, who reported finally that safety criteria could be met by rigorous attention to detail and, in particular, to non-destructive testing during commissioning and in service that was validated independently. This report marked a significant stage in the overall safety case for PWRs, and the exercise demonstrated again Marshall's intellectual ability and technical leadership. He later chaired a task force from the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) and the nuclear industry, charged with determining how the design of a PWR based on that of an American reactor could be altered to accommodate the requirements of the safety regulators in Britain. 
Marshall also took a leading role in the British involvement in the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation Exercise launched by President Jimmy Carter in 1977 to assess and reduce the danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons arising from civilian nuclear power. President Carter had deferred indefinitely the reprocessing of spent fuel from nuclear power stations to recover uranium and plutonium for future use as fuel; he had also cancelled the development of fast (neutron) reactors in the USA, which were most efficient in using plutonium as fuel. Such a strategy was the core of the AEA's programme at the time, and the British, with others, mounted a vigorous defence. Marshall was thanked officially for the part he played. He remained convinced that the long-term future of nuclear power depended on the development of fast reactors which would enable a large proportion of the world's uranium to be used as nuclear fuel, and he considered that fast reactors could be used in ways that would minimize the threat of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. He summarized these arguments in the fifth Cockcroft lecture, published in 'Nuclear Energy' in 1980. Later, as chairman of the CEGB, he agreed that the board would fund 30 per cent of the total AEA expenditure on fast-reactor development. However, he came to accept that fast reactors would not be economic commercially for many decades, and the British programme did not survive the later break-up of the CEGB. 
Marshall was appointed chairman of the Central Electricity Generating Board, at the time a state-owned monopoly responsible for electricity in England and Wales, in 1982. He and others believed that a major reason for his appointment was the government's wish to increase the contribution made by nuclear power through building a series of PWRs. However, he accepted that coal would remain the most important fuel for electricity generation for the foreseeable future -- gas was barely considered in 1983 -- and that the board faced organizational problems owing to the increase in size (and hence the decrease in number) of individual power stations. 
The first crisis that Marshall faced was linked to the dependence on coal as the main fuel -- the long miners' strike in 1984-5. The CEGB had made plans to meet such a situation by building up coal stocks and planning to burn oil in both oil- and coal-fired stations. Marshall believed that the CEGB had an overriding responsibility to maintain electricity supply, and thought that the strike might be a long one. He therefore won board support to burn more oil, at greater cost, since the output from the nuclear stations could not be increased quickly. This strategy was successful in that electricity supplies were not interrupted and the extra cost of oil fuel was borne by the government. Marshall was rewarded with a life peerage, as Baron Marshall of Goring, in 1985. He later confessed that he had enjoyed the excitement of the struggle. 
Marshall always insisted on basing policy on sound science, as in the position he took in the debate over acid rain. He was opposed at first to spending large sums on reducing emissions of acid gases from coal-fired stations, but he supported a joint research programme with Norway and Sweden into the effects of acid deposition, and later agreed that control was necessary. Similarly he was concerned that the language used in the debate about nuclear power was scientifically accurate and reflected properly the probability of future events; he disliked jargon and hated sound bites. He gave a series of lectures between 1980 and 1986 on those aspects of nuclear power that caused public unease, including the threat of large accidents and of the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the problem of radioactive waste disposal, and he inspired and edited a comprehensive set of papers entitled 'Nuclear Power Technology', published in 1983. 
All nuclear power plans suffered a serious set-back following the accident to a reactor at Chernobyl in the USSR in April 1986. Marshall led the British delegation to the meeting organized by the International Atomic Energy Agency to examine the reasons for and consequences of the accident. He also led a comparative study of design standards and of operating and regulatory practice. He became convinced that such an accident could not happen to a reactor under the conditions imposed in Western countries by the late 1980s, but he saw the danger to the world's nuclear industry posed by the public reaction to Chernobyl and played a leading role in the formation of a worldwide organization aimed at raising safety standards in all utilities operating nuclear power plants. The World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO) was based on the Institution of Nuclear Power Operators in the USA. WANO provided a mechanism by which information on safety standards and practices could be exchanged directly between the organizations responsible for operating plants, thus encouraging comparison and emulation. Marshall was elected the executive chairman in 1989, and could report by 1991 that the organization included every nuclear utility in the world. 
Privatization of electricity generation in 1989 finally ended Marshall's career in public service. He had argued for retaining a single national organization for the generation and transmission of electricity, but lost the argument. He regretted the demise of a public service company with an obligation to continuous supply in favour of energy companies whose priority would be to gain commercial contracts, but he accepted the government's decision to introduce competition into the industry and agreed to be chairman-designate of National Power, the company originally intended to run nuclear reactors as well as some other stations. However, this scheme foundered in 1989, when the government decided to withdraw nuclear stations from the planned privatization, and Marshall resigned. In a valedictory address to the British Nuclear Energy Society he described the industrial and financial difficulties which had led to the decisions to retain the nuclear stations in the public sector and to cancel the plan to build several PWRs after the Sizewell B reactor; the main reasons cited were the high capital charges and high return on investment expected in the private sector. 
Marshall continued to work on nuclear projects in other countries after leaving the CEGB, and he also became a consultant to a syndicate insuring nuclear risks at Lloyds as well as a Lloyds name. He was chairman of WANO until 1993, and undertook a large number of visits to overseas utilities. He remained an ambassador for WANO after 1993 because of the close relations he had built with utilities in eastern European countries. He also became an adviser to the Kansai Electric Power Company of Japan. 
Marshall dominated the nuclear power scene for two decades. He could be intimidating and very demanding, but he earned the respect of his close colleagues and of the technical community by his intellectual gifts, total commitment to his causes, and his willingness to lead from the front. He was not so successful in his dealings with politicians, who had different priorities. He collected many national and international honours, including being made a freeman of the City of London in 1984, and an honorary fellow of St Hugh's College, Oxford. 
Marshall enjoyed a notably happy marriage with his wife, Ann, who entertained for him at their home, Bridleway House, near Goring, Oxfordshire, accompanied him on all his travels, and finally nursed him during a long terminal illness. He died of cancer at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, London, on 20 February 1996. He was survived by his wife, son, and daughter. He had become ill during the making of a television programme about his life, but he insisted on completing it and requested that the programme's producer give the address at his funeral. This took place on 1 March 1996 at St Andrew's, South Stoke, Goring, the church where Marshall and his wife had been members for many years, and the address was given again at his memorial service at St Margaret's, Westminster, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 62151


Faithfull, Lucy, Baroness Faithfull (1910-1996), social worker and children's campaigner, was born on 26 October 1910 in South Africa, the only daughter and elder child of Sydney Leigh Faithfull, a lieutenant in the Royal Engineers, and his wife, Elizabeth Adie Algie, a nurse. After her father was killed in action in 1916, the family returned to England where, in straitened circumstances, her mother found residential employment. From the age of seven Faithfull was sent to boarding-school, an unhappy experience which was later to influence strongly her determination to confront childhood suffering in all its manifestations. For many years there was no settled family home, as Faithfull and her brother followed their mother to her successive places of employment. In later life she told few of this early deprivation; indeed, many thought that wider family connections had meant privilege which had eased her way into the House of Lords. After her education at Talbot Heath School, Bournemouth, she attended the Sorbonne in Paris and Birmingham University, graduating with a diploma in social sciences from the latter in 1933. Her subsequent career was largely in the field of child care. She was club leader and sub-warden, Birmingham settlement, from 1932 to 1935; assistant organizer of child care, London county council education department, 1935-40; regional welfare officer (evacuation), Ministry of Health, 1940-48; inspector, children's branch, Home Office, 1948-58; and children's officer (1958-70), and then director of social services (1970-74), Oxford city council. She was made OBE in 1972. 
In 1975 Faithfull was created Baroness Faithfull of Wolvercote; it was an ironic commentary on political priorities of the period that it was left to a septuagenarian, and subsequently octogenarian, tory peer to take the lead on so many social policy campaigns between 1980 and 1996. She was the only social worker of her generation to be created a life peer, and there were some who felt at the time that she was a curious choice, Oxford city being one of the smallest local authorities, which had just disappeared in the latest reorganization. She was to prove them wrong, for it was in parliament, and in particular in her last decade, that she really flowered. During most of her time in the Lords, she was almost the only member with direct professional experience of services for children in need and social work. She felt that she had an absolute responsibility to act as the voice in parliament of those who worked with and for children, and to advise and educate her colleague peers. She was proud of voting according to a conscience, rather than the party line, often to the despair of tory whips, to some of whom she became known as Lady Faithless; for them the problem was not just her vote, but the numbers of her colleagues that she persuaded to follow her into the opposition lobbies. 
For much of her time in parliament, Faithfull chaired the all-party group on children; from this base she co-ordinated the cross-party campaign for parliamentary time for the 'Children Act' of 1989. Much of the groundwork which had exposed the need for this act had been done in a succession of select committees with which she had a close direct or indirect association in the late 1970s and early 1980s. As the bill was regarded as politically uncontentious (a strange judgement, since it anticipated many of what were to become the social exclusion policies of the 1997 Labour administration), it was introduced in the Lords, where much of the detailed work was done. 
One great cause of Faithfull's was to alleviate the brutality with which the criminal justice system could treat children. She was a passionate advocate of the superior approach of the Scottish system of children's panels, and when the possibility of introducing similar reforms into England presented itself in the bill which was to become the 'Prosecution of Offences Act' of 1985, she lobbied energetically throughout. She met the responsible senior Home Office minister, who was unwise enough to patronize her; he, as a barrister, recognized her case, but said that there was no way that it could be a political priority. The faces of the condescending civil servants sheltering behind their minister looked a little different four days later when they sought to negotiate for terms during the tea break as an alternative to her defeating the government. She had persuaded most of the cross-benchers to support her, law lords, bishops, and all. 
Faithfull had other campaigns -- in particular for mental health and more effective care in the community. She was also most concerned about the resources for social work training, and once used her direct access to the prime minister to lead a delegation of social workers to meet with her. Theirs was not a popular cause of Mrs Thatcher's, but Faithfull, fearless of the handbag, told her at the start of the allotted hour that she should listen and not interrupt. A few days later a discreet announcement eased the crisis of resources. Her last campaign was against the Conservative government's plans to establish a network of commercially managed secure training centres for young offenders under the age of fifteen. She found the idea of profits being made from these children offensive, and challenged the need for more of these expensive facilities when inefficient use was being made of those that already existed. She also played an active role in many voluntary organizations. She was a vice-president of Barnardos; had been a founder, and for many years president, of the National Children's Bureau; was chair of Council of Caldecott, a therapeutic community for children; and gave her name to the Lucy Faithfull Foundation, which pioneered advanced child protection strategies in its work with abusers. 
A small, trim figure, usually moving at a brisk trot from one meeting to another, weighed down with at least two briefcases overflowing with paper, Faithfull was, until the end, a very familiar sight in the House of Lords, and to the host of those whom she invited to the succession of campaigning meetings she convened there. Indeed, on the day before her death she hosted a meeting of nearly a hundred friends and colleagues to discuss how the fiftieth anniversary of the 'Children Act' of 1948, to which they had all contributed so much, should be marked. Taken ill at the end of the meeting, and on her way to hospital, she passed the House's electronic screens announcing the order that would require every local authority to prepare a statutory plan for its children services. This had been a missing component of the 'Children Act' of 1989, which had been a major cause of hers all through the 1980s, and she had campaigned ceaselessly for this later 1996 legislation. 
Faithfull's last day in the House of Lords was a vignette of her life and summed up both her continuity and her persistence. She made no claims to intellectual brilliance, and could at times be impatient of detail and see or describe things in a broad-brush way. Often, this apparent vagueness could be deceptive, as many a minister found to his cost. She was remorseless in seeking briefing from those from whom she sought advice -- successions of notes in indecipherable handwriting would arrive. She died at St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 13 March 1996, following a stroke, and was cremated in Oxford. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 62152


Churchill, John Malcolm Thorpe Fleming (1906-1996), army officer, was born on 16 September 1906 in Ceylon, the son of Alec Churchill, director of public works in Hong Kong and Ceylon, and his wife, Elinor ('nee' Bell). He was educated at the Dragon School, Oxford; King William's College, Isle of Man; and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst; and was commissioned into the Manchester regiment in 1926. He was posted to the 2nd battalion, which he joined in Rangoon, and from the beginning of his service showed the unorthodox enterprise and daring which would characterize his subsequent career both in and after the army. Returning from a signals course at Poona, he rode a Zenith motorcycle 1500 miles across India (at one point crashing into a water buffalo, one of the most dangerous and unpredictable of wild animals), and took the Zenith over a railway bridge by pushing it along the line while himself stepping on the sleepers which had nothing between them. When the regiment moved to Maymyo he took part in 'flag marches', moving up and down the Irrawaddy by boat, and visiting villages to deter any of the people who might be contemplating robbery, murder, or dacoity. When not thus engaged he learned to play the bagpipes, tutored by the pipe major of the Cameron Highlanders, and became extremely proficient. However, when the regiment returned to England in 1936 he soon became bored with life at the depot, retired from the army, and set off with a friend on a grand tour of Europe. To finance this venture he played the bagpipes as an entertainer and took minor parts as an archer in films, for he was already an expert with the bow and arrow. He represented Great Britain at archery in the 1939 world championships. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Churchill was recalled by the army, and went with his regiment to France, where he used his bow and arrows (silent, accurate to 200 yards, and lethal) when on patrols in front of the German lines. In the general retreat in 1940 he was awarded an MC at the battle of L'Epinette (near Bethune), where his company was trapped by German forces. He fought back with two machine-guns (and his bow) until ammunition was exhausted and then extricated the remains of the company through the German lines at night. Later he was wounded and carried a bullet in his shoulder all his life. After returning to England he married, on 8 March 1941, Rosamund Margaret Denny ('b'. 1917), elder daughter of Sir Maurice Edward Denny, second baronet, shipbuilder, and his wife, Marjorie ('nee' Lysaght). They had two sons, Malcolm John Leslie ('b'. 1942) and Rodney Alistair Gladstone ('b'. 1947). 
In December 1941, Churchill (who had joined the commandos) was chosen to command the mixed force that raided Vaagso, in Norway, and destroyed shipping, fish-oil factories, and other enemy resources. Armed with a broad-bladed claymore and carrying his bow and arrows, he led his force ashore, playing his bagpipes. He was wounded in this action but recovered to lead (with his bagpipes) no. 2 commando in the landings at Messina in Sicily, and then at Salerno in Italy. At Salerno his commandos captured the important village of Pigoletti with its entire garrison. He was recommended for a VC but eventually was appointed DSO. 
Churchill's next assignment was to command a mixed commando force in the attack on Brac in the Adriatic. Led by him, the commandos captured Vidova Gora, a 2500 foot high mountain with heavily mined approaches, in a night attack, but he was wounded in the subsequent fighting and was taken prisoner by the Germans. Because of his name the Germans assumed (wrongly) that he must be a relation of the prime minister, and imprisoned him with various VIPs at Sachsenhausen (near Berlin) but, because of his military reputation, they also chained him to the floor for the first month. Later he tunnelled out of the camp with another officer, but he was recaptured and transferred to a camp in Austria. He escaped from this one night when the floodlights failed, walked across the Alps, and made contact with American forces in the Po valley. 
After the war Churchill became a parachutist, making his first jump at the age of forty, commanded a Scottish parachute battalion, and then transferred to the Seaforth Highlanders. In 1948 he was appointed second-in-command of the Highland light infantry, at that time on anti-terrorist duties in Palestine, after which he was second-in-command at the army apprentices school at Chepstow; he was then for two years chief instructor at the land/air warfare school in Australia, and then on the War Office selection board for officers. During this latter appointment he rode a surfboard a mile and a half up river on the Severn bore. His last post was as commandant (the first) of the outward bound school. 
After retiring from the army Churchill bought eleven steamboats, which he refurbished to make journeys from Richmond to Oxford. He also took part in motorcycle speed trials and made radio-controlled model boats, which he sold at a profit. Although he was nicknamed Mad Jack on account of his bravery and flamboyance, those whom Churchill commanded were well aware that his more colourful actions, such as dashing up landing beaches brandishing a dirk and dressed only in a kilt, were designed to intimidate the enemy. He was appointed DSO twice in addition to his MC, and was also mentioned in dispatches. When not in action he was quiet and unassuming, romantic and sensitive, an avid reader of history and poetry, knowledgeable about castles and trees, and compassionate to animals, even to hostile insects. He died of bronchopneumonia at St Peter's Hospital, Chertsey, Surrey, on 8 March 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 62157


Cornell, Muriel Amy (1906-1996), athlete, was born on 27 September 1906 at 2 Western Road, Mitcham, Surrey, the daughter of Frederick William Gunn, master grocer, and his wife, Beatrice Minnie, 'nee' Loosemore. She attended Wimbledon county school, where athletics was not part of the curriculum, and came to the sport via her brother and her fiance, Stanley Herbert (Stan) Cornell ('b'. 1903/4), a brush manufacturer (the son of Herbert Cornell, an accountant). Both men were founder members of Mitcham athletic club. In 1926 they encouraged her to join the newly formed women's section and, although she regarded herself primarily as a sprinter, she entered and won the long jump at an internal club competition in June of that year. Intrigued by her success -- obtained despite being tired after running the 220 yards -- she put in some practice, during which she leapt further than the existing world record. Mitcham's secretary then persuaded the organizer of that summer's British games at Stamford Bridge to include a woman's long jump, at which she broke the world mark officially. 
Within two months of taking up long jumping, Muriel Gunn was representing Britain at the second women's world games at Goteborg in Sweden. However, her inexperience let her down. A potential winning leap was reduced by her leaving a mark in the sand behind her actual landing point when she turned to speak to an official before leaving the pit. She and the winner, the Japanese Kinui Hitomi, exchanged the world record several times during the 1920s. Domestically her British all-comers record of 19 feet 21/2 inches, which she set at Birmingham in 1930 in a match against Germany, remained intact for twenty-three years. Before this she had increased the mark five times since she first broke the record. She married Stan Cornell on 15 August 1928. 
Muriel Cornell was not just a long jumper. At the Women's Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) championships she won the 100 metres hurdles in 1927, the 100 yards in 1928, and the 80 metres hurdles in 1930. In 1928 she broke the world record for the 80 metres hurdles in the semi-final but was beaten in the final itself. Of course her forte was the long jump, for which she held the title from the inaugural Women's AAA meeting in 1927 through to 1931. 
Cornell performed poorly at the trials for the Los Angeles Olympics of 1932, a matter later explained as being due to pregnancy. In January 1933 she gave birth to a daughter, Lorna, and then returned to competitive athletics, one of the first mothers to resume high standard track and field. Nevertheless a snapped Achilles tendon in a hurdle race ended her career as an athlete. She remained in the sport as a coach and administrator, serving for eleven years as secretary to the Women's AAA and managing the women's team at the 1936 Olympics in Berlin. 
Cornell's seventieth birthday party was attended by Olympian Harold Abrahams, who presented her with a gold medal inscribed 'from a fellow long jumper'. She herself was never able to jump at the Olympics, as the long jump did not become a recognized event for women until the London games in 1948. She died on 8 March 1996 of pneumonia, in the East Surrey Hospital, Redhill, Surrey. Her husband predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 62160


McKay, Margaret (1907-1996), politician and trade unionist, was born at 308 Union Road, Oswaldtwistle, Lancashire, on 22 January 1907, the eldest of the three children of Joseph McCarthy (1882/3-1911), a spinner in a cotton mill who later became an insurance agent, and his wife, Betty (or Betsy) Anne, 'nee' Catlow (1883-1963). Her father was a Roman Catholic of Irish extraction, whose political sympathies were Liberal; her mother was of a long-established Lancashire Methodist family, who in earlier generations had worked as handloom weavers. It was a strongly political household. Margaret's father died aged twenty-nine, leaving her mother, who worked as a weaver, to bring up three young infants; she remarried in 1915 and became a member of the British Socialist Party; she died in 1963. After elementary schooling Margaret began work as a factory half-timer in a weaving mill and then obtained a post in the advertising department of a local newspaper. The family enjoyed two years' respite from the depression after the First World War, when they lived with Irish relatives in New Bedford, Connecticut. 
Returning to Lancashire, Margaret McCarthy worked in a mill and joined the weavers' union in Accrington. She found companionship in the Independent Labour Party's Guild of Youth, but disagreed with the party's line towards the general strike (which she supported). In November 1926 she resigned from the guild, citing its failure to support unemployed young workers' entitlement to national assistance, and became a recruit to the Young Communist League, having earlier attended classes run by the National Council of Labour Colleges. In October 1927 she took part in a deputation of British trade unionists to the USSR, and was dazzled by the achievements of the revolution's first decade. In 1929 she moved to Burnley, where she was secretary of the local branch of the National Unemployed Workers' Movement, but in 1930 was required by the Communist Party to go to Glasgow, where she was a typist in the party's Scottish office. From June 1931 to June 1932 she worked in Moscow, monitoring the English press for the industrial section of the Comintern. Shortly after her return to Britain she left the Communist Party, apparently as a result of a dispute over a forged election document. Her commitment to, and then disenchantment with, communism dominated her autobiography. 
After 1932 McCarthy turned her energies to the Labour Party and trade union movement. She became general secretary of the National Union of Domestic Workers and on 2 September 1939, in Glasgow, married William McKay ('b'. 1893/4), a journeyman housepainter who was divorced; he was the son of Jasper McKay, gardener. They had a daughter, Morag. Her husband left them in 1943 (and must have died by 1966, when Margaret was described as a widow), and Morag was largely brought up by her grandmother. Margaret often observed that most women would benefit more from a union card than a wedding ring. During the Second World War she worked for the naval victualling department in Lancashire, and then held administrative posts with the Civil Service Clerical Association and the Transport and General Workers' Union, where she was especially concerned with German and Polish refugees. In 1951 she became chief women's officer of the Trades Union Congress; she wrote 'Women in Trade Union History' (1954) and contributed fashion advice to the magazine of the shop assistants' union. Her own fashion preferences included a love of hats, of which she was an avid collector; in appearance she was described as small, dark, bird-like, and lively, with energetic mannerisms. She did not get on with the TUC's general secretary, George Woodcock, and left in 1962 to become a public relations consultant for Unilever. 
In 1959, sponsored by the Transport and General Workers' Union, McKay stood unsuccessfully as Labour candidate for Walthamstow East, but at the general election of 1964 she was elected for Clapham. Bored by debates in the House of Commons, she became involved with the United Nations Convention on the Status of Women. At its meeting in Tehran, in 1965, she began her association with the Arab world which dominated the rest of her life. Re-elected for Clapham in 1966 -- despite the allegations of her opponent that she flitted between Middle Eastern capitals collecting trinkets from sheikhs -- she pursued an increasingly stormy political career. Following the Arab-Israeli war of 1967 she became one of the few parliamentary exponents of the Arab position, and founded the Anglo-Saudi Parliamentary Association. Through the Anglo-Jordan Alliance, funded by Sheikh Zayed (later president of the United Arab Emirates), she arranged for MPs to visit the Palestinian territories; she captured media attention by establishing a Palestinian refugee camp in Trafalgar Square, and by wearing Arab robes in the House of Commons. She read her parliamentary speeches to Fatah guerrillas and befriended King Hussein of Jordan, who honoured her by issuing a postage stamp depicting her cradling a refugee baby. During an American lecture tour, in 1969, she stirred controversy by alleging that Jewish MPs unduly influenced British foreign policy. 
While McKay repudiated charges of antisemitism, these episodes prompted questions about her funding and widened an existing rift with her constituency association and party whips, who despaired of her absences from parliament. Dubbed 'the woman on the Abu Dhabi omnibus', she was held to have neglected her Clapham constituents; in response, she accused her local party of being ignorant of the Middle Eastern situation, and of having been infiltrated by a Trotskyist-Zionist cell. Just before the general election of 1970 she pre-empted a vote on her future by her constituency party and announced her retirement. 
In 1971, at Sheikh Zayed's invitation, McKay emigrated to the United Arab Emirates, where she wrote on her adopted region and on women in history. Although continuing to arrange visits to the Middle East by British delegations, she became increasingly reclusive. She died on 1 March 1996 in Abu Dhabi, where she was buried in the Christian cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 62162


Clibborn, Stanley Eric Francis Booth- (1924-1996), bishop of Manchester, was born in London on 20 October 1924. He was the grandson of the eldest daughter, Catherine Booth-Clibborn, of General William Booth, the founder of the Salvation Army, and was the son of the Revd John Eric Booth-Clibborn (1895-1924), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Lucille, 'nee' Leonard (1903-1989). Educated at Highgate school, Middlesex, he was drafted into the Royal Artillery (1942-5) and the Royal Indian Artillery (1946-7), in which he became a temporary captain. After military service he read modern history at Oriel College, Oxford, receiving a second-class degree in 1950, and then prepared for ordination at Westcott House, Cambridge. He served as curate of Heeley in the Sheffield diocese of Bishop Leslie Hunter from 1952 to 1954, and subsequently in the Attercliffe parishes (then at the heart of the steel industry) from 1954 to 1956. 
In 1956 Booth-Clibborn made a major move to become training secretary of the Christian Council of Kenya (until 1963) and, after that, chief editor of East African Venture Newspapers (1963-7). At a time when the Church of England was still dominant in the Anglican communion, Africa gave him a refreshingly different slant on the church in England in his later ministry, as it had to face great changes in its position both at home and overseas. His years in Africa in an ecumenical job reinforced his commitment to the ecumenical movement for both the unity and renewal of the churches and for its emphasis on the cause of the poor and marginalized. He saw the urgency of preparing Christians in Kenya for leadership as the British empire was dismantled. This meant their taking politics seriously. His outspoken newspapers offended the more evangelical Christians who regarded politics as a dirty business, and also the colonial administrations, which the papers frequently criticized. For a time one of them was suppressed. When Booth-Clibborn realized that he would not again get editorial freedom he returned to the UK. However, Africa remained a continual concern for him and his family. On 15 February 1958 he had married Anne Roxburgh Forrester ('b'. 1926), the daughter of Professor William and Margaret Forrester, both influential members of the Church of Scotland, and this increased his ecumenical concern. His wife later became deputy chair of Christian Aid in the UK, with special responsibility for Africa. They had two sons and two daughters. 
On his return to the UK, Booth-Clibborn was asked to take charge of the Lincoln Centre Team ministry, but three years later he was called to the university church, Great St Mary's, Cambridge, which had a vigorous ministry to the town but also to students, particularly with its late Sunday evening service, to which speakers of national and international significance came. He maintained its vigour for nine years. By now his energy, communication skills, and leadership qualities were well known, and it was no surprise that in 1979 he was nominated to the see of Manchester, a diocese whose importance was equalled by its problems. The world's first industrial city was now the centre of a conurbation which was a northern metropolis, a dynamic city, with a rapidly changing industrial and commercial base. But the diocese included all the poorer areas and few of the more prosperous ones, except the city centre; and most of those who worked there lived outside the diocesan boundary. Of the just over 300 parishes, two-thirds were shortly to be classed as urban priority areas, or almost so, an indication of the problems of unemployment, crime, and vandalism which they faced. The church had inherited too much plant from the Victorian expansion, much of it inflexible and unsuitable, and many parishes were having a hard struggle. Booth-Clibborn liked Manchester but he could not in one diocese solve the wider problems of the Church of England. He reorganized his diocese into three episcopal areas, each of just over 100 parishes, which made it more efficient in terms of the existing structures of the Church of England and also more pastorally cared for. On a wider scale he played a full part in the general synod and its standing committee, and he took his membership of the House of Lords very seriously, hard as it was to fit it in with diocesan duties. He was a public figure, often called upon by the media for comments, especially in the early years, when little of public interest was said by the then archbishops of Canterbury and York. He always expressed himself clearly without evasions. His arrival in Manchester coincided with the Thatcher years in politics, and those who approved of them regarded him as a dangerous radical, but in fact he stood for the kind of consensus which was associated with the earlier post-war years. Broadly his theology and social ethics were those associated with William Temple, and were acceptable not only to the Labour Party, of which he was a member, but also to most Liberals and a considerable number of Conservatives, often called 'wets' by the new protagonists in that party. His one book, 'Taxes: Burden or Blessing?' (1991), was mainly a reasoned defence of direct taxation as a way of discharging civic responsibility, hostility to which was characteristic of the Thatcher years. 
Booth-Clibborn was a keen advocate of women's ministry and was the first moderator of the Movement for the Ordination of Women (1989-92). During his time in Manchester he also retained his connection with Africa, making several visits to Namibia and establishing a special relationship between that diocese and the Manchester diocese. Ill health dogged his retirement, after 1992, but his work in Manchester, which had already been recognized by Manchester Polytechnic in 1989, was further honoured by the conferment of the degree of DD by Manchester University in 1994. He died in Edinburgh (to where he and his wife had retired), following major heart surgery and a stroke, on 6 March 1996. He was cremated in Edinburgh on 12 March and his ashes were interred in Manchester Cathedral on 29 March. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 62163


Poynton, Sir (Arthur) Hilton (1905-1996), civil servant, was born on 20 April 1905 at 3 Fyfield Road, Oxford, the younger son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Arthur Blackburne Poynton (1867-1944), fellow of University College, Oxford, and his wife, Mary, daughter of J. Y. Sargent, fellow of Magdalen and Hertford colleges. His father was a distinguished classicist, curator of the Bodleian Library (1912-37), and master of University College (1935-7). Poynton's elder brother, John Blackburne Poynton (1900-1995), was also a gifted classical scholar, but chose to be a schoolmaster at Winchester College in preference to an Oxford career. 
Poynton was educated at Marlborough College and Brasenose College, Oxford, where he obtained a first in classical moderations (1925) and a second in 'literae humaniores' (1927). He joined the civil service in 1927, spent two years at the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and moved to the Colonial Office in 1929, his professional home for most of the next three and half decades. He was seconded to Sierra Leone in 1933-4 and to the Dominions Office for a short period in 1935. Between 1941 and 1943 he was on loan as a private secretary, first to Lord Beaverbrook, the minister of supply, and then to Oliver Lyttelton, the minister of production. On his return to the Colonial Office in 1943, he became an assistant secretary and head of its defence department. He was promoted assistant under-secretary of state in 1946. As deputy under-secretary of state between 1948 and 1959 he had overall responsibility for the economic division of the Colonial Office. In 1959 he became permanent under-secretary of state, a post that he held until his retirement in August 1966. He was appointed CMG in 1946, KCMG in 1949, and GCMG in 1964. On 12 July 1946 he married Elisabeth Joan ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of the Revd Edmund Williams, Congregational minister, of Exmouth; they had three children, John ('b'. 1947), Christopher ('b'. 1949), and Elisabeth ('b'. 1954). 
Poynton was the last head of an independent Colonial Office, the latter merging with the Commonwealth Relations Office to form the Commonwealth Office in 1966, before this department in turn merged with the Foreign Office in 1968 to create the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. At the beginning of his career colonial administration from London was concerned with good government, law and order, and sound finance. During and after the war the promotion of colonial development and welfare became another priority. By the end of his career -- and especially during the 'wind of change' era of the early 1960s, when no fewer than eighteen territories (all but eight of them African) became independent -- the work of the Colonial Office had become highly political. Poynton presided over this transition and indeed participated in it. He spent hours behind the scenes at Marlborough House conferences working on the details of independence constitutions. But it was not a climate that he particularly enjoyed: an old-fashioned and rather patrician administrator, he belonged to a different world. 
Over the whole of his career Poynton left a mark in three areas. First, he was a dogged opponent of the notion that colonial powers should be internationally accountable. At San Francisco in 1945 he played a significant role in drafting those chapters of the United Nations (UN) charter that dealt with non-self-governing territories. His defence department at the Colonial Office had been assigned responsibility for post-war reconstruction in this area of policy, and the British intention at the time was to keep UN supervision at arm's length. As the international critics of colonialism gathered strength at the UN in the 1950s and 1960s, Britain found itself under attack. Poynton, however, stood firm. He observed in 1962 that what he objected to was not 'international scrutiny of affairs in our Colonies in all circumstances but international scrutiny prompted solely by the fact that the territories are Colonial' (Hyam and Louis, 2.347). His stand was not welcome to some on his own side. Sir Hugh Foot, the United Kingdom representative at the UN, complained that 'Poynton in particular seems obsessed by the need to resist any attempt by the people at the UN to interest themselves in British colonial affairs'. According to Foot, Poynton saw no need to work closely on such matters with the Americans or Commonwealth countries, and he regarded the new countries of Africa and Asia as 'irritating busybodies' (ibid., 2.339). 
Poynton's second legacy concerned the future of the Colonial Office itself. As the number of territories for which it was responsible shrank, he was determined that the Colonial Office should not be reduced to what he described in 1963 as a 'rocks and islands Department' (Hyam and Louis, 1.338). He fought the Colonial Office corner, insisting at the time of the 1966 merger that his officials would have much to offer through their specialist expertise and advisory services. 
Finally, at the end of his career Poynton devoted considerable time to the future of those very small colonial territories for which independence was ruled out because they were either too small or too poor and very often both. He would not countenance any abdication of Britain's responsibilities. In 1959 the Treasury and the Commonwealth Relations Office wanted for financial reasons to transfer the Pacific colonies to Australia and New Zealand. Poynton responded:'I don't mind 'giving up' a territory in favour of another Commonwealth administration if that provides a more efficient administration & is what the people want. I 'do' object to being asked to 'give up' territories just because they are thought to be a nuisance to the Treasury or others!' (Hyam and Louis, 2.721). 
Upon retirement Poynton served between 1968 and 1977 as the director of the overseas branch of St John Ambulance. He was also a governor of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine from 1965 to 1977. Always somewhat donnish in manner, he was able to pursue his lifelong interest in classical literature. Between 1967 and 1976 he was treasurer of the Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies. He died of bronchopneumonia and heart failure at Mayday Hospital, Croydon, on 24 February 1996. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 62169


Armstrong, Terence Edward (1920-1996), polar scholar, was born on 7 April 1920 at Oxted, Surrey, the youngest of three sons in the family of six children of Thomas Mandeville Emerson Armstrong (1869-1922), director of the Commercial Union Insurance Company, and his wife, Jane Crawford Young (1881-1945). The Armstrong family came originally from northern England, close to the Scottish borders, where they were sheep farmers, but during the plantation period they moved to Northern Ireland and became linen merchants. Although both of Armstrong's parents were from Ulster they had moved to England before any of their children was born. Terence Armstrong attended Winchester College, and while in the upper school heard a talk in 1937 by the distinguished Russian scholar Sir Bernard Pares, encouraging the boys to study the Russian language. A master at Winchester agreed to learn Russian and to keep a few lessons ahead of any pupil, and Armstrong, who had already shown an aptitude for learning languages and was a competent French speaker, was one of the first to take up the challenge. 
In 1939 Armstrong went up to Magdalene College, Cambridge, to read modern languages, specifically French and German, but he was persuaded by the legendary Russian scholar Elizabeth Hill, who was recruiting for her new small department of Slavonic studies, to drop German in favour of Russian. He took first-class honours in French and Russian in part one of the modern languages tripos and graduated BA with a first-class degree in 1941. In the meantime, in 1940, he was obliged to join the army intelligence corps, where he was later commissioned. He served in north Africa, Italy, and the Netherlands, where he was parachuted behind enemy lines at Arnhem and wounded, but made his way back to allied lines south of the Rhine, and in Norway, where he was one of the first in the liberation of Oslo. On 20 December 1943 he married Iris Decima Forbes (1921-1999), a ballet dancer. 
In 1947, on demobilization, Armstrong returned to Cambridge and sought advice from Elizabeth Hill about his future. She advised him to apply to the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI) in the university, which was considering appointing a Russian specialist. Without any prior knowledge of polar studies Armstrong approached James Wordie, chairman of the institute's management committee and later master of St John's College, and applied for the post of research fellow in Russian studies. There was no formal interviewing board, but Armstrong also discussed the matter with the director of the institute, Launcelot Fleming (later bishop of Norwich), and Brian Roberts, who at that time was both acting librarian and archivist. Armstrong was appointed research fellow, and thus began a professional life of thirty-six years during which time he established for himself and for SPRI an international reputation for research in the polar north, and particularly the Russian Arctic. He was successively research fellow (1947-56), assistant director of research (1956-77), reader in Arctic studies ('ad hominem', 1977-83), and acting director (1982-3). He retired in 1983, but carried on as adviser on Arctic affairs and supervisor of students' work. 
Aside from his linguistics abilities, Armstrong became known as an economic and social geographer, yet he was never appointed as one: 'I never learned Geography as a single subject, but once appointed to SPRI I read all the standard textbooks in the subject. I was not driven by a boyish desire to find out about the Poles, but, like many others came to the subject by chance. (recorded interview, SPRI)' He was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and often addressed its meetings. The society gave him the Cuthbert Peek award in 1954 and the Victoria medal in 1978. 
Armstrong travelled widely in the Arctic, at first principally in Canada and Alaska, but as the cold war began to thaw he made many visits to Russia, including parts of Siberia seldom visited by scientists from the west. Through his writings his reputation as a polar scholar went ahead of him: using information gleaned from his daily reading of 'Pravda' he published in the SPRI house journal 'Polar Record' his analysis of shipping movements and mineral developments that were otherwise largely unknown to northern commentators within Russia itself. He forged lasting friendships with several Soviet academics, particularly academician Treshnikov, who later became the director of the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of St Petersburg, and Boris Kremer, a famous Soviet 'polyarnik' (polar explorer), who stated: ''In' 'Russia' 'his works are especially esteemed for their objectivity. Even though there was socialism and capitalism, what' 'Terence' 'did was tell the truth'' (Heap; italics in original). 
Armstrong's doctoral thesis was published as 'The Northern Sea Route: Soviet Exploitation of the North East Passage', and at the time of his death he was the British representative on the international advisory committee on the northern sea route. In 1958 he published 'The Russians in the Arctic: Aspects of Soviet Exploration and Exploitation of the Far North, 1937-1957', and in 1965 'Russian Settlement in the North'. After a flight across the north pole from Thule in northern Greenland, courtesy of the RAF in 1953, and a trip through the north-west passage in 1954 in the maiden voyage of HMSC 'Labrador', he researched ice conditions in the Arctic and published an 'Atlas of Sea Ice North of the USSR', and contributed with two colleagues at SPRI, Charles Swithinbank and Brian Roberts, to an 'Illustrated Glossary of Snow and Ice Terms', published in 1966. 
In 1960 Armstrong became, with Eila Campbell of Birkbeck College, London, joint honorary secretary of the Hakluyt Society, a post he retained for twenty-five years. He saw more than fifty publications through the press, including his edition of 'Yermak's Campaign in Siberia' (1966). He was a frequent traveller in the north of North America and was awarded in 1970 a scholarship by the national Science Foundation to contribute to the US programme 'Man and the Arctic' and enjoyed a 'half-sabbatical' at the campus of Fairbanks of the University of Alaska. While there he became good friends with Graham Rowley, science adviser to the Canadian department of Indian affairs and northern development, George Rogers, senior economic adviser to the state of Alaska, and Frank Darnell, a leading educator among the indigenous peoples of the Arctic and sub-Arctic. Together and with others they created a programme of seminars on cross-cultural education in the circumpolar north. Armstrong, Rogers, and Rowley published in 1978 'The Circumpolar North', a major textbook the value of whose survey of scientific, political, and economic themes lasted some twenty years. 
Armstrong became, in 1964, a foundation fellow of Clare Hall, one of the new graduate colleges in Cambridge, and was the first senior tutor in 1966 and vice-president in the 1980s. A former president of the college, Sir Michael Stoker, wrote: 'I never heard him speak ill of any-one -- I suspect that during nearly three decades Terence was the most popular member of Clare Hall. Everyone loved him' (Heap). He had a ready wit and an infectious laugh. He loved walking and music: he had taken up both oboe and cor anglais while at Winchester and for over forty years he contributed to the musical life of Cambridge. He was a confirmed member of the Church of England all his life and a regular attender of the parish church at Harston, Cambridgeshire, where for most of his professional life he and his family lived in a beautiful Queen Anne house, Harston House. 
Armstrong died at his home on 21 February 1996, having suffered latterly from Parkinson's disease. He was cremated and his ashes were buried at the Cambridge crematorium on 1 March 1996. His wife died on 17 June 1999 and they were survived by two sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 62171


Bancroft, Ian Powell, Baron Bancroft (1922-1996), civil servant, was born at Risedale Maternity Home, Barrow in Furness, Lancashire, on 23 December 1922, the only son of Alfred Ernest Bancroft (1886-1954), a schoolmaster who later became an inspector of schools, and his wife, Lilian, 'nee' Stokes (1889-1977). He was educated at Coatham School, Cleveland, where he became head of school, and from where he won a scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, to read English. Graduating with a second-class degree in 1942, he immediately joined the rifle brigade, serving with the 7th armoured division throughout the landings in Normandy and the advance through France and Germany. Demobilized with the rank of captain in 1945, he returned briefly to Balliol College for a year's further study. 
Bancroft joined the civil service in 1947 as one of the 'reconstruction' entrants and was posted to the Treasury, where he was quickly marked out as someone who had the potential to go very high in the service. He was soon made private secretary to Sir Henry Wilson Smith, a second secretary, and then assistant private secretary, first under William Armstrong and then under Louis Petch, to the chancellor of the exchequer, R. A. Butler. When Butler left the Treasury on becoming lord privy seal in December 1955, he took Bancroft with him as his private secretary; he later described Bancroft as 'the best Private Secretary I ever had' ('The Independent'). Before returning to the Treasury Bancroft served a spell in the Cabinet Office. Once back in the Treasury he was promoted to assistant secretary in the public expenditure divisions. In 1964 he became principal private secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer, first to Reginald Maudling and then, on the change of government, to James Callaghan. Meanwhile, on 28 June 1950 he had married Jean Hilda Patricia Swaine (1925-2013), daughter of David Richard Swaine, an inspector of schools. They had two sons and a daughter, and enjoyed a long and very happy marriage. 
On leaving the private office in 1966 Bancroft was promoted to under-secretary in the establishment side of the Treasury. Following the recommendations of the Fulton commission on the civil service, this part of the Treasury was hived off in 1968 to become the major part of the newly created Civil Service Department, under William Armstrong as permanent secretary and head of the home civil service. Bancroft's duties there included responsibility for the machinery of government division of the Civil Service Department, which was involved in the many proposals to change the functions of departments and the boundaries between them in which successive prime ministers liked to indulge. One of the several major departmental changes in which he played an important part at this time was the proposed amalgamation of three departments -- housing and local government, transport, and public building and works -- to form the Department of the Environment. Once the decision to amalgamate was taken Bancroft was sent to the Department of the Environment to assist the process by being appointed its director-general of establishments on promotion to deputy secretary. He had the task of overseeing the merging of the central organizations of three departments with quite different structures, traditions, and priorities, into a single co-ordinating division. Such mergers inevitably affect adversely the career prospects of many individuals and can damage staff morale generally. Bancroft was helped by the fact that he was an outsider and not suspected of favouring one of the merging departments against the others. By 1972 he had helped his permanent secretary to create a well-integrated department which was functioning well and in which morale was high. He had as a result gained a reputation as an organizer and manager who was particularly good in the field of staff relations, and this strongly influenced the rest of his career. 
Bancroft's success at the Department of the Environment led to his next step when, at the end of 1972, he was moved to customs and excise with the expectation that he would take over as head of that department when its permanent secretary, Sir Louis Petch, reached retiring age a few months later. There was, however, a change of plan as the Civil Service Department needed him back. Sir William Armstrong, its permanent secretary, was being used by the prime minister, Edward Heath, as his principal adviser on economic policy, in preference to relying on the Treasury. The main economic problem facing the government was how to reduce the level of unemployment, which was regarded as unacceptably high, yet at the same time contain the rising pressure in the economy on costs and prices. The government was attempting to deal with these problems by a strategy which combined a relatively expansionary fiscal policy with a tight control of public sector pay (and later of pay and prices generally). This involved actions which breached previous understandings about the principles governing civil service pay, and was not only producing unrest and low morale in the civil service generally but also a call for industrial action by some members of civil service unions. Armstrong did not have the time to deal with these civil service problems. A new post of second permanent secretary was therefore created in the Civil Service Department, and Bancroft was brought back to fill it on promotion. He made his primary objective the removal of some of the resentment and ill feeling among civil servants, by demonstrating that civil service managers were aware of the problems that the civil service unions were experiencing and by seeking through negotiation in the civil service Whitley councils to find ways of dealing with the more sensitive issues. While he was successful in improving relations between civil service managers and staff, this could not lead to any major change in the Heath government's policies, which became more rigid with the passing of legislation to enforce the control of prices and incomes. Even with some relaxation after the change of government in early 1974, the inherent conflict between central government economic strategies and the traditional way of negotiating public sector remuneration remained. The continuing problems of the economy at large meant that pay issues, low morale, and industrial unrest would overhang civil service management for many years and severely affect the last period of Bancroft's civil service career. 
At the end of 1975 Bancroft went back to the Department of the Environment as its permanent secretary. It had already seemed likely that he would become the next head of the home civil service and that a spell as a departmental permanent secretary would provide him with valuable experience. In the Department of the Environment he had again to deal with issues that required sensitive handling. Relations between central and local government were deteriorating. The Layfield report on local government had pointed to the excessive dependence of local government on central government finance, and had recommended major changes in the financing arrangements in order to give local authorities more independence and responsibility. These proposals, while welcomed by local government bodies, were not in the circumstances of the time acceptable to central government. Local authorities were already increasingly overspending the public expenditure allocations agreed by ministers, and the government feared that this tendency would be augmented by greater independence. With public expenditure as a whole growing faster than central government wanted, the mood at the centre was for more rather than less control of local government spending, particularly in the context of general public expenditure cuts in 1976. Local authorities were therefore becoming both disappointed and resentful. 
The general direction of policy towards local government fell to the Department of the Environment, although other Whitehall departments had degrees of responsibility for some services administered through local government bodies. Bancroft's experience of working with departments in the context of Treasury expenditure control was valuable in securing the co-ordination and cohesion of the approaches of central government to local government issues, and at the same time he quickly established good personal relationships with local government leaders. In most respects the amalgamation of departments into the Department of the Environment, which Bancroft had earlier done so much to bring about, had proved to be one of the more successful changes in the machinery of government. 
The decision of the prime minister in 1976 to split the Department of the Environment and create a separate Department of Transport therefore came as a great shock to Bancroft, as it seemed to be about to destroy the work of many civil servants over several years. However, close and friendly co-operation between Bancroft and Peter Baldwin, who became permanent secretary of the Department of Transport, enabled a number of collaborative functions to be retained, especially the maintenance of common staff lists and a common staffing organization. Once again Bancroft's way of discussing issues with his colleagues and the staff associations concerned, and his sensitive handling of the staff most affected by the change, reduced the upset created by the reorganization. 
Bancroft's experience and achievements made him a strong candidate to succeed Sir Douglas Allen as head of the home civil service when Allen retired at the end of 1977. But by then the continuing problems of morale and increasing militancy over pay issues in the civil service were having to be handled in a political environment which had become far more critical of all aspects of public administration. On appointment as head of the civil service Bancroft found that the economic situation and policies of the time gave very little room for manoeuvre. His problems increased with the change of government in 1979. The new prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, was determined to improve the efficiency of the civil service by bringing in private sector methods and by cutting staff numbers. She was very critical of what she regarded as the negative attitudes of senior civil servants when they were made to contemplate new ideas. Bancroft accepted that the civil service would have to be reduced substantially and that the Civil Service Department would have to play a key role in that reduction, but he felt that the management problems with which his senior colleagues would have to grapple as numbers were reduced and posts eliminated were insufficiently understood in no. 10. His attempt to persuade the prime minister that some of her criticisms of senior civil servants were unfair was seen as an example of the weakness which the prime minister believed permeated government departments generally and the Civil Service Department in particular. He persuaded the prime minister to give a dinner to permanent secretaries at which he hoped that a better understanding might be achieved, if problems could be discussed informally in a relaxed atmosphere. It proved to be a disaster. The explanation of difficulties merely persuaded the prime minister that very few of the permanent secretaries were 'one of us', and she ended the dinner unexpectedly early. From that moment Bancroft's position became increasingly untenable. 
The prime minister's decision in November 1981 to abolish the Civil Service Department and divide its functions between the Treasury and the Cabinet Office brought to an abrupt end the concept of a separate department for civil service affairs which had been the major recommendation of the Fulton commission's report of 1969. Bancroft's distinguished career as a civil servant came to a premature and distressing end along with his department. It also permanently affected the balance of top civil service posts. The functions of the head of the civil service were initially divided between the secretary of the cabinet and the permanent secretary of the Treasury as joint heads of the service, but on the subsequent retirement of the then permanent secretary of the Treasury, Sir Douglas Wass, in 1983, the cabinet secretary became the head of the civil service. Bancroft was bitter about the decision to abolish his department but accepted it with dignity, and did what he could to ensure that his colleagues did not suffer unduly. In recognition of his public services, in 1982 he was offered and accepted a life peerage (he had already been made CB in 1971, KCB in 1975, and GCB in 1979). He became a cross-bencher. 
After leaving the civil service Bancroft took on a number of non-executive directorships, including the Rugby Group, Grindlays Bank, Bass, and Sun Life (of which he had a spell as deputy chairman). He was a visiting fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, from 1973 to 1981, and chairman of the Royal Hospital and Home, Putney, from 1984 to 1988. Despite these commitments, however, he continued to devote attention to civil service affairs, and in speeches and lectures expressed his concern that the unity and integrity of the civil service was being endangered by over-rapid changes, the full consequences of which had not been adequately considered. He became a very effective speaker on these issues in the House of Lords, where his turn of phrase and keen wit injected a sharp sting into his criticism of government policies affecting the public services. Especially irate about the Conservative government's proposal in 1996 to privatize the recruitment and assessment agency of the civil service commission, he played a very persuasive role in the debate on that proposal in the House of Lords, which led to a government defeat in the relevant vote there and to the setting up of a select committee of the House of Lords to report on the public service. But by that time Bancroft was too ill to serve on that committee himself. He lived to see the special report of the select committee, which recommended that the recruitment and assessment agency should not be privatized, and the rejection of that recommendation by the government, which gave a contract to a private company. In February 1999 the Labour government announced that the selection stages of the fast stream recruitment process would be returned to direct civil service management when that contract expired in 2001; Bancroft would have been delighted. 
As a civil servant Bancroft was conscientious and hard working, calm, and fully in control, taking care to plan and organize his work in co-operation with his colleagues, and an excellent team leader. He was well liked and highly regarded by all his staff and colleagues and by the ministers he served, especially valued for his support as a private secretary. He was always concerned about the well-being of those who worked with him and saw great virtues in the long-established traditions of the civil service, as typified in many of the senior officials under whom he had worked in his younger days. Having entered the civil service at a time when memories of wartime co-operation between government and both sides of industry were strong and there was a high degree of consensus on economic policy issues, he always looked for ways to find solutions to problems by securing agreement on policies after dispassionate analysis. The integrity of the service, the absence of corruption, and the outlawing of patronage were objectives he fought for and was prepared to defend against all proposals he regarded as damaging to them. He became head of the civil service when many of those traditions he valued were being questioned, and he greatly regretted his inability to persuade politicians that some of the proposed changes affecting the service could be severely damaging both to standards of service and to the integrity of government. Unlike many of his colleagues he appeared to enjoy being cross-examined by parliamentary committees about the work of his departments, seeing this as an opportunity to foster a better understanding of departmental objectives. By contrast, however, in the light of the difficulties he experienced, he was reluctant to be interviewed by the media while a civil servant, and warned his senior colleagues against undue exposure. But he no longer felt the need for such restraint after he had left the civil service, and he became a very effective participant and campaigner in various public causes. He died at Trinity Hospice, London, on 19 November 1996, of liver cancer, and was cremated on 25 November. He was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 62173


Hollingsworth, Dorothy Frances (1916-1994), nutritionist and civil servant, was born on 10 May 1916 at 15 Honister Avenue, Newcastle upon Tyne, the daughter of Arthur Hollingsworth, pharmacist, and his wife, Dorothy Coldwell. After secondary education at Newcastle upon Tyne Church High School she entered King's College, Newcastle (Durham University), where she achieved a second-class BSc honours degree in chemistry in 1937. She dropped her original intention of becoming a teacher and, at the suggestion of her general practitioner who regarded nutrition as an up-and-coming field, decided to take the diploma of dietetics at the school of dietetics in the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, under the pioneer dietician Sister Ruth Pybus. This course involved three months at the domestic science college at Atholl Crescent, as well as some teaching by members of Edinburgh University's biochemistry department, and some nursing experience. 
Hollingsworth qualified in 1939 and three months later obtained a temporary unpaid summer locum post in the Royal Northern Hospital, London. After the outbreak of war, however, she stayed on, becoming the senior dietician running the hospital's dietetics department, before successfully applying for a job with the Ministry of Food in 1941. She joined a group in the ministry's statistics division, working on the Wartime Food Survey, based at Colwyn Bay in north Wales. The aim of the survey, begun in July 1940, was to find out how well the population was coping with wartime food rationing. Hollingsworth learned about statistics and economics from her colleagues in the ministry and was initially responsible for working out, from the survey findings, the nutritional composition of the food consumed and the implication of the results. The data were collected by the London Press Exchange on behalf of the ministry, and at first only urban working-class households in seven cities were included. In 1945 the exercise was continued as the Family Food Survey, and in 1950 it was extended to a national sample of the population, becoming the National Food Survey. The survey was used to assess the effects of the end of rationing in 1954, and gave rise to some concern about the deterioration of the diet of poorer and larger families. It became a valued resource not only for government, but also for scientists and the food industry. Hollingsworth was associated with the survey throughout her period in government service, and later continued to be a member of and consultant to the National Food Survey Committee. 
In 1945 Hollingsworth and the nutritional part of the food survey were transferred to the scientific adviser's division of the Ministry of Food under Sir Jack Drummond. In 1949 she succeeded Magnus Pyke as principal scientific officer in the division in charge, and took charge of its nutrition bureau. She remained responsible for a range of nutrition-related work for the next twenty-one years, during which time there was a series of divisional reorganizations. Other administrative changes included the merger of the Ministry of Food with the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries to form the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in 1955. Latterly Hollingsworth's title was head of food science advice branch. Her remit covered all aspects of scientific information in nutrition, and aspects of food science, statistics, and education. Her responsibilities varied over time but included a laboratory concerned with the nutritional value of food, an experimental kitchen and taste-panel studies, an experimental factory in Aberdeen which made dehydrated foods, and food defence work. In 1958 she was appointed OBE. 
In 1970 Hollingsworth left the civil service and was appointed director of the British Nutrition Foundation (BNF), an organization which aimed to emulate a body funded by the food industry in the United States. The BNF had been founded in 1967 on the initiative of Alastair Frazer, professor of medical biochemistry and pharmacology at Birmingham University, who was the first director-general. Hollingsworth succeeded Frazer after he died in 1969, and she remained in the post until 1977. The BNF hoped to disburse funds for nutritional research donated from industry, on the basis of the advice of an independent scientific committee. However, insufficient money was forthcoming for this objective to be pursued on any scale. The organization then began to concentrate on educational activities. Hollingsworth had to keep up to date with knowledge while responding to enquiries from the press and other sources and organizing events on behalf of the foundation. With only a small staff she found this frustrating and tiring. 
Hollingsworth edited two volumes based on BNF conferences, 'Nutritional Problems in a Changing World' (1973) and, with Elizabeth Morse, 'People and Food Tomorrow' (1976). Earlier, in 1957, she published the revised edition of a work by Jack Drummond and Anne Wilbraham, 'The Englishman's Food: a History of Five Centuries of English Diet'. This had first been published in 1939, and Hollingsworth added a chapter updating the book. In 1969, with Hugh Sinclair, she published 'Food and the Principles of Nutrition', a revised edition of Robert Hutchison's 'Food and the Principles of Dietetics'. 
Hollingsworth was a member of many professional and scientific organizations. She served as chairman of the British Dietetic Association (1947-9) and as honorary secretary of the Nutrition Society (1962-5). She was a member of the dietetics board of the Council for Professions Supplementary for Medicine (1962-74), and the joint Agricultural Research Council and Medical Research Council committee on food and nutrition research (1970-74). She was a fellow of the Royal Institute of Chemistry, the Institute of Biology, and the Institute of Food Science and Technology. After her formal retirement she served as secretary-general of the International Union of Nutritional Sciences. Her recreations as given in 'Who's Who' included talking to intelligent and humorous friends, appreciation of music, theatre, countryside, and gardening -- interests reflected in her membership of the University Women's Club and the Arts Theatre Club. She died at Bromley Hospital, Bromley, Kent, on 16 February 1994. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 62183


Susan Mowbray (1829-1911)], youngest child of William Thomas, a Bridgwater innkeeper, and his wife, Hannah. She trained as a teacher at Whitelands College in London from 1843 to 1845. The Mowbrays had seven surviving children, two sons and five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 62184


Stockenstrom, Sir Andries, first baronet (1792-1864), colonial official and politician, was born in Cape Town on 6 July 1792, the son of Andries Stockenstrom, (1757-1811), a Swedish-born Cape official of the Dutch East India Company and his colonial-born wife, Maria Geertruyda, 'nee' Broeders ('bap'. 1764). Like many so-called Cape Dutch families, the Broeders' founding maternal ancestor was actually a seventeenth-century Guinean slave. From 1795, when the British took over Cape Colony, Stockenstrom's father served the new administration. Stockenstrom spent six years at a Cape Town secondary school, Tot Nut van't Algemeen ('c'.1802-1808), an institution which was a product of the Dutch enlightenment but in its colonial manifestation probably contributed to Stockenstrom's sense of African identity. In 1811 his father was killed while leading a colonial militia, and the young Stockenstrom took over his post as commander of the burgher forces. He served in the Cape corps (1811-15), was landdrost (magistrate) of Graaf Reinet (1815-25), commissioner-general for the eastern Cape (1828 and 1833), member of the advisory council (1827 and 1833), lieutenant-governor of the eastern Cape (1836-9), commander of the burgher militia (1847), and member of the Cape parliament (1854-7). On 8 December 1828 he married Elsabe Helena (died 1889), daughter of Gysberg Henry Maasdorp, a woman renowned for possessing 'the strongest Christian principles': they had two sons and three daughters. 
Required to play a leading role in Cape society from a young age, Stockenstrom soon developed a paternalistic relationship with frontier Afrikaners and creolized Khoisan (Hottentot) and slave populations. His strong sense of duty was constantly frustrated by his belief that the British administrators he served were the inexperienced, ill-informed, and corrupt beneficiaries of nepotism. He valued British constitutional and legal systems but believed that 'Anglo-saxon' 'colonialism' was motivated by greed and characterized by hypocrisy. Were 'plunder' and 'extermination' deemed profitable, he argued, then metropolitan evangelicals would claim these as 'the work of a beneficent providence'. Dutch colonialism, guilty, he acknowledged, of similar 'aggressions', never justified itself 'by the pretence of spreading the 'Bible' or civilization'. His public career and personality were marked by these convictions ('Autobiography', 124-5). 
When Dutch rule ended, Khoisan gatherer-hunters and pastoralists had either been incorporated into the colony, or had withdrawn beyond its boundaries, but colonists had achieved little more than ineffectual stalemate with the more powerful Xhosa-speaking farmers beyond the eastern frontier. The introduction of the British army and, after 1820, British settlers, led to increasingly bitter wars as the newcomers combined superior fire power and numbers with an unprecedented ruthlessness. The Xhosa were increasingly 'cleared' from their essential grazing lands and were driven to ever-expanding retaliation and resistance. Frontier violence was further exacerbated by a 'reprisal' system permitting burgher patrols to invade Xhosa territory in search of allegedly stolen cattle. At the first Xhosa homestead such patrols encountered, stock would be seized regardless of whether there was local evidence of involvement in rustling. Stockenstrom opposed the reprisal system, recommending that the Cape cease to act as if it had authority over African lands beyond the colony's boundaries. His 'treaty system' proposed recognizing the sovereignty of chiefdoms, and sought to maintain the peace by diplomacy. Proof of cattle theft would require acceptance by both sides and restoration of stolen animals would need the active involvement of colonial officials and the Xhosa polity. 
After Stockenstrom's evidence to the 1835 House of Commons select committee on Aborigines, his policy proposals led the colonial secretary, Lord Glenelg, to appoint him lieutenant-governor of the eastern Cape. Returning in the aftermath of the devastating 1835 war with instructions to revoke the annexation of Xhosa territory recently designated as Queen Adelaide Land, he became increasingly unpopular among new and old settlers. His key role in drafting ordinance 50, the 'Hottentot Emancipation Act' of 1828, and his opposition to the reprisal system brought enemies, not only among influential Grahamstown British settlers and their press but also among British administrators and the British officer corps. Their efforts to undermine his system ensured that it was eventually deemed a failure. Stockenstrom's own sense of failure in these years derived from his inability to dissuade the land-hungry Afrikaners of the eastern Cape from abandoning the colony in the emigration afterwards known as the great trek. At this point Glenelg lost office, and Stockenstrom his protector, and the new colonial secretary acceded to his enemies and dismissed him. In 1840, for the first time in his life, and to the delight of his enemies, Stockenstrom, though made first baronet on 29 April, was no longer a public servant. 
In 1846, war broke out between the Xhosa and the colony, the remaining, mostly prosperous, Afrikaners refused to serve in the militia under British officers, judging these to have provoked the Xhosa and to be dangerously ignorant of bush warfare. Without Afrikaner support, however, the defeat of the Xhosa promised to be much more difficult and expensive. Reluctantly, Stockenstrom was persuaded by the governor to lead the burgher forces, the only way of ensuring colonial volunteers. Suffering great physical hardship but succeeding militarily, Stockenstrom then made efforts to restore the peace by allowing the vanquished Xhosa to maintain their independence. His proposals were, however, overturned by a new governor, Sir Harry Smith, who, intent upon dealing the Xhosa a crushing defeat, annexed their territory and renamed it British Kaffraria. Stockenstrom corresponded with the colonial secretary, Earl Grey, demanding a comprehensive inquiry into frontier policy and warning that Smith's actions would precipitate a greater crisis. Grey's refusal proved the turning point in Stockenstrom's career. He now threw his energies into a campaign for self-government. Having long opposed the granting of representative institutions to the colony, he finally conceded that the existing system prevented the reform of frontier policy. At much the same time an agitation for representative government had emerged among Cape Town's editors and its middle classes who resented the control over patronage and economic policy which the governor and his nominated legislative council held. This agitation was given extra impetus in the widespread protests against the colonial secretary's attempts to settle convicts at the Cape. 
Since Stockenstrom's frontier policy was widely supported by Cape Town's leaders it was possible for a coalition to emerge between those who wished to limit the expansion of the colony, because it promised endless external warfare and internal rebellion, and those who saw that such expansion required the presence of a strong -- inevitably imperial -- state. Such a state, they recognized, would place severe limits on an accountable property-holding system of government. Stockenstrom therefore found himself in an alliance with Cape Town's English and Dutch-Afrikaner merchants, its professional men, and its white and coloured artisans and petty traders. In the western Cape their campaign won the support of small-town traders and Dutch-Afrikaner wine and wheat farmers. In the east Stockenstrom leadership won the backing of similar groups -- those who were the beneficiaries of colonial stability and opposed to the expansionism of the Grahamstown party -- Afrikaner wool farmers, graziers, and their dependants. Moreover, because groups of eastern Khoisan peoples crossed over to the Xhosa in the war of 1851, Stockenstrom and others made strenuous efforts to win the loyalty of western Khoisan and former slaves by promising them access to a property franchise in any future Cape parliament. 
Only those dependent on government patronage, or with an interest in territorial expansion and land speculation, or those who profited from the commissariat trade and illegal gun trafficking, opposed Stockenstrom and his allies in their campaigns. Facing a complete breakdown of consent, the colonial administration conceded an elected constitution-drafting committee and Stockenstrom was returned with by far the largest number of votes polled. The poll gave him much satisfaction, but ultimately he and the other 'popular' members were again outflanked. Representative rather than responsible government was granted, and, in the face of further expansion of the colony's boundaries, Stockenstrom resigned and retired to Europe. He died of bronchitis in London on 15 March 1864 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. A portrait was left to the South African Library in Cape Town. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Gysbert Henry (1841-1912), army officer and member of the legislative council of Cape Colony. The baronetcy became extinct in 1957. 


@@@@@


doc= 62186


Bunyard, Edward Ashdown (1878-1939), nurseryman and pomologist, was born on 14 December 1878 at 74 King Street, Maidstone, the eldest son of 
George Bunyard was at the centre of this activity. His nursery provided many of the trees for the new orchards and George was a key figure in the Royal Horticultural Society (RHS) and the Worshipful Company of Fruiterers -- the main organizations that, through fruit shows and exhibitions, were encouraging the public to buy home-grown produce. George helped stage the historic National Apple Congress of 1883 and the Great Fruit Show at the Guildhall in 1896, for which he was made a freeman of the City of London, and he was among the first sixty to receive the prestigious RHS Victoria medal of honour in 1897. Throughout this period his firm was staging prize-winning exhibitions and he held many prominent positions on horticultural and trade societies: member of the RHS council, 1904-13; member of the fruit and vegetable committee from 1880 and chairman 1901-13; and master of the Worshipful Company of Fruiterers, 1906. 
Bunyard was also a successful author: 'Fruit Farming for Profit', published in 1881, went into six editions and 'The Fruit Garden' (1904), which he wrote with Owen Thomas, Queen Victoria's head gardener, became the amateurs' bible. He contributed the fruit section to 'The Century Book of Gardening' (1899), and wrote 'A Book on Apples and Pears' (1910), 'Handbook of Hardy Trees and Shrubs' (1907), and 'England's National Flower', on roses, his favourite flowers. He died at his home, The Crossways, Mereworth, near Maidstone, on 22 January 1919, survived by his wife. 
Edward Bunyard was educated privately at home with his brothers and sisters, followed by a period in France with leading nurserymen, before he entered the family business in 1896. By the time he took over on his father's death it had become one of the foremost British nurseries, with an international reputation for fruit. He directed the business until 1939, when he retired and became librarian of the RHS's Lindley Library in London, and editor of the society's publications. He remained a bachelor. His main interest was in pomology, the study of fruit. He made many distinguished contributions through papers and books: 'The Handbook of Hardy Fruits' (1920) and 'Stone and Bush Fruits' (1925) cover the main cultivars of all the fruits then grown in Britain and remain standard reference works. He was acknowledged as Britain's leading pomologist, the successor to the great Victorian authority Dr Robert Hogg. In recognition of his work in systematic pomology, Bunyard was made a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1914, and sat on its council from 1924 to 1927. He was ideally placed to study fruit, with a wealth of material growing in the nursery around his home at Allington. The Bunyard nursery claimed '800 kinds true to name'. He was also a gifted bibliophile, and sought out rare books about fruit, creating an extensive library. His botanic and historical studies included many other plants and particularly roses. 'Old Garden Roses' has inspired many gardeners to plant the 'older roses' since its publication in 1936. 
Like his father, Edward Bunyard was a prominent figure in the horticultural world: council member of the RHS, 1924-39; chairman of its fruit and vegetable committee, 1930-39, and chairman of the library committee, 1925-39. He was closely involved with the work of the newly established government funded fruit research institutes -- particularly East Malling Research Station, near Maidstone. In 1919 he founded, edited, and published the 'Journal of Pomology', which he ran for two years until it was adopted as the official organ of East Malling and Long Ashton Research Station. Bunyard was a member of the advisory committee to the national fruit trials formed in 1922, and also a key figure in setting up the associated national fruit collections, now internationally renowned and located at Brogdale, Faversham, Kent. 
Edward Bunyard was a prolific writer, not only of scholarly works but also of lighter articles and books on the pleasures of the table. 'The Anatomy of Dessert', published in 1929, encompassed all the temperate fruits that could be enjoyed at the grand finale of dinner -- the fresh fruit dessert -- which was at its zenith in Victorian England. He wrote lyrically of the nuances of flavour to be found in fruit, especially the apple, and revived interest in many old favourites. The book was widely acclaimed and remains treasured by all fruit lovers. In the second (1933) edition he included a section on the best wines to enjoy with fruit, and in 1937 wrote 'The Epicure's Companion' in collaboration with his sister Lorna. Bunyard's delight in good food and wine led to his close association with the London dining clubs -- the Wine and Food Society and the Saintsbury Club -- to which he brought up baskets of fruit and nuts from the nursery, and organized tastings. 
Bunyard had embarked on a career in broadcasting with the 'radio gardener', C. H. Middleton, shortly before his tragic death on 19 October 1939. It was said that he had become extremely depressed over the war and this had led to his taking his life. He shot himself in the Royal Societies Club, St James's, London, with the gun he used for frightening the bullfinches from the cherries at the nursery. Bunyard died on the way to St George's Hospital, London. 
Edward's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 62187


Villiers, Susan Alice (1863-1945), nurse, was born on 6 September 1863 at Chase Vale, Edmonton, Middlesex, the eighth of the nine children of John Fitzpatrick Villiers (1815/16-1874), barrister-at-law of Gray's Inn, and his wife, Mary Ann(e) ('bap'. 1825, died 1899), daughter of William Sharp, a farmer of Upwell, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Mary. The product of a middle class family, she was privately educated. However, the death of her father in 1874 appears to have strained the family's finances. By 1892 she was twenty-eight and perhaps regarded as a confirmed spinster; it was therefore appropriate for her to support herself in a career suitable to her station in life. In May that year she commenced three years of general nurse training at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. Probably because of her social class she began as a special probationer. However, in November 1892 she became an ordinary probationer, which enabled her to benefit from a wider range of experience. She qualified in April 1895 and was appointed staff nurse at Bart's in May, working in that capacity until she resigned in March 1896. 
Various factors are likely to have influenced Susan Villiers's decision to specialize in fever nursing. Infectious diseases were still rife, although mortality rates were mostly declining. The growth of fever (or isolation) hospitals necessitated large numbers of nurses who required leadership. Susan Villiers's comprehensive nurse training, which included work on a diphtheria ward, gave her an insight into the skilled care necessary. She may also have been influenced by her matron at Bart's, Isla Stewart, who believed that employment with the Metropolitan Asylums Board was the best possible school for matrons. She herself had been matron of two asylums board institutions, a tented smallpox camp at Darenth, Dartford, Kent (1885-6), and the Eastern Fever Hospital, Homerton, East London (1886-7). Susan Villiers therefore knew that there was tremendous potential for advancement in asylums board hospitals, and it was within their large fever institutions in London that she spent her whole career and became a leader of the fever nurses. She went on to hold appointments as night superintendent at the South Eastern Hospital (1896-9) and assistant matron at the Brook Hospital (1899-1901) before becoming matron at the Fountain Hospital (1901-10), the Park Hospital (1910-13), and the South Western Hospital (1913-27). 
Between 1861 and 1891, 353 new public isolation hospitals were created in England and Wales. Although they varied tremendously in size, they experienced comparable problems of recruitment and retention of nurses. The main solution to this was seen as fever nurse training. A few hospitals had established courses, but they varied in length, content, and clinical experience. This led to the recognition that standardization was necessary. Susan Villiers was a key figure in fever nurse training from 1908 to 1937. In June 1908 she was appointed to the first council of the Fever Nurses' Association, a new body established in January 1908 to provide a unified system of fever nurse training in British hospitals approved by the association. Moreover, she was determined to ensure the rights of fever nurse members in their conditions of work, and in obtaining special recognition for those with both fever and general training under state registration. She was in an ideal position to implement the association scheme after its approval by the asylums board in July 1909. Following the 'Nurses Registration Act', 1919, the General Nursing Council for England and Wales was established. A general register of nurses was opened in which she was the seventh entry, while the supplementary register of fever nurses records her name as the 60th entry. As the fever nurse representative to the council, 1920-37, she served on various committees and contributed to its decision to adopt the association scheme virtually unchanged. 
Susan Villiers's commitments were wide ranging. She was one of three representatives of the Matrons' Council of Great Britain and Ireland to the National Council of Women of Great Britain, where she served on the public health sectional committee (1926-7). She became a member of the British College of Nursing in 1926. This new organization was established on 29 April that year by Mrs Bedford Fenwick, matron of Bart's (1881-7) and the chief protagonist of state registration. It was intended to be a rival to the College of Nursing set up in 1916; both had similar educational and professional aims. Although not a militant feminist, Susan Villiers quietly supported the interests and rights of women. In 1927, for instance, she represented the British College of Nursing in support of equal suffrage at the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship, formerly the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. She was a serene, dignified, ladylike person with a charming manner. By conviction she was an Anglican. In 1935 she became the superior of the Guild of St Barnabas, an Anglican organization which gave spiritual support to nurses. 
In retirement Susan Villiers, who remained unmarried, lived first at Stevenage, Hertfordshire, where she was a county magistrate for Stevenage petty sessional division. Towards the end of her life she moved to Little Nutcombe, Portsmouth Road, Shottermill, Hindhead, Surrey, where she died on 29 March 1945. She was buried on 3 April at St Alban's Church, Hindhead. A very well attended requiem mass on 12 April at St Alban the Martyr, Holborn, London, was organized by the Guild of St Barnabas -- a celebration of her life's work and particularly of her contribution to fever nursing. 


@@@@@


doc= 62188


Bolsover, George Henry (1910-1990), historian, was born at 12 Powys Street, Atherton, Lancashire, on 18 November 1910, the son of Ernest Bolsover, cotton operative, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Edge. He attended Leigh grammar school in Manchester, where (unusually for the time, but like his contemporary William Barker, who also became a diplomat) he learned Russian. He graduated BA in Russian in 1931 and MA in 1932 at the University of Liverpool, and wrote a PhD thesis under R. W. Seton-Watson at the School of Slavonic Studies, University of London, on 'Great Britain, Russia and the Eastern question, 1832-1841' (1933). He began his academic career as a tutor in adult education at the Worcester annexe of Birmingham University (1937-8), then from 1938 to 1943 lectured on European history at Manchester University, under Lewis Namier, to whose Festschrift he later contributed. On 25 March 1939, at St Anne's Church, Atherton, he married Stephanie Kallai, four years his junior, and daughter of Jeno Kallai, merchant. They had one daughter, Anne ('b'. 1953). 
Established as a Russian scholar, in 1943 Bolsover was appointed attache and first secretary at the British embassy in Moscow, where he remained until 1947. After returning to Britain he was appointed director of the School of Slavonic and East European Studies, University of London, from which he retired in 1976. 
When Bolsover took over the School of Slavonic and East European Studies in 1947, it was regarded by the security services as a hotbed of pro-Soviet sentiment, under the influence of Andrew Rothstein. Born in England, the son of one of Lenin's most trusted special agents and an Oxford graduate, Rothstein held a temporary lectureship in Soviet institutions, a position that had been granted with reluctance, since he was a founding member of the British Communist Party. He had spent several years in Moscow working in the Communist International organization before returning to England in 1931, ostensibly to head the Friends of the Soviet Union, but was (correctly) suspected of being an NKVD officer tasked with agent development. In 1949 Bolsover, ignoring the clamour of some staff and many students, informed Rothstein that his contract was terminated, as he was unqualified for a superior post. In the minds of many Bolsover had accomplished the task for which he had been appointed director. 
The School of Slavonic and East European Studies had a well-established course for training military interpreters in Russian and other East European languages, and in 1951 this was substantially enlarged into the Joint Services School for Linguists, designed to turn national service personnel into Russian interpreters. Both the wartime Russian course and its national service successor had been inspired by Elizabeth Hill, an alumna of the School of Slavonic and East European Studies and professor of Russian at Cambridge, where a parallel Joint Services School for Linguists came into being in 1951, both courses continuing until 1959, by which time 1500 interpreters of civil service standard had been produced. An element of rivalry arose between the two universities, but Bolsover stood above the fray, leaving the hard labour of administering the course in all its aspects to Ronald Hingley. When the principal British centres of eastern European studies awoke to the plight of Hungarian refugee students in 1956, and perhaps with a personal sense of urgency given his wife's Hungarian origins, Bolsover joined William Deakin and Max Hayward, warden and fellow of St Antony's College, Oxford, respectively, on a delegation to Vienna to select candidates for British universities. 
As well as his administrative duties, Bolsover was on the editorial board of the 'Slavonic and East European Review' until 1963, and was its sometime editor. Nicknamed Mr Russia, he was occasionally called upon by the BBC to comment on Soviet affairs. He published articles in the 'Slavonic and East European Review', the 'English Historical Review', the 'Journal of Modern History', and 'International Affairs', all devoted to his lifelong interest in foreign policy and relations with the Soviet Union. He was appointed OBE in 1947 and CBE in 1970. 
While for his students Bolsover was a shadowy figure, his staff felt he was intrusively unsupportive and often heavy-handed. He had excellent Russian but reputedly little time for Russians, who, he claimed, were all characters out of Gogol. One observer commented, more in grudging approbation of his tough and manipulative personality than in criticism, that 'he struck me... as being 'the useful bastard', an asset (and inconvenience) to many an institution as a curb on wayward individualism' (private information). But when he invited people, including staff members, to his home, he was the perfect genial and hospitable host, for as he also said (in his unpolished Lancashire accent), 'you might as well enjoy yourself, for you never know where your next meal is coming from' (ibid.) He was devoted to his family -- and his pets too, latterly a dog and a tortoise -- and made a point of maintaining a cordial relationship with those at the bottom of the university hierarchy, such as doormen or porters. He was an observant Anglican. He died at prayer on Easter day (15 April) 1990 in his parish church at Hatch End, London, of a heart attack. A memorial service was held at the university church of Christ the King, Gordon Square, London, on 9 June 1990. 


@@@@@


doc= 62192


Thorold, Sir Nathaniel, baronet (d. 1764), entrepreneur and adventurer, was the son of John Thorold and his wife Anne ('nee' Alcock), of the Grantham branch of the family. He inherited Harmston Hall, Lincolnshire, quite unexpectedly in January 1738 following the death of his distant cousin Sir Samuel Thorold, second baronet. He was created a baronet on 24 March 1741. Overwhelmed by this sudden change in circumstance, he ran through his new fortune and, deeply in debt, was obliged to go abroad in 1745. He left in a hurry, for it was discovered that breakfast was still on the table, the chairs hastily pushed aside. But Sir Nathaniel emerged triumphant. In the Netherlands he befriended a Jewish merchant, and together they devised a method of salting cod so that the fish would last long enough to be transported to southern Europe. Thereafter he moved to Italy, and settled first in Leghorn. There he lived with a beautiful young woman from Capri, Anna della Noce, the wife of a Signor Antonio Canale, who accepted his wife's affair. However, the scandal of the 'menage a trois' drove Thorold and his lover from Leghorn to Naples, where he re-established his salted cod business. Further scandal forced the couple to move to the island of Capri. There Sir Nathaniel built a large and beautiful home, the Palazzo Inglese, and his business flourished. He and Anna had several children, who took the name Canale. In 1754 the bishop of Capri wrote in his report to the pope, 'Ad limina apostolorum', that 'a scandal had been caused by the co-habitation, for almost ten years, of a certain married woman with an heretical English nobleman'. However, the pope refused to be drawn on the issue. Thorold lived with Anna on Capri until his death at the Palazzo Inglese on 28 August 1764. He is said to have been buried near the springs of Marucella, where tradition has it that he introduced the growing of cress, sent out to him from Lincolnshire. His son Samuel, to whom his father had left his English property, came to Harmston to inherit, assumed the name Thorold, and was made high sheriff of Lincolnshire at the age of twenty-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 62196


Fortescue, Winifred, Lady Fortescue (1888-1951), author, was born on 7 February 1888 at the rectory, Great Bealings, near Woodbridge, Suffolk, the daughter of Howard Beech, rector of Great Bealings, and his wife, Henrietta Mildred Godden. She had two elder brothers, Mervyn and Guy, and a sister, Marjory, born in 1892. She was educated at home, mainly by her mother, until the age of nine, and then went with one of her brothers to a boys' school, St Augustine's, Cliftonville, an experience that made her independent and plain-speaking all her life. At sixteen she went to Old Cedar House School in Slough, which, soon after her arrival, transferred to London and became Wentworth Hall, Mill Hill. In 1905 she broke the mould and persuaded her parents, initially reluctant, to allow her to train as an actress at one of the first drama schools. For the daughter of a Victorian rectory to enter what was still a barely respectable profession took considerable strength of character on her part, and considerable tolerance on the part of her parents. She was a minor success playing the West End and, in the years up to 1914, touring Britain and Ireland. 
In 1911 she met John William Fortescue (1859-1933), thirty years her senior and the king's librarian and archivist at Windsor. He was also working on his history of the British army, which occupied the rest of his life. Despite the difference in their ages it was, she insisted, love at first sight. They were married in April 1914. During the First World War, Winifred Fortescue worked with wounded servicemen in Windsor and in London, while John worked on an 'interim' official history of the war. However, at the end of the war it became clear to them both that John Fortescue would not be able to finance himself and finish his history of the British army. To Winifred, convinced as many were of the importance of his work, this was another challenge. In 1921 she set up her company, Cintra, in a flat in Knightsbridge dealing with imported clothes from southern Europe. Her business was successful, but in 1925, partly as a result of the strain of her work, she became ill and was forced to sell it. As soon as she recovered she began writing, publishing features in several London papers and in 'Punch'; she was briefly women's editor of the 'Morning Post'. 
In 1926 John Fortescue was knighted, and in 1929 he finished his history of the British army. He earned a little from writing, as did Winifred, but it became clear to both of them that their finances and his health meant that they would need to find somewhere cheaper to live. They found the answer in Provence, which dominated the rest of her life. The Provence of 1930 was remote, poor, and even bleak, especially in winter. Its economy was based on cheap wine and olives, but housing was inexpensive. However, the devaluation of the pound and Sir John's continuing ill health brought them near to the edge of financial calamity. Yet they loved the land they had found. Unlike many visitors (and colonizers) Lady Fortescue spoke French well and was accepted by her neighbours. 
When Sir John Fortescue died in 1933 Winifred's friends and family urged her to return to England, but she refused. Provence had become her home, and she now wrote about it. In 1935 she published 'Perfume from Provence', a witty account of her life in France with Sir John. It foreshadows many later popular accounts of the English in France and has contributed more than a little to their ideas. Through the friendship of an American exile, Elisabeth Starr, she grew to know Provence and its surrounding 'departements' in a way few English of her period did. In 'Sunset House', published in 1937, she wrote of her trips with Starr through Provence, the Alps, and the fashionable coast. It is in many ways a lighter and happier book than her first and is full of an exuberance which reminds the reader she was once a young actress. 
The idyll was short-lived. The collapse of France in 1940 found Winifred back in England, although Elisabeth Starr remained in Provence. However, Winifred's love of France did not fail. At a time when France and the French were deeply unpopular in Britain she became one of the first organizers of the Amis des Volontaires Francais, a group of English sympathizers and supporters of the Free French. Her accounts of those years, 'Trampled Lilies' (1941) and 'Beauty for Ashes' (1948), are important and moving records of the 'little history' of those who stood by France in her darkest days. 
As the war progressed, news from Provence and from Elisabeth Starr got worse. In the terrible winter of 1943-4 Starr died from malnutrition, and on the day Paris was liberated Winifred Fortescue decided that as soon as the south was liberated she would return and continue the medical work begun by her 'beloved companion' among the poor and especially the children of Provence. She began collecting clothes, food, and money, and in May 1945 she returned to France and found a desperate situation. What she had brought with her seemed, as she wrote, 'pitifully small and inadequate', but in the devastated land of Provence it seemed massive. She continued her fund-raising and her trips, and at Christmas 1945 she arranged that every child in her area should have something to hang on the 'arbre de Noel'. As a result she became known as Maman Noel. Her final triumph was to see, in 1947, the tiny hospital built by Elisabeth Starr rebuilt and opened for the care of disabled orphans. 
After the end of the war Winifred settled again in Provence. She wrote one more book, 'Laughter in Provence'. In many ways it may be her best. It laughs at herself, her friends, and her neighbours, especially the new rich. On these she comments wryly, and usually generously, but the book is imbued with a sense of the end of an era. 
Winifred Fortescue died on 9 April 1951 at Fort Escu (Sunset House), Opio, Alpes-Maritimes, France, and was buried in the cemetery at Opio where her friend Elisabeth already lay. On her tombstone is carved the cross of Lorraine, a mark of honour for those who fought for 'la France libre', and the name Maman Noel. The tombstone and the simple but powerful tributes are fitting for an Englishwoman who not only took inspiration and love from Provence but also paid for them in equal measure. 


@@@@@


doc= 62198


Lichfild, Henry (fl. 1613), composer, is known almost exclusively through his single published volume, 'The First Set of Madrigals of 5 Parts, Apt for both Viols and Voices' (1613), and through the biographical information that may be gleaned from its dedicatory preface to Lady Cheyney of Toddington House near Luton, Bedfordshire. Jane Cheyne or Cheyney, daughter of Thomas Wentworth, first Lord Wentworth, had inherited the estate from her late husband, Henry Cheyne or Cheyney, first Baron Cheney (died 1587), and Lichfild was in her service, possibly as her household steward. But she also actively encouraged Lichfild's work as a composer, carried out during 'some hours of the night', and his preface also reveals that his madrigals were performed 'by the instruments and voices' of her family. Evidently Lichfild was a devoted and trusted servant, for his mistress, who died in 1614, left him $20 in her will. 
Lichfild composed his twenty madrigals exclusively in the light canzonet style naturalized into English music by Thomas Morley in the 1590s. His chosen texts were largely amorous effusions from within the pastoral tradition (whether the Daphne who figures in seven of these masked some real-life individual is unknown) and were consistently untroubled by serious or tragic issues; Lichfild made no attempt ever to mine that darker, more substantial musical vein opened principally by Thomas Weelkes and John Wilbye during the preceding fifteen years. That said, it must be conceded he handled this undemanding, anachronistic style very well; his music is highly fluent and literate, the text is always decently set, and the effect gratifying, if anonymous. 


@@@@@


doc= 62200


Sir William Oliphant of Dupplin and Aberdalgie (d. 1329). 
This Sir William now swore allegiance to King Robert, perhaps in the aftermath of the Scottish victory at Bannockburn. He received a number of grants of land throughout the reign and put his seal (three crescents) to the declaration of Arbroath of 1320. In the final years of the reign he also performed the office of escheator. On his death the family had substantial properties, variously acquired through inheritance, marriage, and grants from Robert I. Their landed interests were based on Perthshire and Forfarshire, with their principal residence at Aberdalgie, south-west of Perth, but they also had estates in Fife, Kincardineshire, and Midlothian. Some of these lands were later used to endow younger sons and create different branches of the family. Sir William died in 1329, some four months before the king himself. He was buried at Aberdalgie, where a magnificent tomb was constructed by his family in the following century. 
Despite their service to Edward II, the Oliphants certainly seem to have endeared themselves to the Bruces, as the grants of land demonstrate. Even more significantly, Sir William of Aberdalgie's son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 62201


Yagan (c.1800-1833), Aboriginal warrior, was born in south-western Australia, the eldest of four sons of Midgegooroo (or Midjegooroong). The name of his mother is not known. Yagan's tribal land was Beeliar, one of five clan territories that later formed most of the greater metropolitan area of Perth, the capital of Western Australia. In June 1829 Captain James Stirling, designated the first lieutenant-governor of Western Australia, arrived off the mouth of the Swan River with the first British settlers and within a year these territories were alienated by grants to settlers. One settler, Robert Menli Lyon, wrote: 'Yagan is not a chief but being a son of Midjegooroong, he must be ranked among the princes of the country. He has greatly distinguished himself as a patriot and a warrior. He is in fact the Wallace of the age. ('Perth Gazette and Western Australian Journal', 20 April 1833)' Lieutenant Robert Dale of the 63rd regiment described Yagan as, 'strong and active, perfectly fearless, and the best spearman of his tribe -- but passionate, implacable and sullen; in short, a most complete and untameable savage' (Dale, 15). 
In the summer of 1831 two men, later identified as Yagan and Midgegooroo, fatally speared Enion Entwhistle, a servant on a property within Beeliar, and in May the following year Yagan mortally wounded William Gaze and was proclaimed an outlaw. When Yagan and two male companions, Dommera and Ningana, were arrested in September 1832, Lyon successfully argued that Yagan was a warrior acting in defence of his country and should be treated as a prisoner of war. With the approval of the executive council he accompanied the three men, under military escort, into exile on the small offshore island of Carnac, where he believed he could record their language and convert them to Christian ways. During the six weeks on Carnac, Lyon, from information supplied by Yagan and his compatriots, mapped the territories and recorded the leadership of the Aboriginal bands associated with the Swan River and its tributaries, Canning and Helena. These territories included Midgegooroo's Beeliar, Monday's Beeloo, lying between the Canning and Helena rivers, Weeip's clan to the north of the Helena, and Yellagonga's Mooro, with its heartland on the Swan River and the area later occupied by the city of Perth. In addition to the mapping Lyon compiled a glossary of common Nyungar terms, which included the major geographic features of the Swan River. His report was published in the 'Perth Gazette and Western Australian Journal' in March and April 1833 as 'A glance at the manners and language of the Aboriginal inhabitants of Western Australia: with a short vocabulary'. 
After six weeks of exile Yagan and his companions escaped the island in an unattended dinghy. As no warrant was issued for his arrest, he soon became a familiar and popular figure in Perth, hosting tribal ceremonies known as corroborees, such as one held on 3 March 1833, which was attended by the acting lieutenant-governor, F. C. Irwin, and many leading citizens. The 'Perth Gazette and Western Australian Journal' of 16 March 1833 noted on that occasion that 'Yagan was master of the ceremonies, and acquitted himself with infinite dignity and grace.' 
On 29 April 1833 Domjum was shot while robbing a store. The following day his kinsman Yagan, with Midgegooroo and others, fatally speared two settlers, John and Thomas Velvick. The principals were then proclaimed outlaws wanted dead or alive, with rewards on the heads of Midgegooroo, Monday, and Yagan. Midgegooroo was captured, given a summary trial on 21 May, and executed by a firing squad of the 63rd regiment. Monday was pardoned. Yagan remained at large until 11 July when two shepherd boys, William and James Keats, invited him to share their campfire, somewhere between the Swan River and Ellen Brook in Upper Swan district, and then shot him dead for the $30 reward. William was fatally speared but James escaped. According to George Fletcher Moore, William Dodd, a farm labourer, severed Yagan's head and preserved it by smoking it over a fire of eucalyptus wood. 
Yagan's head was taken to England by Robert Dale, who loaned it to Thomas Pettigrew, a noted surgeon and antiquary, who in turn had it examined by a phrenologist, who reported on the severe damage to the skull caused by a musket-shot. Dale is believed to have deposited the skull with the Liverpool Royal Institution, whence it passed to the Liverpool City Museum. In 1964, by now badly deteriorated, it was interred with stillborn babies in a public grave at a Liverpool cemetery. In 1997, following years of endeavour by Ken Colbung, a Nyungar elder and Korean War veteran, Yagan's skull was returned to be laid to rest with his body. Disputes between rival Nyungar factions and the failure to locate Yagan's grave thwarted this intention and the skull remained in a government vault until 2010, when it was finally reburied in the newly created Yagan Memorial Park near Perth. 
Nyungar people continued to regard Yagan as a patriot and a hero but his true legacy is perhaps in the glossary of Nyungar names that he supplied, which are preserved on modern maps, and also his descriptions of clan leadership and territorial boundaries close to the moment of British settlement, which makes Perth unique in the history of Australian capital cities. 


@@@@@


doc= 62205


Unaipon, David (1872-1967), writer and promoter of Aboriginal rights, was born on 28 September 1872 at Point McLeay Mission, South Australia, the fourth of the nine children of James Ngunaitponi. His father was a Yaralde man of the Lower Murray River and had been the first Aboriginal Christian convert in the region. He befriended the Free Church of Scotland missionary James Reid on his arrival in 1861 and quickly became a key intermediary between Europeans and his own people. James Ngunaitponi assisted the missionary George Taplin with his ethnographic and linguistic research but remained a steadfast Christian. He was also one of the first literate Aboriginal people in South Australia and corresponded with Reid's mentor, the Scottish philanthropist Henrietta Smith, 'nee' Erskine. David Unaipon grew up in a mission environment, with only slight exposure to the traditional culture of his people. He was heavily influenced by the mission schoolteacher, Walter Hutley, who provoked his interest in popular science, introducing him to unsolved mysteries of the philosopher's stone and perpetual motion. In 1885, with his parents' permission, Unaipon was taken into the Kanmantoo home of the pastoralist C. B. Young, a patron of the mission. There he was introduced to classical literature, folk tales, Greek, and Latin. 
On his return to Point McLeay, Unaipon joined other literate, talented young Ngarrindjeri men seeking alternatives to the mission's limited employment opportunities. He avoided physical work such as shearing, fishing, or farming by working as a bookkeeper in the mission store. Adept on the mission organ, he accompanied performances of the young men's Band of Hope, reciting verse as well. During the 1890s Unaipon's relations with mission authorities deteriorated, but now he had befriended several influential members of Adelaide society. These associations later enabled him to avoid the full effect of legislation restricting Aboriginal freedom of movement. 
On 4 January 1901 Unaipon married Catherine Carter, 'nee' Sumner, a Tangani woman. Their son, De Witt Talmage, was born later in the year and named after an American evangelist. Unaipon's was an unhappy marriage and from this point his mission home served mainly as a base for his frequent travels. His speaking skills were in demand from church groups eager to regard him as living vindication of the mission endeavour, and he addressed large congregations in Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide. His social and political message was conservative, often reflecting the views of the Aborigines' Friends' Association (AFA) which ran the Point McLeay mission; he considered that Aboriginal people should be brought into the mainstream of Australian society through enlightened paternalism and that, like him, they would respond to the effect of a favourable environment and Christian influence. He proclaimed: 'Look at me and you will see what the 'Bible' can do.' 
In 1910 Unaipon accompanied the Point McLeay glee club to Hobart to participate in Tasmanian centenary commemorations. His troupe impersonated Tasmanian Aborigines; Unaipon played the organ. He did not share the views of the emerging voice of Aboriginal activism arising from eastern Australia, and in 1938 he rejected calls for involvement in a national day of mourning. In 1928 he led a delegation from Point McLeay calling for the reinstatement of the AFA control of the mission, which had become administered by the government after 1910. During the 1920s he supported the utopian scheme of a model Aboriginal state proposed for central Australia, but criticized attempts to insulate Aboriginal people from European contact by creating reserves. He and another moderate, the lay preacher James Noble, were suggested as Aboriginal representatives for federal parliament. 
Precocious and self-possessed in his urbanity, Unaipon subverted popular notions of an inarticulate and primitive Aboriginality. When steamerloads of tourists visited Point McLeay to see the natives, Unaipon demonstrated his perpetual motion prototype machine, lecturing the visitors on Aboriginal astronomy, botany, and bushcraft, and calling for donations. The press hailed him, perhaps ironically, as the Black Leonardo. Unaipon took out nine patent applications between 1909 and 1944. His particular interest lay in converting rotary to linear motion, and he drew inspiration from the flight of the boomerang. He produced a prototype of a shearing handpiece after 1910, but the device did not go into production. 
Unaipon was called upon to advise anthropologists, particularly during the 1914 meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science; these interviews encouraged his interest in Aboriginal and European mythology. He began gathering Aboriginal legends while working in the country in South Australia, Victoria, and New South Wales as an itinerant pedlar for the AFA. During the 1920s he signed a contract with the publishers Angus and Robertson for a book of children's Aboriginal stories. He submitted several, but they baulked at his blend of fairy tale, popular science, Aboriginal legend, and Christian morality. He published two stories with AFA support, becoming the first Aboriginal author in print, but Angus and Robertson transferred the rights in his collection to William Ramsay Smith, who edited and published them without acknowledgement as 'Myths and Legends of the Australian Aborigines' (1930). 
Unaipon lived until the age of ninety-four, dying at Point McLeay on 8 February 1967. In 1992 his portrait appeared on the Australian $50 note. Now remembered for his writings, Unaipon achieved his main impact through public speaking, delivering a potent message that his people were actors in the historical present, not in a primitive past. 


@@@@@


doc= 62206


Namatjira, Albert (1902-1959), Aboriginal artist, was born on 28 July 1902 at the Lutheran mission of Hermannsburg (later Ntaria), Northern Territory, Australia, the second of the three children of Namatjira (1880-1956) and his wife, Ljukuta (1881-1934), and given the name Elea. His parents, both Western Arrernte Aboriginal people, arrived at the mission in 1902 seeking refuge from the devastating impact of European colonization. In 1905 they were received into the church: Albert and his father (who took the name Jonathon) were baptized, and his mother was blessed and received the name Emilie. 
Albert Namatjira attended the Hermannsburg mission school, living separately from his parents in a boys' dormitory in accordance with mission practice. At the age of thirteen he spent six months in the bush, during which time he underwent initiation. He left the mission again when he was eighteen to marry Ilkalita, a Kukatja woman. The family returned to Hermannsburg in 1923 and Ilkalita (1903-1974) was baptized Rubina. Eight of their children survived infancy: three daughters, Maisie, Hazel, and Martha, and five sons, Enos, Oscar, Ewald, Keith, and Maurice -- all of whom became painters. 
An enterprising and creative individual who took advantage of every available opportunity, Namatjira trained as a blacksmith and carpenter and worked as a stockman and cameleer at Hermannsburg and on nearby pastoral stations. From the late 1920s his finely crafted mulga wood plaques and boomerangs decorated in pokerwork, black ink, and paint sold in the mission shop. Among the many visitors to Hermannsburg were two artists from Victoria, Rex Battarbee and John Gardner. Fascinated by an exhibition of their work in the schoolroom at Hermannsburg in 1934, Namatjira expressed interest in learning to paint, announcing 'I can do that too' (Henson, 75). With tuition from Battarbee acquired during two month-long excursions in 1936, Namatjira began to paint -- as an expression of his Aboriginal identity and a means of achieving economic independence. In 1935 his watercolours were displayed at a Lutheran conference at Nuriootpa, South Australia, and in 1938 Namatjira held his first solo exhibition at the Fine Art Society Gallery in Melbourne. In the post-war period he exhibited regularly and with great success throughout Australia in solo exhibitions and with other members of the Hermannsburg school he founded. Through his pioneering efforts Namatjira forged a new, contemporary expression for Aboriginal art, while he himself became an important role model for a future generation of Aboriginal artists. 
In the following decades Namatjira achieved national and international prominence. In 1944 he became the first Aboriginal person included in 'Who's who in Australia' and the subject of the first monograph devoted to an Aboriginal artist. He subsequently starred in the film 'Namatjira the Painter' (1947). During successive royal visits he was presented to the duke and duchess of Gloucester (1946) and Queen Elizabeth (1954). Honours accrued: Namatjira was awarded Queen Elizabeth II's Coronation Medal (1953) and elected an honorary member of the Royal Art Society of New South Wales (1955). William Dargie's striking portrait, which won the Archibald prize in 1956, conveys both Namatjira's powerful physical presence and his proud and dignified manner. 
Namatjira's watercolour landscapes achieved widespread popularity among white Australians, for whom the landscape represented an important symbol of national identity, but they were overlooked or denigrated by art institutions. To many, his use of Western techniques and the pictorial conventions of the landscape genre appeared derivative and conservative. In effect his work was misinterpreted as a symbol of assimilation and a sign of colonial domination. More recently his reputation has undergone considerable revision: his watercolours are now generally viewed as reaffirming and reclaiming his ancestral connections to country. In the words of the Yirrkala elder and political leader Galarrwuy Yunupingu, Namatjira 'showed to the rest of the world the living title held by his people to the lands they had been on for thousands of years' (Yunupingu, 66). Redressing earlier neglect, Namatjira is now represented in the collection of the National Gallery of Australia in Canberra and in all state galleries. 
Namatjira's achievements highlighted the gap between the reality and rhetoric of assimilation policies. Controversies surrounded his financial situation and attempts by the mission and government agencies to maintain control over the sale and marketing of his work and that of other members of the Hermannsburg school. In 1951 he was prevented from building a house on land he had purchased in Alice Springs. The citizenship granted to him in 1957 heightened growing tension and directly impacted on the tragic events surrounding his death. Exemption from the restrictions imposed on other 'full blood' Aborigines gave Namatjira access to alcohol, which he shared with members of his family in accordance with customary law. In 1958 he was charged with supplying alcohol to the artist Henoch Raberaba and sentenced to six months' imprisonment with labour. A nationwide protest resulted in two appeals, which reduced his sentence to three months. Eventually Namatjira served two months in open detention at Papunya settlement from March to May 1959. Taken ill while living at Papunya, he died of heart failure at the Alice Springs Hospital on 8 August 1959. He was buried with a Lutheran service on 9 August at the Alice Springs cemetery. As a gesture of respect, in 1994 his granddaughter Elaine, working in collaboration with women from the Hermannsburg Potters, produced a terracotta mural for his gravestone. 


@@@@@


doc= 62211


Ramsden, Harry (1888-1963), fish and chip restaurateur, was born on 10 February 1888 at 64 Chatham Street, Bradford, the sixth child of seven born to Henry Ramsden and his wife, Emily Gledhill, formerly Holroyd. His father was then a police constable, but later became a stage-door manager, publican, and fish frier. Shortly after Harry's birth his father was running a fish and chip shop at 22 Manchester Road, Bradford, a main thoroughfare in a working-class district. At this time the fish and chip trade was developing rapidly from its small and often disreputable origins in the 1870s and becoming an important provider of main meals as well as late-night snacks for working-class families in London and the northern industrial towns. It was a labour-intensive, invariably family-run business, using coal-fired ranges and ingredients prepared by hand, and it recruited mainly from skilled workers and their families, with limited capital saved or borrowed from relatives and friends. Children were usually pressed into service, but Ramsden took evasive action, working half-time in a mill in the mornings and as a lather boy in a barber's shop after school. In his late teens he borrowed heavily, and successfully, to set up a small taxi business, and at twenty-one he leased the Craven Heifer in Bolton Road, reputed to be a publican's graveyard, and made it pay by introducing (unlicensed) piano music. Then war service intervened. 
It was after the First World War that Harry Ramsden followed his father into the fish and chip trade, combining it with theatrical lodgings. The latter were managed by his first wife, Bridget ('b'. 1888/9), daughter of James Murphy, a farmer; they had married on 13 June 1911. He subsequently traded up from small beginnings and opened the Cosy Cafe in Westgate, which his lodgers promoted by introducing it into their stage patter. In 1928 he moved to White Cross, Guiseley, at the edge of the Leeds-Bradford conurbation, in search of cleaner air for his wife and son. The former died within a few months; but the move was to make Ramsden famous. In 1931, in the depths of the depression, he opened a full-scale restaurant at White Cross, with chandeliers, wall lighting, leaded lights in the windows, piano music, and a conspicuous clock. This was not the first attempt to propel fish and chips up market: there had been several since the turn of the century, in Leeds as well as London, Manchester, and indeed Reading. In 1917 a restaurant in Wigan had given tripe the same treatment. But Harry Ramsden's became a famous success. It was solidly based in the established lunch-time take-away trade of the surrounding factories; but the restaurant soon became a destination for evenings out, and also captured the returning weekend motor traffic from the Lake District and Yorkshire dales. Above all, it was stimulated by Ramsden's obsessive attention to detail and eye for improvement, and his flair for populist advertising. He created and propagated his own myth, and was sometimes referred to as 'the uncrowned king of fish and chips'. Through his nephew the television puppeteer Harry Corbett he made contact with a world of Blackpool showmanship with which he had much in common. 
Ramsden took pride in dressing well but without pretension. But his own roots remained resolutely local, and after he handed over management of the restaurant to Eddie Stokes in 1954 he set up two more fish and chip restaurants, before terminal illness set in. It is in many ways ironical that his name should be attached to the Harry Ramsden restaurant chain which spread its wings internationally in the 1990s, because he himself exemplified the local entrepreneur who knew his market well enough to respect his customers, in a trade where such local knowledge was at a premium. His career belongs to a tradition of extrovert populist showmanship which also flourished in the music-hall, and his personal success was a product of that era. 
Harry Ramsden died from cancer on 7 January 1963 at the hospital, Middleton, Wharfedale, Yorkshire. He was survived by his second wife, I. M. Ramsden. 


@@@@@


doc= 62212


Griffith, John (1821-1877), journalist, was born on 16 December 1821 at Bodgwilym, near Barmouth, Merioneth, the son of Griffith Griffith, a farmer, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Roberts. Through his mother he was nephew of the famous radical newspaper publisher the Revd Samuel Roberts of Llanbrynmair. After an elementary education in Barmouth and some early experience in the grocery trade, Griffith moved to London in 1847 as assistant to Hugh Owen, secretary of the Welsh Education Society. This position ended in 1849, and for the next decade Griffith returned to shopkeeping, opening his own business at 55 Camberwell Road in 1856, and writing occasional letters for his uncle's paper, 'Y Cronicl', under the pen name Wmffra Edward. In 1857, however, he began to write weekly letters for 'Baner ac Amserau Cymru', edited by Thomas Gee, and, in 1861, gave up the shop to concentrate on journalism as London correspondent of 'Baner', thereby becoming the first full-time Welsh correspondent. 
Griffith, known henceforth as y Gohebydd (literally 'the correspondent'), quickly established his reputation. His meticulously researched weekly column played a key role in awakening the interest of the Welsh people in politics during the 1860s. Alongside witty, radical commentaries on parliamentary affairs and accounts of his visits to America (1865-7) and the Paris Exhibition (1867), he championed a series of 'Welsh' causes, blending a celebration of the nation's cultural and historical heritage, the travails of contemporary nonconformists (who formed a majority of the population in Wales), the politics of the Liberal Party, and the representation of Wales in parliament. By these means, he did more than anyone else to dictate the markedly Welsh form taken by radical nonconformist politics at the general election of 1868. 
This election was, perhaps, Gohebydd's finest hour. He campaigned hard on behalf of Liberal candidates like Henry Richard, a fellow metropolitan Welshman and Congregationalist, and hoped their triumph would lead to the creation of a 'Welsh Brigade' to look after Welsh interests in parliament ('Baner', 23 Dec 1868, 4-5). In the controversial aftermath of the election, when Conservative landowners in Wales apparently evicted tenants who had voted for Liberal candidates, Gohebydd was at the forefront of the campaign to secure redress for the victims. He organized a conference at Aberystwyth in October 1869 which established a fund to compensate those evicted and then toured the afflicted areas, publishing detailed accounts of the tenants' sufferings. The campaign lasted two years; it was in respect of his work at the election that, in 1875, Griffith was presented with a testimonial worth $734 17's'. died 
Gohebydd's success brought him considerable influence in other spheres. He was a reform-minded member of the national eisteddfod committee during the 1860s and became a member of the governing body of the new university at Aberystwyth when it opened in 1872. Within the Welsh community in London he was similarly prominent, being part of the delegation which waited on the home secretary in 1862 to protest against the revised code, and another which met Garibaldi in 1864. It is some mark of his popularity that John Thomas, the Liverpool photographer who specialized in retailing 'carte-de-visite' portraits of famous nonconformist ministers, also advertised one of Gohebydd. 
A slight, earnest man, Gohebydd never enjoyed good health. Samuel Morley, after meeting him in 1868, referred to him as 'the little man that coughs' (D. Tecwyn Lloyd, 211); in 1875, he paid for him to winter in Switzerland, but the end was not long delayed, and Griffith died, unmarried, on 13 December 1877 at his sister's house, 6 Thackeray Street, Liverpool. He was buried in the Fron cemetery, Llangollen, and was escorted to his final resting place by a procession, it was said, the like of which the town had never seen. 


@@@@@


doc= 62213


Iorwerth ab Owain (d. 1175x84), prince in Wales, lord of Caerleon, succeeded the king, his elder brother Morgan ab Owain, on Morgan's violent death in 1158. There is no indication that Iorwerth ever used the royal style, derived from their grandfather, Caradog ap Gruffudd (d. 1081), one-time dominant king of Gwlad Morgan and client of William I. Iorwerth's first appearance is in 1136 when Gerald of Wales names him as the man responsible for the killing of Richard de Clare of Ceredigion in the pass of Grwyne Fawr between Abergavenny and Talgarth. In the subsequent conquest of Upper Gwent and Llefennydd by Morgan ab Owain, Iorwerth was closely associated with his brother. They issued joint charters in Stephen's reign, and even appear to have possessed a joint seal (although no impression of it survives). Although King Morgan left at least two sons, it was his brother who succeeded him in 1158. This was quite clearly because Iorwerth had occupied the position of heir designate ('edling') during his brother's lifetime. 
Iorwerth (styled on one occasion of 'Gwynllwg') presided over the decline of his family's fortunes in Gwent in the 1160s and 1170s. Before 1169 the castle of Usk (taken by his brother 'c'.1136-7) was taken back by Earl Richard de Clare (Strongbow), lord of Chepstow. Iorwerth's failure to come to terms with Rhys ap Gruffudd of Deheubarth added to his problems. In 1171, on his way into the west, Henry II was persuaded by Rhys to join with him to oust Iorwerth from his castle of Caerleon and drive him back to his stronghold of Machen in Gwynllwg. Iorwerth, his sons, and Morgan ap Seisyll, his nephew, retaliated by devastating the region of Llefennydd. Warfare continued into 1172, when Iorwerth's elder son, Owain, was assassinated by the earl of Gloucester's soldiers during a temporary truce. On 21 July 1173 Iorwerth retook Caerleon after a three-day siege and by mid-August had subdued all of lower Gwent, except the castles. He and his son Hywel ['see below'] appear to have maintained themselves by force in the area until early 1175, when family unity collapsed after Hywel blinded and castrated Owain Pen-Carn, his uncle (his father's younger brother). Iorwerth's nephew, Morgan ap Morgan ab Owain, seems always to have supported the English rather than his uncle. Caerleon Castle was once more lost. 
Late in June 1175 Iorwerth came to an agreement with the Lord Rhys, with whose support he regained Caerleon from King Henry. The recovery of Caerleon may also have had something to do with the sexual liaison between the king and Iorwerth's daughter, Nest Bloet, with whom the king had an illegitimate son, Morgan (surnamed Bloet, from his being brought up in the family of Nest's husband, Ralph Bloet (died 1199) of Silchester). The date of Iorwerth's death is unknown, but he had been succeeded by his son Hywel ab Iorwerth of Caerleon by 1184. In Stephen's reign, probably before 1148, Iorwerth married Angharad, daughter of Bishop Uthred of Llandaff. With her he had several known sons, Owain (killed in 1172), Hywel, his heir, and a younger pair, Gruffudd and Cadwallon, who appear at the court of King John at St Briavels in 1207, and also perhaps another son, Morgan. Iorwerth probably founded Llantarnam Abbey in Gwent and may have been buried there. 

Hywel ab Iorwerth (d. in or before 1216) continued to rule as lord of Caerleon until the reign of John. A number of charters, in which he is styled Hywel of Caerleon, attest to his authority in the lowland area of Llefennydd, his control over Caerleon and the forest of Gwynllwg (that is, upland Gwynllwg), and his advocacy of Goldcliff Priory. In 1184-5 he was allied with the king of England, leading a company in the defence of the lordship of Glamorgan, where he acted as castellan of Newcastle, near Bridgend. 
By 1216 Hywel had been succeeded by his son, Morgan ap Hywel (d. 1248), who in that year was carrying out a damaging campaign in Gwent against William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke and Striguil. The Marshal's biography suggests that Morgan had attempted to reclaim his dynasty's lost lands, which would imply an assault on the lordship of Usk. Morgan seems to have seized the opportunity presented by the invasion of England by Louis of France to press his claims by violence. The coming of peace in September 1217 removed his chance, and Morgan's men were driven from Caerleon at the end of the year by a bloody assault on the castle by the military household of William (I) Marshal. The campaign against him continued, as Morgan moved the centre of his resistance to his castle of Machen in upland Gwynllwg. A conference at Worcester on 11 March 1218 led to Morgan's loss of Caerleon to the Marshal and the rest of Morgan's career is a story of his dogged attempts to reclaim his family's position in lower Gwent. 
Morgan's principal opponents were the successive Marshal earls of Pembroke, each formidable in personal wealth and power. His chances of success against the younger Earl William Marshal were slim, for the earl maintained a great position at court, and married the king's sister. Even so, Morgan managed to challenge Earl William (II)'s continued possession of Caerleon in the 'curia regis' and the castle remained in royal hands between 1223 and 1226 pending a resolution of the case. Morgan's failure led to a formal quitclaim of his rights in Caerleon to Earl William in or soon after 1227. But Morgan's great opportunity came with the succession of Richard Marshal in 1231. Earl Richard rapidly fell foul of Henry III and a war erupted in the marches and the south-west in 1232. Morgan was retained in the royal household for the campaign, and did great damage to the Marshal lands in Gwent. In the summer of 1233 his suit against the Marshals for possession of Caerleon was once again in the 'curia regis'. By September 1233 he had a royal decision in his favour, but since the new earl, Gilbert Marshal (who succeeded his brother in 1234), would not give up the castle, Morgan had a grant of two English manors until he could repossess it. Morgan reoccupied the castle of Caerleon and lordships of Edlogan and Llefennydd early in 1236 (the 'Brut' noting that it was 'for fear of the Lord Llywelyn') and also had damages assessed against Earl Gilbert, which the earl paid (reluctantly) in September. It seems that Earl Gilbert took the reverse badly, as is demonstrated by a remarkable indenture of 1236 between him and a local knight, Sir William de St Maur, by which Sir William undertook to support by any legal means possible the earl's attempts to oust Morgan from the manor of Undy, in lower Gwent. None the less, Morgan remained in control of Caerleon and its associated lordships until his death in 1248, before 15 March. He was childless, and was succeeded by Maredudd ap Gruffudd, who in one source appears to have been the descendant of Iorwerth ab Owain through Gwerfyl, the daughter of his youngest son, Morgan, but who could also conceivably have been the son of Gruffudd ab Iorwerth ab Owain (and therefore Morgan ap Hywel's first cousin once removed). Maredudd acquired lands in Llefennydd and elsewhere, but Caerleon was denied him (presumably on the pretext of its being a life grant to Morgan in 1233, and not therefore heritable except at the king's will). 
The career of Morgan ap Hywel is the logical culmination of earlier choices of his family, such as the judicious collaboration of Morgan ab Owain with marcher powers in the reigns of Stephen and Henry II, and the choices of his grandfather and father at key points to ally with the king against the dominant Welsh power of their day (whether Deheubarth or Gwynedd). Morgan ap Hywel was an open Anglicizer: he operated through attorneys in courts of English law; served (as had his father) with English armies; adopted a toponym; and broke with the traditional Welsh families who supported and were tied to his dynasty, as can be seen from his aggression against his own hereditary 'distain' ('steward'), Iorwerth ab Adam, in the 1240s. He prefigures several other Anglicizing Welsh dynasties, notably those of Powys and Afan. It is perhaps ironic that the ab Adam family, with whom he fell out, followed the same path and ultimately became peers of the English parliament in the reign of Edward I. 


@@@@@


doc= 62214


Iorwerth ab Owain (d. 1175x84), prince in Wales, lord of Caerleon, succeeded the king, his elder brother Morgan ab Owain, on Morgan's violent death in 1158. There is no indication that Iorwerth ever used the royal style, derived from their grandfather, Caradog ap Gruffudd (d. 1081), one-time dominant king of Gwlad Morgan and client of William I. Iorwerth's first appearance is in 1136 when Gerald of Wales names him as the man responsible for the killing of Richard de Clare of Ceredigion in the pass of Grwyne Fawr between Abergavenny and Talgarth. In the subsequent conquest of Upper Gwent and Llefennydd by Morgan ab Owain, Iorwerth was closely associated with his brother. They issued joint charters in Stephen's reign, and even appear to have possessed a joint seal (although no impression of it survives). Although King Morgan left at least two sons, it was his brother who succeeded him in 1158. This was quite clearly because Iorwerth had occupied the position of heir designate ('edling') during his brother's lifetime. 
Iorwerth (styled on one occasion of 'Gwynllwg') presided over the decline of his family's fortunes in Gwent in the 1160s and 1170s. Before 1169 the castle of Usk (taken by his brother 'c'.1136-7) was taken back by Earl Richard de Clare (Strongbow), lord of Chepstow. Iorwerth's failure to come to terms with Rhys ap Gruffudd of Deheubarth added to his problems. In 1171, on his way into the west, Henry II was persuaded by Rhys to join with him to oust Iorwerth from his castle of Caerleon and drive him back to his stronghold of Machen in Gwynllwg. Iorwerth, his sons, and Morgan ap Seisyll, his nephew, retaliated by devastating the region of Llefennydd. Warfare continued into 1172, when Iorwerth's elder son, Owain, was assassinated by the earl of Gloucester's soldiers during a temporary truce. On 21 July 1173 Iorwerth retook Caerleon after a three-day siege and by mid-August had subdued all of lower Gwent, except the castles. He and his son Hywel ['see below'] appear to have maintained themselves by force in the area until early 1175, when family unity collapsed after Hywel blinded and castrated Owain Pen-Carn, his uncle (his father's younger brother). Iorwerth's nephew, Morgan ap Morgan ab Owain, seems always to have supported the English rather than his uncle. Caerleon Castle was once more lost. 
Late in June 1175 Iorwerth came to an agreement with the Lord Rhys, with whose support he regained Caerleon from King Henry. The recovery of Caerleon may also have had something to do with the sexual liaison between the king and Iorwerth's daughter, Nest Bloet, with whom the king had an illegitimate son, Morgan (surnamed Bloet, from his being brought up in the family of Nest's husband, Ralph Bloet (died 1199) of Silchester). The date of Iorwerth's death is unknown, but he had been succeeded by his son Hywel ab Iorwerth of Caerleon by 1184. In Stephen's reign, probably before 1148, Iorwerth married Angharad, daughter of Bishop Uthred of Llandaff. With her he had several known sons, Owain (killed in 1172), Hywel, his heir, and a younger pair, Gruffudd and Cadwallon, who appear at the court of King John at St Briavels in 1207, and also perhaps another son, Morgan. Iorwerth probably founded Llantarnam Abbey in Gwent and may have been buried there. 

Hywel ab Iorwerth (d. in or before 1216) continued to rule as lord of Caerleon until the reign of John. A number of charters, in which he is styled Hywel of Caerleon, attest to his authority in the lowland area of Llefennydd, his control over Caerleon and the forest of Gwynllwg (that is, upland Gwynllwg), and his advocacy of Goldcliff Priory. In 1184-5 he was allied with the king of England, leading a company in the defence of the lordship of Glamorgan, where he acted as castellan of Newcastle, near Bridgend. 
By 1216 Hywel had been succeeded by his son, Morgan ap Hywel (d. 1248), who in that year was carrying out a damaging campaign in Gwent against William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke and Striguil. The Marshal's biography suggests that Morgan had attempted to reclaim his dynasty's lost lands, which would imply an assault on the lordship of Usk. Morgan seems to have seized the opportunity presented by the invasion of England by Louis of France to press his claims by violence. The coming of peace in September 1217 removed his chance, and Morgan's men were driven from Caerleon at the end of the year by a bloody assault on the castle by the military household of William (I) Marshal. The campaign against him continued, as Morgan moved the centre of his resistance to his castle of Machen in upland Gwynllwg. A conference at Worcester on 11 March 1218 led to Morgan's loss of Caerleon to the Marshal and the rest of Morgan's career is a story of his dogged attempts to reclaim his family's position in lower Gwent. 
Morgan's principal opponents were the successive Marshal earls of Pembroke, each formidable in personal wealth and power. His chances of success against the younger Earl William Marshal were slim, for the earl maintained a great position at court, and married the king's sister. Even so, Morgan managed to challenge Earl William (II)'s continued possession of Caerleon in the 'curia regis' and the castle remained in royal hands between 1223 and 1226 pending a resolution of the case. Morgan's failure led to a formal quitclaim of his rights in Caerleon to Earl William in or soon after 1227. But Morgan's great opportunity came with the succession of Richard Marshal in 1231. Earl Richard rapidly fell foul of Henry III and a war erupted in the marches and the south-west in 1232. Morgan was retained in the royal household for the campaign, and did great damage to the Marshal lands in Gwent. In the summer of 1233 his suit against the Marshals for possession of Caerleon was once again in the 'curia regis'. By September 1233 he had a royal decision in his favour, but since the new earl, Gilbert Marshal (who succeeded his brother in 1234), would not give up the castle, Morgan had a grant of two English manors until he could repossess it. Morgan reoccupied the castle of Caerleon and lordships of Edlogan and Llefennydd early in 1236 (the 'Brut' noting that it was 'for fear of the Lord Llywelyn') and also had damages assessed against Earl Gilbert, which the earl paid (reluctantly) in September. It seems that Earl Gilbert took the reverse badly, as is demonstrated by a remarkable indenture of 1236 between him and a local knight, Sir William de St Maur, by which Sir William undertook to support by any legal means possible the earl's attempts to oust Morgan from the manor of Undy, in lower Gwent. None the less, Morgan remained in control of Caerleon and its associated lordships until his death in 1248, before 15 March. He was childless, and was succeeded by Maredudd ap Gruffudd, who in one source appears to have been the descendant of Iorwerth ab Owain through Gwerfyl, the daughter of his youngest son, Morgan, but who could also conceivably have been the son of Gruffudd ab Iorwerth ab Owain (and therefore Morgan ap Hywel's first cousin once removed). Maredudd acquired lands in Llefennydd and elsewhere, but Caerleon was denied him (presumably on the pretext of its being a life grant to Morgan in 1233, and not therefore heritable except at the king's will). 
The career of Morgan ap Hywel is the logical culmination of earlier choices of his family, such as the judicious collaboration of Morgan ab Owain with marcher powers in the reigns of Stephen and Henry II, and the choices of his grandfather and father at key points to ally with the king against the dominant Welsh power of their day (whether Deheubarth or Gwynedd). Morgan ap Hywel was an open Anglicizer: he operated through attorneys in courts of English law; served (as had his father) with English armies; adopted a toponym; and broke with the traditional Welsh families who supported and were tied to his dynasty, as can be seen from his aggression against his own hereditary 'distain' ('steward'), Iorwerth ab Adam, in the 1240s. He prefigures several other Anglicizing Welsh dynasties, notably those of Powys and Afan. It is perhaps ironic that the ab Adam family, with whom he fell out, followed the same path and ultimately became peers of the English parliament in the reign of Edward I. 


@@@@@


doc= 62215


Patrick Dunbar, fifth earl of Dunbar (c.1186-1248), continued the family tradition of endowing religious houses, most notably Dryburgh and Melrose abbeys. He took part in Alexander II's campaign against Thomas, illegitimate son of Alan of Galloway, in 1235 and in 1242 became involved in the aftermath of the murder, through arson, of the young earl of Atholl by the Bissets. The Comyns, together with Dunbar, pushed for retribution, and the Bissets were forced to flee the country. In 1247 Earl Patrick decided to go on crusade, supposedly because he had offended the monastic house of Tynemouth, and sold his stud horses in Lauderdale to Melrose Abbey to pay for his expenses. He and a number of other Scots died at the (successful) siege of Damietta in Egypt in 1248. Matthew Paris describes him as 'earl Patrick... who was held to be the most powerful among the magnates of Scotland' (Anderson, 360), though his career suggests that any distinction he achieved was due to his position rather than his abilities. He married, some time before 1213, Euphemia ('fl'. 1193), daughter of Walter Fitzalan, and was succeeded by their son, another Patrick. 


@@@@@


doc= 62216


Dunbar, Patrick, eighth earl of Dunbar or of March, and earl of Moray (1285-1369), soldier and magnate, was the first member of his family for nearly a century to attain national prominence. His great-great-grandfather Patrick, the fourth earl, died in December 1232 and was succeeded by his son, also Patrick. Patrick Dunbar, fifth earl of Dunbar (c.1186-1248), continued the family tradition of endowing religious houses, most notably Dryburgh and Melrose abbeys. He took part in Alexander II's campaign against Thomas, illegitimate son of Alan of Galloway, in 1235 and in 1242 became involved in the aftermath of the murder, through arson, of the young earl of Atholl by the Bissets. The Comyns, together with Dunbar, pushed for retribution, and the Bissets were forced to flee the country. In 1247 Earl Patrick decided to go on crusade, supposedly because he had offended the monastic house of Tynemouth, and sold his stud horses in Lauderdale to Melrose Abbey to pay for his expenses. He and a number of other Scots died at the (successful) siege of Damietta in Egypt in 1248. Matthew Paris describes him as 'earl Patrick... who was held to be the most powerful among the magnates of Scotland' (Anderson, 360), though his career suggests that any distinction he achieved was due to his position rather than his abilities. He married, some time before 1213, Euphemia ('fl'. 1193), daughter of Walter Fitzalan, and was succeeded by their son, another Patrick. 

Patrick Dunbar, sixth earl of Dunbar (c.1213-1289), featured in the power struggle of the minority of Alexander III. Identifying himself with the Durwards against the Comyns, the earl participated in the English-backed seizure of the young king from Edinburgh Castle in 1255. The Comyns returned to power two years later, but a compromise between the two factions was reached soon after, which left Dunbar out. The earl was present at the battle of Largs against the Norwegians in 1263, apparently in command of the left division; despite injury, he then went with the earls of Atholl and Carrick to subdue the Western Isles. He witnessed the main events of King Alexander's reign, such as the marriage contract between Princess Margaret and Erik II of Norway in 1281; he later swore to uphold their daughter, Margaret, as heir to the Scottish throne. Perhaps the most significant event in his career, though, was the alleged visit to Dunbar Castle of Thomas Erceldoune, when Alexander III's tragic death was prophesied. After this became a reality in 1286 the earl, with his three sons, subscribed to the 'Turnberry Bond' of the same year, effectively backing the Brus claim to the throne. Earl Patrick reputedly married Christian Bruce, daughter of Robert (V) de Brus of Annandale (died 1295), the Competitor, which may explain his otherwise unexpected presence at Turnberry; however, his only recorded spouse was one 'Cecilia filia Johannis', possibly a Fraser. Earl Patrick died in 1289, well into his seventies. Like that of his father, his career indicates that, while he took part in events, he was not the main author of them. 
He was succeeded by his son, Patrick 'with the blak beard'. Patrick Dunbar, seventh earl of Dunbar or of March (1242-1308), was the first to designate himself earl of March. He attended the parliament at Birgham in 1290 and subsequently put forward a claim to the vacant throne through his great-grandmother Ada, illegitimate daughter of King William the Lion, but soon withdrew ['see also 'Competitors for the throne of Scotland]. When war broke out in 1296, Earl Patrick quickly joined the English side, proving so useful that he was appointed captain of the Berwick garrison in May 1298 and promoted to chief commander of English forces in southern Scotland the following November. He was with the English army at the siege of Caerlaverock in 1300, yet for some reason failed to take up his appointment as a Scottish commissioner to the English parliament in 1305. On the resumption of hostilities in 1306 the earl does not appear to have played an active part and he died, aged sixty-six, on 10 October 1308. He was married to Marjory Comyn, a daughter of Alexander, earl of Buchan (died 1289), and their son, the inevitable Patrick, became eighth earl. This Patrick, like his father, initially consistently backed the English: he participated in the siege of Caerlaverock, aged fifteen, and received orders, with his father, to keep the peace on Edward II's accession. In 1313 Earl Patrick and Sir Adam Gordon (died 1328), a prominent Lothian landowner, approached Edward II on behalf of the 'people of Scotland' who were suffering from English raids. Dunbar's own lands were also under attack from the English garrisons at Berwick and Roxburgh. 
The earl's faith in the ability of the English government to protect his property survived until Bannockburn; although he allowed Edward II to shelter at Dunbar, he submitted to King Robert immediately thereafter. He proved an active supporter, taking part in the siege of Berwick in 1318 and attesting the declaration of Arbroath in April 1320. The presence of Adam Gordon in the embassy that took this letter to Rome has led to the suggestion that Earl Patrick was also in the party; while travelling back through France he heard rumours of a pro-Balliol plot, which, on his return to Scotland, resulted in the arrest of those associated with the so-called Soulis conspiracy. Following the death of King Robert in 1329 the earl remained loyal to the late king's son; the brigade he commanded after the battle of Dupplin Moor in 1332 besieged Edward Balliol (died 1363) in Perth until a lack of supplies caused their withdrawal. Indeed, it was claimed in the sixteenth century that the earl was a joint guardian, with the earl of Mar, appointed specifically 'to governe the realme on the south side of Forth' (Boece, 2.414). Later in 1332 he and Sir Archibald Douglas (died 1333), guardian of Scotland, tried and failed to make peace with the invading army. Earl Patrick was given command of Berwick Castle in 1333, but surrendered it to Edward III after the Scottish defeat at Halidon Hill in that year. Having then decided to rejoin the English, he received a grant of $100 of land and attended Balliol's parliament in 1334, which effectively handed Scotland over to Edward III. The devastation caused by the English army in the south-east in 1334, however, forced Dunbar to change sides again; he deserted Edward Balliol in 1335, took part in the Scottish siege of Perth in 1339, and commanded the left wing of the Scottish army at Nevilles Cross in 1346. His son and heir, possibly called John, was sent to England as a hostage while King David visited Scotland in 1351 and also in 1354, but not in 1357, suggesting that he was dead by that date. John's mother was probably Patrick's first wife, Ermigarda, who was recorded as pregnant in 1304. 
About 1320 Earl Patrick married Agnes [Agnes Dunbar, countess of Dunbar or of March (d. 1369)], the eldest daughter of Thomas Randolph, first earl of Moray (d. 1332), and Isabel, daughter of Sir John Stewart of Bunkle. According to the chronicler Pitscottie, the countess was popularly called Black Agnes 'be ressone sho was blak skynnit', presumably meaning that she was swarthy in complexion. Pitscottie goes on to add that she was also 'of greater spirit than it became a woman to be' ('CDS', 4.xxi), a remark which the few known facts about her life would seem to corroborate. She was Patrick's cousin, and a papal dispensation was needed before they could marry. She played as prominent a part as her husband in the cause of Scottish independence. 
With the resumption of war in the 1330s the strategically important castle of Dunbar became a focal point for both sides. The castle was rebuilt in 1333 at Edward III's expense, yet by 1337 it was held against him. Control of English affairs in the north lay with Richard (II) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (died 1376), and William Montagu, earl of Salisbury (died 1344); the two resolved to launch an English offensive by attacking Dunbar. The siege was begun in January 1338, when a vast array of professional engineers ensured that the castle faced a formidable barrage of missiles. Earl Patrick had absented himself, but his wife was ready. Appearing on the battlements even during bombardment, she mocked Salisbury's efforts and, according to Sir Walter Scott, set her maids to dusting the walls struck by the missiles. When a particular engine, called a sow owing to its shape, was drawn up, she taunted the English earl by saying, 'Beware, Montagow, for farrow shall they sow', and destroyed it with a specially prepared fragment of rock. As the English ran for cover, she reputedly shouted after them, 'Behold the litter of English pigs' (Scott, 99). Edward III was so impressed by this resistance that he interrupted his continental preparations to visit Salisbury and Arundel. Ultimately they decided to lift the siege, pleading the need to devote all resources overseas. This ineffective expedition cost almost $6000, which prompted one English chronicler to remark that its conclusion was 'wasteful, and neither honourable nor secure, but useful and advantageous to the Scots' ('Historia Anglicana', 1.200). 
With the death of his wife's brother, John Randolph, at Nevilles Cross, Earl Patrick assumed the title of earl of Moray. David II, on his release in 1357, granted the earldom to the English duke of Lancaster, though Dunbar seems to have held on to both the title and the rents. Agnes and her younger sister, Isabel, jointly inherited their brother's considerable lands in Dumfriesshire, Ayrshire, Aberdeenshire, and Fife. Isabel was married to Earl Patrick's cousin, Sir Patrick Dunbar, with whom she had a son, George. Since Agnes and Patrick remained childless, George became their heir. In November 1355 Earl Patrick participated in the raid which for a short time took the town of Berwick and in 1358 he was briefly captured by Sir James Lindsay for some unknown reason. He joined with Robert Stewart, the heir to the throne, and the earl of Douglas in 1363 in a rebellion ostensibly directed against David II's extravagance, but more truthfully associated with Stewart's royal ambitions in the face of the king's impending marriage to Margaret Logie. Earl Patrick, who continued to witness royal charters until July 1368, remained active up to his death in 1369. Although Countess Agnes was still alive in 1367, this is the last mention of her before her death, also in 1369. 


@@@@@


doc= 62217


Dunbar, Patrick, eighth earl of Dunbar or of March, and earl of Moray (1285-1369), soldier and magnate, was the first member of his family for nearly a century to attain national prominence. His great-great-grandfather Patrick, the fourth earl, died in December 1232 and was succeeded by his son, also Patrick. Patrick Dunbar, fifth earl of Dunbar (c.1186-1248), continued the family tradition of endowing religious houses, most notably Dryburgh and Melrose abbeys. He took part in Alexander II's campaign against Thomas, illegitimate son of Alan of Galloway, in 1235 and in 1242 became involved in the aftermath of the murder, through arson, of the young earl of Atholl by the Bissets. The Comyns, together with Dunbar, pushed for retribution, and the Bissets were forced to flee the country. In 1247 Earl Patrick decided to go on crusade, supposedly because he had offended the monastic house of Tynemouth, and sold his stud horses in Lauderdale to Melrose Abbey to pay for his expenses. He and a number of other Scots died at the (successful) siege of Damietta in Egypt in 1248. Matthew Paris describes him as 'earl Patrick... who was held to be the most powerful among the magnates of Scotland' (Anderson, 360), though his career suggests that any distinction he achieved was due to his position rather than his abilities. He married, some time before 1213, Euphemia ('fl'. 1193), daughter of Walter Fitzalan, and was succeeded by their son, another Patrick. 

Patrick Dunbar, sixth earl of Dunbar (c.1213-1289), featured in the power struggle of the minority of Alexander III. Identifying himself with the Durwards against the Comyns, the earl participated in the English-backed seizure of the young king from Edinburgh Castle in 1255. The Comyns returned to power two years later, but a compromise between the two factions was reached soon after, which left Dunbar out. The earl was present at the battle of Largs against the Norwegians in 1263, apparently in command of the left division; despite injury, he then went with the earls of Atholl and Carrick to subdue the Western Isles. He witnessed the main events of King Alexander's reign, such as the marriage contract between Princess Margaret and Erik II of Norway in 1281; he later swore to uphold their daughter, Margaret, as heir to the Scottish throne. Perhaps the most significant event in his career, though, was the alleged visit to Dunbar Castle of Thomas Erceldoune, when Alexander III's tragic death was prophesied. After this became a reality in 1286 the earl, with his three sons, subscribed to the 'Turnberry Bond' of the same year, effectively backing the Brus claim to the throne. Earl Patrick reputedly married Christian Bruce, daughter of Robert (V) de Brus of Annandale (died 1295), the Competitor, which may explain his otherwise unexpected presence at Turnberry; however, his only recorded spouse was one 'Cecilia filia Johannis', possibly a Fraser. Earl Patrick died in 1289, well into his seventies. Like that of his father, his career indicates that, while he took part in events, he was not the main author of them. 
He was succeeded by his son, Patrick 'with the blak beard'. Patrick Dunbar, seventh earl of Dunbar or of March (1242-1308), was the first to designate himself earl of March. He attended the parliament at Birgham in 1290 and subsequently put forward a claim to the vacant throne through his great-grandmother Ada, illegitimate daughter of King William the Lion, but soon withdrew ['see also 'Competitors for the throne of Scotland]. When war broke out in 1296, Earl Patrick quickly joined the English side, proving so useful that he was appointed captain of the Berwick garrison in May 1298 and promoted to chief commander of English forces in southern Scotland the following November. He was with the English army at the siege of Caerlaverock in 1300, yet for some reason failed to take up his appointment as a Scottish commissioner to the English parliament in 1305. On the resumption of hostilities in 1306 the earl does not appear to have played an active part and he died, aged sixty-six, on 10 October 1308. He was married to Marjory Comyn, a daughter of Alexander, earl of Buchan (died 1289), and their son, the inevitable Patrick, became eighth earl. This Patrick, like his father, initially consistently backed the English: he participated in the siege of Caerlaverock, aged fifteen, and received orders, with his father, to keep the peace on Edward II's accession. In 1313 Earl Patrick and Sir Adam Gordon (died 1328), a prominent Lothian landowner, approached Edward II on behalf of the 'people of Scotland' who were suffering from English raids. Dunbar's own lands were also under attack from the English garrisons at Berwick and Roxburgh. 
The earl's faith in the ability of the English government to protect his property survived until Bannockburn; although he allowed Edward II to shelter at Dunbar, he submitted to King Robert immediately thereafter. He proved an active supporter, taking part in the siege of Berwick in 1318 and attesting the declaration of Arbroath in April 1320. The presence of Adam Gordon in the embassy that took this letter to Rome has led to the suggestion that Earl Patrick was also in the party; while travelling back through France he heard rumours of a pro-Balliol plot, which, on his return to Scotland, resulted in the arrest of those associated with the so-called Soulis conspiracy. Following the death of King Robert in 1329 the earl remained loyal to the late king's son; the brigade he commanded after the battle of Dupplin Moor in 1332 besieged Edward Balliol (died 1363) in Perth until a lack of supplies caused their withdrawal. Indeed, it was claimed in the sixteenth century that the earl was a joint guardian, with the earl of Mar, appointed specifically 'to governe the realme on the south side of Forth' (Boece, 2.414). Later in 1332 he and Sir Archibald Douglas (died 1333), guardian of Scotland, tried and failed to make peace with the invading army. Earl Patrick was given command of Berwick Castle in 1333, but surrendered it to Edward III after the Scottish defeat at Halidon Hill in that year. Having then decided to rejoin the English, he received a grant of $100 of land and attended Balliol's parliament in 1334, which effectively handed Scotland over to Edward III. The devastation caused by the English army in the south-east in 1334, however, forced Dunbar to change sides again; he deserted Edward Balliol in 1335, took part in the Scottish siege of Perth in 1339, and commanded the left wing of the Scottish army at Nevilles Cross in 1346. His son and heir, possibly called John, was sent to England as a hostage while King David visited Scotland in 1351 and also in 1354, but not in 1357, suggesting that he was dead by that date. John's mother was probably Patrick's first wife, Ermigarda, who was recorded as pregnant in 1304. 
About 1320 Earl Patrick married Agnes [Agnes Dunbar, countess of Dunbar or of March (d. 1369)], the eldest daughter of Thomas Randolph, first earl of Moray (d. 1332), and Isabel, daughter of Sir John Stewart of Bunkle. According to the chronicler Pitscottie, the countess was popularly called Black Agnes 'be ressone sho was blak skynnit', presumably meaning that she was swarthy in complexion. Pitscottie goes on to add that she was also 'of greater spirit than it became a woman to be' ('CDS', 4.xxi), a remark which the few known facts about her life would seem to corroborate. She was Patrick's cousin, and a papal dispensation was needed before they could marry. She played as prominent a part as her husband in the cause of Scottish independence. 
With the resumption of war in the 1330s the strategically important castle of Dunbar became a focal point for both sides. The castle was rebuilt in 1333 at Edward III's expense, yet by 1337 it was held against him. Control of English affairs in the north lay with Richard (II) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (died 1376), and William Montagu, earl of Salisbury (died 1344); the two resolved to launch an English offensive by attacking Dunbar. The siege was begun in January 1338, when a vast array of professional engineers ensured that the castle faced a formidable barrage of missiles. Earl Patrick had absented himself, but his wife was ready. Appearing on the battlements even during bombardment, she mocked Salisbury's efforts and, according to Sir Walter Scott, set her maids to dusting the walls struck by the missiles. When a particular engine, called a sow owing to its shape, was drawn up, she taunted the English earl by saying, 'Beware, Montagow, for farrow shall they sow', and destroyed it with a specially prepared fragment of rock. As the English ran for cover, she reputedly shouted after them, 'Behold the litter of English pigs' (Scott, 99). Edward III was so impressed by this resistance that he interrupted his continental preparations to visit Salisbury and Arundel. Ultimately they decided to lift the siege, pleading the need to devote all resources overseas. This ineffective expedition cost almost $6000, which prompted one English chronicler to remark that its conclusion was 'wasteful, and neither honourable nor secure, but useful and advantageous to the Scots' ('Historia Anglicana', 1.200). 
With the death of his wife's brother, John Randolph, at Nevilles Cross, Earl Patrick assumed the title of earl of Moray. David II, on his release in 1357, granted the earldom to the English duke of Lancaster, though Dunbar seems to have held on to both the title and the rents. Agnes and her younger sister, Isabel, jointly inherited their brother's considerable lands in Dumfriesshire, Ayrshire, Aberdeenshire, and Fife. Isabel was married to Earl Patrick's cousin, Sir Patrick Dunbar, with whom she had a son, George. Since Agnes and Patrick remained childless, George became their heir. In November 1355 Earl Patrick participated in the raid which for a short time took the town of Berwick and in 1358 he was briefly captured by Sir James Lindsay for some unknown reason. He joined with Robert Stewart, the heir to the throne, and the earl of Douglas in 1363 in a rebellion ostensibly directed against David II's extravagance, but more truthfully associated with Stewart's royal ambitions in the face of the king's impending marriage to Margaret Logie. Earl Patrick, who continued to witness royal charters until July 1368, remained active up to his death in 1369. Although Countess Agnes was still alive in 1367, this is the last mention of her before her death, also in 1369. 


@@@@@


doc= 62221


Wren, Christopher (1589-1658), dean of Windsor, was born in the city of London on 17 September 1589, the third child and second son of Francis Wren (1553-1624), who was described in 'Parentalia' as a London mercer but on his marriage certificate as a 'painter-stainer'; Christopher's mother was Susan, daughter of John Wiggington, a 'merchant of London and deputy alderman of Cheapside' ('Parentalia', BL Add. MS 25071, fol. 4). Like his elder brother, Matthew Wren (1585-1667), later bishop of Ely, Christopher was admitted as a scholar at Merchant Taylors' School (9 February 1601) but unlike him he went to Oxford. He was elected a Sir Thomas White scholar at St John's College in 1605 and matriculated in October 1608; he graduated BA in June 1609 and proceeded MA in 1613, when he was a candidate for the chair of astronomy at Gresham College, London. As a graduate he wrote a successful Latin drama, 'Physiponomachia', based on a passage from Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', which he dedicated to his college's president, John Buckeridge. In April 1619 he and Brian Duppa of All Souls were appointed to serve as proctors. On 21 June 1620 he defended his BD and a week later he was granted a licence to preach. In the same year he became a household chaplain to Bishop Lancelot Andrewes, a close friend of Buckeridge and formerly master of Matthew Wren's Cambridge college. Andrewes himself was also an old boy of Merchant Taylors' School and in 1620 he appointed the younger Wren to be rector of Fonthill Bishop in Wiltshire. There Christopher married, in September 1623, Mary Cox ('bap'. 1604, died after 1660?), the daughter of Robert Cox. Recent research has shown that Cox, who died in early 1647, was not (as previously thought) a London merchant who had acquired land at Fonthill Bishop prior to his death in November 1621, but a modest, non-gentry landowner of that parish (Davies and Johnson)`. Christopher Wren remained rector until 1639 and in 1623 he became rector also of the neighbouring parish of East Knoyle. It was there that he and his family lived -- Wren's second son, Christopher Wren (1632-1723), the future architect, was born in the village. The younger Christopher was one of eleven children born to the couple between 1624 and 1643. 
In 1628, while Wren was appointed a chaplain to the king, his brother Matthew, already master of Peterhouse, Cambridge, became dean of Wolverhampton and of Windsor and register of the Order of the Garter. When Matthew resigned his offices on becoming bishop of Hereford in 1634, Christopher was not elected despite having been the front runner, but did succeed to all his other positions, being admitted to the deanery at Windsor on 4 April 1635. Later in life Wren took great pleasure in pointing out that his family had been associated with Windsor since before the Reformation since one Geoffrey Wren had held the seventh stall there under Henry VII. Like his brother before him Dean Wren was assiduous in attending to chapter business, even transferring two chapter meetings, in October 1636 and in 1638, to the deanery when recurrent ill health prevented him leaving his home. He followed his brother's 1628 initiative in insisting upon order and decency in the life of the chapel, complaining to the king in 1637 of 'promiscuous and undecent sitting in, and filling the stalles in the Choyre by weomen and people of meane qualitie' (Windsor Castle, chapter acts, VI. B 2, fol. 138'r'), against which the king provided for reordering the chapel. 
As dean Wren had oversight of the worship for the Garter knights whenever they were at Windsor, and as register of the Garter, an office traditionally linked with the deanery, he took a serious interest in the history of the order and in record keeping. He delighted Charles I by establishing that Henry VII had been entitled 'defender of the faith', 'long before the Pope's pretended Donation' of 1521 (Wren, 'Parentalia', 143). 
The marginalia of Wren's books -- including that of Henry Wootton's 'Elements of Architecture' -- reveal him to have been interested in the visual arts and a talented draughtsman. At East Knoyle Wren used the profits from his deanery to undertake the redecoration of the chancel. In 1639 he employed a Dorset man, Robert Brockway, to undertake the work that he designed and supervised himself. The plasterwork covers the four walls and extends above head height with friezes of strapwork patterns depicting cherubs on the north and south walls; in Wren's original design the ceiling was also decorated with plaster cherubim, though these were removed in the nineteenth century. The east wall, and the flanking panels of the north and south walls, bear images and texts on the theme of Jacob's dream, while opposite, on the chancel's west wall, is the ascension and next to this, on the north wall, is a depiction of an 'everyman' figure kneeling as a supplicant, lamenting with the psalmist that he is yet far off and wingless, unable to reach the highest heavens '(Psalm 55)'. 
In November 1638 Wren was presented to the living of Great Haseley in Oxfordshire by the unanimous vote of the Windsor chapter, but he had little enjoyment in the living, and by Easter 1641 sought to exchange it with Christopher Potter, the dean of Worcester. At the outbreak of the civil war he took care to safeguard the registers of the Order of the Garter, hiding them with the order's silver, beneath the floor of the treasury. This precaution paid off when the castle was first ransacked in 1642 but three years later a more determined search found them. Although Wren successfully petitioned for the return of the documents of the order, the 1637 altar silver, made by Christian van Vianen, and other treasures were never returned. The deanery itself was sacked on 21 September 1642, allegedly by parliamentary order, although both houses denied this, and as well as personal papers Wren's collection of gift silver, from the king, the elector palatine, and other knights of the Garter, was taken. At the time all that was returned to him was his harpsichord, valued at 10's'. 
Wren was expelled from Windsor by parliamentary forces in May 1643 and spent the next two years at the royalist centres of East Knoyle, Oxford, and Bristol. He was described as a 'main agent' in the organizing of the Clubmen to resist parliamentary forces on the Wiltshire-Dorset border in summer 1645. However, by then, and despite a royal order for his protection (December 1643), Wren had been briefly imprisoned following a referral by the sequestration committee. In this or the following year Wren wrote to one of his churchwardens suggesting that 'there were certaine pictures in the chancel of Knowle wch might prove scandalous' for their potential association with Laudian forms of worship (BL, Add. MS 22084, fol. 25). After his release from custody (for which he paid $40 in August) he was rearrested and imprisoned for five months at Bristol and Longford Castle, Wiltshire, before his release by July 1646. As a consequence of his being declared 'a delinquent' he was deprived of his living at East Knoyle, though he retained a small property in the village. His creative decoration at East Knoyle church was censured before the Faulstone commission meeting at Longford Castle in May 1647. In retirement he moved to Bletchingdon in Oxfordshire, where his son-in-law William Holder was incumbent, and renewed his considerable scholarly interests -- encouraging his son's remarkable talents in mathematics and writing extensive comments on Francis Bacon's 'Sylva sylvarum' and 'New Atlantis' and on Thomas Browne's 'Pseudodoxia epidemica'. Wren's marginalia reveal his diverse interests and wide reading in, among other subjects, botany, climatology, and child-rearing. Christopher Wren died at the vicarage at Bletchingdon on 29 May 1658 and was buried in the churchyard. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 62223


Haigh, Emily Alice (1879-1943), writer and journal editor, was born at 115 King Edward Road, South Hackney, London, on 26 January 1879, the daughter of John Walter Haigh, wool dealer, and his wife, Catherine Jane, 'nee' Doorly. She was brought up in Port Elizabeth, Cape Colony, but was sent to school in Pevensey, Sussex, near Hastings, from which town she took the name she later used. She spent some time in France before moving to London, where she began to publish poems, stories, and literary essays in periodicals. Interested in the modern movements of her time -- including feminism, women's suffrage, and socialism -- Hastings met the editor and social reformer Alfred Richard Orage (1873-1934) when she attended a lecture he gave on theosophy in 1906. 
Hastings and Orage fell in love and began a rather fraught affair which continued until 1914. There was evidently no question of marriage: Orage was already married and, however estranged from his wife, may well have been aware from the start of Hastings's volatile personality. Reputed to be a beauty, Hastings was an independent woman, financially secure, and familiar with the city in ways Orage initially was not. They soon began to live together, not only in London but during the summers at seaside resorts and, as Orage prospered, in several suburban homes. In 1907, when Orage took over as editor of the 'New Age' -- a periodical which soon championed established as well as new, experimental writers -- Hastings joined the editorial staff and became a regular contributor. She published under her own name as well as anonymously and under a variety of pseudonyms (including Beatrice Tina, Alice Morning, Robert a Field, T. K. L., D. Triformis, Edward Stafford, S. Robert West, V. M., G. Whiz, J. Wilson, T. W., A. M. A., and Cynicus). Her submissions were informed and spirited, and ranged from poems and stories to letters, literary articles (over 200), and essays on feminism and social reform. In her autobiography, 'The Old 'New Age': Orage -- and Others', published in 1936 as a 42-page pamphlet by a small press, she took credit for discovering or arguing with Orage for the inclusion of such promising young writers as F. S. Flint and Ezra Pound. She worked closely with other members of the staff, among them Huntly Carter, J. M. Kennedy, and A. E. Randall. 
By early 1914 Hastings's relationship with Orage had become, according to her autobiography, 'intolerable' (Hastings, 8), and that spring she left London for Paris. She immediately joined the flamboyant circle of artists in Montparnasse that included the Italian modernist painter Amedeo Modigliani (1884-1920), with whom she fell in love. They lived together, first at his flat at 53 rue Montparnasse, then at her cottage at 13 rue Norvins. Their frequently violent affair, fuelled by alcohol and hashish, soured late in 1915; after a brief affair with Jean Cocteau's lover Raymond Radiguet, Hastings left Paris for the south of France. According to June Rose, Hastings served as a 'stimulant, irritant and catalyst' (Rose, 109) for Modigliani's work during this important period in his development, and he depicted Hastings in at least fourteen contemporary paintings and numerous sketches, not only as herself and his lover, but as Sappho and Mme de Pompadour. These pictures reveal Hastings as a compelling and dramatic woman. Clothed, she appears poised, with a small, proud head and long neck, her black hair pinned back in a low bun; nude, she is sometimes dishevelled, her nakedness emphasized by drapery that fails to cover her body. She continued to write for the 'New Age' until 1920, contributing essays on pacifism, a sequence of short stories, and 'Impressions of Paris', a series of weekly articles that appeared for eighteen months. After the war she lived in both Paris and the south of France as well as in Switzerland, not returning to London until the early 1930s. 
Generally quarrelsome, often drunk and unwell, Hastings squandered a large inheritance and became increasingly difficult and unreliable. Her highly emotional autobiography, which she described at the start as 'Extracts from an Introduction to 'Incidents in the Life of the old 'New Age', 1907 to 1916'', a volume 'in preparation' (p. 1), is the only book she published. It is a painful and generally vitriolic account of her betrayal by former literary friends, top among them Orage himself, whom she pillories as a fraud, a bad writer, an incompetent editor, a stupid and grossly ungrateful one-time lover, a 'consummate schemer' (p. 15), and a 'maniac' (p. 29) -- an estimate in sharp contrast to the man of grace, charm, generosity, and good sense admired by all of those who wrote about him after his death in 1934. 
Orage was not the only figure to receive such harsh and unfair criticism: Hastings portrayed Katherine Mansfield, another contributor to the 'New Age', as a pretentious and twittering would-be 'saint', who 'fouled' the world 'wherever she went', while her writing was 'incredibly vulgar stuff' (p. 28). Hastings similarly accused Richard Aldington, an author Orage encouraged and whose third novel, 'All Men are Enemies', appeared in 1933, of stealing his title from one of her articles, 'Women's worst enemy, woman'; she went on to lambast him as a 'silk-fingered, scratch-nailed, sob-stuffing, eaten-brained curate of the feminine soul' (p. 9). 
The effect of Hastings's bitter autobiography is not finally comic, but both deeply disquieting and pathetic. She clearly felt wronged by the world, particularly by the English literary establishment, and above all by Orage himself, yet while she struggled to elicit the reader's sympathy, she demonstrated her own emotional instability and lack of judgement. In his revised edition of 'A. R. Orage: a Memoir', Philip Mairet admits that Hastings's book was embarrassing and outrageous, but refrains through kindness from arguing with her, stressing instead her competence as an editor in the formative years of the 'New Age'. 
Clearly unhappy and financially pressed, Hastings could in 1936 nevertheless declare proudly in her autobiography, 'I still love the social rebel, and challenge mere man-made laws... I am still the same crusading, anti-philistine woman I ever was' (p. 9). By the early 1940s, however, Hastings had failed to complete the book-length study she had initially projected, and was living in Worthing as the widow of a pugilist, Lachie Thomson. She made a will in mid-October 1943, leaving 'the whole of my household furniture from beds to tin tacks' to a 'devoted friend', Doris Lillian Green, and her 'Literary Estate' to the British Museum or 'the first Public Library that puts in a claim'. On 31 October 1943 her dead body was discovered in her flat, 4 Bedford Row, Worthing, Sussex. At the inquest the coroner stated that she died as a result of asphyxia from carbon monoxide poisoning due to inhaling coal gas, and her death was officially registered 'as a suicide while mentally unhinged' (d. cert.). It seems likely, as stipulated in her will, that 'no Service whatever' was held and that Hastings was cremated; Green also probably followed Hastings's explicit instructions to throw her ashes 'down a hill, or in a field'. 


@@@@@


doc= 62226


Kravchinsky, Sergey Mikhailovich (1851-1895), revolutionary and author, was born on 1 July 1851 OS in Novy Starodub, Aleksandriya district, Kherson province of the Russian empire (roughly in the centre of what is now Ukraine). He was the second son and third of the four children of Mikhail Faddeevich Kravchinsky (died 1865), a Belarusian army doctor, and Lyubov Yakovlevna, 'nee' Levinskaya (died 1887), a Ukrainian noblewoman. Before settling in London for good in 1884, he was highly peripatetic. Between 1858 and 1865 his father's work took him to the Ukrainian towns of Yelizavetgrad, Uman, Chuguev, and Slavyansk. His mother then retired to Kremenchug. He left Ukraine for Russia to go to an army gymnasium in Oryol and completed his education between 1867 and 1870 at specialized military schools in Moscow and St Petersburg. On becoming an artillery officer he was sent back to Ukraine to serve as an instructor in the Kharkov military district, but in 1871 he left the army and entered the Forestry Institute in St Petersburg. After two years of a three-year course of study he left this too. Russian populism, the doctrine of sympathy for the common people, was reaching its peak. Craggy (if short-sighted), good with his hands, utterly fearless, and profoundly spiritual (his close associate Prince Peter Kropotkin was to say of him that 'he knew the 'New Testament' almost by heart'; Kropotkin, 322), Kravchinsky was no less likely and much better qualified than his fellow students to participate in the celebrated 'going to the people' to which several thousand of them committed themselves in 1873 and 1874. 
Like the majority of his peers, Kravchinsky was arrested (when working as a sawyer in the province of Tver in November 1873). Unlike most of them, however, he immediately escaped (with the help of a peasant). After dodging the authorities for more than a year, he went abroad for the first time in the spring of 1875 and turned up in the next six months in Brussels, London, Paris, Herzegovina, Lugano, and Geneva. In London he had business with an older Russian emigre, Pyotr Lavrov, the publisher of his early writings (stories for peasants); in Herzegovina he fought in the opening round of the Balkan crisis of 1875-8; in Lugano he was converted by the elderly anarchist Mikhail Bakunin to the merits of political violence. Early in 1876 he went back to Russia in the hope of helping the populists to recover from the mass arrests which had decimated their ranks. At the end of the year he left again, this time for Sicily (because the wife of one of his comrades was dying and needed a warm climate). Drawn into Errico Malatesta's Benevento uprising, he spent nine months in an Italian gaol. A beneficiary of the amnesty which followed the accession of Umberto I in January 1878, he returned once more to St Petersburg and on 4 August 1878 OS consummated his career as a practitioner of revolutionary violence by stabbing to death General N. V. Mezentsev, the head of the tsar's 'third department' (secret police). After a remarkable escape from the scene of the crime he published a pamphlet whose subtitle, 'A Death for a Death', testified to his belief in terror. 
In the next few years, however, Kravchinsky abandoned or at least seriously modified his terrorist convictions. In emigration again (in Geneva in 1878-81 and 1882-4; in Milan in 1881-2; in London from early July 1884 to the end of his life), he came to believe that the social justice to which he had committed himself at the beginning of the 1870s could be achieved by the introduction of a constitution for the Russian empire, by literary rather than military methods, and by working for consensus among Russian revolutionaries. The many reasons which have been adduced for this shift in his outlook constitute one of the principal talking points of his career. Possibilities include the start, in 1878, of his lifelong relationship with Fanni Markovna Lichkus ('c'.1853-1945) (with whom he had a daughter who died within a few days of her birth in 1879); friendship in Geneva with the scholarly and pacific Ukrainian federalist Mykhailo Drahomanov; fear of capture by the tsarist secret police, who were increasingly active in western Europe from the beginning of the 1880s and whose activities may have been part of the reason why, in 1881, he assumed the pseudonym Stepniak ('Man of the Steppes'); and the realization that, if even the populists' assassination of Alexander II in March 1881 did not incline the tsarist authorities to give ground, no amount of violence was likely to do so. 
An explanation of Kravchinsky's change of heart that does not appear to stand up to scrutiny is the notion that he changed his views under the influence of long residence in supposedly moderate Britain, for the moderation he displayed as Stepniak is present even in some of the things he wrote as Kravchinsky. It needs to be said, furthermore, that the pseudonymous Stepniak did not abandon the views of Kravchinsky altogether, for his first book to be published in English, 'Underground Russia' (London, 1883; first published in Italian as newspaper articles in 1881-2 and as a book in 1882), declared that 'The Terrorist... is noble, terrible, irresistibly fascinating, for he combines in himself the two sublimities of human grandeur: the martyr and the hero' (pp. 40-41). Nor does Stepniak's novel of 1889, 'The Career of a Nihilist', portray its admittedly unsuccessful hero in an unfavourable light. It is possible, therefore, that in Britain Stepniak did not so much renounce his past as keep quiet about it. His youthful exploits certainly came as a shock to at least one of his British admirers when she read about them in a London periodical of January 1894 ('Tea and Anarchy!', 239-40; 'Olive and Stepniak', 1-10, 19). Perhaps, then, it is sensible to characterize Stepniak as a moderate who never wholly denied the merits of direct action. 
Apart from 'The Career of a Nihilist', Kravchinsky's original publications as Stepniak -- 'Russia under the Tzars' (1885), 'The Russian Storm-Cloud' (1886), 'The Russian Peasantry' (1888), 'King Stork and King Log' (1895) -- were repositories of information rather than calls to action. It is true that 'Nihilism as it is', which also came out under the pseudonym Stepniak in 1894, was of a programmatic rather than an empirical nature, but the essays which it contained had already appeared in Russian. Although the descriptive books took a much less sanguine view of the Russian empire than their immediate precursor in English, Donald Mackenzie Wallace's 'Russia' (1877), they nevertheless pretended, as reportage, to be objective, and they certainly adopted a much more judicious tone than, say (to take a much later example of a book by a Russian dissident published outside Russia), Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's 'Gulag Archipelago' of the 1970s. It is some indication of their relative moderation that they enabled Stepniak to forge relationships with British people (and Americans) of many different political allegiances. 
Kravchinsky's British friends in his early days in London were mainly socialists. He met George Bernard Shaw, for example, within three weeks of his arrival, at the demonstration which took place in Hyde Park on 21 July 1884 to protest about the House of Lords' resistance to the 'Third Reform Bill'. He knew Edward Pease, the secretary of the Fabian Society, before the latter moved to Newcastle upon Tyne in 1886, for the two corresponded frequently in the years that Pease spent there. William Morris and Sidney Webb were other early acquaintances. Yet even in the mid-1880s Stepniak's British associates included William Westall (novelist and journalist on 'The Times', who helped him to 'English' 'Russia under the Tzars') and W. Earl Hodgson (another journalist on 'The Times', whose principal interest lay in fishing). In later years his main British political associates were Liberals. Robert Spence Watson, a Newcastle lawyer who was shortly to become the president of the National Liberal Federation, was so impressed by a lecture that he gave to an audience of 1500 people in the Tyne Theatre in Newcastle on 24 February 1889 that he decided that 'something had to be done' (F. Volkhovsky, obituary of Spence Watson, 'Free Russia', July 1911, 2). In conjunction with Prince Peter Kropotkin, Thomas Burt MP, and others, Spence Watson and Stepniak established a Society of Friends of Russian Freedom at the beginning of 1890 which survived until 1914. Its journal, 'Free Russia', became one of the best-known outlets for anti-tsarist opinion in late Victorian and Edwardian Britain. 
In 1891 Stepniak and four of his Russian associates established a Russian Free Press Fund in London to provide a context for his continuing activities as Kravchinsky. The flysheets of this body ('letuchie listki') enabled him to demonstrate to other Russian exiles (notably Georgy Plekhanov in Geneva) that he was still engaged in the quest for their 'holy grail', the pooling of the Russian dissidents' scattered resources. Fate, however, prevented him from bringing his work among the Russian exiles to a head, for he was knocked down by a train on 23 December 1895 when walking across the North London Railway between Acton and Chiswick at a level crossing at the end of his street (Woodstock Road, Bedford Park, Middlesex, where he had lived since 1892, having previously been based in St John's Wood). Lost in thought, he was on his way to a fellow Russian's flat in Shepherd's Bush, where plans were to be finalized for a new Russian-language newspaper in which Russian exiles of many different stripes were to play a part. 
Stepniak's funeral took the form of a public meeting at Waterloo Station on 28 December 1895. The thirteen speakers included Kropotkin, Malatesta, Spence Watson, William Morris, Keir Hardie, and John Burns. After the meeting his body was taken to Woking for cremation (without ceremony). A public collection provided his indigent widow with some assistance and enabled her to arrange the translation of some of her husband's English-language work into Russian. She sold his personal papers to the Soviet Union in the 1930s. In April 1944 his British socialist friends affixed a plaque in his memory to a cottage he had frequented in Pastens Lane, Limpsfield, Surrey. It is hard not to suppose that the Soviet authorities purchased his papers in order to suppress them, for his populist creed differed markedly from theirs and a major Russian-language study of his life did not appear until 1973. In Britain, Stepniak's legacy was above all literary, for the most prolific translator of the Russian classics into English, Constance Garnett, learned Russian in his circle, and it has been argued that Joseph Conrad's 'Under Western Eyes' represents, in part, a fictionalization of his relationship with Olive Garnett (the translator's sister-in-law). He was one of the few Russian exiles ever to have lived in Britain who attracted significant attention in both Anglophone and Russophone contexts. 


@@@@@


doc= 62227


Volkhovsky, Felix Vadimovich (1846-1914), revolutionary and man of letters, was born into a family of impoverished gentry in Poltava, eastern Ukraine, on 6 July 1846 OS, the son of Vadim Volkhovsky and his wife, Yekaterina. After spending his early childhood there and in Novgorod-Volynsk in western Ukraine he attended gymnasia in St Petersburg and Odessa before entering the law faculty of Moscow University in 1863. Serfdom had been abolished two years earlier, the 'great reforms' appeared to be continuing, and Nikolay Chernyshevsky's inspirational novel 'What is to be Done?' had just been published in 'The Contemporary'. Then in a famous public event of May 1864 Chernyshevsky was condemned to hard labour in Siberia. Volkhovsky wrote an eye-witness account of this 'civil execution' and began to move in the same circles as Dmitry Karakozov, whose attempt on the life of the tsar in April 1866 brought the great reforms to an end. Questioned by the authorities in the wake of Karakozov's attempt, he was held only to have run a self-help association for fellow students from his Ukrainian homeland. 
Subsequently, however, Volkhovsky was formally arrested on three occasions: in February 1868 for co-founding the Rouble Society (whose purpose was to devote the eponymous monthly subscription to the publication of tracts for the common people); in April 1869 for associating with Sergey Nechaev (the advocate of strong-arm tactics whom Dostoyevsky was to excoriate in 'The Devils'); and in August 1874 for running a circle in Odessa and Kherson whose members sought to propagandize local peasants and workers. Although he escaped indictment in 1868, after the other arrests he suffered years of preliminary detention in St Petersburg before being tried among Nechaev's associates in 1871 and again in the 'trial of the 193' of 1877-8. In 1871 he was acquitted, for he disagreed with Nechaev's advocacy of direct action (and the political trial of 1871 was one of the few in Russian history to be conducted with due attention to the law). In 1878, however, he was sentenced to exile in western Siberia. His hair, by this time, had gone grey, and his hearing had been severely impaired by his experiences in prison. His first wife, Mariya Osipovna Antonova (1848-1877), whom he had married in July 1871, had died in Italy. 
Volkhovsky was developing as a man of letters. He had started writing poetry at least as early as 1870 and published a good deal when he was in prison (getting it to the printer through his mother). In 1876 he published in Vienna one of the first socialist pamphlets ever to appear in the Ukrainian language. In May 1878 he drafted (in Russian) the defiant 'open letter' that twenty-five of those indicted in the trial of the 193 submitted to the authorities after their conviction. Although in his first place of Siberian exile, Tiukalinsk, he was obliged to work as a sign-writer and house-painter in order to keep body and soul together, he secured permission to move to Tomsk in 1881 and there became heavily involved in the recently founded 'Siberian Newspaper'. When the American investigator George Kennan visited Tomsk in 1885 and 1886 he helped him gather material for what was to become, in 1891, 'Siberia and the Exile System', one of the greatest of all indictments of the tsarist regime. In Tomsk he also edited a substantial collection of poetry under the title 'Echoes of Siberia' (1889). But the authorities closed the 'Siberian Newspaper'; his second wife, Aleksandra Khorzhevskaya (a fellow revolutionary whom he had married in Tiukalinsk) shot herself in December 1887; and his three-year-old daughter, Katia, died of pneumonia in early 1889. To find work he moved east, first to Irkutsk and then, after further harassment by the authorities, to Chita and Troitskosavsk. 
In the summer of 1889 he made a bid for freedom, leaving Vera, his eight-year-old daughter, in Irkutsk and travelling surreptitiously to Russia's Pacific seaboard. After throwing himself on the mercy of British sea-captains at Vladivostok and Yokohama he reached Vancouver and wrote to George Kennan. The two men renewed their friendship. In July 1890 he moved on from North America to London, where the Newcastle lawyer Robert Spence Watson and the Russian 'emigre' Sergey Stepniak had just founded the Society of Friends of Russian Freedom and the periodical 'Free Russia'. With help from Kennan and a family of Russian musicians he arranged for Vera to make her way from Irkutsk to London by the western rather than the eastern route (disguised as a boy to get across Russia's European frontier). 
Thus the stage was set for Volkhovsky's British phase. It began in a blaze of publicity, for the story of his escape from Siberia was reported at length in 'The Times' and his inside knowledge of Russian prisons was grist to the mill of both the country's leading newspaper and a number of British periodicals. Because of the foundation of the Society of Friends of Russian Freedom and the publication of Kennan's book on tsarist malfeasance in Siberia, the deficiencies of Russia's political system were receiving particularly extensive scrutiny in Britain at the time of Volkhovsky's arrival. He had started lecturing on his Russian experiences almost as soon as he arrived in Canada. In England he spoke throughout the country. In Newcastle, for example, he told a 'splendid audience' at the Grand Assembly Rooms in February 1891 that in solitary confinement in St Petersburg he had almost forgotten how to speak and had struggled to retain his sanity ('Newcastle Daily Leader', 26 Feb 1891). Shortly afterwards he spoke 'for the first time in London before a purely Socialist audience, at William Morris's Socialist Club, Hammersmith' ('Free Russia', May 1891). Such appearances remained part of his life until his health gave way for good. 
As his deafness intensified Volkhovsky devoted more time to writing and editing. He served as a sub-editor and later the editor of 'Free Russia'; he was a prime mover in the foundation, at the end of 1891, of the Russian Free Press Fund; between 1893 and 1899 he edited the forty-six issues of the fund's Russian-language 'flysheets'; and he published 'A China Cup and Other Stories for Children' (1891), letters to the press (such as those in his exchange with Vera Zasulich in 'Labour Leader' and 'Justice' in August and September 1896), and political essays such as the Russian-language 'What the Constitution of Loris-Melikov Teaches' (1894) and the English-language 'Claims of the Russian liberals' (in Sergius Stepniak, 'Nihilism as it Is', 1894). Perhaps his greatest single contribution to the promotion of Russian culture in England was inspiring Constance Garnett to learn Russian, a decision that led to her translations of most of the Russian classics. 
He also excelled as an organizer. It was to his flat in Shepherd's Bush that the leader of the Russian exiles in London, Sergey Stepniak, was going for a key meeting when he was knocked down by a train in December 1895. Meetings at his various places of residence were to be still more important to Russian 'emigres' when they no longer had Stepniak to lead them. When, for example, Vladimir Burtsev was arrested on the steps of the British Museum in December 1897 and charged with incitement to murder, it was from Volkhovsky's address, 176 Lancaster Road, Notting Hill, that the Russian exiles initiated his defence (via Spence Watson in Newcastle and, in due course, the leading barrister Lord Coleridge). 
Despite the many difficulties of his life in London -- poverty, the unexpected death of Stepniak, the need constantly to watch out for tsarist agents (for Rachkovsky, the head of the Paris office of the Russian secret police, was hand in glove with Chief Inspector Melville of the special branch in London) -- Volkhovsky remained true to the principles he had adopted in the 1860s. He did not embrace terrorism and he was reluctant to cheapen himself even in debate. When, for example, he could have vilified the tsarist government in 'Free Russia' in 1900 for criticizing British conduct in the South African War, he refused to do so on the grounds that supporting Britain in this instance meant supporting military intervention on the part of one country in the internal affairs of another. He wanted Russians to gain their freedom from the tsar, but not with the military assistance of foreigners. All he asked the British to do was 'to show active sympathy with the Russian aspirants to Freedom by materially and morally supporting the victims of tyranny, by educating public opinion, and, if possible, by preventing the British Government from taking any step which might be a support to the Russian official system' (letter to Spence Watson, 4 Jan 1900, Spence Watson papers). 
At the beginning of the twentieth century Volkhovsky began to write for Russia's new Socialist Revolutionary Party and to spend significant periods of time with the party's 'emigre' leaders in Switzerland. He found the 'flattering comments' which certain Socialist Revolutionaries made on his work in 1909 'a great encouragement to a man who is doing his work 'outside Russia' and thus is always afraid of losing touch with the real needs of the moment' (letter to Spence Watson, 4 June 1909, original emphasis). He was still in touch with the 'needs of the moment' when he died, at his current residence, 30 Arundel Mansions in the Fulham Road in London, on Sunday 2 August 1914. He was cremated at Golders Green three days later in a non-religious ceremony that included addresses by both Prince Kropotkin and H. M. Hyndman. Viktor Chernov, the leader of Russia's Socialist Revolutionary Party, was surely right to identify indomitability as the keynote of his character. 
Volkhovsky's daughter Vera studied at Somerville College, Oxford, between 1901 and 1903, worked for a time as a gym mistress in Cardiff, fell in love with Bertrand Russell, adopted a boy and a girl in Russia when living there in 1923-4, and died in 1966. His papers sold for $3291 at Sothebys in 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 62228


Llewelyn, Mary Catherine Pendrill (1811-1874), writer and translator, was born on 12 March 1811 at Cowbridge, Glamorgan, the daughter of Thomas Rhys (1778-1851), schoolmaster, and his first wife, Joanna ('c'.1775-1815). Educated first at home, she later attended an academy for young ladies at Swansea. She displayed early signs of a literary and artistic flair, and was influenced by Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg), in whose company she spent many of her childhood evenings. She met her future husband, Richard Pendrill Llewelyn (1813-1891) ['see below'], while he studied in Cowbridge. The two were well matched, as they shared a deep interest in Welsh culture and both were mildly eccentric characters. Rejecting her father's wishes in the matter, she chose to marry Llewelyn, a poor curate: their clandestine marriage took place at Clifton on 25 January 1837. They lived initially at Blaen-gwrach, Glamorgan, before moving to Sussex, where their first two children were born. On returning to Glamorgan in 1841 they took up residence at Llangynwyd vicarage. This was Mary's home for the rest of her life; she had seven more children and did the bulk of her writing here. The living of Llangynwyd was meagre, and the Llewelyns had no money of their own: with the cares of raising a large family and managing a penurious household, Mary Llewelyn's literary work was done in most unfavourable circumstances. 
In 1845 the Llewelyns contributed letters, signed 'R & M', to 'The Cambrian' regarding their collected folklore of Llangynwyd parish, including the first appearance in writing of 'The Maid of Cefn Ydfa', which became a nationally known Welsh folk story. Mary Llewelyn published much poetry of her own, in English and Welsh, notably in 'The Cambrian' and the 'Cardiff and Merthyr Guardian'; she also contributed 'sacred sonnets' and hymns to the 'Church of England Magazine'. Her translations were mainly of hymns and popular ballads. She published 'Hymns Translated from the Welsh' (1850), chiefly those of William Williams, Pantycelyn. John Jones (Tegid) hailed her as 'one of the... very best translators of Welsh poetry', linking her name with those of Charlotte Guest and Maria Jane Williams as women whose work would assist towards rekindling Welsh nationality and the revival of Welsh literature and music ('Archaeologia Cambrensis', 1846, 185). Mary Llewelyn died of cancer on 19 November 1874. 




@@@@@


doc= 62231


Ezekiel Culverwell (c.1554-1631), second son of Nicholas Culverwell, who graduated BA at Oxford in 1573, proceeding MA in June 1577. The Oxford records do not mention his college, but since his father endowed a preachership there in 1569 there can be little doubt that Ezekiel was sent to Magdalen, where Laurence Humphrey (whose biography of Jewel is the source for Nicholas's patronage of him) was president. He was ordained deacon and priest at Lincoln in 1585, before arriving in Essex as household chaplain at Leighs Priory, principal seat of Robert, third Lord Rich, in late 1586 or early 1587. Establishing a strong friendship with Richard Rogers, lecturer of Wethersfield, he joined the conference of nonconformist ministers around Braintree which had first met in 1582. He also persuaded his sister Elizabeth and her husband, Thomas Gouge, to send their son William to Felsted School, where the young Gouge was 'trained up three years under the public ministry of his uncle' (Gouge, 'A narrative', sig. A1) before departing for Eton in 1589. Culverwell's activities soon engaged Aylmer's attention: as 'preacher of Felsted' he was amongst those who, some time in 1587, are recorded as having been suspended 'in his last visitation and since for the surplice' (Peel, 'Seconde Parte', 2.260). 
Culverwell's position as Rich's chaplain could not protect him from the attentions of Aylmer's officials in the visitation of 1589. In a series of twenty-one articles, probably written by Thomas Rust, vicar of Felsted, his nonconformist practices were comprehensively scrutinized. Subsequent court hearings were admirably handled by Edward Stanhope, Aylmer's vicar-general, who refused to turn the case into a witch-hunt and ostensibly reconciled Culverwell and Rust (and their wives). Culverwell continued to preach at Felsted and a son, Ezekiel (died 'c'.1606), was baptized in the parish church in March 1591. On 23 December 1592 Aylmer instituted Culverwell, on the presentation of Robert Lawson, to the Essex rectory of Great Stambridge. Nothing is known of his first wife but in 1598 he married Winifred ('nee' Hildersham), widow of Edward Barefoot, a friend of his brother Samuel's from Cambridge and Heidelberg days, and possibly the sister of Arthur Hildersham. 
Following the death of Arthur Dent, Culverwell saw through the press his treatise on the apocalypse, 'The Ruine of Rome' (1603), adding a dedicatory epistle to Lord Rich. His reference to his 'near conjunction' with his 'late brother' (sig. 1'v') led to the erroneous assumption that Dent had married a Culverwell daughter. In April 1605 Culverwell solemnized at Great Stambridge the marriage of Mary Forth to John Winthrop, future governor of Massachusetts. Winthrop later recorded that it was Culverwell who had converted him to godliness and the two men continued to correspond long after Mary's death. Two of Culverwell's three surviving letters are preserved amongst the Winthrop papers. 
After the Hampton Court conference in 1604 nonconformity again came under siege as James I pressed his bishops to demand subscription to the prayer book ceremonies as the badge of inclusion within the Church of England. Although undisturbed during Richard Vaughan's episcopate (1604-7) Culverwell could not parry the demands of his successor, Thomas Ravis. On 20 March 1609 he was one of four Essex incumbents deprived by the high commission. 
Culverwell apparently spent the rest of his life in London. In 1623 he published 'A Treatise of Faith', a comprehensive attempt to anatomize the scriptural basis of Calvinist belief and practice, which reached an eighth edition in 1648 and prompted a small spate of similar guides to godliness. Alexander Leighton accused Culverwell of Arminian errors in 'A Friendly Triall of the 'Treatise of Faith'' (1624). Scorning to name either Leighton or the title of his book, Culverwell penned 'A Briefe Answere to Certain Objections Against the 'Treatise of Faith'' (1626). Several shorter works were published after his death. 
Culverwell lived out his last years as a widower. Winifred was buried at All Hallows Barkingside in November 1613 and all his children but one -- Sarah Barefoot, his executrix -- were dead when he made his will in July 1630. He was buried in the parish of St Antholin on 14 April 1631. 
C. H. Garrett's 'The Marian Exiles' (1938) has been castigated for suggesting that protestant activities abroad between 1553 and 1558 were in some sense an organized withdrawal and planning of a New Jerusalem, the experience of which led directly to the American colonial experiment three generations later. A career such as Ezekiel Culverwell's, which exactly spans the vital eighty years involved, nevertheless gives pause for thought. The child who was dandled on John Jewel's knee just after the death of Mary I lived on to inspire William Gouge, John Winthrop, and also Ezekiel Cheever (1616?-1708) -- presumably a godson -- to whom he bequeathed $10 and one third of his Latin books. New England's most celebrated schoolmaster, Cheever died in harness more than a decade after the death of Mary II: Ezekiel Culverwell's was thus a vital handshake in the dispersal of the nonconformist protestant tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 62232


Nicholas Culverwell (d. 1569), the first to achieve success if not demonstrably the eldest, served an apprenticeship under George Barne (c.1500-1558), later lord mayor of London and probably his mother's brother, and was made free of the Haberdashers in July 1549. He immediately married Elizabeth Joyce: their eldest child, Elizabeth, was baptized at St James Garlickhythe in September 1550. Six other children are known to have been born before 1563. 
By 1553 Nicholas Culverwell had settled his family in the parish of St Martin Vintry. A convinced protestant probably from his prentice days he may, like his friends George and Thomas Heton, have been one the 'sustainers' of the secret protestant congregation in Marian London, while in 1559 he entertained John Jewel (1522-1571) following his return from exile. Rated that year in the high assessment for subsidy at $90 he was thus officially counted amongst London's 500 richest citizens. His prosperity appears to have been based initially on the Gascon wine trade, but during 1559-60 he attempted, with the aid of Lord Robert Dudley, to establish a government-sponsored company to regulate a new wool staple on the continent, on the grounds that the loss of Calais in 1558 had cancelled the ancient privileges of the Merchant Staplers. The latter, however, retaliated, negotiating a new government charter in early 1561 and transferring their activities to Bruges. The patent granted to Dudley was accordingly surrendered. 
In October 1561 Culverwell bought from George Heton a large estate in Stratford-Bow and Bromley by Bow, Middlesex, and in 1566 contributed $3 6's'. 8died for the building of Sir Thomas Gresham's New Exchange, a sum which placed him within the top fifth of the 732 London merchants involved in the scheme. In 1568 he was one of a consortium which, partly under cover of a government contract for the importation of wine and salt, was responsible for providing help for the Huguenot cause in France. Accorded quasi-diplomatic status, Nicholas was sent to negotiate with Cardinal Chatillon, the mayor of La Rochelle, and Jeanne d'Albret, queen of Navarre. A letter mentioning his activities, found on the body of the prince de Conde after the battle of Jarnac (13 March 1569), survives in the Bibliotheque Nationale de France. 
Although clearly destined for a spectacular mercantile career Nicholas Culverwell died on 26 October 1569, probably in his early forties. His will, made four days earlier, contains generous bequests and set up two trusts under the auspices of the Haberdashers. A stock of $100 was to provide five young freemen with $20 each for five years, tax-free. A trust fund of $200 was to be established in order to pay $5 per annum to two poor divinity students, one at Christ's College, Cambridge, and the other at Magdalen College, Oxford, 'they to be called for ever by the names of the preachers of Nicholas Culverwell'. The Haberdashers administers the trust to this day. Elizabeth was named sole executrix. Nicholas's four overseers were his brother Richard; the Marian exile John Bodley (father of Sir Thomas), with whom the family had established a lasting friendship; Thomas Heton; and Thomas Sampson, who had been deprived of the deanery of Christ Church for nonconformity in 1565. First to witness the will was the young John Field, on the brink of his career as London's most energetic and determined religious reformer. 
Nicholas Culverwell's profound impact on London's godly community was spectacularly reflected in the marriage alliances of the next generation. His daughter Elizabeth became the mother of the Church of England clergyman and author William Gouge. His eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 62233


Lyde, Lionel William (1863-1947), geographer, was born on 28 March 1863 at the vicarage, Wigton, Cumberland, the eldest son of William Lyde (1829/30-1914), vicar of Wigton, and his wife, Elizabeth Emily Hart, 'nee' Chamberlain (1841/2-1874). He was educated at Sedbergh School, and at Queen's College, Oxford, where he took a second in classical moderations in 1883 and a third in 'literae humaniores' in 1886. He became a schoolmaster, teaching English at Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh (1887-90), and the Glasgow Academy (1890-99) before becoming headmaster of Bolton School (1899-1903). In 1896 he married Elizabeth Susan Frances (Lily) Gildea ('b'. 1868), daughter of Major-General George Gildea. 
Lyde's first book was 'An Introduction to Ancient History' (1890), which considered classical events in relation to environmental conditions, and was followed by texts on Scottish history, English grammar, poetry, and the plays of Shakespeare. Lyde also developed a fascination for geography, publishing five 'Elementary Geography' titles on parts of the British empire in 1892-3, followed by 'A Commercial Geography of the British Empire' (1894), 'Man on Earth' (1895), 'Black's School Geography' (1897), 'Man and His Markets' (1898), and 'A School Geography of the World' (1899). Already a fellow of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1901. Two years later Edmund Johnston Garwood, professor of geology at University College, London (UCL), advocated that human geography should be taught in the college. The senate of the University of London and the council of UCL accepted his case for a new chair in economic geography, which was offered to Lyde. The teaching of human geography was duly reinstated at UCL, after the tenure of Alexander Maconochie (1833-6). In 1903 Lyde was the only holder of a chair of geography in the British Isles. 
Until 1919 Lyde taught students reading for non-specialist degrees and schoolteachers enhancing their qualifications. In 1903-4 he delivered sixty lectures on economic geography and regional geography. He published three 'Elementary Geography' titles in 1904, on Asia, America, and the British Isles, and worked with Colonel Mockler-Ferryman on 'A Military Geography of the Balkan Peninsula' (1905). Lyde displayed a remarkable and unflagging talent for distilling information into brief textbooks and attractive lectures. 'A Short Commercial Geography' (1906) was followed by 'A Child's Geography of England and Wales' (1908), 'The Teaching of Geography' (1909), 'Man in Many Lands' (1910), and four 'Junior Geography' titles in 1914; later books in that series appeared in the 1920s. 'Some Frontiers of Tomorrow: an Aspiration for Europe' (1915) advocated peace from the depths of war. Lyde was still a comparatively young man when his publishers gave a dinner to mark the sale of 2 million copies of his books; by the end of his life his sales exceeded 4 million. 
Lyde taught alone for most of his tenure at UCL, and also lectured at the London School of Economics in 1905-6 and 1912-17. Students reading for the BSc (Econ) degree, instituted at UCL in 1914, attended his classes. He is reputed to have arrived top-hatted for lectures, with the hat concealing his notes and then receiving his lavender gloves. He gained a reputation as an excellent lecturer. His fine voice, the flash of his brilliant eyes, and his unfailing dignity left a powerful impression. He assembled material from newspapers and learned journals, using highly personal turns of phrase to evoke regions, landscapes, and physical and human processes. He was neither explorer nor fieldworker, relying on the published word to fashion his own version of geography. His remarkable powers of assimilation and argument were enhanced by an impressive use of language. For him geography was a synthetic human science, rather than one ruled by environmental determinism. His greatest faults were an inability to distinguish the important from the trivial, and a tendency to advance arguments based on flimsy evidence. 
In 1919 Lyde was president of section E (geography) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and inaugurated the honours school of geography at UCL. Five years later he worked with three assistants and received support from staff in cognate disciplines. His own teaching was on Europe and the Mediterranean lands, economic geography being taught by colleagues. Lyde also delivered evening lectures, Saturday classes, and short courses for schoolteachers, being a trustee of the Geographical Association from 1914 to 1947. He continued to revise his elementary texts and prepared more substantial books for university students, such as 'Peninsular Europe' (1931) and 'The Continent of Asia' (1933); his much reworked 'The Continent of Europe' (1913) was still in print in 1930. All these books were illustrated by well-drawn maps but included few references. 
Containing forcefully expressed opinions and an amalgam of the relevant and the fanciful, Lyde's publications dominated the market for geography textbooks in Great Britain for many years. They had a massive impact on schoolchildren, teachers, and undergraduates alike. He retired from UCL in 1928, and was replaced by Charles Bungay Fawcett. For a further two decades he updated his textbooks and produced completely new works. He died at his home, the Old House, Gloucester Street, Cirencester, of heart failure on 24 January 1947, and was survived by his wife and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 62235


Jones, Llewellyn Rodwell (1881-1947), geographer, was born on 28 August 1881 at 131 Ashley Road, Bristol, into the large family of William Rodwell Jones (1834-1914), a Wesleyan Methodist minister of Welsh origin, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Cuthbertson. An older sister, Hilda (1877-1973) ['see 'Ormsby, Hilda], was later to become a close colleague. He attended Kingswood School, Bath, and studied mathematics and chemistry at the Royal College of Science, London, graduating BSc in 1904, before becoming a schoolteacher. He studied from 1908 to 1910 at the London School of Economics (LSE), where Halford Mackinder was reader in geography, for the certificate in geography, which Hilda had gained in 1909. At the LSE Rodwell Jones came under the influence of A. J. Sargent, later professor of commerce, who assisted Mackinder by teaching economic geography. In 1911 he and his sister attended the inspiring Saturday morning lectures that Mackinder was then giving to crowded audiences of schoolteachers from all over the London region on his 'new' geography. Rodwell Jones was regarded as a geographer of promise. Sargent and P. F. Kendall of the University of Leeds invited him to collaborate with them on a book on commercial geography, and in 1913 he was appointed to a lectureship in the University of Leeds teaching commercial geography, especially railway geography. On the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 he enlisted and was commissioned into the West Yorkshire regiment. He saw active service in the 62nd (West Riding) division in France, was awarded the Military Cross, and received a mention in dispatches. As a major he commanded his battalion. 
On demobilization in 1919 Rodwell Jones joined the staff of the LSE as an assistant to Mackinder at a salary of $450 (partly met from the Cassel Trust), becoming lecturer in commercial geography in 1920. He became a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. 'North England' (1921), a concisely effective study in regional economic geography, showed how technical changes in industry and transport had helped to transform geographical values, producing the industrial regions of the time. S. W. Wooldridge, later professor at King's College, London, referred frequently to the quality of Rodwell Jones's knowledge of northern England and led his students in the field on routes chosen by him. 
On Mackinder's retirement from the chair of geography in 1925, the director, William Beveridge, having failed to bring in H. J. Fleure, agreed to appoint Rodwell Jones as Mackinder's successor. In the same year Rodwell Jones received the degree of PhD. He quickly established himself as a successful head of department. Teaching for the BSc (Econ) degree prospered, with a smaller number of students reading for the BA honours degree. He was chiefly responsible for the formation of the joint school of geography with King's College, London. His inaugural lecture set out a broad view of a developing subject. He became recognized as a highly effective teacher and administrator. 
The first of ten editions of Rodwell Jones's book 'North America' (written with P. W. Bryan, who had been one of his students and contributed four chapters based on his PhD thesis) appeared in 1924, to the interested surprise of its American reviewer. It was the first serious regional geography of the continent. Rodwell Jones travelled widely in North America. He was a visiting professor at the University of Chicago in 1925 and 1927. He also visited Kenya in 1931 and wrote on its economic geography. He became interested, as was his sister Hilda, in the geography of London, and published 'The Geography of London River' (1931), again opening a new field of enquiry. He was indefatigable in organizing the work of the joint school and maintaining intellectual standards. He was a member of the court of governors of the LSE from 1929 to 1934 and took an active part in the organizing arrangements for the founding of the Institute of British Geographers in 1933. The Second World War brought special problems. The LSE was evacuated to Cambridge while King's College went to Bristol: Rodwell Jones spent many long hours on wartime trains keeping the joint school active. 
Rodwell Jones's personality was described as 'strong and distinctive, but not overbearing' (Stamp and Wooldridge, xii). He had a dry sense of humour and 'a most kindly and generous nature' (ibid.). His leadership was outstanding. Beveridge wrote (in December 1944) that 'in your hands, the department of Geography has been one of the most successful in the School, has caused no problems and given no anxiety' (Beveridge to Rodwell Jones, 7 Dec 1944, Rodwell Jones papers). His colleague Dudley Stamp acknowledged Rodwell Jones's help in promoting research, in his case for the land-utilization survey of Britain. But his energy began to fade and he retired in 1945. Unusually, the professorial council of the LSE passed a resolution of appreciation noting the combination of 'modesty with firmness' and his 'untiring energy on behalf of his department and students to whom he was a valued friend and counsellor' (professorial council resolution, 22 Oct 1947, Rodwell Jones papers). He lived latterly at 2 Elm Crescent, Ealing, cared for by his sister Mabel, and died there of cancer on 15 August 1947. Colleagues and former students joined together to express their appreciation in 'London Essays in Geography: the Rodwell Jones Memorial Volume' (1951), and a room was named for him at the LSE. 


@@@@@


doc= 62246


Mason, Kenneth (1887-1976), geographer and mountaineer, was born on 10 September 1887, at Glenmore, Brighton Road, Sutton, Surrey, son of Stanley Engledue Mason, merchant, and Ellen Martin Turner. He was educated at Cheltenham and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. At Cheltenham, he set his heart on the survey of India after reading Francis Younghusband's 'Heart of a Continent'. He was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers in 1906, and spent two years at the School of Military Engineering, Chatham, where he worked on the development of stereoplotting machines. 
Mason was posted to Karachi to join the survey of India in 1909, and spent several years surveying in Kashmir. There he taught himself to ski, and he once considered himself the first person to bring skis to India. He also climbed many of the peaks between the Sind, Liddar, and Warwan valleys. In 1911-12, he climbed the highest peaks of the Kolahoi group (17,799 ft) with his shikari, Abdulla Bhat, and Ernest Neve, a medical missionary. After a colleague's death in 1912, he took over an extended survey of the Taghdumbash Pamir intended to link previous Indian and Russian surveys. With Captain R. W. G. Hingston, a doctor, and several Gurkha soldiers and Hunza porters, he spent 1913 in arduous work plotting peaks in the western Karakoram using stereoscopic photography. 
During the First World War, Mason, by this time a captain, served in France (1914-15), where he was wounded at Loos, and in Mesopotamia (1916-18), where he was awarded the Military Cross during the relief of Kut. In the Tigris corps, he was promoted brevet major, thrice mentioned in dispatches, and became chief intelligence officer. On 25 June 1917 he married Dorothy Helen (1893/4-1974), daughter of Captain Arthur Robinson, Royal Engineers, at the garrison church of St George, Aldershot, Hampshire. They had two sons and one daughter. 
After the war, Mason returned to India, and was disappointed not to be chosen for the early Everest expeditions. He began research in the records of the survey of India and published many papers on the history of surveying. In 1926 he led an expedition to survey the remote Shaksgam valley and the Aghil ranges in the Karakoram, areas that Younghusband visited in 1887. For this work, the Royal Geographical Society (RGS) awarded him the Cuthbert Peek grant in 1926, and the founder's gold medal in 1927. In 1928 he was appointed assistant surveyor-general of India, and, in 1929, deputy director of surveys. In 1928 he co-founded the Himalayan Club in Delhi, and its publication, the 'Himalayan Journal', became under his editorship from 1929 to 1945 an authoritative record of mountaineering in the Himalayas. He was superintendent of the survey of India in Burma during 1931-2. 
Oxford had had a reader in geography (jointly funded by the university and the RGS) since 1887, a school of geography since 1899, and a graduate diploma in geography since 1900, but by the end of the Second World War the subject languished. It had few supporters within the university from either natural scientists or those in favour of 'modern humanities', and outside it its diploma holders faced stiff competition from geography graduates from other universities. By 1930 there were just seven candidates for the diploma, and numbers for the biennial summer school were also shrinking. In 1928 the committee for geography renewed its call for an honours degree in geography at Oxford and the university responded in 1930 by establishing a new honours school and a new chair, the first holder of which was Mason (1932-53). Mason retired as lieutenant-colonel to take up the chair and a fellowship of Hertford College. Although he had strong backing from the RGS, Mason was by no means an obvious choice for a department seeking to re-establish its academic credentials. In some ways he proved surprisingly successful. During his term of office the school was a success in numerical terms: it was first examined in 1933, by 1939 it had thirty-nine, or 4 per cent, of both men and women honours finalists, and it continued to grow rapidly after the end of the Second World War. 
Mason also revitalized the links between geography at Oxford and practical service. These had begun with the RGS's involvement in the establishment of the discipline at Oxford and were fostered by Halford Mackinder and particularly his successor, A. J. Herbertson. Under Mason, with his extensive contacts in the military services, government, the city, and the RGS, the school consolidated its practical focus, linked to regional planning, surveying, exploration, teaching, and colonial service. A notable product was the Admiralty handbooks produced during the war when the school became an intelligence unit. Mason also had ambitious plans for establishing a geographical research institute partially funded by the Rockefeller Foundation: but although during his term of office the school's library grew, a large lecture hall was built, and the staff expanded, plans for a research institute, a second chair in geography, and a chair of planning attached to the geography school failed. Mason's own publications, such as they were, were wholly devoted to surveying and mountaineering and, except for Marjorie Sweeting, the staff he appointed were products of the Oxford school with little commitment to research and publication. The school was thus ill-equipped to conduct research of the type which was beginning in both other Oxford schools and other British geography departments. 
Mason served the RGS as a council member (1932-45 and 1952-4), vice-president (1937-42), and briefly as acting president. He also served on the committee organizing the Everest expeditions from 1933 to 1940 and during this period the India Office frequently consulted him when deciding who should be given permission to scale peaks in the Himalayas. During the Second World War Mason was active in the inter-services topographical intelligence department located at Oxford, organized a series of 'Admiralty Handbooks' on overseas countries, and co-authored a volume for naval intelligence on western Arabia and the Red Sea. After his retirement from Oxford in 1953, he published his 'magnum opus', 'Abode of Snow' (1955), a valuable and encyclopaedic history of surveying and climbing in the Himalayas that epitomizes the early twentieth-century view of mountaineering as exploration and conveys the allure of 'blanks on the map'. 
Mason was also freeman of the Drapers' Company, City of London, and elected master in 1949. He was made an honorary fellow of the RGS (1965), honorary member of the Alpine Club (1973) and the French Alpine Club (1930), and an honorary fellow of Hertford College (1953). In the 1970s he was one of the interviewees for the BBC's oral history 'Plain Tales from the Raj'. Contemporaries admired him as an attractive and accurate writer, an efficient administrator with a gruff military bearing, and as energetic, kindly, and generous. He died of renal failure and coronary thrombosis on 2 June 1976 at his home, Sylvanway, West End Road, Mortimer West End, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 62248


Manley, Gordon (1902-1980), geographer and meteorologist, was born on 3 January 1902 at Douglas on the Isle of Man, the son of Valentine Manley, a chartered accountant. He grew up in Lancashire and was educated at the Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Blackburn. From the age of twelve he took meteorological readings in the countryside around his home. He went to Manchester University in 1918 to read engineering, graduated in 1921, and proceeded to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, to read geography. He gained a double first in 1923. At Cambridge he studied under Frank Debenham, who inspired his interest in high-altitude environments. He obtained employment in the Meteorological Office in 1925 and was stationed at Kew observatory, but in the following year he accepted an assistant lectureship in geography at Birmingham University. In the same year he also accompanied the Cambridge expedition to east Greenland. There he undertook gravitational measurements which formed the basis of his earliest publications. 
The foundations of Manley's career were now established. His training at Manchester in an applied science and his keen geographical interest were focused through his experience of scientific instrumentation, which was refined in Greenland and at Kew, where he also first encountered long meteorological records. In 1928 he was appointed to establish geography as a degree subject at Durham University. He remained at Durham until 1939. While there he married, in 1930, Audrey Fairfax Robinson, the daughter of Arthur Robinson, master of Hatfield College. They had no children. 
At Durham, Manley began his work on the British climate which became the distinguishing feature of his scholarship. His research developed two related themes. Field observations concentrated on the climate of upland Britain. In 1932 he began to collect data on Cross Fell in the northern Pennines and in 1938 he established a meteorological station close to the summit of Dun Fell. At the same time he began to analyse historic meteorological records. He was curator of the Durham University observatory between 1932 and 1937 and published an account of the observatory's lengthy meteorological records in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society' in 1941. In 1939 Manley moved back to Cambridge as a university demonstrator in geography. This involved him almost immediately in teaching responsibilities shaped largely by the war, including service short courses and teaching shared with the geography department of Bedford College, evacuated from London from 1939 until 1944. He remained at Cambridge throughout the war, serving as an officer of the university air squadron and widening his research interests to embrace global climatic change and palaeoclimatology. He gave the Symons memorial lecture to the Royal Meteorological Society in 1944, and his title, 'Some recent contributions to the study of climatic change', gives a clear indication of the focus of his research. 
By the end of the war Manley's academic standing was established among both geographers and meteorologists. He was president of the Royal Meteorological Society in 1945-7 and was awarded the Murchison grant of the Royal Geographical Society in 1947. In the immediate post-war years his publications began to indicate his widening interests, beyond the British Isles and into a more distant past affected by the glacial climates of the Pleistocene. 
Manley was appointed to a university lectureship at Cambridge in 1947, but in 1948 he accepted the newly established chair of geography at Bedford College in the University of London. Here 'he was welcomed as an entertaining lecturer and for his genial personality and friendly manner with staff and students alike' (Lamb). At this time he was a member of committees of the Royal Society, the Royal Geographical Society, and the Air Ministry, and also of the British national committee for the international geophysical year. His research publications remained prolific and included his important and meticulous work on historic temperature records for central England for the period 1698-1952, which he later extended to cover the period 1659-1973, published in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society' in 1953 and 1974 respectively. His memory for the details of this and other meteorological records was prodigious. He also reached a wider public through his book 'Climate and the British Scene' (1952) and through his articles in the 'Manchester Guardian'. Of the latter, more than fifty appeared between 1954 and 1961, mostly concerned with the unpredictability of Britain's daily and seasonal weather. 
In 1964 Manley was invited to found a department of environmental studies at the new University of Lancaster, and this occupied him until his retirement in 1967. In nurturing the departments at both Bedford College and Lancaster he was more concerned with quality than with scale. 'Festina lente' was his motto. After retiring to Coton in Cambridgeshire he was a supporter of the village church there, and he remained active in research and writing until the end of his life. Between 1927 and 1981 he published more than 180 papers. He died on 29 January 1980 at Papworth Hospital, Papworth Everard, of heart failure, and was survived by his widow. 
Manley was a pioneer in the study of climatic change. He showed how the weather and climates of the past could be reconstructed, sometimes in considerable detail, using data from many different sources. His own main interest was in the historic period with its written and instrumental archives, but he was fully aware of the climatic signal in the geological record and its significance for the more distant past. Seen in its historical context, his work provides part of the insight that has led to the study of such issues as global warming and has enabled palaeoclimatic research to focus on the causes of climatic change. 


@@@@@


doc= 62249


Buchanan, Robert Ogilvie (1894-1980), geographer, was born at Maheno, Otago, New Zealand, on 12 September 1894. His father, Duncan Buchanan, of Scottish origin, was an engine driver at the time of his marriage in Dunedin in 1887, but he then took his bride, Janet, to Maheno and farmed there. About 1898 they moved to Tapanui, West Otago, where Janet's brothers, who had accompanied pedigree sheep from Scotland, had settled. Buchanan started school in Tapanui in 1899, progressing, when fifteen, to the Otago Boys' High School. At the University of Otago, Dunedin, he studied history and economics but, after two years, during the First World War, enlisted in the 2nd Otago regiment and served with New Zealand forces in the Middle East and France. He was badly wounded in France in 1917 and in hospital for almost a year. He returned home in 1919, took his BA degree, and taught for a year at Whangarei, before returning to Dunedin for his MA honours degree in economics, which he received in 1921. He developed a strong interest in rugby football and a reputation as a coach. 
A period as a schoolmaster at Mount Albert Grammar School, Auckland, from 1922 to 1925, brought Buchanan the opportunity to teach geography, a new subject. His interest led him to apply to the London School of Economics (LSE) to study geography for the BSc (Econ) degree. He obtained a first-class degree in 1927, then spent a further year as a research student supervised by Llewellyn Rodwell Jones. In 1928 he became an assistant lecturer in the subject at University College, London, under C. B. Fawcett, whom he admired. He became a lecturer in 1930. He married Kathleen Mary (Kay) Parnell (1900-1990), daughter of Alexander James Parnell, merchant, at St Paul's Presbyterian Church, Croydon, on 18 July 1931. It was a happy marriage, and they had a son (Colin Buchanan, later bishop of Aston and of Woolwich) and two daughters. 
Buchanan (who wrote as R. Ogilvie Buchanan) brought together his knowledge of economics and trade and his interest in the changing regional specialization of agriculture in 'The Pastoral Industries of New Zealand', an analytical study based on his PhD thesis of 1932. This was published as the first volume of the 'Transactions and Papers of the Institute of British Geographers' (1935). He gave great energy to the development of the Institute of British Geographers, of which he was honorary secretary and treasurer (1939-50) and president (1953). He was remembered as a trusted and inspiring leader. 'An Economic Geography of the British Empire' appeared in 1936. Promotion to a readership came in 1938. War service during the Second World War, first as an RAF corporal in charge of a barrage balloon site near London and later as a squadron leader in charge of maps serving the Royal Air Force, again interrupted his academic career. 
Buchanan's appointment as professor of geography at the London School of Economics in 1949 came at a crucial time, when L. Dudley Stamp was involved in international work and new regulations for the BSc (Econ) degree required a reorganization of teaching. Buchanan successfully found new colleagues and the department ran smoothly. Students enjoyed his informal, crisp, and conversational style of lecturing. He contributed substantially to the organization of the University of London as a member of senate (1951-67), chairman of the academic council, and deputy vice-chancellor. The University of London's Institute of Education valued his membership of its management committee so highly that it named its chair of geography in his honour. He was a member of the delegacy of Goldsmiths' College, London, from 1954 until his death, 'readily identified by his merry smile and twinkling eyes and his broad brimmed hat' (Firth, 128); a portrait by John Mansbridge hangs there. He was an ideal choice as honorary treasurer of the Association of Commonwealth Universities (1961-7), a member of the Nature Conservancy (1965-71), and chairman of the Association of Agriculture (1964-72). Contributions to the economic geography of agriculture, trade, air transport, and his home country continued to appear. 'Industrial Activity and Economic Geography' (written jointly with R. C. Estall) was published in 1961, went through four editions, and was translated into many languages. His role as editor of Bell's long running series of 'Advanced Economic Geographies' opened doors to younger colleagues to present their work to a wide audience. He was a meticulous research supervisor. Long after formal retirement in 1961 he went regularly to London School of Economics to edit and advise. 
Buchanan's work was recognized by election to the presidency of section E of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1952), the Institute of British Geographers (1954), and the Geographical Association (1958). The Royal Geographical Society elected him to honorary fellowship in 1966, as did the London School of Economics in 1970. He died at Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, on 9 July 1980 after a stroke, and a memorial service was held at St Mary-le-Strand Church, London, on 9 October 1980. A book compiled in his honour, 'R. O. Buchanan and Economic Geography', appeared in 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 62255


Bowen, Emrys George (1900-1983), geographer, was born on 28 December 1900 at 1 Towy View, Carmarthen, the elder child of Thomas Bowen, insurance agent, and Elizabeth Ann Lynch. He was educated at the council school, Pentre-poeth, and from 1912 to 1919 at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Carmarthen, before proceeding in 1919 to the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, where he obtained a first-class honours degree in geography in 1923. The following year he took a teacher's diploma and, after a year's research at Aberystwyth, became the first Cecil Prosser research fellow at the Welsh National School of Medicine at Cardiff, investigating the relationship between 'racial type' and chest disease. From 1928 to 1929 he was an assistant editor with the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' before being appointed in 1929 assistant lecturer in the department of geography and anthropology at Aberystwyth. There he remained for the rest of his academic career, including the war years when he continued to lecture and also taught meteorology to the Royal Air Force initial training wing which was located there. He became Gregynog professor in 1946. 
There were three strands to Bowen's academic work. The first was physical characteristics of populations; his master's thesis (1926) was entitled 'South west Wales: a study of physical anthropological characters in correlation with varied distributions'. It was this attempt to relate physical anthropological character to disease, especially to tuberculosis among the population of upland Cardiganshire, which led to his subsequent work at the National School of Medicine. An early paper, 'The incidence of phthisis in relation to race type and social environment in south and west Wales' appeared in the 'Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute' in 1928 (new ser. 31, 363-98). The second was the nature of the social organization, or the way of life, of a people, especially as it was derived from the past, from the process of cultural inheritance. The third was the nature of the physical environment in which the people lived. Essentially Bowen's aim was to integrate all these three strands in the explanation of the variable character of the earth's surface. This is best illustrated in the first book he published, 'Wales: a Study in Geography and History' (1941). These themes he had inherited from his mentor, H. J. Fleure, but it was the determination to stress the second, social organization, which had led to the department's being entitled 'geography and anthropology' when it was founded in 1917. Bowen carried forward that emphasis and many of his research students contributed significantly in the field of social anthropology. Against that background, and under Bowen's leadership, the department played a distinctive role in the development of geography in Britain ensuring that both contemporary social structures and the role of historical development were given a significant status in the interpretation of landscape. 
If Bowen's early research was in the field of physical anthropology his first published paper ('Geographical Teacher', 13, 1924-6, 317-26) was 'A study of rural settlement in south-west Wales'. That interest became his specialist concern, more particularly those settlements which had grown about the cells established in the post-Roman period by the so-called Celtic saints. In 1932 he published an article entitled 'Early Christianity in the British Isles: a study in historical geography' ('Geography', 17, 1932, 267-77), and in 1934 'Aberystwyth Studies' included a paper by him on 'The travels of Saint Samson of Dol' (13, 61-7). His research and writings subsequently broadened to cover the early history of western Britain and its prehistorical antecedents. Its full flowering was represented in his three books, 'The Settlements of the Celtic Saints in Wales' (1954), 'Saints, Seaways, and Settlements' (1969) and 'Britain and the Western Seaways' (1972). 
Apart from his specialized field Bowen's interests ranged widely. For many years he was a Sunday school teacher in a Welsh Baptist chapel; in his retirement he lectured on church history in the United Theological College at Aberystwyth. The paper 'Bedyddwyr Cymru tua 1714' in 'Trafodion Cymdeithas Hanes Bedyddwyr Cymru' (1957-8, 5-14), ('Welsh Baptists circa 1714' in the 'Transactions of the Welsh Baptists Historical Society', 1957-8, 5-14), and the volume of essays 'Geography, Culture, and Habitat' (1975) indicate his versatility, although Wales was always a common denominator. He lived for many years with his sister. After his retirement in 1968 Bowen continued to live at Aberystwyth where he died unmarried after a heart attack on 8 November 1983 at Bronglais General Hospital, Aberystwyth. He was buried at Carmarthen. 
Bowen's work was widely recognized. He was president of the Institute of British Geographers in 1958 and president of section E of the British Association in 1962. He was awarded the Murchison grant by the Royal Geographical Society in 1958. In 1949 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and in 1967 he was president of the Cambrian Archaeological Society. He was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Wales and an honorary DUniv by the Open University. He was an honorary member of the Gorsedd of Bards. 
But it was as a teacher and lecturer that Bowen was supreme. His exposition, based on careful structuring, triad upon triad, and the timing of a consummate actor, was masterly. It was in the tradition of Welsh preaching rather than of academic discourse, a feature reinforced by his lively presentation, epitomical short, dark appearance and 'Bible' black clothing. By his devotion to his subject, and his willingness to lecture throughout the country in the smallest and remotest of locations, he did much to establish geography as an academic discipline in Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 62256


House, John William (1919-1984), geographer, was born at 23 Horton Grange Road, Horton, Bradford, Yorkshire, on 15 September 1919, the son of John Albert House, railway clerk, and his wife, Eveline, 'nee' Brunton. The family home was later at 12 Ellercroft Terrace, Lidget Green, in inner Bradford. He was educated at Bradford grammar school, where he excelled in geography and French. From Bradford he won an open exhibition to Jesus College, Oxford, where he went in 1937 to read geography. His tutor at Jesus was the formidable, distinguished, but sardonic, historical geographer J. N. L. Baker. In 1940, on graduating with a second-class degree, House joined the army, serving in the intelligence corps. On 21 February 1942, having already progressed from second lieutenant to lieutenant, he married the equally strong-minded Eva Timm ('b'. 1918), of Sheffield. She was the daughter of Albert Edward Timm, a director. Both committed Anglicans, John and Eva married in the parish church of St John the Evangelist, Abbeydale, Sheffield. They were known as a devoted couple and had two sons and two daughters. Meanwhile House's facility in French was put to good use during his wartime service in intelligence and he was awarded the medaille de la Reconnaissance Francaise by the French government in 1944. He left the army with the rank of major in 1946. 
For the next twenty-eight years House was based in Newcastle upon Tyne, as lecturer (1946-58), senior lecturer (1958-61), then reader (1961-3) in the geography department of the federal University of Durham's King's College. In 1963 King's College became independent as the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, and House was named as reader in applied geography. In 1964 he succeeded another Oxford geographer, George Henry Daysh, as professor and head of the Newcastle geography department, a position in which he successfully managed its growth in numbers and premises over the next ten years. 
House's first academic paper was published in 1949. Between 1951 and his death in 1984 he published every year, often producing several publications in a single year. Altogether he produced seventy-three publications, on a wide range of themes: the industrial structure of Teesside, land use in Newcastle, the changing employment structure of the north-east, labour mobility, rural problems of the borders, the economic geography of the United Kingdom, the economic geography of France, French regional geography, the American-Mexican border of the Rio Grande, and geopolitics. His research interests focused strongly on applied geography, planning, regions, and regional development. He was deeply involved in the planning of the north-east region. From 1966 to 1974 he was a member of the Northern Economic Planning Council, and from 1967 to 1970 of the Northern Pennines Rural Development Board. He was committed to serving the community, as shown by his chairmanship of the Tyneside action group for the young unemployed. His publications, including 'Northumbrian Tweedside' (1956), 'Teesside at Mid-Century' (1960), the edited collection 'Northern Geographical Essays' (1966), and 'Industrial Britain: the North East' (1969), attest the deep roots he had put down in his adopted region. The Royal Geographical Society's Murchison award in 1970 recognized these contributions. 
Although applied geography and planning issues relating to the north-east and its economic problems formed the core of House's publications, in his well-received edited book 'The UK Space' (1973) he applied his expertise to the wider canvas of the whole country. Migration was also one of his research interests. France and the United States figured prominently in his publications. His book 'France: an Applied Geography' was published in 1978. He had much earlier published a traditional regional descriptive work, 'A comparative study of the landscapes of the plateau de Millevaches and the western Cevennes', in the 'Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers' for 1954. His early interest in political geography led to a Leverhulme research fellowship in 1957-8. This allowed him to carry out an extended study of the Franco-Italian border zone. Political geography continued as a leitmotif running through his research, overshadowed for a while by his north-eastern activities, until it flowered again. 
The process of House's appointment to the Halford Mackinder professorship at Oxford in 1974 was convoluted. The school of geography's wholehearted wish was for Peter Haggett, the country's outstanding young geographer among a set of outstanding Cambridge geographers. Their quantitative revolution and modelling challenge to traditional regional geography revolutionized the discipline in the 1960s and 1970s. Haggett would have brought a new direction to Oxford geography. Thus, there was jubilation when it was announced that Haggett had been appointed to the newly established Halford Mackinder chair. Shortly afterwards, joy was followed by grief, when Haggett, for family reasons, withdrew his acceptance. Despite House's solid achievements and recognized expertise in planning and in political geography, despite his international reputation in France and the USA, and despite his complete embodiment of the protestant work ethic in his energy, publications, effective organizational skills, and meritocratic ascent, his appointment in Haggett's place was inevitably seen as second best. The fit with Oxford geography's need was not good, and he seemed less at ease in his new role than he had been in Newcastle. 
House was a tallish, imposing figure, dark-suited, with a long, vertically lined face and thinning, brushed back, grey hair. He had a military bearing and a sense of his own achievements. His anonymous obituarist in the 'Geographical Journal' described him as 'a little reserved with his colleagues'. A formal man, he was not comfortable with the Oxford school of geography's non-hierarchic style of collegiality. Soon after arriving in Oxford he attempted to refuse appointment as an examiner for the first year undergraduate mods examination, on the grounds that it would be possible for him, as chairman, to be outvoted by two junior staff. On the other hand, he appreciated the fellowship of St Peter's College, to which the Halford Mackinder chair was attached. On his premature retirement in 1983, because of his failing health, the college elected him to an emeritus fellowship. 
House spent two periods as a visiting professor in the USA. The first was as visiting Fulbright professor of geography at the University of Nebraska (1962-3); the second as visiting professor at the University of Texas at Austin (1977-8). The Nebraska placement does not seem to have had any published outcome on American or political matters, but the visit to Texas led to his book 'The Rio Grande Frontier' (1982) and to his edited volume 'US Public Policies' (1983). His stay in Texas led also to a revitalized interest in political geography and in geopolitics, the field in which Halford Mackinder had been the iconic exponent. Oxford University awarded him the degree of DLitt in 1980 in recognition of his publications. 
In Newcastle and Oxford John and Eva House chose to live in rural areas, Corbridge and Islip respectively. The village environment was the one in which they felt most at home. As his obituary in the 'Geographical Journal' stated, 'here he found time to serve on Church Councils, to be a member of the Royal British Legion and to participate fully in the activities of the local dramatic society. He was also a keen allotment holder'. It was a severe disappointment to him that because of his cancer he was not able to succeed Jean Gottmann as head of the Oxford school of geography, and that he was not able to deliver his presidential address in person to the Institute of British Geographers in Durham in 1984. Instead he recorded it on video and it was played to the conference. The address, entitled 'War, peace, and conflict resolution: towards an Indian Ocean model', dealt with the new political geography, and geopolitics. His final paper, with his Newcastle political geography colleague Peter Taylor, was published posthumously. He died at his home, 38 North Street, Islip, on 1 February 1984, of cancer, and was survived by his wife and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 62261


Evans, (Emyr) Estyn (1905-1989), geographer, was born on 29 May 1905 at 12 Havelock Terrace, Shrewsbury, Shropshire, the fourth of the five children of the Revd George Owen Evans (1865-1920), and his wife, Elizabeth (1864-1944), 'nee' Jones. His parents were both Welsh-speaking and the Revd Evans -- a Methodist -- later moved from Shrewsbury to a poorer parish across the Welsh border. Estyn Evans was educated at Welshpool county school (1915-22) before going to the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, in 1922 to study geography and anthropology under the tutelage of H. J. Fleure. After graduating with a BA in 1925, Evans was prevented by tuberculosis from undertaking postgraduate study at Oxford and it was not until 1928 -- albeit then aged only twenty-three -- that he was appointed to the first post in geography at Queen's University, Belfast. Two days after his successful interview, he met his future wife, Gwyneth Lyon Jones (1908-2003); they married on 27 August 1931 and had four sons, David ('b'. 1934), Colin ('b'. 1939), Edwin ('b'. 1943), and Alun ('b'. 1944). 
Evans struggled long and hard during the 1930s, and the straitened years of the Second World War, to establish his discipline and department in Queen's, encountering an often hostile academic environment in which geography was for long regarded as an adjunct to geology. Consequently, it was only in 1947 that geography was granted the status of a single-honours course, and not until 1955 that Evans was able to offer a first-year course in his own subject. He was appointed professor of geography in 1945, in which post he remained until resigning in 1968 to accept the university's invitation to become the first director of the newly established Institute of Irish Studies. What was by then a flourishing department of geography was by no means his only achievement. He was awarded the degrees of MA (1931) and DSc (1939) from Aberystwyth, together with five honorary degrees. Evans was also instrumental in originating departments of archaeology (1948) and social anthropology (1960) at Queen's, and played a leading role in the creation of the Ulster Folk Museum at Cultra, co. Down (established in 1958), which was designed to record a way of life then fast disappearing. In 1970, the same year in which Queen's appointed him emeritus professor in geography and Irish studies, he was appointed CBE. 
Because Evans published largely in Ireland, his work was never as well known in Britain as it deserved. In contrast, however, he was widely recognized in the United States and is often compared to the influential Berkeley geographer Carl Sauer. Evans's geographical context was dominated by Ireland and its setting on the Atlantic margins of Europe. Fascinated by borders and frontiers, and the infinite variety of folk adaptations to a bewildering array of environments, he created an Ireland of regional diversity in which differences were as important as similarities. It was a moral world, too, for while Evans had long lost his father's faith, his geography is defined by a humanistic vision of the total inheritance of Irish heritage, irrespective of formal creeds. For Evans, Irishness was a complex fusion of processes operating at a variety of scales from the intimacy of locality to the wider embrace of the Atlantic world. This vision of a pluralistic place was -- and remains -- a powerful riposte to the simplifying certainties of traditional Irish nationalism. 
Evans published numerous academic papers, archaeological surveys, excavation reports (especially that on Lyle's Hill, co. Antrim), and contributions to reviews, magazines, and newspapers, many posthumously collected in 'Ireland and the Atlantic Heritage' (1996). His output is dominated, however, by seven books, of which the most enduring in popular terms is 'Irish Folk Ways' (1957). In the contemporary context, however, the most important may be 'Mourne Country' (1951), now widely recognized as a classic study of the interrelationships between place and identity, and 'The Personality of Ireland' (1973). The latter is not an easy book, but it distils Evans's vision of Ireland as a complex and diverse place, a conceptualization which provides his work with an enduring relevance as subsequent generations seek to break down the malevolent legacy of ethnic conflict. Following his death in Belfast on 12 August 1989 after a long illness and his cremation on 15 August at the Roselawn crematorium, Belfast, it was entirely appropriate that Evans's life's work was marked by a memorial service held on 9 December 1989 at the Ulster Folk Museum, the institution which embodied his belief that regional diversity should be seen as a source of richness and integration rather than division. 


@@@@@


doc= 62262


Watson, (James) Wreford (1915-1990), geographer and poet, was born on 8 February 1915 in Sanyuan, Shensi (Shanxi), China, the third of five children of the Revd James Watson (1878-1952), and Evelyn Russell (died 1926). His parents were Scottish Baptist missionaries in the Far East and the young Wreford travelled much, a fact he regarded as influential in his geographical writing. 
Wreford Watson was educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, between 1927 and 1931 and at the University of Edinburgh from where he graduated with first-class honours in geography in 1936 and where he met fellow geographer Jessie Wilson Black (1915-1989), with whom he founded the university's Geographical Society (he was first president, she first secretary). They married in 1939. Watson received part of his training from Alan Ogilvie and Arthur Geddes, son of Sir Patrick, both of whom emphasized the importance of regions and regional differentiation. These issues, central to Watson's own work, were reinforced following his meeting, in 1937, the Australian geographer Griffith Taylor, professor of geography at Toronto. In 1939, after two years as an assistant lecturer in geography at the University of Sheffield, Watson moved to Canada as a PhD student under Taylor, and became an instructor at McMaster University. He spent the war years in Canada. 
In 1949 Watson moved to Ottawa to take up an appointment as chief geographer and director of mines and technical surveys. From this time Watson developed interests in applied and social geography, initially evident in a key paper, 'The sociological aspects of geography' (1951). In 1952 he took up the chair in geography at Carleton in Ottawa, a position held concurrently with that of chief geographer. 
From 1954 until retirement in 1982, Watson held a chair in geography at the University of Edinburgh. Watson's inaugural lecture at Edinburgh -- 'Geography: a discipline in distance' -- was ahead of its time in its attention to mental perceptions of distance and landscape. It has been undeservedly neglected. While in Edinburgh, he was prominently involved in international geographical congress meetings, was president of the geography section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1970), vice-president and president of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society (1968-76, 1977-83 respectively), and, for 1982-3, was president of the Institute of British Geographers. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1978. In Edinburgh he established the Centre for Canadian Studies in 1972, a largely humanities-based research centre which provided both a home for visiting scholars and courses on Canada's history and geography. In Edinburgh, with his wife and their son and daughter, Watson created a happy home and a welcoming environment for students, colleagues, and visiting scholars. His retirement was spent quietly in south-west Scotland. 
Watson's contribution to geography is most evident in his regional and social geography texts, notably 'General Geography' (1953), 'Canada: its Growth and Prospects' (1968), 'Social Geography of the United States' (1979), and 'The United States: Habitation of Hope' (1983), although he took greatest pleasure from co-writing with his wife 'The Canadians: how they Live and Work' (1978). For his geographical work, Watson received honorary degrees from five Canadian universities, awards from the Association of American Geographers, the Canadian Association of Geographers, and the Murchison medal (in 1960) and the research medal (1964) from the Royal Geographical Society. For contributions to Canadian studies, he was awarded the gold medal of the International Council for Canadian Studies in 1984. His poetry volume, 'Of Time and the Lover' -- published under the 'nom de plume' James Wreford -- was awarded the governor-general of Canada's poetry medal in 1954. 
Both for his writings and for his immense organizational abilities, Watson may be considered one of the great British and North American geographers of the post-1945 era. His written work and fluent lecturing style owed much to his literary skills. His textbooks stressed the regional differentiation of social characteristics, and, in his papers on social geography, he extended geography's conceptual boundaries by emphasizing the place of the imagination in geography. In such ways, he helped develop what would now be understood in geography as 'behaviouralism' and stressed the importance of perception and belief in understanding the social world. 
Watson died on 18 September 1990 at Castle Douglas, Kirkcudbrightshire, where he was buried on 22 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 62263


Phillips, Charles William (1901-1985), archaeologist and topographer, was born at 114 Alexandra Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 24 April 1901, the son of Harold William Phillips, a corn merchant, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Williams. After the suicide of his father in 1907, following business problems, his mother supported Charles and his younger brother and sister by managing a dairy. His father had been a freemason and, after spending brief periods at Henley grammar school and Littlehampton commercial school, help from the masons enabled him to attend the Royal Masonic School at Bushey, Hertfordshire, and then Selwyn College, Cambridge, which he entered with an exhibition in history in 1919. He was awarded the Searle prize and a history prize by the college and took a first in history in part one of the tripos (1921) and a second class (division one) in part two (1922). Also in 1922 he was awarded a third class in law. After graduating he continued to reside in Cambridge as a private coach and college supervisor in history. 
In 1929 Phillips was appointed librarian of Selwyn College and was elected to a research fellowship in 1933. He remained librarian until 1945 and a fellow until 1947. Although he taught undergraduates reading history, his main contribution to the college was rehousing, reordering, and cataloguing the library after its move in 1929 from temporary quarters to the War Memorial Building. The work also involved restoring many of the older volumes. In a small community of only eleven fellows Phillips stood out as a large and imposing man whose trenchant views on many subjects were always expressed with confidence. He had a remarkable gift of illuminating an account of mundane incidents by the use of an unexpected but entirely apposite word. He was a raconteur of an unusual kind. On Saturday evenings in term he presented monologues about events and trends in the world and in Cambridge. These pieces, which became known as his 'Phillipics', were clad in the most sombre shades, not least as war approached. 
From his Cambridge base Phillips made major contributions to the archaeology of Lincolnshire and East Anglia. His work in Lincolnshire between 1932 and 1936 was particularly formative and has retained its significance to the present day. Two summative papers entitled 'The present state of archaeology in Lincolnshire' (1933, 1934) anticipated the record-gathering of the 1970s and 1980s, and provided useful training for Phillips's later career at the Ordnance Survey. His activity also included original fieldwork and excavation, notably on neolithic burial monuments. He surveyed a number of long barrows for the first time and excavated one of these, at Giant's Hills, Skendlebury (Lincolnshire). He also began his long interest in the fenland of East Anglia and was an original member of the Fenland Research Committee, founded in 1935. This organization was not able to make much impact before the outbreak of war in 1939, but an important foundation was laid for future work. 
Phillips's flair for administration also emerged before the Second World War. Up to the 1930s prehistoric archaeology was not specifically represented by any national body. In collaboration with J. G. D. Clark, Phillips greatly expanded the East Anglian Prehistoric Society, an organization which still occupies the premier position in its field. 
One single enterprise in Phillips's long career turned out to be of signal importance in British archaeology. The owner of a group of barrow mounds at Sutton Hoo, near Woodbridge, Suffolk, Edith May Pretty, began to investigate some of the monuments in summer 1938, assisted by Guy Maynard and Basil Brown. In May 1939 excavation began on the largest and most elongated barrow in the group. It quickly became clear that the mound had been erected over a wooden ship, within which had been placed one of the most magnificently furnished funerary deposits of early medieval Europe. Professional support was obviously called for, and Phillips was called in to supervise and co-ordinate the work of recovery on 10 July 1939, after discussions between the British Museum and the office of works. A team of experienced excavators was assembled under Phillips's direction, among them O. G. S. Crawford, Stuart Piggott, and W. F. Grimes. Excavation continued until late August against a background of gathering war and ended only nine days before its declaration on 3 September. 
The increasing haste with which the investigation had to be conducted was far from ideal, but it is a measure of the expertise and organization of Phillips's team that the great bulk of the contents of the ship burial was recovered and the context of the monument firmly established. For the first time the burial place of an Anglo-Saxon king had been identified and his grave-goods made available for study. The outbreak of war, however, meant that the Sutton Hoo treasure was packed away and consigned to a disused section of the London Underground. After 1945 the treasure was deposited in the collections of the British Museum and was fully published between 1975 and 1983. The success of this very taxing excavation owed a great deal to Phillips's organizational skills. He was himself a careful but not massively experienced excavator. His great achievement was to keep together an effective team in trying circumstances. Although he played no further part in the study of the site and the treasure, his records of the work in 1939 were of immense value to later investigators. 
In 1940 Phillips joined the RAF volunteer reserve as a flight lieutenant conducting duties in the photographic interpretation centre, mainly in producing gazetteers of maps of Europe. He married on 3 July 1940 Margaret Mann ['see below'] of Newnham College, Cambridge, with whom he had a son and a daughter. In 1945 he returned to Cambridge but in 1946 he was appointed archaeology officer at the Ordnance Survey in succession to O. G. S. Crawford, a post for which he was superbly qualified. 
Crawford had firmly established archaeology as a central concern of the Ordnance Survey after the First World War, and from taking up the position at the beginning of 1947 until his retirement in 1965 Phillips greatly developed the division, issuing professional papers which provided a solid basis for the development of regional strategies for studying the past. He continued and expanded the policy of producing period maps which recorded and illustrated major phases of British prehistory and early history. The best of these were the maps relating to the southern Iron Age, Roman Britain, the dark ages, and Britain before the Norman conquest. These were works of high scholarship and excellent cartography, matched in no other country at the time. In 1967 Phillips was awarded the Victoria gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society for services to archaeological and historical topography. 
Phillips continued to work after retirement, not least in supporting research in the East Anglian fenland. He died at the West Middlesex Hospital, Isleworth, on 23 September 1985. His memoirs of his archaeological career were published posthumously. Phillips's wife, 
In 1956 Margaret Mann Phillips returned to teaching as assistant lecturer at King's College, London, and was reader in French from 1964 until her retirement in 1968. She was active in the British Federation of University Women, a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, and a member of the Society for Renaissance Studies. Her principal work was on Erasmus. Her 'Erasmus and the Northern Renaissance' (1949; revised edn, 1981) was an essential introduction to Erasmus for English-speaking readers. She published 'The Adages of Erasmus: a Study with Translations' (1964) and contributed a study and translation of 'Anti-barbari' (1968) to the Toronto collected works of Erasmus. She also wrote on Thomas More, Marguerite de Navarre, and Montaigne. In 1979 Oxford University awarded her an honorary degree of DLitt. Described as 'a teacher of great warmth and modesty' ('Newnham College Roll Letter', 79), she died on 18 September 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 62267


Parsons, Ian Macnaghten (1906-1980), publisher and anthologist, was born on 21 May 1906 at 28 Pont Street, Chelsea, London, the only son of Edward Perceval Parsons, a stockbroker, and his wife, Mabel Margaret, 'nee' Macnaghten. After prep school he went to Winchester College; a contemporary remembered him as 'an unbelievably handsome... and godlike figure... with his golden hair haloed by his straw boater with its blue-black-blue ribbon' (R. W. David, memorial address). In 1925 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner (commoner). Two years later he became a senior scholar on the strength of a first in English. This was the last year English was not on offer as part three of the tripos. In his third year Parsons read psychology, which did not carry a class mark. His first, in English part two, stood as his final class. Parsons was one of the Cambridge 'guinea pigs' who attended I. A. Richards's sessions on practical criticism. He edited the 'Cambridge Review' and published some of F. R. Leavis's earliest criticism, as well as poetry by his contemporaries, who included Richards's pupil William Empson. 
In 1928 Parsons found employment with the publishers Chatto and Windus as a typographer. Two years later Harold Raymond, the chairman, appointed Parsons as a junior partner. In that year Parsons also made his debut as an author with 'Shades of Albany', a slim illustrated volume he described as 'a facetious phantasy' inspired by the chambers in Piccadilly. 
The young writer-publisher was now in a position to bring the work of his Cambridge contemporaries to the attention of the world at large. Empson's 'Seven Types of Ambiguity' (1930), Leavis's 'New Bearings in English Poetry: a Study of the Contemporary Situation', and his wife Q. D. Leavis's 'Fiction and the Reading Public' (both in 1932) were the first of a steady stream of critical books published by Chatto under Parsons's aegis from the 1930s to the 1970s. 
Parsons suffered a misfortune over publication of 'Ultramarine', the first novel by the writer Malcolm Lowry, a Cambridge contemporary. After it had been appraised by Oliver Warner, the firm's reader in succession to Frank Swinnerton, and given to Parsons, the typescript was stolen from a suitcase he left unattended on the seat of 'an old open 3 litre Bentley of which in my salad days I was the proud possessor', as Parsons later explained ('TLS'). Lowry had no carbon copy and after he had painfully reconstructed the text from a draft he defected to Jonathan Cape. The 3 litre Bentley was often pointed towards the Lake District and Scotland during Parsons's holiday periods. Though bookish he was also vigorously athletic; off duty he enjoyed long walks and climbs. He once visited Lapland simply 'in order to get away from civilisation, to get right away to an obscure part of the world where there's no chance whatever of running into anybody you've ever met before' ('The Listener', 28 March 1934). 
Parsons managed to find time to review and lecture as well as publish. He took classes at the Working Men's College and was part of the team of broadcasters who in the BBC's early days reviewed new books for the Home Service. Parsons's talks, reprinted in 'The Listener' in the first quarter of 1934, reveal his wide-ranging literary inquisitiveness. However serendipitous he was as a reviewer, Parsons always remained faithful to poetry, his first literary love, and to his aim of making it more accessible to the general reader. He began with 'The Poet's Corner' (1930), a collection of what he considered to be 'the hundred most popular poets in English'; in 1936 came 'The Progress of Poetry: an Anthology of Verse from Hardy to the Present', which included poems by Eliot, Auden, Day-Lewis, Spender, MacNeice, and Empson. Parsons was an excellent reciter of poetry as well as an accomplished after-dinner speaker. 
On 30 August 1934 Parsons married Marjorie Tulip Brooker, 'nee' Ritchie ('b'. 1902), known as Trekkie, an artist who had done illustrative work for the Hogarth Press. They lived in Victoria Square, Belgravia. 
Parsons worked closely with Norah Smallwood on 'Night and Day', a weekly magazine of which he was managing director and Graham Greene the editor. Parsons and Smallwood hoped the magazine would prove to be a British rival to the 'New Yorker'. It was launched by Chatto on 1 July 1937 but lasted only six months, undone by a libel action involving Greene's review of Shirley Temple's film 'Wee Willie Winkie'. 
In 1939 when war broke out both Parsons and Trekkie joined the Auxiliary Fire Service and in 1940 Parsons took a commission in the Royal Air Force volunteer reserve. Although at thirty-four he was declared too old for flying duty, he served in intelligence in France with the British expeditionary force until Dunkirk; and then after D-day with Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force. On demobilization he held the rank of wing commander and was awarded the OBE. 
Back in civilian life in 1945 Parsons returned to Chatto. In 1946 Chatto took over the Hogarth Press. Leonard Woolf retained his editorial sovereignty but financial control of the imprint remained with Chatto. Their combined lists represented much that was most significant in modern literature. From the Hogarth stable came Virginia Woolf, Vita Sackville-West, Henry Green, and Christopher Isherwood; and from Chatto, Aldous Huxley, Julian Huxley, Richard Hughes, Compton Mackenzie, V. S. Pritchett, Rosamond Lehmann, T. F. Powys, Sylvia Townsend Warner -- to mention only some of the most eminent names. 
Parsons had originally met the Woolfs in 1935 when he approached them for permission to reprint some of Virginia's novels in the 'Phoenix Library', pocket editions published by Chatto. That had come to nothing but in 1942, after he had been bombed out of Mecklenburgh Square, Leonard came to live next door to the Parsons in Victoria Square and a friendship ripened between the three of them. The Parsons' marriage became complicated by a growing intimacy between Leonard and Trekkie. Trekkie divided her time between Monk's House (Woolf's weekend house in Rodmell, Sussex) and the Parsons' home of Juggs Corner in Kingston, near Lewes, and went on visits abroad with Leonard. Parsons accepted the situation without demur or fuss, not allowing it to interfere with his and Woolf's business interests. An unpublished letter from Parsons to Woolf asks Leonard to remit half of the cost of a winter coat they had agreed jointly to give Trekkie as a present. 
In 1953 Chatto became a limited company. In 1954 Raymond retired and Parsons took over as chairman. Under his guidance the company extended its reputation as an imprint notable for publishing works of contemporary literature. Fiction and biography were keenly cultivated, while Parsons's work as a promoter of poetry continued with his 'Poetry for Pleasure' anthology, eight volumes published between 1952 and 1956; 'Men who March Away', a pioneering collection of First World War poetry to which he wrote an introduction in 1965; and his important edition of 'The Collected Works of Isaac Rosenberg' (1979). 
Of the post-war generation of authors published by Parsons the most prolific was Iris Murdoch, whose first novel, 'Under the Net', was brought out by Chatto to great acclaim in 1954. In the field of translation the major contribution came from the works of Freud: the Hogarth Press had begun this before the war, and the work of Alix and James Strachey was now completed by Angela Richard. Likewise Parsons inherited translations of Stendhal and of Proust by Scott Moncrieff. The Proust volumes were reissued with illustrations by Philippe Jullian, and the cult received a further boost from George D. Painter's two-volume life of Proust in 1959 and 1965, a landmark in modern literary biography. 
If Parsons did not personally engineer the boom in books about Bloomsbury, he proved to be its ideal impresario. 'A Writer's Diary', a one-volume edition of Virginia Woolf's journals edited by Leonard, appeared as the curtain-raiser in 1953. The publication of Leonard's own autobiography in five volumes from 1960 to 1969, revealing much that was new about his wife's state of health, whetted the public's appetite for still more. This was satisfied for a while by the publication of Quentin Bell's life of Virginia Woolf (his aunt) in 1972. In 1977 came 'A Marriage of True Minds: an Intimate Portrait of Leonard and Virginia Woolf', which Parsons wrote with George Spater, the American Woolf scholar. 
Resources were now in place to publish Virginia's letters and diaries in full, something that Leonard had initially resisted. The mammoth task, edited by Anne Oliver Bell (Quentin Bell's wife), Nigel Nicolson, and others, was carried out in sets of six and five volumes respectively, throughout the 1970s and early 1980s. The outspoken candour of Virginia's comments on her friends sometimes shocked Parsons. On reading the typescript of one early volume he strongly objected to including some disparaging remarks about Raymond Mortimer which he felt would prejudice the book's being reviewed in the 'Sunday Times'. The editors appealed to Mortimer himself who said that the remarks were 'Virginia's truth' and should be printed exactly as they stood -- and they were. 
Meanwhile, Parsons became president of the Publishers' Association (1957-9) and a staunch upholder of the net book agreement, which was already under threat. Conditions became more and more difficult throughout the 1960s for an independent publishing company of Chatto's limited financial base to stand on its own, and in 1969 Chatto merged with Jonathan Cape. In 1972 Parsons defended Helen Bannerman's 'Little Black Sambo', which came under attack for its alleged racism. A pressure group, Teachers Against Racism, were urging that it should be withdrawn from circulation. This was one battle that Parsons lost. When the Bodley Head became part of Chatto in 1973, Parsons was made joint chairman. He retired in 1975 and was succeeded by Smallwood. Parsons also held directorships with the Edinburgh printers Hunter and Foulis, the Reprint Society, the Scottish Academic Press, and the Sussex University Press. He was made a CBE in 1971 and court assistant to the Stationers' and Newspaper Makers' Company in 1977. 
Outside his work Parsons led a full social life, hosting many convivial gatherings at Juggs Corner. He was a popular member of the Garrick and the Beefsteak clubs. He gardened when in Sussex, took a keen interest in sport, especially rugby and cricket as a member of the MCC. He died at his home in Kingston near Lewes, Sussex, on 29 October 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 62273


Closs, August Max (1898-1990), German scholar, was born on 9 August 1898 at Neumarkt, Styria, Austria, the son of Alois Closs (1852-1909), an official at the local law court, and his wife, Rosa, 'nee' Halm (1872-1960). After schooling at the Furstbischofliches Gymnasium, Graz, from 1906 to 1916, he served in the Austrian army until 1918, when he was taken prisoner by the Italians. After his release he studied German and English at the University of Graz from 1919 to 1923, writing his doctoral thesis on the poet and dramatist Arno Holz under Bernhard Seuffert. After obtaining a teaching qualification at the University of Vienna in 1924 he taught at a school there for five years. 
In 1929 Closs moved to England, first working with Leonard Willoughby as assistant lecturer in German at the University of Sheffield, then moving to University College, London, in 1930, where he came under the spell of Robert Priebsch, the professor of German. On 20 June 1931, at Hampstead register office, he married Priebsch's daughter, Hannah ['see below']. They had one daughter, (Olwen Eleanor) Elizabeth (who, as Elizabeth Closs Traugott, became professor of linguistics and English at Stanford University, teaching there from 1970 to 2003). 
In 1931 Closs was appointed lecturer and head of the department of German at the University of Bristol, being promoted to reader in 1936 and professor in 1948. Before and after his retirement in 1964 he spent periods as visiting professor at universities in Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the USA, Canada, and even India, where he advised Nehru on the reform of Indian universities. He received the grand cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, the cross of honour 'litteris et artibus' from Austria, and honorary doctorates from the Technical University of Hannover and the University of Bristol. 
Something of Closs's character is caught in the bronze busts of him sculpted by the Bristol artist Ernest Pascoe. A gracious, charming man in an old-fashioned Austrian manner, he seemed in later life almost the archetypal professor of popular imagination, with straggly white hair, wayward handwriting, and an infectious enthusiasm for anything that caught his attention. Like Goethe he believed that literature could have an effect on individuals and mould them into world citizens. As a teacher he had a rare ability to bring poetry alive, and published on it prolifically. His best-known book, 'The Genius of the German Lyric' (1938, revised 1962), an investigation into the formal and metaphysical values of German lyric poetry, was remarkable for its breadth of reference and was warmly received by reviewers, though Closs's London colleague Jethro Bithell, unimpressed by his idiosyncratic approach, told a friend he had submitted 'a voluminous and withering report' on it to a publisher; likewise, Bithell said he could not 'imagine how a Swiss publisher found it possible to accept' Closs's 'Die freien Rhythmen in der deutschen Lyrik' (1947, dedicated to Priebsch's memory) (Bithell to R. Majut, 6 Aug 1948, Bithell papers, Institute of Germanic and Romance Studies, University of London). Closs's later books included a collection of essays focusing on the theme of reality and poetic symbol in German poetry from the middle ages to post-1945, published as 'Medusa's Mirror' (1957, dedicated to the memory of his wife); he edited a four-volume 'Introduction to German Literature' (1967-71), as well as several medieval texts and anthologies of German verse, and contributed articles to many German and British scholarly journals and reference works. His enduring admiration for the scholarly work of his father-in-law expressed itself in his editing of some of Priebsch's unpublished work, notably his 'Letter from Heaven' (1936, repr. 1975) and 'Christi Leiden in einer Vision geschaut' (1936), as well as of an absorbing selection from Priebsch's scholarly correspondence with the German philologist Elias von Steinmeyer between 1892 and 1922 (1979). 
Closs's home was an elegant early eighteenth-century house, hidden behind mysterious yews and an enormous mulberry tree, at 40 Stoke Hill, Stoke Bishop, Bristol. Living in an aesthetic, poetic world, seemingly oblivious of all that was mundane or garish, he lovingly tended his fine assemblage of artistic treasures and the valuable library he and his wife had inherited from Priebsch. The integrity of this collection of medieval manuscripts, incunabula, and other early printed books, with many first editions of German classicism and romanticism, as well as early German translations of Shakespeare, and notable holdings of translations of plays from and into German, was compromised already in 1969 when 273 sixteenth-century items were purchased by Princeton University. The substantial remainder went to form the core of the Priebsch-Closs collection at the Institute of Germanic and Romance Studies of the University of London, which was augmented after his death by further books and papers, including his extensive correspondence with colleagues and authors, among them J. R. R. Tolkien, Thomas Mann, and E. M. Forster, as well as 120 letters from L. P. Hartley which Closs had proposed to publish. 
Despite his apparent unworldliness Closs played a major role in the town-twinning movement through his initiative to re-establish cultural relations with Germany after the Second World War. In 1947, with special permission of the Foreign Office, he led five 'men of goodwill' from Bristol city council, the university, and the chamber of commerce to Hannover 'to explore the possibility of establishing useful contacts between the two famous cities, both of which had suffered serious war damage' ('Times', 24 Feb 2004). There were no previous links of note between the cities; the people behind the partnership were motivated primarily by their awareness of the strong historical links between Hannover and Great Britain, through the royal family. This 'expedition' (as it was officially described) was to concern itself only with aid and cultural matters. Subsequently a working committee was established in Bristol to support and develop contacts with Hannover in five main fields: relief, education, church contacts, youth exchanges, and music. In recognition of the part Closs played he was awarded honorary citizenship of Hannover in 1987. 
Closs died at Ham Green Hospital, Pill, Bristol, on 21 June 1990, of heart failure. A magnificent memorial service, framed with the music of Mozart, was held at St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, on 2 November 1990, in which the 'Oberburgermeister' of Hannover took an active part. 
Closs's wife, Hannah Margaret Mary Closs (1905-1953), art critic and novelist, was born at 29 Haverstock Hill, Hampstead, London, on 6 December 1905, the daughter of Robert Priebsch (1866-1935), German scholar, and his wife, Ada Mary, 'nee' Rademacher (also known as Radmar). Her 'Art and Life' (1936), on aesthetics, won an award from the Eugene Field Society in the United States, and her re-working of the Tristan story (1940) also won plaudits. She wrote a trilogy of novels involving the Albigensians, 'High are the Mountains' (1945), 'And Sombre are the Valleys' (1949, reissued in 1960 as 'Deep are the Valleys'), and the posthumously published 'The Silent Tarn' (1955). She was described by W. E. Collinson, a student of her father, as 'singularly gifted and charming' ('The Times', 15 Oct 1953). She died of toxaemia at Bristol General Hospital on 8 October 1953. Her three novels were re-published as the 'Tarn Trilogy' in 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 62274


Boyd, James (1891-1970), German scholar, was born on 27 December 1891 in Gardiner's Close, Lockerbie, Dumfries, the only son of Peter Boyd, master blacksmith, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Tennant. His schooling was at Lockerbie Academy and in 1909 he was awarded an open scholarship to the Athenaeum School of Music, Glasgow (forerunner of the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland) to study the violin. In 1910-11 he pursued his musical studies in Berlin, as a pupil of Goby Eberhardt, and it was there that he met his future wife, a Dutch fellow student, Anna Maria Geertruida Josephina Smulders (1893-1978). They married in 1915. Theirs was a happy union. She remained enamoured of him and was heard describing him, in her thick Dutch accent, as looking like a 'creek cod' (private information, M. Ewert). Meanwhile, in 1911 and 1912 Boyd performed as a soloist with the Hamburg Orchestra at the Conventgarten. He was then appointed a teacher of the Mittelklasse at the Vogt'sches Konservatorium fur Musik in Hamburg and in the vacations continued his violin studies in Vienna. In August 1914 Boyd happened to be in the United Kingdom and on the outbreak of the First World War he volunteered for the army, serving with the Durham light infantry. In 1916 at the second battle of the Somme he received a wound which completely severed the nerve of his right forearm and he spent more than a year in hospital recuperating from this. He afterwards volunteered for war work which occupied him until the summer of 1918. The long-term consequence of his injury was that his promising career as a professional violinist was irrevocably ended and he was obliged to cast a new future for himself. In 1919 Boyd matriculated as an undergraduate at Oxford at the delegacy of non-collegiate students. He chose to study German, though it is said that he also considered English or mathematics. He was awarded a first class in the final honour school in 1921, with a distinction in the spoken language. From 1921 to 1923 he was at Heidelberg University as the first post-war lektor in English. While there he continued his study of German and added Old English, comparative philology, and Latin. He was awarded a BLitt from Oxford University in 1923 for his study, 'Goethe's Knowledge of English Literature', and in 1927 a doctorate from Heidelberg University for his work, 'Ulrich Fuetrers Buch der Abenteuer'. In 1923 came his first academic appointment in German when he became professor of German at the University of Cape Town, South Africa. In 1926 he returned to the United Kingdom to take up a post as reader and head of the department of German at the University of Bristol. Five years later, in 1931, he returned to Oxford as reader in German and from 1938 to 1959 he served as the second Taylor professor of the German language and literature at Oxford, successor to H. G. Fiedler. In connection with this post he was a fellow of the Queen's College, curator of the Taylor Institution, and chairman of the faculty of medieval and modern languages. 
Boyd's academic publications were largely devoted to Goethe: his BLitt thesis, 'Goethe's Knowledge of English Literature', was published in 1932, followed by his German doctoral thesis, 'Ulrich Fuetrers Parzival: Material and Sources', in 1936, his edition of 'Goethe's Poems' in 1942, and in the same year 'Goethe's Iphigenie auf Tauris: an Interpretation and Critical Analysis'. Between 1944 and 1949 appeared his 'Notes to Goethe's Poems'. The paucity of German publications in the immediate post-war years inspired Boyd in collaboration with Sir Basil Blackwell to produce some forty volumes in a series entitled 'Blackwell's German Texts', which became an enduring standard collection of representative German authors. He also played a major role in reviving and editing the periodical 'German Life and Letters', originally founded in 1936 but in abeyance during the Second World War. Boyd's interests also extended to Dutch and Afrikaans: he examined for the University of London and for several years between 1934 and 1937 compiled the annual listing of publications on Dutch studies for the 'Year's Work in Modern Language Studies'. In 1949 he represented Oxford at the Goethe centenary celebrations in Frankfurt and in the same year he was instrumental in inviting Thomas Mann to lecture at the Taylor Institution in Oxford on the subject of 'Goethe und die Demokratie'. On that occasion Mann received an honorary DLitt from the University of Oxford. 
In addition to his Oxford duties, Boyd was president of the Modern Language Association of Great Britain in 1940, vice-president of the English Goethe Society from 1945 to 1970, and chairman of the Annual Conference of Teachers of German in Great Britain and Ireland. In 1959 he was presented with a festschrift, 'The Era of Goethe'. He died at his home, 36 St Margaret's Road, Oxford, on 30 October 1970 of cancer of the tongue, and was cremated at the Oxford crematorium. He was a substantial figure in the field of German studies and with his work on Goethe and as editor of the 'Blackwell's German Texts' and the journal 'German Life and Letters' made a significant contribution to the post-war revival of the subject. 


@@@@@


doc= 62275


Fiedler, Hermann Georg (1862-1945), German scholar, was born on 28 April 1862 at Zittau, Saxony, the second of three children of August Fiedler (1837-1912) and Minna Grossmann (1842-1894). His father was 'Musikdirektor' at Zittau and his elder brother (August) Max Fiedler (1859-1939) became one of the most renowned conductors of his time. His sister (Minna) Elise (Mrs Karl Wichmann) was, in 1903, the first woman to be awarded a doctorate (DLitt) by the University of Birmingham. In his notes for an autobiography, Fiedler describes his idyllic youth in the pleasant kingdom of Saxony and his loving and hard-working family. After passing his 'Abitur' exam at the Zittau Gymnasium in March 1881, he went on to study German philology and literature at the University of Leipzig under Friedrich Zarncke. He took the PhD degree in July 1888 and in October of the same year, through Zarncke's intercession, he was appointed lecturer in German at Queen Margaret College and the University of Glasgow. This was to be his first step towards a successful career in Britain, the country he had toured with his brother Max in 1885 and to which he had since longed to return. 
In October 1890 Fiedler was elected to the German professorship at Mason College, which was later to become the University of Birmingham. He gave lectures on Goethe and Wagner, as well as courses entitled 'Writers of modern Germany' and 'Recent German literature', and a popular series of lectures on several aspects of German culture and society. His commitment to the reorganization of the university, including the creation in 1903 of the school of modern languages, gave him a privileged place in Birmingham academic circles. His marriage, on 13 December 1899, at the Bristol Street Unitarian Church, Birmingham, to his former pupil Ethel Mary (1870/71-1933), daughter of the lawyer and governor of the university Charles Harding, further consolidated his ties to English society. He and his wife had two daughters, Herma ('b'. 1902) and Beryl ('b'. 1913). His relationship with Ethel began to deteriorate about the time of their move to Oxford due to her bouts of depression which worsened irrevocably when their younger daughter became ill with diphtheria in 1915. The child's death, on 2 May 1920, caused Ethel's complete withdrawal from society until her death in 1933. 
After having visited Oxford as a Taylor lecturer and external examiner for five consecutive years, Fiedler was appointed to the new chair of German on 12 July 1907. He soon became a driving force within the university, and as chairman of the faculty board played a vital role in the establishment of the honour school of modern languages. During his first years at Oxford he formed a close and lasting friendship with Gerhart Hauptmann who, mainly thanks to Fiedler, had been awarded an honorary degree at Oxford in 1905. In 1909 he became the supervisor of the poet Ernst Stadler, a Rhodes Scholar who studied for a BLitt in modern languages. From 1912 to 1914 he was tutor to the prince of Wales, whom he accompanied to Germany twice during the spring and summer of 1913 and with whom he remained in contact throughout his life. 
In 1915, the publication of Fiedler's 'Oxford Book of German Verse' marked the end of the most successful decade in his life. Although officially a British citizen since 1911, during the war he was fiercely attacked in the student newspaper 'The Varsity', and in the summer of 1915 handed in his resignation, which was rejected. In November 1918 the vice-chancellor proposed a special vote of thanks to Fiedler for the way in which he had kept the German department working during the war. In 1926 he became secretary to the curators of the Taylor Institution. In this capacity he supervised the erection of the Taylor extension, which was opened by the prince of Wales in 1932, and worked incessantly towards the improvement of the Taylor Library. His research covered a wide range of subjects, but he produced no single work of lasting significance. His most significant publications, apart from the 'Oxford Book of German Verse' (1915) and the 'Oxford Book of German Prose' (1943), are an edition of Goethe's 'Faust II' and his 'Textual Studies on Goethe's Faust' (1946). He published a number of textbooks and contributed articles to several periodicals, including 'Das Literarische Echo' and the 'Modern Language Quarterly'. 
Fiedler's most lasting legacy resides in his tenacious effort to promote a fruitful intercultural relationship between Germany and Britain. His true gift lay in his remarkable talent as a teacher. He was 5 feet 6 inches tall, had brown eyes, 'the moustache of a German burgher' (Wroughton, 4), and a sympathetic expression. Gerhart Hauptmann's literary tribute to him, Professor Geiger in 'Vor Sonnenuntergang' (1932), is the affectionate portrait of a wise and jovial old man whose age and profession are almost at odds with his youthful vitality. Fiedler retired in 1937 and died at his home, the Lane House, Norham Road, Oxford, on 10 April 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 62277


Norman, Frederick (1897-1968), German scholar, was born Ferdinand Krott on 10 November 1897 at 378 Lillie Road, Fulham, London, the second child and eldest of three sons of a German couple, Johann Heinrich (Harry) Krott (1853/4-1906) and his wife, Clara Jane (Jenny), 'nee' Wulff (1871/2-1951). His birth certificate gave his date of birth as 23 November (the doctor apparently recommending his mother to post-date his birth to avoid falling foul of the time-limit for registering it), and he continued this pretence in his 'Who's Who' entry, which also included incorrect information concerning his parentage and the date of his marriage. His parents ran a laundry. Following his father's death his mother married, in 1907, Albert Edward Norman, at the time of their marriage a journeyman plumber; her children did not adopt their stepfather's surname until about 1918. Her unmarried brother Willy Wulff, a fairly prosperous Hamburg businessman, made himself responsible for the education of his English nephew Ferdinand (known as Fred). After a private school in London he was enrolled in a school at Hamburg. In Germany when war broke out in August 1914, when he was not yet seventeen, he declined an 'invitation' to join the German army, so he was interned along with some 4200 merchant sailors, businessmen, students, and hapless tourists after the German authorities decided that autumn to incarcerate all British males aged from seventeen to fifty-five in retaliation for measures taken against 'enemy aliens' in Britain. Friedrich Krott (as he meanwhile called himself) was confined in the civilian internment camp on the racecourse at Ruhleben, near Spandau, on the outskirts of Berlin, where, despite very primitive conditions, inmates lived under a relatively benign German regime. As one of the youngest internees, Krott was known as 'Bimbo' (from 'bambino'), a name that stuck. Of the thirty or so German classmates who had read Homer with him at Hamburg in 1914, he was the only one to survive the war. 
Following his release in late November 1918, shortly after his twenty-first birthday, Frederick Norman (as he now called himself) studied German at University College, London, under Robert Priebsch and John George Robertson, graduating BA in 1922 and proceeding MA with distinction in 1925. Even before he graduated Priebsch persuaded Gregory Foster, provost of University College, to appoint Norman as assistant lecturer in German from September 1922. On 21 March 1924 Norman married Elsie (Elizabeth) Dixon (1900-1955), daughter of the artist and book illustrator Arthur Augustus Dixon; a witness at their wedding at Hackney register office was George Merritt, another former Ruhleben inmate and later a noted film and television actor. The couple had first met at the 1917 Club in Gerrard Street, Soho, a left-wing club formed to celebrate the Russian Revolution; Norman had left-wing sympathies and was persuaded in the 1930s by Hugh Gaitskell to join the Labour Party. 
As well as teaching at University College, from 1926 to 1930 Norman headed the German department at the University of Reading. From 1930 to 1937 he held a readership in German jointly at University College, London, and King's College, London. In 1937, having been thwarted in his ambition to succeed Priebsch as professor at University College, he was appointed to the chair of German at King's College, holding it until his retirement in 1965. In 1966 he became Mellon professor at the University of Pittsburgh. 
While interned at Ruhleben, Norman had become a friend of a fellow internee, John (Jock) Balfour, who later joined the Foreign Office (and ended his career as ambassador to Spain). In 1933 he sent Balfour a detailed letter describing the atmosphere in Germany, which Balfour passed on to his superiors; so impressed were they that Norman was invited to advise the Foreign Office on matters German. In the later 1930s he regularly broadcast to Germany, recruited German speakers for the BBC's broadcasting team, and translated many of Hitler's speeches for the benefit of the British government (he deemed the Fuhrer's German 'execrable'). From the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 until 1945 he was involved with military intelligence work at Bletchley Park. From the start he played a leading role in Hut 3 where his team sifted German army and air force decrypts for information that might indicate technological or scientific innovations, thus providing advance warning of the details of German secret weapons. Among men with whom he worked there were several German scholars, including a number of his own pupils who later, partly thanks to his patronage -- Norman always considered himself the key player in British German studies -- obtained chairs at universities around the country. On 23 November 1943 he made a discovery of major significance: in elucidating an intercepted German radio message he brilliantly deduced that 'Heuschrecke', the German code name for an important reporting station, was a pun on the small Baltic islet of Oie, near Greifswald, which provided vital information to the whereabouts of the headquarters of a radar tracking detachment essential to the work of the experimental V1 and V2 rocket range at Peenemunde. As the war progressed, Norman, a linguist with no science, became a key associate providing intelligence to a scientist with no German, R. V. Jones, assistant director of intelligence (science), in the Air Ministry. In April 1945 Norman, with the honorary rank of wing commander, was involved in investigating Werner Heisenberg's experimental nuclear pile at Haigerloch, near Stuttgart. Subsequently he played an advisory role with the British control commissions in Germany and Austria, and also worked for the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research after the war, on behalf of Bertie Blount, who was responsible for scientific research in the British zone of occupation in Germany. He also kept in touch with R. V. Jones and indeed, meeting in the Athenaeum in 1958, he floated with him the idea of making a small fortune by jointly writing a book revealing -- notwithstanding the constraints of the 'Official Secrets Act' (Norman always had a rebellious streak about him) -- the nature of their wartime work. In 1947 he was appointed OBE, the citation describing him as having been 'employed in a Department of the Foreign Office' ('London Gazette', 6 June 1947). 
Back at King's College from 1945, the number of staff, undergraduates, and postgraduates in German increased three- or fourfold under Norman's guidance, thanks to the rare blend of enthusiasm and realism that enabled him at all times to discern academic needs of the future and to raise the funds to implement them. The teaching of postgraduates was one of his great strengths, and with his support his pupils obtained senior positions in universities in Britain, the USA, and Germany. He was a member of the senate of the University of London from 1938 to 1966, and deputy vice-chancellor from 1962 to 1964. At various periods he was a member of the governing bodies of several of the university's schools and institutes. He was closely involved with the planning for the University of Kent, founded in 1965. From 1956 to 1965 he was director of the University of London Institute of Germanic Studies (a part-time appointment which, to his chagrin, he failed to have converted into a full-time paid post). In 1965 he was appointed European academic director of the Chicago Institute of European Studies, becoming its academic vice-president shortly before his death in 1968. Many honours came to him: he became a fellow of University College, London (1936), of the Society of Antiquaries of London (1949), and of King's College, London (1954), he was awarded the gold medal of the Goethe Institut (1964), and in 1965 the German Academy for Language and Literature, Darmstadt, awarded him its prize for German studies abroad. Yet his proudest boast was to be the only professor with a private bathroom at a college in London, a relic from the days when the premises occupied by the King's German department had been a pub on the Strand. 
Norman was a brilliant and energetic personality, an enthralling lecturer, a stimulating and witty conversationalist, a competent pianist, a lover of classical music, and a balletomane, and his erudition was such that he either fascinated or terrified his students. Colleagues and students knew him for a hard, yet just, taskmaster. To work with him was an object lesson in the art of getting things done. He possessed an excellent knowledge and command of various German dialects. At the drop of a hat he could digress and give a learned disquisition on the etymology of any word. His ambidexterity enabled him to write different things with each hand on the blackboard simultaneously and legend has it that he even marked two piles of school certificate scripts at once in order to finance a ticket for a whole season of the Diaghilev ballet. Such was his reputation that the fact that King's College came to be so well known in German academic circles was largely due to its being the institution to which Norman belonged. Yet, compared with his reputation, his output as a scholar was slender: he preferred the spoken word to the written. He was a prolific reviewer, once anonymously reviewing in the 'Times Literary Supplement' Walter Dornberger's 'V2' (1954), the classic account of German secret weapons by one of the men whose activities Norman had for so long been tracking at Bletchley Park, but the most substantial study from his own pen was 'Henry Crabb Robinson and Goethe' (1930-31), based on material in Dr Williams's Library, London. Otherwise he edited the Old English 'Waldere' (1933) and, with P. F. Ganz and others, the proto-Yiddish heroic epic 'Dukus Horant' (1964). Apart from two school textbooks, Gustav Schwab's 'Die Schildburger' (1925) and 'Selections from Hebel' (1928), nearly all the other publications appearing under his name were collections of essays and conference proceedings edited by him. Two books appeared in his honour: 'Mediaeval German Studies' (1965), a Festschrift presented by students, colleagues, and friends to mark his retirement, and his own 'Three Essays on the 'Hildebrandslied'', edited by A. T. Hatto as a memorial to him (1973). 
After his first wife, who had for twenty-five years been a child psychotherapist at Guy's Hospital, died of cancer, on 3 January 1957 Norman married Martha Catherine Willis, 'nee' McNicol (1921-2005), daughter of Robert Stewart McNicol, cotton yarn merchant, and former wife of Donald Willis. Each of his marriages produced one daughter, to whom he was a devoted father. He died suddenly in Vienna on 8 December 1968 and was cremated there. His ashes were interred at Bow Brickhill, Buckinghamshire. After 'The Times' in 1967 had abandoned its tradition of announcing births, marriages, and deaths on the front page, Norman, a man always acutely aware of his own worth, wrote to his London colleague Edna Purdie, ''The Times' is becoming a quite deplorable paper. Our deaths will have to appear on the last page, which I find humiliating' (Royal Holloway, U. Lond., Purdie papers). 


@@@@@


doc= 62279


Belcher, John William (1905-1964), politician and trade unionist, was born on 2 August 1905 at 12 Radington Road, Kensington, London, the first surviving child of John Thomas Belcher, an assurance agent and later a postal sorting worker, and his wife, Lillie Harriett, 'nee' Garrard. From 1912 onwards the family lived in Hammersmith, west London; John Belcher attended the local Brackenbury Road elementary school and won a scholarship to Latymer Upper School, Hammersmith, in 1916. He left school at sixteen and entered clerical employment, finding a secure job at the Smithfield goods depot of the Great Western Railway in December 1922. Soon afterwards he joined the Railway Clerks' Association (RCA) and became a trade union activist, a decision he regarded as 'the turning point of my life' (Belcher, 'How I... rose and fell'). He became branch secretary about 1929, served on local and regional bodies of the RCA and the wider labour movement during the 1930s, and founded a Workers' Educational Association study group on economics among the Smithfield clerks. He took an external London University diploma in economics and social science in 1932 and became a fellow of the Royal Economic Society. 
Belcher married Louisa Moody on 5 June 1927, when both were aged twenty-one; she was the daughter of William Moody, an engine man of Chalk Farm. He recalled that 'we took a chance on marrying so young, but our interests and political sentiments were so identical, and we were so much in love, that we never thought about waiting' (Belcher, 'John Belcher's tribute'). They remained in love for the rest of their lives, although their marriage was childless until their daughter Jill was born on 22 June 1940. Shortly afterwards the family moved from Camden Town, north London, to Sydney Road in Enfield, Middlesex. The Belchers had three children. 
Belcher suffered from poor health for much of his life. He had surgery in 1931 for intestinal problems including a duodenal ulcer and was classified disabled during the Second World War, during which he worked as a lecturer for the Ministry of Information. He was elected Labour MP for Sowerby, Yorkshire, in July 1945 and was among the first of the 1945 intake to be given a ministerial job -- parliamentary secretary at the Board of Trade -- on 12 January 1946. A large proportion of his workload lay in dealing with the complex apparatus of controls, permits, and rationing administered by the Board of Trade during the 1940s. While a popular and well-regarded minister, he suffered from severe stress, and by the middle of 1947 'luncheons and dinners which I had to attend in increasing numbers became an ordeal and I only kept going by dosing myself with various powders to relieve the almost constant pain. I knew I was heading for a breakdown' (Belcher, 'What happens'). He turned increasingly to alcohol, which worried the president of the Board of Trade, Harold Wilson, and Belcher's own civil servants. His health did indeed collapse and he spent several weeks in hospital in May 1948. 
Belcher tried to meet as many business people as possible directly, operate controls reasonably, and win trust for the Labour government. Unfortunately he formed his closest links with a fraudster, illegal alien, and undischarged bankrupt known as Sidney Stanley. Stanley was a 'contact man' who claimed to be able to arrange favours from government for businessmen on production of a fee. One such was Harry Sherman, an unscrupulous football pools promoter. Stanley showered Belcher with minor gifts, such as a suit, a week in a hotel in Margate, and frequent visits to the dog track. Belcher naively accepted these as friendly gestures. He also saw no harm in accepting gifts from other people who had dealings with the Board of Trade, such as a few Max Factor cosmetics and a prodigious amount of sherry from Maurice Bloch distillers. Stanley falsely claimed to clients that Belcher took cash bribes but pocketed the money himself. 
Rumours started to circulate about corruption at the Board of Trade in summer 1948; Wilson called in the police on 9 October 1948 and Belcher was suspended from duty on 18 October. On 9 October the prime minister, Clement Attlee, announced the appointment of a tribunal of inquiry under Sir George Lynskey to investigate the allegations. The proceedings were highly publicized. John Belcher appeared before it and was harshly examined by the attorney-general, Sir Hartley Shawcross. Belcher's counsel conceded that the gifts were incompatible with his position as a minister of the crown, but not that his ministerial activities had been influenced. Louisa Belcher also underwent a rigorous public investigation of her finances. John Belcher resigned as a minister on 13 December 1948. 
The tribunal's report, which was put before parliament on 22 January 1949, was harsher than the government, or Belcher, expected. It found that he had been influenced by accepting gifts, although Belcher and his ministerial and civil service colleagues continued to believe that he had not. A parallel Metropolitan Police investigation found that it would be possible to charge him and Maurice Bloch over their relationship, but Shawcross advised that if Belcher resigned his seat in parliament it would not be in the interests of justice to proceed. 
Belcher resigned his seat in parliament just before the debate on the Lynskey report on 3 February 1949. He made a dignified resignation speech, reaffirming his belief in a business-friendly form of socialism and condemning the antisemitism that had flared up during the scandal, but he was despondent about the consequences of his mistakes, and blamed himself for damaging the labour movement. He returned to his job at the Smithfield depot. His health continued to deteriorate during the 1950s, although he found some consolation in Labour's election victory a few days before he died, on 26 October 1964, at Chase Farm Hospital in Enfield. Belcher was a bright, idealistic, working-class socialist, who was harshly treated for his naive attempts to forge a good relationship with business and became a martyr to the puritanical standards of conduct in public life in the austere Attlee era. 


@@@@@


doc= 62285


Upfield, Arthur William (1890-1964), author and traveller, was born on 1 September 1890, at 88 North Street, Gosport, Hampshire, the eldest of the five sons of a draper, James Upfield, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Barmore. During childhood he lived sometimes with his parents, sometimes with his grandparents, and attended a series of different schools in Gosport. Although he began writing novels in his spare time, his academic success was minimal. Articled at sixteen to an estate agent, he failed his examinations two years later and was shipped off by his exasperated father to Australia. 
In reaction against the boredom of clerical work, Upfield took a job as boundary rider in interior New South Wales. He quickly gained a liking for the bush, and worked at a variety of jobs, including drover, farmhand, bullock-wagon driver, and cook. His patriotism caused him to join the Australian Imperial Force in August 1914, and he endured campaigns in Flanders and Gallipoli. He married an English nurse, Anne Douglas; they had one son, Arthur James. However, the marriage failed and he returned to Australia and resumed his wandering life. Although his wife and son came out to join him in Western Australia in the early 1930s, the reconciliation attempt failed. However, they were never divorced. 
While working in southern Queensland, Upfield met Leon Wood, whose white mother and Aboriginal father had abandoned him at birth, but whose abilities had brought him employment by the Queensland police. Upfield had begun writing a detective story, but had set it aside and instead written a thriller, 'The House of Cain' (1928). Their second meeting inspired him to model his central character on Leon; the result was Napoleon Bonaparte, the half-Aboriginal detective who made his earliest appearance in 'The Barrakee Mystery' (1929) and was subsequently to be featured in twenty-eight further crime novels; these have been repeatedly republished and featured on radio and television. Upfield published three other novels, but these did not find a significant readership. In 1933 he became a staff writer for the 'Melbourne Herald' and wrote for that newspaper a serial, 'The Great Melbourne Cup Mystery'; this was eventually republished in book form in 1996. He was also a contributor to 'World Wide Magazine' and 'Walkabout'. 
For the second Bonaparte novel, 'The Sands of Windee' (1931), Upfield conceived an effective technique for the disposal of a corpse. He described this to a group that included an itinerant swagman, Snowy Rowles: to Upfield's great dismay, the method was used by Rowles while committing three murders in Western Australia. Upfield's account of this episode, 'The Murchison Murders', was published obscurely in the 1930s and republished in 1987. 
Upfield's burgeoning career as a writer did not prevent him from travelling. In 1948 he headed a 5000 mile long Australian Geographical Society tour in Western Australia. Indeed, there were few parts of Australia that he did not visit. In most of his novels, the setting is integral to the plot; one is even set, not onshore, but in the swordfishing grounds of the Tasman Sea ('The Mystery of Swordfish Reef', 1939). The most urban is 'An Author Bites the Dust' (1948), which contains a thinly disguised self-portrait and expresses his rancour at his shabby treatment by the Australian literary establishment. 
Upfield's strength, however, lies in his depiction of the Australian outback -- its topography, its erratic weather patterns, its unique fauna, and its equally unique human inhabitants. Usually his male characters are of the pioneer breed that was already vanishing; whether good or evil, they are always strongly drawn. Some of his female characters, like the formidable Mary Answerth and her manipulating sister in 'Venom House' (1952), or the streetwise policewoman Alice McGorr in 'Murder must Wait' (1953) and 'The Battling Prophet' (1956), are equally well drawn; but his heroines tend to be idealized and insipid. A particular virtue is Upfield's percipient and sympathetic characterization of Australia's Aboriginal peoples. His knowledge of their beliefs and traditions, and his regret at the erosion of these through the indifference or antipathy of most white settlers, give his writing an especial relevance and poignancy. 
In his later years Upfield enjoyed the companionship of Jessica Uren, with whom he lived at Airey Inlet, Victoria, and at Bermagui and Bowral, New South Wales. She tended him during his last illness; he died in Bowral on 13 February 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 62290


Daubeney family (per. c.1225-c.1510), gentry, of Somerset and Bedfordshire, came originally from Brittany, their name deriving from the town of Aubigne in the diocese of Rennes. By the 1220s, in addition to their Breton estates, the family held property in Lincolnshire, around South Ingleby. At some time before 1225, King Henry III granted the Somerset manor of South Petherton to Philip Daubeney, seigneur de Landal (died 1236). This manor soon became their main English seat. In 1236 Philip died in the Holy Land, leaving as his heir a nephew, Sir Ralph Daubeney (died 1292). Sir Ralph was in turn succeeded by his two sons: Sir Philip Daubeney (died 1294) and Elis Daubeney, Lord Daubeney (c.1270-1305). Elis made two significant contributions to the family's interests. First, he determined that their attentions would focus on England rather than his own birthplace of Brittany, their primary sphere of influence hitherto; and in 1295 Edward I granted a charter naturalizing Elis and his heirs in perpetuity. Second, Sir Elis was the first member of the family to rise to a position of national prominence. After serving in Edward I's campaign against the Welsh rebel Madog ap Llywelyn in 1294-5, he received personal summonses to parliament until his death in 1305. He also took an active part in King Edward's campaigns against the Scots. He married Joan, with whom he had twin sons, Sir Ralph Daubeney (c.1304-1378) and Sir William Daubeney ('c'.1304- 'c'.1372). On Sir Elis's death, the crown took possession of most of his lands during Ralph's minority, his Lincolnshire properties being assigned to Joan as her dower. 
In 1326 Ralph Daubeney was granted livery of his family's English estates, while his brother, William, took possession of the Breton properties, becoming seigneur de Landal. Thereafter, these two spheres of Daubeney interest remained separate. Following the outbreak of hostilities with France in 1337, William's branch of the family ran into difficulties as a result of their English associations, and in 1373 Edward III granted Sir William's widow, Phillipa, $50 per annum until she recovered her Breton lands, which had been confiscated owing to her alleged English allegiance. Ralph, by contrast, had no such difficulties and went on to carve out a successful career. Like his father he served in the wars in Scotland, where he was knighted and appointed a knight-banneret. At some time after 1330 he was taken prisoner by the Scots and was not released until October 1337. Despite this setback, Ralph resumed his career upon release and in February 1342 was admitted to the royal council, though he apparently never received an individual writ of summons to parliament. In 1346 he fought in the bishop of Durham's retinue at Crecy, and he subsequently took part in the successful siege of Calais. Ralph was married twice: his first wife was Alice, daughter of William Montagu, second Lord Montagu, of Shepton Montague, Somerset (died 1319), and his second was Katherine, daughter of Marmaduke (III) Thwing, first Lord Thwing (d. 1323) ['see under 'Thwing, Sir Robert (III) (d. 1245x)]. 
Sir Ralph Daubeney was succeeded by Sir Giles [i] Daubeney (c.1333-1386), his son from his first marriage. Even before his father's death, Giles had begun building up his own estates, in 1357 purchasing the manors of Kempston, Bedfordshire, and Tottenham, Middlesex, for 200 marks from his uncle, Sir William Daubeney. These properties subsequently provided the descendants of Giles [i] with an important secondary sphere of influence, and in the years before his father's death Giles was active in Bedfordshire administration, serving as a justice of oyer and terminer there several times in the 1370s, and as sheriff in 1379-80. Thereafter, having received his inheritance in 1378, his interests returned to his native Somerset, and he served as MP from 1382 to 1384. He died in June 1386 at his manor of Barrington, near South Petherton. His commitment to his midland estates is, however, suggested by the fact that he was buried at Kempston. 
If the Daubeneys' decline from the heights of influence which Sir Elis had scaled was relatively slow during the seventy years after his death, in subsequent decades it accelerated, largely owing to the minorities and early deaths which beset the family from the late fourteenth century. In 1358 Sir Giles [i] Daubeney had married Alianore, daughter of Sir Henry Willington of Umberleigh, Devon. The marriage produced a son, Sir Giles [ii] Daubeney (1370-1403), aged sixteen at his father's death. During his minority his lands were farmed by Margaret Courtenay, countess of Devon, while his marriage was granted to Thomas Lee, one of the king's esquires. In 1390 Giles [ii] was assigned $20 per annum from his lands for his maintenance, and at the end of 1391 he was granted livery. Over the following years he was active in Bedfordshire, where he served as sheriff in 1394-5 and again in 1400. He died in 1403 at Kempston, where he was buried. From his marriage to Margaret, daughter of Sir John Beauchamp (died 1388?), Giles had two sons. The elder was John Daubeney (c.1394-1409), whose wardship the king granted to his consort, Joan of Navarre. John married Elizabeth, daughter of the Yorkshire knight Roger Scrope, but died in 1409 before he could produce any offspring. His heir was his younger brother, Sir Giles [iii] Daubeney (1399-1446). 
By the time Giles [iii] Daubeney took possession of his inheritance, minorities had deprived his family of more than twenty years' estate income and prevented them from playing the active role in local and national affairs which, a century before, had enabled Sir Elis and Sir Ralph temporarily to elevate the Daubeneys above the county gentry. By these minorities they had also been denied the opportunity to benefit from royal patronage, or to profit in the land and marriage markets. Their position began to improve after Sir Giles [iii] took possession of the family lands in 1416. Within two years he was in France, and campaigned there until 1421, but was apparently not among the beneficiaries of the Lancastrian land settlement in Normandy and returned to England in order to enhance his existing interests. Most of his official activities were connected with Somerset, where he served as sheriff in 1426, MP in 1424-5 and 1429, and on a variety of 'ad hoc' commissions from the late 1420s. He was also active in the administration of Bedfordshire (where he had been born), serving as sheriff there in 1431-2. He also expanded his estates. After the death of his first wife, Joan, daughter of Philip, Lord Darcy (died 1399), Giles married Mary, daughter and coheir of Simon Leke of Cotham, Nottinghamshire, thereby acquiring the manors of Cotham and Hawton and tenements in Newark. 
Upon his death in 1446, Sir Giles [iii] Daubeney was succeeded by his eldest son with his first wife, Sir William Daubeney (1424-1461), who followed his father in marrying an heiress, in his case Alice ('b'. 1432), daughter and coheir of John Stourton (d. 1438) of Preston Plucknett, Somerset ['see under 'Stourton family]. As a result of this marriage, considerable estates in Somerset, worth in excess of $80 per annum and including the manors of Yeovilton, Speckington, and Bridgehampton, came to the family. Having been knighted, William served as MP for Bedfordshire in 1448-9 and as sheriff of Cornwall in 1452-3, but does not appear to have been personally involved in the factional strife then besetting the government of Henry VI. Indeed, after 1453 Sir William performed no further official service, perhaps being content to keep his head below the parapet. 
Sir William's son and heir was altogether less reticent, and raised the family's fortunes to their medieval pinnacle. Giles Daubeney, first Baron Daubeney (1451/2-1508), was brought up a Yorkist and served Edward IV, but rebelled against Richard III in 1483 and fled to Brittany where he joined Henry Tudor. Having fought at Bosworth, he became one of Henry's closest associates and, through a series of grants, the dominant magnate in the south-west. In March 1486 Henry created him a baron. He served as a councillor, administrator, diplomat, and, from 1495, as lord chamberlain. Contemporary accusations of wavering loyalty during the western rebellion of 1497 (which he nevertheless helped to put down), and the fine imposed on him by the king in 1506, suggest that there were some strains in his relations with Henry. Nevertheless, on his death in May 1508 he was given a splendid funeral in Westminster Abbey, where alabaster effigies of him and his wife survive. He had married, by 1476, Elizabeth, daughter of John Arundel of Lanherne and his second wife, Katherine Chidiock. They had one daughter, Cecily, who married John Bourchier, Lord Fitzwarine, later second earl of Bath (died 1539), and a son, Henry Daubeney, who was created earl of Bridgewater by Henry VIII. 


@@@@@


doc= 62291


Daubeney family (per. c.1225-c.1510), gentry, of Somerset and Bedfordshire, came originally from Brittany, their name deriving from the town of Aubigne in the diocese of Rennes. By the 1220s, in addition to their Breton estates, the family held property in Lincolnshire, around South Ingleby. At some time before 1225, King Henry III granted the Somerset manor of South Petherton to Philip Daubeney, seigneur de Landal (died 1236). This manor soon became their main English seat. In 1236 Philip died in the Holy Land, leaving as his heir a nephew, Sir Ralph Daubeney (died 1292). Sir Ralph was in turn succeeded by his two sons: Sir Philip Daubeney (died 1294) and Elis Daubeney, Lord Daubeney (c.1270-1305). Elis made two significant contributions to the family's interests. First, he determined that their attentions would focus on England rather than his own birthplace of Brittany, their primary sphere of influence hitherto; and in 1295 Edward I granted a charter naturalizing Elis and his heirs in perpetuity. Second, Sir Elis was the first member of the family to rise to a position of national prominence. After serving in Edward I's campaign against the Welsh rebel Madog ap Llywelyn in 1294-5, he received personal summonses to parliament until his death in 1305. He also took an active part in King Edward's campaigns against the Scots. He married Joan, with whom he had twin sons, Sir Ralph Daubeney (c.1304-1378) and Sir William Daubeney ('c'.1304- 'c'.1372). On Sir Elis's death, the crown took possession of most of his lands during Ralph's minority, his Lincolnshire properties being assigned to Joan as her dower. 
In 1326 Ralph Daubeney was granted livery of his family's English estates, while his brother, William, took possession of the Breton properties, becoming seigneur de Landal. Thereafter, these two spheres of Daubeney interest remained separate. Following the outbreak of hostilities with France in 1337, William's branch of the family ran into difficulties as a result of their English associations, and in 1373 Edward III granted Sir William's widow, Phillipa, $50 per annum until she recovered her Breton lands, which had been confiscated owing to her alleged English allegiance. Ralph, by contrast, had no such difficulties and went on to carve out a successful career. Like his father he served in the wars in Scotland, where he was knighted and appointed a knight-banneret. At some time after 1330 he was taken prisoner by the Scots and was not released until October 1337. Despite this setback, Ralph resumed his career upon release and in February 1342 was admitted to the royal council, though he apparently never received an individual writ of summons to parliament. In 1346 he fought in the bishop of Durham's retinue at Crecy, and he subsequently took part in the successful siege of Calais. Ralph was married twice: his first wife was Alice, daughter of William Montagu, second Lord Montagu, of Shepton Montague, Somerset (died 1319), and his second was Katherine, daughter of Marmaduke (III) Thwing, first Lord Thwing (d. 1323) ['see under 'Thwing, Sir Robert (III) (d. 1245x)]. 
Sir Ralph Daubeney was succeeded by Sir Giles [i] Daubeney (c.1333-1386), his son from his first marriage. Even before his father's death, Giles had begun building up his own estates, in 1357 purchasing the manors of Kempston, Bedfordshire, and Tottenham, Middlesex, for 200 marks from his uncle, Sir William Daubeney. These properties subsequently provided the descendants of Giles [i] with an important secondary sphere of influence, and in the years before his father's death Giles was active in Bedfordshire administration, serving as a justice of oyer and terminer there several times in the 1370s, and as sheriff in 1379-80. Thereafter, having received his inheritance in 1378, his interests returned to his native Somerset, and he served as MP from 1382 to 1384. He died in June 1386 at his manor of Barrington, near South Petherton. His commitment to his midland estates is, however, suggested by the fact that he was buried at Kempston. 
If the Daubeneys' decline from the heights of influence which Sir Elis had scaled was relatively slow during the seventy years after his death, in subsequent decades it accelerated, largely owing to the minorities and early deaths which beset the family from the late fourteenth century. In 1358 Sir Giles [i] Daubeney had married Alianore, daughter of Sir Henry Willington of Umberleigh, Devon. The marriage produced a son, Sir Giles [ii] Daubeney (1370-1403), aged sixteen at his father's death. During his minority his lands were farmed by Margaret Courtenay, countess of Devon, while his marriage was granted to Thomas Lee, one of the king's esquires. In 1390 Giles [ii] was assigned $20 per annum from his lands for his maintenance, and at the end of 1391 he was granted livery. Over the following years he was active in Bedfordshire, where he served as sheriff in 1394-5 and again in 1400. He died in 1403 at Kempston, where he was buried. From his marriage to Margaret, daughter of Sir John Beauchamp (died 1388?), Giles had two sons. The elder was John Daubeney (c.1394-1409), whose wardship the king granted to his consort, Joan of Navarre. John married Elizabeth, daughter of the Yorkshire knight Roger Scrope, but died in 1409 before he could produce any offspring. His heir was his younger brother, Sir Giles [iii] Daubeney (1399-1446). 
By the time Giles [iii] Daubeney took possession of his inheritance, minorities had deprived his family of more than twenty years' estate income and prevented them from playing the active role in local and national affairs which, a century before, had enabled Sir Elis and Sir Ralph temporarily to elevate the Daubeneys above the county gentry. By these minorities they had also been denied the opportunity to benefit from royal patronage, or to profit in the land and marriage markets. Their position began to improve after Sir Giles [iii] took possession of the family lands in 1416. Within two years he was in France, and campaigned there until 1421, but was apparently not among the beneficiaries of the Lancastrian land settlement in Normandy and returned to England in order to enhance his existing interests. Most of his official activities were connected with Somerset, where he served as sheriff in 1426, MP in 1424-5 and 1429, and on a variety of 'ad hoc' commissions from the late 1420s. He was also active in the administration of Bedfordshire (where he had been born), serving as sheriff there in 1431-2. He also expanded his estates. After the death of his first wife, Joan, daughter of Philip, Lord Darcy (died 1399), Giles married Mary, daughter and coheir of Simon Leke of Cotham, Nottinghamshire, thereby acquiring the manors of Cotham and Hawton and tenements in Newark. 
Upon his death in 1446, Sir Giles [iii] Daubeney was succeeded by his eldest son with his first wife, Sir William Daubeney (1424-1461), who followed his father in marrying an heiress, in his case Alice ('b'. 1432), daughter and coheir of John Stourton (d. 1438) of Preston Plucknett, Somerset ['see under 'Stourton family]. As a result of this marriage, considerable estates in Somerset, worth in excess of $80 per annum and including the manors of Yeovilton, Speckington, and Bridgehampton, came to the family. Having been knighted, William served as MP for Bedfordshire in 1448-9 and as sheriff of Cornwall in 1452-3, but does not appear to have been personally involved in the factional strife then besetting the government of Henry VI. Indeed, after 1453 Sir William performed no further official service, perhaps being content to keep his head below the parapet. 
Sir William's son and heir was altogether less reticent, and raised the family's fortunes to their medieval pinnacle. Giles Daubeney, first Baron Daubeney (1451/2-1508), was brought up a Yorkist and served Edward IV, but rebelled against Richard III in 1483 and fled to Brittany where he joined Henry Tudor. Having fought at Bosworth, he became one of Henry's closest associates and, through a series of grants, the dominant magnate in the south-west. In March 1486 Henry created him a baron. He served as a councillor, administrator, diplomat, and, from 1495, as lord chamberlain. Contemporary accusations of wavering loyalty during the western rebellion of 1497 (which he nevertheless helped to put down), and the fine imposed on him by the king in 1506, suggest that there were some strains in his relations with Henry. Nevertheless, on his death in May 1508 he was given a splendid funeral in Westminster Abbey, where alabaster effigies of him and his wife survive. He had married, by 1476, Elizabeth, daughter of John Arundel of Lanherne and his second wife, Katherine Chidiock. They had one daughter, Cecily, who married John Bourchier, Lord Fitzwarine, later second earl of Bath (died 1539), and a son, Henry Daubeney, who was created earl of Bridgewater by Henry VIII. 


