@@@@@


doc= 62511


Roy, Manabendra Nath (1887-1954), international communist leader and ideologist, was born Narendra Nath Bhattacharya on 21 March 1887, according to family tradition, in Arbalia village, near Calcutta, the fourth child of Dinabandhu Bhattacharya, a village teacher. He was educated locally but, like many Bengali young men of the period, he held as his major concern the anti-colonial struggle, and from 1905 he became deeply involved with the revolutionary groups that had sprung up at that time. In 1915 he left India to try to arrange for the smuggling of arms from Germany. This failed, but he was able to reach California in June 1916, at which point he adopted the name Manabendra Nath Roy. He met and married there his first wife, Evelyn Trent, and at the same time came into contact with American radicals and progressives. Forced to leave the United States, he went in 1917 to Mexico, where he became involved in local politics and emerged as the effective leader of the small Mexican Socialist Party. The key event in Roy's political development was his meeting with Michael Borodin, who had arrived in Mexico in 1919 as the Comintern's emissary. Under Borodin's guidance he converted to Marxism and in August 1919 set up the Communist Party of Mexico. 
Roy played a major role at the second Comintern congress in 1920 and engaged Lenin in a famous debate about the role of the 'national bourgeoisie' in the colonies in the transition to communism. Both saw the importance of anti-colonial nationalism in destabilizing the metropolitan countries such as Britain, but they diverged significantly over whether the existing colonial bourgeoisie had any long-term revolutionary potential. An immediate question was whether bourgeois parties, such as the Indian National Congress under Gandhi, should be supported. While Lenin believed they should, Roy thought that the Comintern should be more selective and seek to identify and support revolutionary movements based on the colonial working class. This reflected his more general view, set out for example in 'India in Transition' (1922), that the tools of Marxist analysis could be applied universally. 
From 1920 until 1929 Roy was a full-time leader of the Comintern and played a prominent part in its affairs. He was a key figure in the early history of the Communist Party of India, founded originally at Tashkent in 1920 and in India itself in 1925. His involvement in the disasters that struck the fledgeling Chinese Communist Party in 1927, however, led to his exclusion from the inner circle of leadership, while his analysis of the situation in India led him to take positions which diverged from the increasingly rigid Comintern orthodoxy. He maintained his highly critical analysis of Gandhi, but began to see the need for a tactical alliance with left-wing elements within Congress. His positions -- especially his so-called 'decolonization' thesis, which saw the British establishing a working relationship with the Indian bourgeoisie at the expense of the working class and therefore implied the need for solidarity of all progressive forces -- were attacked at the sixth Comintern congress in 1928 and he was expelled the following year. His personal association with figures such as Bukharin meant that there was no place for him in the Stalin-dominated Comintern thereafter. He found a spiritual home at this point with the dissident communist group in Germany led by August Thalheimer and Heinrich Brandler. 
In December 1930 Roy secretly returned to India in order to establish a political base, but he was arrested by the authorities after a few months and sentenced to twelve years in prison on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the state. Although his sentence was reduced on appeal to six years, he had to endure harsh conditions in gaol, relieved only by the opportunity to read extensively. During this period he began to move beyond the orthodox Marxism of his earlier period. After his release from gaol in 1936 Roy attempted a strategy of working with the left in Congress, and established friendly relations with Jawaharlal Nehru and other progressives. However, he found little space for manoeuvre between a new generation of socialists on the one side and Gandhian activists on the other. Roy left Congress in 1940, believing that it should have agreed to support Britain in its war with Nazi Germany, and established his own Radical Democratic Party. This failed to make any electoral impact and Roy dissolved it in 1948. 
Roy had separated from his first wife in 1926, and, after a relationship with Louise Geissler, in 1936 married Ellen Gottschalk. From 1946, when he settled in Dehra Dun, until his death there on 25 January 1954 he continued to develop his theories of radical humanism, which sought to apply his rationalist and materialist analysis of historical processes to the Indian context. His 'magnum opus' was 'Reason, Romanticism and Revolution', published in two volumes in 1952 and 1955. After his death his ideas were kept alive by a circle of devoted followers. 


@@@@@


doc= 62512


Bhave, Vinoba (1895-1982), spiritual leader in India, was born Vinayak Narhari Bhave on 11 September 1895, the eldest of the five children (four brothers, one sister) of a Maharashtrian Brahman family in the village of Gagoda, Kolaba district, Bombay. His father, Narhari Shambhurao Bhave, an industrial chemist in the Buckingham mills, Baroda, and later a civil servant in the state, inculcated in Vinoba (as he became known) a commitment to science. By far the greater influences were his pious mother, Rukmini Devi, and his grandfather Shambhurao, an inandar and ayurvedic physician who ran his own village temple. Possibly his mother's dominant influence explains why all three surviving sons chose celibacy. In 1909 Vinoba joined his father in Baroda, where he received his education in Baroda School. He admired contemporary and historical examples of patriotism, such as western India's B. G. Tilak and the Italian Mazzini, and fell under the spell above all of the Maharashtrian saints, and of Shankara. In March 1916, abandoning his intermediate examination in Bombay, he chose to go to the holy Hindu city of Benares to study Sanskrit and philosophy. Gandhi's notorious speech at the laying of the foundation stone of Benares Hindu University profoundly influenced him, and in June 1916, aged twenty, he joined Gandhi in his ashram (community) in Ahmadabad, Gujarat. 
Until Gandhi's assassination in January 1948 Vinoba worked out of the limelight with total dedication in the fields of social reconstruction and education. He opened a new ashram in Wardha, central India, in July 1921. Khadi, the hand-spun cloth which was one hallmark of Gandhi's politics, became his obsession. 
In December 1932 Vinoba opened another ashram in the village of Nalwadi, 2 miles from Wardha, and gave more of his time to the plight of the 'untouchables' at the base of Hindu society, travelling widely through the villages of the locality. In 1938, to recover from ill health, he moved to an empty bungalow belonging to Jamnalal Bajaj, a wealthy supporter of Gandhi, in the village of Paunar, set on a mound above the River Dham in central India. This, the Paramdham ashram, was to remain his home until his death. Vinoba did not see Gandhi as his guru (spiritual guide) and insisted that one should pursue one's own ideals. But Gandhi, recognizing Vinoba's application of his ideals, saw him as a son. He selected him as the first to initiate individual non-violent opposition to the war; the resulting prison sentence troubled Vinoba little as he was disciplined by the austerity of ashram life. He came to be seen as Gandhi's spiritual heir as Nehru inherited the role of political leadership. 
After Gandhi's assassination in 1948 Vinoba began the second phase of his life as the charismatic leader of a Gandhian inspired non-violent revolution, the Sarvodaya movement. In 1951 he found his vocation as the apostle of 'bhoodan', the free gift of land, an answer to landlessness and an alternative to violent socio-economic change. So began an extraordinary personal pilgrimage in which Vinoba walked the length and breadth of India, some 44,000 miles, returning to Paunar only in April 1964. In time the more individualist character of 'bhoodan' gave way to the more socialist 'gramdan', the gifting of a whole village. But the gap between this ideal and reality was always huge; for example, the land gifted was often uncultivable. As the movement lost momentum in the 1960s, Vinoba was forced to compromise. He agreed to a 'sulabh' (simplified) 'gram', whereby the landowner granted all his land to the village, but retained one-twentieth and never surrendered rights of inheritance. When almost the whole of the state of Bihar was seemingly incorporated in the movement by 1969, Vinoba announced his retirement. However, Bihar's subsequent history, and the plight of the lowest in society, cast doubt on the long-term efficacy of such non-violent and voluntary strategies for radical change. 
Vinoba's Achilles heel was politics. He claimed to stand for a decentralized self-governing society, and, like Gandhi, affirmed that, with restraint, there would be no need for government. He claimed to reject the politics of power and stand for a partyless democracy, though significantly one based on consensus rather than majority rule. Yet he was always close to Nehru and came to look on his daughter, Indira Gandhi, as his own niece. Vinoba believed that structural change was almost incidental to a change in ethical outlook, to a transformation of values. But the rank and file of the post-Gandhian Sarvodaya movement for the welfare of all were driven by a genuine wish for structural change on behalf of the landless, and under the alternative leadership of J. P. Narayan were ready to engage in active confrontation with what they saw as a corrupt social and political system. 
So began the third and least happy phase of Vinoba's career. Narayan, among others, challenged Indira Gandhi's dictatorial politics, and she responded with the imposition of an emergency regime in July 1975, which lasted for two years. Vinoba may have staved off a split in the Sarvodaya movement, but it was cosmetic. He screened the rift by undertaking a year-long vow of silence on 25 December 1975. When he did pronounce on the emergency, in writing in July, he did so in terms of its being an era of discipline, 'anushasan parva', seemingly sanctioning its repressiveness and earning himself the sobriquet 'the Saint of the Emergency'. His 'fast unto death' against cow slaughter in September 1976 can only disingenuously be seen as a challenge to Mrs Gandhi to return to democracy. She courted his support throughout, bribing him with promises of a nationwide celebration of the silver jubilee of the Sarvodaya movement and promising to step up distribution of land to the landless. 
Vinoba can all too easily be portrayed as the cerebral Brahman, given his pedantry with words and his obsessive fascination with mathematics. His best-known writing was a commentary on the 'Bhagavad gita', first delivered in Dhulia gaol in 1932. The concept of desireless action, so prominent in this sacred text, underpinned his life's work. He feared for India's security, setting up the 'shanti sena', a kind of non-violent police force, as an answer to internal threats from communalism and external challenges from Pakistan and China. Himself a brilliant linguist, he championed the use of the Devanagari script, in which Hindi is written, for all the vernacular languages as a further means of strengthening Indian unity, despite the passionate concern for regional vernacular evident in India after independence. He saw himself as driven by compassion, by a politics of love, but there was in his life, as in that of Gandhi, that other 'saint' in Indian politics, a seemingly contradictory combination of self-punitive austerity and a genuine, almost maternal, search for the moral well-being of others. 
On 9 November 1982 Vinoba had a heart attack. With characteristic physical detachment, he went on a fast and, in a manner appropriate for a modern saint, calmly prepared for death; this came at the Paramdham ashram on 15 November. He was cremated the following day on the banks of the River Dham, close to the Gandhi memorial. His ashes were placed in his 'babakuti' (hut) at the ashram. 


@@@@@


doc= 62513


Campbell, Victor Lindsey Arbuthnot (1875-1956), naval officer and Antarctic explorer, was born on 20 August 1875 at 16 Adelaide Crescent, Hove, Sussex, son of Captain Hugh Campbell RN, commander of the royal yacht 'Victoria and Albert', and his wife, Lucy Eleanor Archer. Educated at Eton College, Victor Campbell is said to have run away three times before his father agreed to let him join the Merchant Navy (Huxley, 274). He was subsequently admitted to the Royal Navy on 31 October 1895. 
Commissioned acting sub-lieutenant, Campbell served in HMS 'President' and HMS 'Victory', joining HMS 'Cordelia' in March 1896, which brought him to Newfoundland, a place which left a lasting impression on him. In 1901 he resigned his commission and the following year married Lillian Mary Settle (died 1953), daughter of Major-General Sir Henry Hamilton Settle RE KCB DSO. Their son Nigel was born in 1903. Subsequently the family spent their summer months in Sand, Norway, where Campbell was introduced to the art of ski running, a skill which in due course was to serve him well in the Antarctic with Captain Scott. Then in 1909 tragedy struck when Campbell's sister-in-law was drowned in a boating accident in Sandefjord, an event which so affected his wife that the marriage began to founder. It seems likely that this event played some part in deciding Campbell to sign on with Scott's British Antarctic expedition in 1910 as first officer of SY 'Terra Nova'. 
An archetypal naval officer of his time, Campbell was dubbed 'the Wicked Mate' by the ship's party, a nickname that implied the mixture of respect, awe, and affection with which he was regarded. Following his supervision of the landing of the stores at the expedition's base at Cape Evans, Ross Island, in January 1911, Campbell was selected by Scott to command a six-man eastern party to explore King Edward VII Land. They were to be landed there by 'Terra Nova', but in the event heavy ice frustrated this plan. On the return voyage Campbell and his men unexpectedly encountered the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen at the Bay of Whales planning the expedition to the south pole which was subsequently to defeat Scott. Following a brief exchange of news Campbell continued towards his second objective, Cape Adare, with what had now become the northern party, pausing only to leave news for Scott of Amundsen's intentions. 
The story of the northern party is well recorded by one of its members, the geologist Raymond Priestley, in his book 'Antarctic Adventure' (1914). More recently Campbell's own diaries were published as 'The Wicked Mate' (1988). The other members included Surgeon-Commander G. Murray Levick, petty officers G. F. Browning and G. P. Abbott, and seaman A. B. H. Dickason. The party's objective was to carry out a scientific survey of the Cape Adare region, a frustrating mission since the topography of the area prohibited all access to the interior. Thanks to Campbell's capable leadership morale was maintained and some useful science accomplished. In January 1912 the northern party was picked up by 'Terra Nova' and landed on ice-clad Inexpressible Island to geologize for six weeks. When the ship subsequently failed to relieve them Campbell and his men were compelled to overwinter in a hastily improvised snow cave 12 feet by 9 in area and 51/2 feet high. In it they managed to survive for seven months during one of the worst winters then on record, subsisting mainly on seal and penguin meat. That they survived was largely due to Campbell's leadership. His word was law. To maintain discipline he drew an imaginary line bisecting the cave, one half of which was the 'messdeck', the other the 'quarterdeck'. Thus nothing could be officially heard in one half that had been spoken in the other. At last on 30 September 1912 the northern party set off for Cape Evans; they traversed a distance of 230 miles over hazardous crevassed terrain and reached base camp on 6 November 1912. Here they learned of the deaths of the pole party. Campbell then took over the command pending their final relief by 'Terra Nova' in January 1913. 
Back in London the death of Scott and his companions overshadowed the sufferings and remarkable survival of the northern party. Campbell, ever reticent, was content to receive a gold watch from the Royal Geographical Society and the praise of its president, Lord Curzon, for whom 'no more brilliant thing has ever been accomplished in the history of Arctic and Antarctic exploration' ('Wicked Mate', 12). In 1913 he was raised to the rank of commander for his part in the expedition. During the summer of 1914 he was employed by the Northern Exploration Company to lead a mineral prospecting expedition to Spitsbergen, but this was abruptly terminated by the outbreak of war. His wartime career was exemplary. He saw action in the Dardanelles and was awarded the DSO to which a bar was subsequently added for service in the Dover patrol. In 1918, aboard HMS 'Warwick', he took part in the Zeebrugge raid and in 1919 was appointed OBE for service in north Russia. Following further commands in the Atlantic Fleet he was promoted captain in 1922, before retiring to his beloved Newfoundland. 
In 1926 Campbell's wife, Lillian, divorced him, and two years later he married Marit Fabritious, daughter of a Norwegian artist and a former lady-in-waiting to Queen Maud of Norway. During the Second World War he served for a time as senior naval officer, Trinidad, returning to Newfoundland in 1941 to live in the settlement of Black Duck on the west coast. He finally retired to neighbouring Corner Brook where he died on 19 November 1956 and where he was buried with full military honours. A neighbour once described Campbell as 'the finest of a fine breed, so modest and yet with some quality about him so that you would follow him anywhere' ('Wicked Mate', 14). His contribution to Scott's last expedition has undoubtedly been much underestimated. 


@@@@@


doc= 62514


Ponting, Herbert George (1870-1935), photographer and film-maker, was born on 21 March 1870 in Market Place, Salisbury, Wiltshire, the son of Francis William Ponting, a bank manager, and his wife, Mary Sydenham. After a restless youth he emigrated to California, USA, where he took up fruit farming, learned photography, and married. But the lure of travel, once he was armed with a camera, proved incompatible with domesticity. In 1901 he left his wife and young children and embarked on the first of many photographic trips to the Far East, where he visited Japan, Manchuria, Korea, and Russia, and recorded the Russo-Japanese War. Although he travelled in China and India in 1906-7, and also visited Java and Burma, his great love was Japan, which led to his first illustrated book, 'In Lotus-Land Japan' (1910). 
Having also photographed Swiss and French mountains, Ponting was regarded as the best outdoor cameraman in the world when in 1909 Captain Robert Scott invited him to join the Antarctic expedition he was organizing. Convinced that moving pictures were now an essential aspect of expedition coverage (and financing), he set about learning their technique with a crash course from the manufacturer Alfred Newman, one of whose Newman-Sinclair cameras was specially adapted for polar conditions. Ponting began his record of the expedition on board the 'Terra Nova', when his requests for poses became known affectionately as 'the peril of ponting for Ponko'. During the long Antarctic winter of 1911 he developed all his breathtaking photographs and thousands of feet of film, as well as teaching photography to his companions and entertaining them with lantern slide lectures on his travels. In October 1911 the first fruits of his ''live' chronicles of life among the snows', as the 'Evening Standard' described it, were seen in London; although it would be over a year before the world had confirmation of Scott's fate. 
Ponting bought out Gaumont's rights to the film footage and began lecturing with a combination of film and slides almost daily throughout 1914. He later toured with the same programme and sent copies of the films to the western front, as they began to be regarded not only as Scott's memorial but also as exemplars of moral 'devotion to purpose, ideals and duty'. In 1921 Ponting published a long-awaited book on the expedition, 'The Great White South', and in 1924 -- ironically, at the lowest ebb of British film production -- issued a feature-length compilation under the same title. None of Ponting's business ventures prospered. He lost his own money on almost all presentations of the Antarctic material, bickered with other surviving expedition members over alleged infringement of his rights, and invested in a variety of disastrous novelties, such as the 'Distortograph' system for producing photographic caricatures. Determined that his film should become 'a national possession', he succeeded in having it formally accepted by the duke of York (later George VI) on behalf of the short-lived British Empire Film Institute in 1929, but was again disappointed by the financial outcome. 
With the coming of synchronized sound, Ponting decided that this would 'very greatly add to the interest of the story', and embarked on three years of painstaking work to create a new version at what was then the vast cost of $10,000. His confidence was justified, when the resulting 'Ninety Degrees South' (1933) was acknowledged to be highly effective, with an introduction by Scott's former second-in-command, Lieutenant (now Vice-Admiral) E. R. G. Evans, and commentary by Ponting, drawing on his years of experience in presenting the material. Reworking the material restored the story's intrinsic, if understated, drama, allowing its humour and intimacy, as well as its outstanding wildlife material, to balance the monumental beauty of Ponting's 'mastery of ice subjects' that Scott had admired. The film also made use of models and animation to cover the final unphotographed trek, combined with the poignant eloquence of Scott's own diaries. 'The Chief', Ponting recalled on the soundtrack, had joked that he 'couldn't wait to see the film at his local cinema'; and here the irony is moving. Sadly, the film did not prove a commercial success and Ponting, by his own account, was 'run down physically and cleaned out financially'. He died of a heart attack on 7 February 1935 at 44 Oxford Mansions, Market Place, Oxford Circus, London. Thanks to video, the film has now re-emerged to take its place as an authentic British epic, while Ponting's reputation as a photographer, both of landscape and of the expedition, is secure. 


@@@@@


doc= 62516


Lattimore, Owen (1900-1989), Mongolist and Sinologist, second son of David Lattimore (1874-1965) and his wife, Margaret Barnes (1873-1958), was born in Sibley Hospital, Washington, DC, on 29 July 1900. His father was a language teacher who accepted a job with the Chinese government teaching English and French in 1901. Owen was raised in Shanghai, Paotingfu (Baodingfu), and Peking (Beijing); the children were educated at home. In 1912 Margaret Lattimore took their five children to Switzerland for formal schooling. Owen was enrolled at the 'college classique cantonal' in Lausanne until war broke out in 1914; he was then sent to St Bees School, Cumberland (1914-19), where he flourished although he failed to secure a place at Oxford. Years later, he was glad that he had not attended Oxford. He felt that he would have emerged 'an insufferable aesthete' like Evelyn Waugh or Aldous Huxley, or would perhaps have been influenced by one of the extremist ideologies of the day, fascism or Marxism, which would have pre-empted the strong empirical bent that dominated his scholarship. 
After returning to China in 1919 Lattimore obtained a job with the British trading firm Arnhold & Co., first in Tientsin (Tianjin), then in Shanghai. He learned Chinese and frequently travelled to the interior, where he learned much about politics, economics, banditry, landlordism, and peasant unrest. 
On 4 March 1926 Lattimore married Eleanor (1895-1970), daughter of Dr T. F. Holgate, a Northwestern University dean then living in China. The story of their honeymoon trip through central Asia was told in Owen's 'Desert Road to Turkestan' (1929) and 'High Tartary' (1930), and in Eleanor's 'Turkestan Reunion' (1934). From India they went to Italy, England, and the United States. 
From 1928 to 1929 Lattimore studied anthropology at Harvard, after which he obtained grants including the Royal Geographical Society's Cuthbert Peek grant, that enabled him to travel widely in the Chinese areas bordering the USSR between 1929 and 1934. He emerged from this study vigorously hostile toward Japanese aggression, and dedicated to the welfare of the Mongols whose autonomy he espoused for the rest of his life. He also developed the appreciation for the Soviet minority policies in central Asia that later was interpreted by American cold-warriors as pro-communist. The Mongols and other minorities that he studied had kin on the Soviet side of the Sino-Soviet border; 'democracy' to them meant the educational and economic opportunities afforded by the USSR, which contrasted strongly with Chinese repression. This was what Lattimore called Russia's 'power of attraction' for the central Asian peoples; this was a phrase that, in mid-century America, was held to be pro-communist. 
In 1934 Lattimore became editor of 'Pacific Affairs', the major journal of the Institute of Pacific Relations, which he edited from a base in China. By 1937 Japanese depredations made it impossible to continue working there. Isaiah Bowman, president of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, offered Lattimore a job lecturing and shortly thereafter as head of the Page School of International Relations at Johns Hopkins. 
In 1941 President Roosevelt nominated Lattimore political adviser to Chaing Kai-shek. Lattimore had never met Chiang but thought him the only person with the stature to lead China against the Japanese. In 1942 Lattimore resigned from Chiang's service to direct the Pacific operation of the American office of war information. He was then asked by Roosevelt to accompany Vice-President Henry Wallace's mission to Siberia and China in 1944. 
After a short return to Johns Hopkins, Lattimore served on the Pauley reparations mission in Tokyo from December 1945 to January 1946. Back at Johns Hopkins, he organized a programme of Mongol studies and published some 350 articles between 1945 and 1950, many of them scholarly but most popular discussions of world affairs. His first mass-market book, 'Solution in Asia' (1945), advocated entrepreneurial enterprise freed from European colonial control and endemic corruption as in China. Among many international academic honours he received by this time was the Royal Geographical Society's patron's medal (1942). 
But events in China did not go as Lattimore hoped. Instead of promoting political and economic liberalization the nationalist government concentrated on destroying Mao's forces, with the aid of American arms and transport. This did not work; as whole nationalist armies defected with their American equipment to the communists, Lattimore became the most prominent exponent of the heresy that aid to Chiang was throwing good money after bad. And since Mao had won without significant Soviet aid, the people's republic established in 1949 was not a creature of the Kremlin hence not part of a monolithic world communist conspiracy. With the defeat of the American Eighth Army in Korea in 1950, this 'Mao was independent' heresy became intolerable in Washington. 
In 1950 Senator Joseph McCarthy selected Lattimore not only as the scapegoat on whom to blame the 'loss' of China, but as the 'top Soviet spy' in the United States, the 'boss' of the ring to which Alger Hiss had allegedly belonged. Democratic senator Pat McCarran, a ferocious supporter of Chiang and of Francisco Franco, in 1951 assembled a senate internal security sub-committee of like-minded ultra-conservatives to probe the Institute of Pacific Relations and Lattimore as its former editor. For twelve days in 1951 Lattimore was questioned by McCarran and his sub-committee, the longest interrogation in senate history up to then. He emerged bloody but unbowed; McCarran, on the basis of testimony by former communist witnesses who were known by the FBI to be mendacious, declared him a 'conscious, articulate instrument of the Soviet conspiracy' ('Institute of Pacific Relations Report', p. 224) and persuaded the attorney-general to indict him for perjury in December 1952. The FBI was not consulted as to whether this indictment should be sought and indeed their five costly and extensive evaluations concluded that there was no perjury (or any other) case against him. A federal judge threw out most counts of the indictment, but not until June 1955 did Attorney-General Brownell dismiss the case. 
Johns Hopkins kept Lattimore on during the inquisition, but the post-indictment years there were a torment to him. He no longer had a public audience, and right-wing professors constantly attacked him. In 1963 the University of Leeds asked him to head a new department of Chinese studies, organizing it as he saw fit. He accepted gladly. At Leeds he was able to incorporate all that he believed necessary to sound scholarship: language, literature, history, economics, geography, anthropology, and sociology. Leeds's willingness to ignore conventional disciplinary boundaries, which had been stultifying at Johns Hopkins, was to Lattimore a 'summum bonum'. He counted the years at Leeds the most satisfying of his life. He acquired a new audience, and his public appearances returned to what had been normal before McCarthy, with the BBC and 'Times Literary Supplement' the most prominent outlets. The Foreign Office asked him to interpret for the queen when the new Mongolian ambassador presented his credentials on 14 November 1963. He gave the Chichele lectures at the University of Oxford in May 1965. 
In 1961 the Mongolian people's republic invited Lattimore to visit and he visited Ulan Bator almost every year from then until he was too old to travel, becoming a major force in the small but active world of Mongol scholarship. In 1969 he became the only foreigner to hold full membership of the Mongolian Academy of Sciences, an honour that he prized above all others. Even the USSR decided in the 1960s that, capitalist apologist or not, his ideas were worth hearing, and he spent extensive periods in Moscow and Soviet Central Asia. He was invited to lecture and advise at every centre of Asian studies in Europe. As he put it in a letter to the 'New York Times', the 'outrageous Department of Justice indictment became an international passport' (23 March 1972). 
In 1970 Lattimore retired from Leeds but his wife's death the same year deprived him of the support and domestic discipline that had made his earlier writings possible. From 1970 to 1985 he wandered ceaselessly. As professor emeritus at Leeds from 1970 he still visited the department to work with colleagues and students and sporadically to lecture, but his main residence was at Paris (1973-9) and then Cambridge (1979-85) where honorary links to the university and King's College gave some institutional stability in a period otherwise marked by great restlessness. 
Many of Lattimore's books became classics, especially 'Inner Asian Frontiers of China' (1962), but his major claim to fame was the clarity and prescience of his many predictive judgements. What were once heresies, at the turn of the century appear to be perceptive and well informed analyses of the countries of the Far East and central Asia and their relations with the West. To beleaguered American liberals, and perhaps some British people, his most important legacy was proof that it was possible for a single individual to prevail against a powerful committee of the American senate, without knuckling under, confessing imagined sins, or running away. 
In 1985 Lattimore moved to Pawtucket, Rhode Island, to be near his only son, David, and six grandchildren. He was frail, but still keen of mind. He died there of pneumonia on 31 May 1989; his ashes were to be scattered on a mountain in Mongolia. 


@@@@@


doc= 62519


Price, Harry (1881-1948), writer and psychical researcher, was born at home on 17 January 1881 at 37 Red Lion Square, Holborn, London, the second of two children of Edward Ditcher Price (1834-1906), a commercial traveller for a paper manufacturer, and his wife, Emma Randall, 'nee' Meech (1860-1902). Price's father was born in Rodington, Shropshire, and the young Harry spent many of his school holidays with relatives in that area. In his autobiography he attributes his lifelong fascination with magical and occult matters to an encounter, at the age of eight, with an itinerant conjuror and purveyor of patent medicines in the market place at Shrewsbury. 
Price was educated at the Haberdashers' Aske's Boys' School, Hatcham, in south-east London, and later at Goldsmiths' College, where he studied chemistry, photography, and mechanical and electrical engineering. He evinced an early flair for writing, contributing many articles to the school magazine and to local newspapers. He also carried out some early experiments in wireless communication. Upon leaving school he supported himself by a variety of jobs before joining Edward Saunders & Son, the same paper-making firm as his father. On 1 August 1908 he married Constance Mary Knight (1882-1976), daughter of the deceased Robert Hastings Knight, at St Mary's Church, Pulborough, Sussex. There were no children of the marriage. The Prices continued to live at Arun Bank, Pulborough, until Harry's death. 
Price was an enthusiastic collector, and gave lectures and wrote many articles based upon his collections of old coins, tokens, Roman artefacts, and books on conjuring and psychical phenomena. In 1917 he placed about eighty artefacts of the First World War on display in the Eastbourne Home Life Exhibition; these were afterwards donated to the newly formed National War Museum (later the Imperial War Museum). 
In 1920 Price joined the Magic Circle and the Society for Psychical Research (SPR). He was initially highly sceptical about allegedly paranormal phenomena, and used his knowledge of conjuring techniques to expose fraud. His exposure of the 'spirit photographer' William Hope brought down upon him the wrath of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the great champion of spiritualism ('A case of fraud with the Crewe Circle', 'Journal of the Society for Psychical Research', 20, 1922, 271-83). In the succeeding years Price exposed many fraudulent mediums, including the notorious Helen Duncan, the last woman to be prosecuted in England under the 'Witchcraft Act' of 1735 ('Regurgitation and the Duncan mediumship', 'Bulletin of the National Laboratory of Psychical Research', 1, 1931). However, after a visit to Schrenck-Notzing's laboratory in Munich in 1922, Price was convinced that there are a few phenomena which are genuine and worthy of serious scientific investigation. He spent the rest of his life trying to persuade the academic world of the truth of this conviction. 
Price's experimental work was brilliantly conceived and executed. Essentially, he tried to obtain evidence of psychokinetic phenomena (PK) under conditions which left no scope for alternative explanations such as fraud or malobservation. His 'telekinetoscope' was an ingenious device which required the PK force to depress an electrical contact inside a soap bubble, without bursting the latter. At some seances Price wired both the medium and the sitters into an electrical circuit so that any attempt at fraud would be immediately detected, and he made extensive use of photography, including stereoscopic photography, to register the occurrence of phenomena. 
Many leading scientists attended these sessions and were impressed with what they saw. Price's meticulously written reports on his work with the mediums Stella Cranshaw and Rudi Schneider were widely read, and are among the great classics of psychical research. Although Price remained a member of the SPR until his death, his relationships with several of its leading members were less than cordial, and he never held any office in the society. However, he was foreign research officer to the American Society for Psychical Research from 1925 to 1931, and in 1937 he was offered an honorary doctorate from Bonn University, and the Red Cross medal, first class, from the German government if he would help to set up a department of parapsychology at Bonn. The onset of the Second World War put a stop to all such plans, and Price never received either his doctorate or his medal. 
Price's own organization, the National Laboratory of Psychical Research, was formally opened on 1 January 1926 in a flurry of media attention. On its council were some of the world's leading parapsychologists. Lord Sands, a distinguished Scottish judge, accepted the presidency, and Price took the title of honorary director. In 1934 the management of the laboratory was transferred to a group of academics from London University (the University of London Council for Psychical Investigation), which included the psychologists Cyril Burt, J. C. Flugel, and C. A. Mace, and the popular philosopher C. E. M. Joad. This organization eventually petered out during the Second World War, the books and equipment being transferred to the care of London University. To the general public Price is best-known for his investigation of the allegedly haunted rectory at Borley, Essex, which he conducted intermittently from 1929 until his death. Although Price's conduct of this inquiry has been severely criticized, the case remains the most fully documented example of a haunting in the annals of psychical research. 
Price died at Pulborough on 29 March 1948, and was buried in St Mary's churchyard. After his death a number of attacks were made on both his personal integrity and his conduct of psychical investigations, most notably by E. J. Dingwall, K. M. Goldney, and T. H. Hall (1956), T. H. Hall (1978), and A. Gregory (1985). Price's friends and admirers defended his good name, and for a balanced assessment the reader should compare the aforementioned writings with those of M. Coleman (1956), R. J. Hastings (1969), and Ivan Banks (1996). 
Price remains a controversial figure in the field of parapsychology. He has been described as 'a man of great ability, great energy and great kindness' but also as very ambitious, and suffering acutely from 'an ingrowing chip on his shoulder about his lack of a university degree' (Haynes, 146). He unquestionably put more time, effort, and money into psychical research than any other Englishman since the founding of the SPR and, despite his personal failings, deserves an honoured place among the ranks of those who have sought to push back the frontiers of the unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 62520


Hewitt, Sir Frederic William (1857-1916), anaesthetist, was born on 2 July 1857 at 52 Westbourne Park Villas, London, the eldest of six children (there were three brothers and two sisters), of George Frederick Hewitt (1832-1869), agricultural chemist, and his wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 1833), daughter of Thomas and Elizabeth Day of Stratton St Margaret, Wiltshire. Hewitt was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1869 to 1874. He then attended the Royal School of Mines for two years and shortly afterwards won a scholarship to Christ's College, Cambridge. After graduating BA with a third class in the natural science tripos he became in 1880 a medical student at St George's Hospital, London, where he won prizes in medicine and surgery. He qualified MRCS in 1882 and graduated MB (Cambridge) in 1883, and MD in 1886. He intended to practise in London as a physician and joined a colleague, Marmaduke Sheilds, in rooms in Somerset House, Portman Square. However, a defect in Hewitt's eyesight, which had begun to trouble him at Cambridge, became worse, and he decided to take up anaesthetics. He was appointed anaesthetist to Charing Cross Hospital, London, in 1884, to the National (later the Royal Dental) Hospital in 1885, and to the London Hospital in 1886. 
Hewitt's first paper was published in 'The Lancet' in 1885; it was the first of many describing apparatus for the safe administration of nitrous oxide anaesthesia and demonstrated by detailed experiments the value of combining it with oxygen -- work which received the acclaim of the physiologist J. S. Haldane. Hewitt rapidly became known as an outstanding anaesthetist and teacher, writing many papers and delivering many lectures on improving apparatus and techniques in anaesthesia. Always concerned that students and doctors should receive proper instruction in the subject, he was foremost in persuading the General Medical Council that the study of anaesthetics should form part of the medical curriculum. Hewitt wrote three textbooks, of which the most important, 'Anaesthetics and their Administration', was published in 1893. It reached its fifth edition in 1922, six years after his death. 
In 1902, when Edward VII became ill with an appendicular abscess two days before his projected coronation, Hewitt administered the anaesthetic for the necessary operation. Afterwards, the king appointed him MVO. From that time, his practice became so busy that he gave up his appointments at the Charing Cross and Royal Dental hospitals. In 1902 he was given the honorary position of consulting anaesthetist at the London Hospital and returned to his alma mater, St George's Hospital, as physician anaesthetist. 
Hewitt was appointed anaesthetist to Edward VII and later to George V. In 1907 he was honoured with a knighthood for his services to medicine. Much of the later part of his life was devoted to efforts to ensure that only medically qualified persons should be permitted to administer anaesthetics, and he was largely responsible for organizing a bill to be presented to parliament which would legalize the position. Unfortunately, pressure of business and the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 caused the bill to be dropped and it was never reconsidered. 
A photograph of Hewitt, which remained in the Royal College of Physicians, shows a balding man with a rather triangular face and a moustache, and bearing a solemn appearance. Even family photographs never show him smiling, yet he had a lively sense of humour. He was a popular student at Cambridge and at St George's, where he wrote many humorous poems and sketches which appeared in the hospital's 'Gazette' even after he had achieved fame. 
On 24 December 1891 Hewitt married Emmie (Eve) Elizabeth (1868/9-1950), daughter of George Clare. They had three children, two daughters and one son, who died in infancy. The Hewitts lived in London first at 10 George Street (later St George Street), Hanover Square; in 1901 they moved to 14 Queen Anne Street, where they lived for the next fourteen years. In 1902 Hewitt bought a house in Peppard, near Henley-on-Thames, which the family visited as often as possible. In 1915 the Hewitts' London residence became 24 Harcourt House, Cavendish Square. 
Hewitt died of stomach cancer on 6 January 1916, at 146 King's Road, Brighton, a town to which the family frequently went on holiday; he was buried in the Brighton and Preston cemetery four days later. A memorial service was held at St George's Hospital Chapel on 12 January 1917. Lady Hewitt died on 2 April 1950 and was buried in the same grave as her husband. 
Frederic Hewitt's work was a major factor in establishing anaesthesia as a subject requiring the full attention of specially trained medical men and women. He is commemorated by a lectureship at the Royal College of Surgeons, since 1991 held at the Royal College of Anaesthetists. 


@@@@@


doc= 62523


Rudler, Gustave (1872-1957), French scholar, was born in Besancon, France, on 11 January 1872, the son of a teacher at the local 'lycee', and educated at the Lycee Louis-le-Grand and the Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris. Taking the first place nationally in the 'agregation', he was appointed as professor of rhetoric at, successively, 'lycees' in St Etienne, Caen, and finally his old school of Louis-le-Grand. In 1908 he successfully defended his doctoral thesis, 'La jeunesse de Benjamin Constant, 1767-1794'. When published, this work achieved the distinction of being 'couronne' by the Academie Francaise, being seen as a pioneering study in the field of Constant literature and remaining authoritative on this early period of the author's life. 
Rudler was briefly a lecturer at the Sorbonne until in 1913 he was appointed professor of French at Bedford College in the University of London. The rest of his professional life was spent in England. The tenure of the chair, however, was interrupted by the obligations of military service in the First World War. He subsequently returned to Bedford College, remaining there until 1920, when he was elected to the newly created Marshal Foch chair of French literature at the University of Oxford, which carried with it a fellowship at All Souls College. He held this chair until his retirement in 1949, then returned to Paris, dying there on 17 October 1957. His wife, Madeleine, had predeceased him in 1946. 
Rudler's scholarship is strongly marked by the influence of the famous French scholar and critic Gustave Lanson, who had directed his doctoral research, and he came to see himself as Lanson's disciple. Indeed, his lavish praise for Lanson's work aroused intense irritation in such opponents as Charles Peguy in the years preceding the First World War. Like Lanson, he held a fervent belief in the importance of clear order and logical thinking in literary criticism, via the traditional French methods of 'explication de texte' and 'dissertation' (essay writing), allied to a lucid and exactingly accurate analysis of literary texts. In pursuit of this objective, he wrote a primer on textual criticism, 'L'explication francaise: principes et application' (1902), and, for more advanced students, 'Les techniques de la critique et de l'histoire litteraire' (1923), which he dedicated to Lanson. These works carried the Lansonian gospel to Britain, with consequences that, in the view of many, unduly encouraged a 'scientific' approach to French studies in this country. 
Rudler's own scholarly publications ranged widely, but had a particular emphasis on Benjamin Constant. His 'these complementaire' for the doctorate had been a 'Bibliographie critique des oeuvres de Benjamin Constant', which was published, like his main thesis, in 1908. He later provided a critical edition of Constant's most well-known work, 'Adolphe' (1919), and over the years he composed several articles and lectures on the author. But he also wrote a two-volume study, 'Michelet: historien de Jeanne d'Arc' (1925-6), and a critical edition of Michelet's eponymous work on Joan of Arc (1927). Late in his career he provided important editions for the Blackwells 'French Texts' series of Racine's 'Mithridate' (1943) and Moliere's 'Le misanthrope' (1947). In addition, he wrote articles on themes and authors as widely ranging as the correspondence of Guez de Balzac, the political content of Chateaubriand's 'Les martyrs', the historical sources of Mme de Lafayette's 'La princesse de Cleves', and the portrait scene in Victor Hugo's 'Hernani'. His published writings extended over a half-century, from 1898 to 1947. 
Rudler edited the 'Revue universitaire' and the 'Revue critique des livres nouveaux' (both 1910-13), and later the 'French Quarterly' (1919-32), the first English periodical devoted to French literature, thought, and art, of which he was the founder (with A. Terracher). He was warmly remembered at Oxford for his devotion to scholarship and teaching alike; a former pupil recalled that he lectured rapidly and entirely in French, firing at students in the audience questions that had to be answered in the language. While lecturing on plays he acted out certain scenes, on one occasion hiding under a table when the plot required it. In 1952 a Festschrift was presented to him, 'The French Mind', edited by Will Moore, Rhoda Sutherland, and Enid Starkie, with a foreword by Alfred Ewert that describes the book as 'a token of gratitude and admiration for the scholar and of esteem and affection for the man'. 


@@@@@


doc= 62524


Seznec, Jean Joseph (1905-1983), art historian and scholar of French literature, was born on 18 March 1905 at Morlaix, Brittany, the son of Jean Seznec and his wife Pauline, 'nee' le Ferec, both primary school teachers, although originally of farming stock. His mother died giving birth to a younger brother and he was brought up mainly by a grandmother. He valued his Breton origins, retaining a connection with the province through academic work on Chateaubriand and Renan, and lifelong friendship with the judge and painter Pierre Cavellat, some of whose works are held at All Souls College, Oxford, to which Seznec was attached for over thirty years. 
The young Seznec aspired to be a painter but intellectual promise led him, from the 'lycee' at Rennes, to the Lycee Henri IV in Paris, and on to the Ecole Normale Superieure, then headed by the illustrious literary scholar Gustave Lanson. Seznec was a contemporary of Jean-Paul Sartre and gained the 'agregation' in 1928. Two years at the French School in Rome, where he encountered the scholar of medieval French iconography Emile Male, furnished a decisive opportunity to combine his passion for art with the skills of literary analysis nurtured by Lanson. In the course of two years teaching literature at Cambridge (1931-3) and one at the Lycee Thiers in Marseilles (1933-4), Seznec published his first articles on early modern art and mythology in the journal 'Melanges d'Histoire et d'Archeologie' and made initial contact with Fritz Saxl, who was to be the first director of the Warburg Institute when it moved to London in 1933. During five years at the French Institute in Florence (1934-9) Seznec wrote 'La survivance des dieux antiques', a brilliant and original account of the continuous survival of the pagan gods in European literature, philosophy, sculpture, and painting from the early middle ages to the late Renaissance. Imbued with the spirit of Warburg, Panofsky, and Saxl, but more wide-ranging, geographically and culturally, than was typical of their work, Seznec's book earned him his Sorbonne doctorate and was published in London by the Warburg Institute in 1940 (although only circulated in 1946). Alongside his edition of Diderot's 'Salons', 'La survivance' was to remain Seznec's magnum opus, and was translated into English (as 'The Survival of the Pagan Gods') in 1953, into Japanese in 1975, into Spanish in 1983, and reissued, to renewed acclaim, in a revised French edition in 1980, through the enthusiastic offices of the poet and critic Yves Bonnefoy. 
Mobilized in 1940, Seznec served in the Chasseurs Alpins, and after the armistice went to the United States, where in 1941 he obtained a post at Harvard and rose rapidly through the academic ranks. In 1946 he became a full professor and in 1949 was appointed chairman of the department of romance languages, but then gladly accepted an invitation, masterminded by Maurice Bowra and John Sparrow, to apply for the Marshal Foch professorship of French literature at Oxford, held at All Souls, in succession to Lanson's disciple Gustave Rudler. He was duly elected in 1950. A first marriage, which had produced a son, Alain, who became a professor and then librarian at Cornell University, had ended when, in 1946, in New England, Seznec met Simone Louise Lee, 'nee' Pailley (1899-1992), the French daughter of a professor, and widow of Guy Hunter Lee, landscape architect. They were married in 1954. 
Freed from major administrative duties, Seznec revelled in the academic and collegiate life of Oxford. He was devoted to All Souls, where his elegance, wit, and erudition were much appreciated, as were the regular research seminars he organized. He lectured extensively for the faculty of medieval and modern languages, taking as his central focus the enduring presence of classical mythology and literature in the art and literature of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and regularly supervised postgraduates in these areas. His many articles included studies of Diderot, Flaubert, Renan, Michelet, and Proust, to whom he devoted an outstanding Zaharoff lecture in 1982, entitled characteristically 'Marcel Proust et les dieux'. Having helped to secure the appointment of the Warburgian Edgar Wind as the first professor of art history at Oxford in 1955, he strongly supported art scholarship in the university, regularly lecturing at the Ashmolean Museum. In Oxford he also embarked, initially with Jean Adhemar, on his edition of Denis Diderot's reviews of the biennial Paris 'Salon', exhibiting remarkable skills of connoisseurship in tracking down the works Diderot had commented on. The four volumes of Diderot's 'Salons' published by the Clarendon Press between 1957 and 1966 constituted a monumental work of imaginative erudition. 
After his retirement from the Foch chair in 1972 Seznec remained in Oxford as an emeritus fellow of All Souls and pursued his work on Diderot, preparing the bulk of a second edition of 'Salons', and embarking on studies of Egypt in nineteenth-century French art and painting. He received many honours: elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1960, he was also made a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, an officer of the Legion d'honneur, and a commander of the Ordre national du merite, and was awarded the prix du rayonnement francais by the Academie Francaise. He was a visiting professor at seventeen different universities and received honorary doctorates from Harvard and St Andrews. Having lived latterly at 1 Steady's Lane, Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, he died on 21 November 1983 in the War Memorial Hospital, Chipping Norton, of bronchopneumonia and cerebral arteriosclerosis. 


@@@@@


doc= 62525


Downs, Brian Westerdale (1893-1984), literary scholar and translator, was born on 4 July 1893 at 5 Beech Grove, Beverley Road, Newland, Kingston upon Hull, the son of James Downs, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Ethel Ester, 'nee' Wilson (1866-1958). After attending Abbotsholme School, he went up to Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1912, and graduated with first-class honours in modern and medieval languages (German and Old Norse and Anglo-Saxon) in 1915. In 1918 he was made a college lecturer in English and modern languages, and in 1919 a college fellow. From 1920 he taught English and modern languages for the university and for much of the next decade lectured on 'Tragedy, Medieval and Modern' for the first two terms of the academic year and the Victorian novelists for the third term, varying this occasionally with aspects of German literature. He also taught elementary Dutch, and in 1921 with H. Latimer Jackson published a 'Manual of the Dutch Language'. His next publication was 'Cambridge Past and Present' (1926). In 1927 he lectured for two terms on Samuel Richardson and his predecessors and in 1928 published a study of Richardson as well as an introduction to an edition of Richardson's 'Familiar Letters on Important Occasions'. Given his interest in the Victorian novelists, it is perhaps not surprising that the name of George Eliot should appear among his publications, but when it did it was not as his own work, but as a translation of a study of her life by the French writer George Romieu. He also published a translation of Andre Maurois's novel 'Bernard Quesnay' in 1927, a year after its original publication in France. 
On 1 July 1924 Downs married Elsie Ada Maud Drew (1887-1965). Born in Singapore, the daughter of Alfred Henry Drew, solicitor, she was an English scholar who had taught at Girton College, and who evidently resembled Virginia Woolf. The author of the Christ's College obituary of Downs wrote of the hospitality that Downs and his wife extended at their home in Trumpington. From the late 1930s Downs began acquiring more administrative posts, starting with membership of the council of senate of the University of Cambridge, a post he held from 1939 to 1944 and again from 1954 to 1960. 
But the war years also brought personal tragedy. In 1930 Brian and Elsie Downs had a son, Jonathan, and at the outbreak of the Second World War Elsie followed advice and sought the safety of America where Jonathan, who was then nine years old, was killed by a truck while playing outside his home in Northampton, Massachusetts. The marriage did not survive this tragedy, the couple divorced, and Downs is reported never to have spoken of his son again. On 14 September 1946, however, he married Evelyn Faith Marion Wrangham, 'nee' Doubble (1907-1977), widow of Stephen D. Wrangham and daughter of Meredith Sedgwick Doubble. She had worked in the Foreign Office in Portugal, but had more recently served as Downs's secretary. This relationship brought him lasting happiness and when she died in 1977 Downs is reported to have said that 'When Evelyn died, I died too'. Before that, however, she supported him as his life now entered a full and busy phase. In 1950 he was appointed master of Christ's College, a position he held until his retirement in 1963, and in the same year he was appointed as the first professor of Scandinavian studies. He had already published in 1946 his first book on Ibsen, 'Ibsen: the Intellectual Background', and in 1949, with Brita Mortenson, 'Strindberg: an Introduction to his Life and Work'. These were followed in 1950 by 'A Study of Six Plays by Ibsen', and in 1966 by 'Norwegian Literature, 1860-1918'. These were much-used works until literary scholarship developed in a different direction in the late 1960s. 
From 1955 to 1957 Downs served as vice-chancellor of the University of Cambridge. He was a founder trustee of Churchill College and also maintained links with his home town of Hull and its university where he served on the academic court and council, for which services he was awarded an honorary DLitt. His services to Scandinavian literature and culture were recognized with honours by Sweden and Denmark, and he was also made an officer of the Legion d'honneur. 
Downs belonged to a tradition of gentlemen scholars, and during the 1920s and 1930s his duties as lecturer and tutor did not prevent him 'delighting in the gaming tables of Monte Carlo, or organizing theatre parties and acting as host to undergraduate play-readings' ('Christ's College Magazine', 29). He clearly had a warm and hospitable nature but was also a deeply private person, who presented to the world an urbane but rather formal facade, nowhere more evident than in his legendary sartorial elegance, which by the 1960s must have seemed strangely archaic. In his duties as master of Christ's or vice-chancellor of the university he was one of the last of a line of men who reigned and administered before the need for innovation and radical shake-up took over. He lived after his retirement in 20 Marlborough Court, Grange Road, Cambridge, but died in the Hope Nursing Home, Cambridge, of bronchopneumonia and diabetes mellitus, on 3 March 1984. He was cremated. A memorial service was held in the chapel of Christ's College on 2 June 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 62526


Willoughby, Leonard Ashley (1885-1977), German scholar, was born on 4 June 1885 in Bonby, Lincolnshire, the son of William Henry Willoughby, hat manufacturer, and his wife, Fanny Ann, 'nee' Grant. His father, who owed a great deal to the working men's institutes, was a man of great energy and intelligence, and of wide cultural and linguistic sympathies, who could recite 'Don Quixote' in the original, and he instilled in his son an abiding love for Goethe's drama 'Egmont'. He set up his own hatter's business in the rue Castiglione, off the Place Vendome, in Paris (he was, apparently, particularly good at producing silk toppers). Much of that verve and breadth of interests was passed on to his son. 
Willoughby was educated at the Lycee Carnot in Paris, at the Ohlig Realschule in Solingen in the German Rhineland, and at the City of London School. In 1902 he went to University College, London (where one of his most cherished memories was of buying, for sixpence, a first edition of 'A Shropshire Lad' from the college's professor of Latin, who was none other than A. E. Housman). After graduating with a first in German in 1906 he continued his studies at the University of Vienna (where he worked on a medieval text concerning the last judgment, obtaining a doctorate of which he was fond of observing that it gave him a place both in this world and the next) and at the University of Bonn. After two years (1908-10) at the University of Cologne as English 'Lektor' he was appointed Taylorian lecturer in German at Oxford, holding that post until 1919. One of his students in those heady years was Adrian Boult. When Willoughby took his mother to one of Boult's early concerts she was, apparently, sceptical that any great future awaited him on the podium. 'His legs are too thin', she remarked with summary authority (private information). Dorothy L. Sayers, another of Willoughby's students, repaid her fond memory of his teaching by agreeing to speak on 'Faust and the devil' in 1944 to the newly revived English Goethe Society (revived by Willoughby himself). Her lecture was briefly -- but only briefly -- interrupted by a V2 rocket descending on Tottenham Court Road. 
During the First World War Willoughby served with the Loyal North Lancashire regiment before being invalided out of active service and assigned to the naval intelligence department, with the rank of lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. After the cessation of hostilities he acted as an interpreter to the armistice commission at Kiel and the reparations commission at Versailles. The war gave Willoughby two cardinal experiences. One was the beginning, on 18 August 1916, of a long and happy marriage to Lucie Edith Berthon ('b'. 1895/6), daughter of Henry Edward Berthon, the Taylorian lecturer in French at Oxford (known affectionately to generations of Oxford students as Papa Berthon); they had one son. The other was an abiding sense of the importance of maintaining cultural links between nations, most particularly at times when politics sundered them. After the war Willoughby moved to the University of Sheffield as lecturer in charge of German (1919-30), then briefly to the University of Manchester as Henry Simon professor of German and head of department (1930-31), before returning to his alma mater, University College, London, to succeed his former teacher Robert Priebsch as Fielden professor and head of the German department. 
As a scholar Willoughby had four particular achievements. The first was his editions of various important German literary texts, including Schiller's 'Die Rauber' (1922), Goethe's 'Urfaust' and 'Faust, ein Fragment' (1943), and Schiller's 'Kabale und Liebe' (1945), which made him a household name with generations of sixth-formers and undergraduates. Second, he wrote monographs on two key periods of German literature -- 'The Classical Age of German Literature' (1926) and 'The Romantic Movement in Germany' (1930) -- which combined erudition with brevity and an essayistic lightness of touch. Third, in a splendid post-retirement burst of creativity, he collaborated with his former pupil, then colleague, and then successor to his chair, (Elizabeth) Mary Wilkinson, on a volume of essays, 'Goethe: Poet and Thinker' (1962), and on a translation, bilingual edition, and annotation of Schiller's letters, 'On the Aesthetic Education of Man' (1967). The latter work is beyond doubt a superlative achievement: tenaciously detailed, breathtaking in the range and breadth of its scholarship, it combines intense theoretical sophistication with almost visceral energy and passion. These qualities were also abundantly in evidence in the late volume of essays, 'Models of Wholeness', which appeared in 2002, a year after Mary Wilkinson's death. The fourth strand of Willoughby's principal achievements involved the practical, institutional life of German studies in the UK. In 1937 he founded, and until 1956 he edited, 'German Life and Letters', which, as its title indicates, was conceived as a journal concerned with a broad spectrum of intellectual enquiry into things German -- embracing history, philosophy, politics, and literature in an approach that later became known as cultural studies. Willoughby was concerned that the journal should offer 'an historical perspective, free from political bias' (as he put it in an editorial note in the first number). That it swiftly achieved its aim can be gauged from the fact that when publication was interrupted in October 1939 Willoughby was able to note with great pride that the London correspondent of the official Nazi newspaper, 'Volkischer Beobachter', had described 'German Life and Letters' as a 'journal which no self-respecting German could read' (O. I. Bond, 'Foreign language films at International House', 'Books Abroad', 14/2, 1940, 215). 
Throughout the Second World War Willoughby remained passionately concerned about events in Germany, and about the need, wherever possible, to establish lines of communication between Britain and that country and to work towards the reintegration of the valuable things about Germany and its culture into English life after the war. Against all the odds in 1943 he received the support of his colleagues in German, and miraculously, not long thereafter, persuaded London University at large to back his plan for a research centre in German studies in London. Thus the Institute of Germanic Studies came into being, and when it opened in 1950 Willoughby, rightly, was its first honorary director. That public achievement also had a personal aspect. In March 1939 Willoughby had managed to bring to England his student friend Robert Pick, who had survived incarceration in Dachau, and Pick became the first librarian of the Institute of Germanic Studies. 
In recognition of his services to German culture Willoughby was the first English scholar to be elected to the German Academy for Language and Literature, and he was the first English scholar to receive the gold medal of Germany's Goethe Institute. He was (at various times, and sometimes they were quite lengthy times) president of the English Goethe Society, the Modern Language Association of Great Britain, and the Modern Humanities Research Association. Such honours, though welcome, were not looked for. Willoughby was a supremely modest man -- delightful, urbane, and civilized. He was renowned for his ability to chair meetings deftly and to deliver after-dinner speeches in English, French, or German -- with the same wit and flair in evidence in all three languages. 
Willoughby lived, throughout his time at London University, in Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, latterly at Angle Place Cottage, Montague Road. His last days were spent at University College Hospital, from which, to his intense delight, he could glimpse the portico of the beloved college that had been his spiritual home for over sixty years. He died on 5 October 1977, of bronchopneumonia and a perforated duodenal ulcer. He was survived by his wife, Lucie. 


@@@@@


doc= 62531


Berkeley, Norborne, fourth Baron de Botetourt (1717-1770), politician and colonial governor, was born on 21 December 1717 in London, probably at the family's residence in Clifford Street. He was the only son of John Symes Berkeley (1663-1736), head of a branch, based at Stoke Gifford in south Gloucestershire, of the Berkeleys at Berkeley Castle. His mother was Elizabeth, 'nee' Norborne (1678-1742), of Calne, Wiltshire, who was the widow of Edward Devereux, eighth Viscount Hereford. After attending Westminster School in 1726 and a period of private tuition, Berkeley went on a grand tour, including stays at Angers, Rome, Florence, Turin, Venice, and Vienna. In Angers he lodged with Madame de la Haye and studied French under the Abbe Aubert; in Turin he attended the academy of Carlo Emanuele, which may have given him a taste for the life of a courtier. During the tour his father died and Berkeley inherited the Stoke Gifford estate, lands in Wiltshire and Norfolk, and mining rights in the Kingswood coalfield east of Bristol. 
Having donated $500 at a meeting called by Bristol's Stedfast Society to thwart the Spanish interception of the port's ships, Berkeley was elected to the society, a tory association, in 1739. In his preparation for election to parliament, he sought the backing of his kinsman, the third earl of Berkeley, who withdrew his promised support under pressure from the prime minister, Sir Robert Walpole. In May 1740 Berkeley's younger sister Elizabeth married Charles Noel Somerset ['see under 'Henry Somerset, second duke of Beaufort], MP for Monmouth, and brother of the third duke of Beaufort. In 1741 Berkeley stood as a county tory with the support of the Beauforts (who were sympathetic to the Jacobite cause), and was elected a member for Gloucestershire. Kept out of public office by the Hanoverians' proscription of the tories, he undertook constituency duties and local charitable works, being involved with Gloucester infirmary and, as a trustee, with the charity school at Fishponds of which Hannah More's father was the master. He also undertook the improvement of his house and grounds at Stoke Gifford, in which he was assisted from about 1749 by the gentleman-designer Thomas Wright, with whom he toured stately homes in England in 1750. Berkeley enveloped the Jacobean house with a crenellated gothic facade and introduced neo-classical features within. His innovative landscaping of the grounds -- with serpentine paths in woodland -- anticipated the more picturesque style of William Kent and William Shenstone; he also erected a number of neo-classical structures: a rotunda, a sarcophagus -- commemorating his brother-in-law, from 1745 the fourth duke of Beaufort -- an obelisk, and a replica of the so-called tomb of the Horatii and Curiatii at Albano, which Berkeley may have seen on his grand tour. In addition to his architectural pursuits, he subscribed to the King's Theatre, London; was steward and a patron of the Gloucester music meeting, a forerunner of the Three Choirs festival; and was patron of the organist and composer William Felton. An interest in the classics led to his early membership of the Society of Dilettanti, and of the committee which in 1764 sent Richard Chandler and Nicholas Revett to record antiquities in Asia Minor. Berkeley did not marry, but fathered at least four children: two, by a Mrs Thompson of Edinburgh, whom he openly acknowledged. Berkeley paid for naval training and a commission for his son Charles Thompson, who sent specimens of exotic birds and plants to his father and mother. Having nearly killed a man in a brawl in Boston in 1764, Thompson fled to avoid a possible charge of murder, and sheltered in Berkeley's London house until the victim recovered and it was deemed safe to return to his ship. 
Berkeley was active in the militia, of which he became a colonel in 1758. That year, to some disapproval because he was the guardian of his infant nephew, Henry, the future fifth duke, he joined the expedition to attack St Malo and Cherbourg. Politically Berkeley was a Hanoverian tory, not a Jacobite like his father and his in-laws: after the 'Forty-Five he signed the association pledging allegiance to George II. He appears not to have been harmed by receiving an honorary degree at the opening of the Radcliffe (Camera) Library at Oxford in 1749, when the ceremony was exploited by William King to mount a Jacobite demonstration. In the Commons Berkeley generally supported the government. He showed independence and principle, however, over issues such as Jewish naturalization in 1753, the cider excise in 1763, the 'Stamp Act', and the Townshend duties imposed on the American colonies, tending to vote with the government both for the enactment of the latter and their repeal. 
In 1760, on the accession of George III, Berkeley acquired a place at court as a groom of the bedchamber. That year the doll he annually gave to his god-daughter, Lady Elizabeth Berkeley (later margravine of Brandenburg-Ansbach-Bayreuth), wore full court dress. In 1761 Berkeley was appointed to the House of Commons committee of privileges and in the following October he stood second to Lord Talbot who duelled with John Wilkes on Bagshot Heath. A suggestion that he become secretary-at-war was blocked. In 1762, having been appointed lord lieutenant of Gloucester, Gloucestershire, and Bristol, and colonel of the north Gloucestershire militia, Berkeley became constable of St Briavel's castle. From the following year he was warden of the Forest of Dean, which involved responsibilities for timber for ships for the navy. In 1764 Berkeley successfully renewed a claim to the abeyant Botetourt peerage, which his father had investigated to the point of obtaining a certificate of entitlement from the College of Heralds, but had not pursued. He entered the House of Lords as the fourth Baron de Botetourt. In 1766 he moved the fateful resolution in the Lords insisting that the Westminster parliament had the power and the right to legislate for Britain's colonies 'in all cases whatsoever' ('JHL', 31, 11 March 1766). 
From 1761 Berkeley had invested heavily in William Champion's zinc manufactory at Warmley, south Gloucestershire. However, his investment of about $15,000 was lost when the enterprise collapsed -- this the result of a delay by Pitt the elder in executing a charter for the company's incorporation, and Champion's fraudulent withdrawal of capital. In 1768 Botetourt was saved from financial embarrassment when he was made governor of Virginia -- an appointment which displeased the author of the 'Letters of Junius' (letter 3, 7 Feb 1769, 'The Letters of Junius', ed. J. Cannon, 1978, 40). Botetourt's polite and courtly manner did much to maintain good relationships in the colony, notwithstanding the movement towards independence. In his brief period as governor he established the colony's western boundary and restrained white settlement beyond this demarcation at the expense of Native Americans to whom Britain had treaty obligations. He also regulated trade with Native Americans in the west and allocated land to colonists and investors. His governorship also witnessed agitation against the Townshend duties which, by 1768, had become a proxy for a range of grievances concerning self-government. When the Virginia assembly passed George Washington's resolutions in 1769, Botetourt dissolved the assembly, as his instructions required him to do, but he sympathized with the colonists' grievances, and privately deplored the hard line taken by the Grafton ministry. Impulsive and hot-tempered, Botetourt was also generous to a fault. He died of a fever at Williamsburg on 15 October 1770 and was buried in the chapel of the College of William and Mary. He was survived by his son, Charles, who rose to become admiral of the red and was second-in-command at the battle of Cape St Vincent (1797), for which he was made a baronet. Botetourt was held in high regard by Virginians and his sudden death was deeply mourned. He was commemorated by a marble statue (1772-3) by the English sculptor Richard Hayward, which stood initially at the capitol building and, from 1801, before the Wren Building at the College of William and Mary. In 1958 the statue was moved to an indoor location for its preservation and was replaced by a bronze copy in the college yard in 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 62533


Chippendale, Thomas (bap. 1718, d. 1779), cabinet-maker and designer, was baptized on 5 June 1718 in the parish church of Otley, a small market town in Wharfedale, Yorkshire, the only child of John Chippindale ('bap'. 1690, died 1768), joiner, and his first wife, Mary (1693-1729), daughter of Thomas Drake, stonemason of Otley. His father remarried and had seven more children. Many of Thomas Chippendale's relations were involved in the timber and woodworking trades in this vicinity, so young Thomas probably served a family apprenticeship and received an elementary education at Otley grammar school. The location of the family home may have been in Boroughgate. 
As a young man Chippendale was almost certainly employed by Richard Wood, a leading joiner and cabinet-maker of York, who later ordered eight subscription copies of 'The Director'. One of his apprentices, William Benson, became foreman in Chippendale's London workshop, and in 1771, while working at Nostell Priory, Chippendale asked his former master to supply six locks and to silver a looking-glass. In later life he probably came to regard York, rather than Otley, as his natural base in Yorkshire, although a deed dated 28 July 1770, in which 'Thomas Chippendale of St Martin's Lane, London, Cabinet Maker' assisted one of his kinsmen over the conveyancing of property in Otley, shows that he maintained links with his birthplace. The oft-quoted myth that the young Chippendale was employed and encouraged by local grandees such as the Lascelles and Winn families for whom he later provided extensive furnishings cannot be substantiated. 
The earliest evidence of Chippendale's presence in London is the licence recording his marriage to Catherine Redshaw at St George's Chapel, Mayfair, on 19 May 1748 in which he was described as being from the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. Nothing is known about his wife's background, but it seems unlikely that she provided much in the way of capital or social contacts to improve his condition. Their eldest child, Thomas, was baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, in April 1749 and they subsequently had another four boys and four girls. At Christmas 1749 Chippendale rented a modest house in Conduit Court, an enclave off Long Acre, close to the manufacturing centre of many of the luxury trades. At mid-summer 1752 he moved to more respectable premises in Somerset Court, off the Strand, adjoining the earl of Northumberland's great mansion. At this time it is likely that he was making small quantities of furniture for established firms on a subcontracted basis rather than dealing directly with clients. Nevertheless a bald statement in Lord Burlington's private account book for 13 October 1747 recording a payment 'to Chippendale in full $6-16-0d' suggests that he had already come to the notice of certain 'Persons of Distinction' and 'eminent Taste' who, he claimed, encouraged him to publish 'The Director'. He may also have provided designs for furniture and upholder's trade on a freelance basis. 
During 1753 Chippendale prepared the drawings for his ambitious publication 'The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director' to be dedicated to the earl of Northumberland. Matthias Darly, who engraved most of the plates and who may also have been Chippendale's drawing-master, shared the house for several months in 1753. The two also collaborated on a characteristic rococo invitation ticket for a fellow furniture maker, Caesar Crouch, who later helped organize an appeal for Chippendale's workmen who lost their toolboxes in the fire of 1755. 
The year 1754 was momentous for Chippendale: he moved to spacious premises in the fashionable paved thoroughfare of St Martin's Lane (later numbered 60, 61, and 62, opposite the present-day Albery Theatre) which the firm occupied as tenants of Lord Salisbury until 1813; he formed a partnership with James Rannie, a Scottish merchant who provided the capital; and he brought out the first edition of his highly influential furniture pattern book 'The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director', copies of which, as the dual appeal of the title intended, were acquired by the nobility, gentry, and many fellow tradesmen. The property consisted of three houses then opposite Old Slaughter's Coffee House, a venue of some of the most interesting avant-garde artists and designers of this period (none of whom, however, were subscribers to 'The Director'). Other furniture makers operating in St Martin's Lane at this time included John Channon, William Hallett, William Vile, and John Cobb. No. 60 became Chippendale's dwelling, no. 61 the shop, and Rannie lived at no. 62. A plan of the premises of 1803 showed that a covered passageway led to a yard and extensive workshops at the back including a chair room, cabinet-maker's shops, veneering, carpet, glass, and feather rooms, a large upholsterer's shop, various timber stores, workrooms, and a counting house. The name of the new establishment was the Cabinet and Upholstery Warehouse and the partners adopted a chair as their shop sign -- presumably the stylish armchair featured on their trade card. No partnership agreement with Rannie has been traced, but their formal association evidently dates from about August 1754 when a joint lease on the St Martin's Lane property was signed. Rannie and his bookkeeper, Thomas Haig, probably looked after the accounting side of the business. 
The Sun Fire Insurance ledgers reveal that in March 1755 the partners' premises, utensils, and stock-in-trade were covered for $3700. That April a fire destroyed their cabinet workshop, for which they were compensated with $847. However, some twenty-two journeymen lost their toolboxes which were uninsured. Since the fire gutted only the cabinet shop, it is likely that Chippendale's workforce at this time might have numbered considerably more, possibly between forty and fifty artisans -- including cabinet-makers, upholsterers, carvers, gilders, chair makers, polishers, and packers. The names of his specialist carvers or marqueteurs, who must surely have been some of the most accomplished in London, are not known. Chippendale's remarks in 'The Director' indicate that he was fully conversant with all aspects of the trade but, as a proprietor, his responsibility was for design, quality control, subcontracting, dealing with customers, and, with the assistance of foremen, general workshop management. It would be absurd to think that he might have been employed on the workbench himself at this time. Nevertheless, despite daily pressures as an entrepreneur, there is plenty of evidence that Chippendale was constantly required to supply his clients with bespoke designs or solutions to problems, often at very short notice. Between 1760 and 1766 he was a member of the Society of Arts. 
James Rannie died in January 1766. Press notices announced the dissolution of the partnership and that 'Trade will for the future be carried out by Mr Chippendale on his own account'. Rannie's executors insisted on withdrawing his capital and on holding an auction sale on the premises of 'The entire genuine Stock in Trade of Mr Chippendale and his late Partner' including 'a great Variety of fine Mahogany and Tulip Wood furniture... Pattern chairs and... Curious Cabinet Work, carpets, fine feathers etc.' This usefully describes the range of furniture displayed in the warerooms. Chippendale's financial difficulties are alluded to in his correspondence with his clients at this time. In December 1766 he had written to Sir Rowland Winn, with whom the firm had continuous difficulties in obtaining payment, 'I am in great Need at present on Account of the Death of my late partner, his effects being taken out of trade' (Gilbert, 'Chippendale', 1.167). On other occasions he claimed, 'I could hardly keep myself out of jail', or 'I have not a single Guinea to pay my men with tomorrow' and feared being driven out of his mind with money worries (ibid., 175). His problems were greatly exacerbated by the attitude of the aristocracy towards tradesmen and their habitual tardiness in paying creditors. In fairness, however, there are numerous instances of client dissatisfaction, and Chippendale himself seemed to court difficulties by the ingratiating tone of some of his correspondence. 
Chippendale's desperate financial situation resulted in Rannie's bookkeeper, Thomas Haig, who had stayed with the firm, being taken into partnership in 1771, apparently borrowing $2000 from his late master's widow. The rescue also required financial backing from another executor, Henry Ferguson. The business thus became Chippendale, Haig & Co. This arrangement established a measure of financial stability and credit-worthiness, although there were frequent cash-flow problems. This may well have had an impact on the quality of the furniture supplied to these clients; examples of cost cutting and uneven work can sometimes be found. 
Chippendale's son Thomas ['see below'], who became a first-class cabinet-maker and designer in his own right, played an increasingly important part in the enterprise, enabling his father to retire, perhaps on the grounds of ill health, about midsummer 1776 when Thomas senior took a modest house in Lob's Fields (now Derry Street), Kensington. Chippendale's first wife having died in 1772, on 5 August 1777 he married Elizabeth Davis at Fulham parish church. She was illiterate, marking her cross on documents. A daughter, Elizabeth, was born four months later, followed by John in 1779 and Charles, after his father's death, in 1780. Thus Thomas Chippendale had twelve children altogether, only four of whom were alive in 1784. During his last illness in 1779 Chippendale moved to Hoxton, where he died of consumption, and was buried on 13 November at St Martin-in-the-Fields. His son paid 4 guineas for his Hoxton lodgings, 5 guineas to the physicians who attended him, and $24 for funeral expenses. No obituary appeared. He had lived quite simply, for the probate inventory valued his house contents at only $28. 
Prior to the publication of 'The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director' in 1754 no cabinet-maker, regarded by society as mere tradesmen, had shown the audacity to issue a collection of designs comparable in scale to the lavish volumes produced by professional architects. The large folio contained 161 plates illustrating 'Elegant and Useful Designs of Household Furniture in the Gothic, Chinese and Modern Taste'. It was prefaced by an explanation of the 'five orders', the rules of perspective, and extensive notes. The 'modern taste' is today termed rococo, a spirited curvilinear style incorporating naturalistic ornament. It is not known where Chippendale received his artistic education and how he learned the principles of rococo composition; maybe he was taught by Matthias Darly who was an engraver and a professional drawing-master. Chippendale's eloquent drawings for 'The Director' eventually came into the possession of Lord Foley and most were purchased by the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, in 1920. Some had been pirated beforehand and a group of six is owned by the Chippendale Society; others are at the Victoria and Albert Museum among the designs of Matthias Lock, a carver by trade. It was at one time believed that Lock and his associate Henry Copland 'ghosted' the 'Director' designs, but there is now ample evidence that Chippendale was himself a fluent and accomplished draughtsman. 
A series of notices, from March 1753 onwards, appeared in London and provincial newspapers, inviting the public to order subscription copies of 'The Director' for $1 14's'. 0died bound, representing a saving of 8's'. on the full price. Analysis of the 308 names in the subscription list shows that it includes forty-nine members of the nobility and gentry but that the others were nearly all practising tradesmen, plus a scattering of professional men, academics, and booksellers. A second edition with trifling corrections appeared in 1755 and a third revised and enlarged edition containing 200 plates was published in parts between 1759 and 1762. A French edition appeared at this time. Catherine the Great and Louis XV both acquired copies. The first edition had been dedicated to Hugh, earl of Northumberland, who repaid the compliment by patronizing the firm. Most copies of the second edition are dedicated to Prince William Henry, duke of Gloucester, who also ordered furniture between 1764 and 1766. 
Publication of 'The Director' clearly had a stimulating effect on Chippendale's career because all known commissions (with the exception of Lord Burlington's) date from after its appearance. It was also highly influential in disseminating his designs throughout Britain, Europe, and the colonies. In fact until his first documented furniture was identified by Percy Macquoid in 1906 Chippendale's illustrious reputation was based entirely on his celebrated pattern book. He also contributed a dozen or so unsigned designs to a modest anthology, 'Genteel Household Furniture', first published by the enterprising printseller Robert Sayer in 1760. 
Elegantly finished bespoke drawings intended for his clients which Chippendale produced free of charge (in contrast to architects) survive at Wilton House, Wiltshire, and at Nostell Priory, Harewood House, and Burton Constable, Yorkshire. His approach can be seen in a letter to Sir Rowland Winn of Nostell: following a preliminary visit to Harewood in July 1767 he wrote 'as soon as I had got to Mr Laselles and look'd over the whole of the house I found I should want Many designs & knowing that I had time Enough I went to York to do them' (Gilbert, 'Chippendale', 1.196). Until quite recently it was thought that at houses where Robert Adam and Chippendale both worked the former regularly supplied Chippendale with drawings to execute. Such arrangements certainly existed between Adam and other leading cabinet-makers but Chippendale is known to have made furniture according to Adam's design on only one occasion when, in 1765, he provided an opulent suite of armchairs and sofas in a transitional neo-classical style for the house of Sir Lawrence Dundas in Arlington Street, London. Adam in fact displayed great confidence in Chippendale's ability to design and make appropriate furnishings for even his finest interiors and apparently recommended him to clients, although as a matter of courtesy he would expect to be consulted about proposals. In 1774 Chippendale wrote to Sir Rowland Winn: 'I have sent... a small case containing a section of the Saloon with designs of the furniture which has been settled by Mr Adams and myself & he totally approves everything therein sketched' (Gilbert, 'Nostell Priory', 59-60). The number of houses at which Chippendale collaborated with the most influential architects of the day is impressive: James Paine, the Adam brothers, John Carr of York, Sir William Chambers, and James Wyatt (the latter two not without difficulty). 
Information about Chippendale's business can be gleaned from the firm's surviving bills and from two important collections of letters associated with his Nostell Priory and Mersham-le-Hatch commissions. Modern research has identified over seventy clients, their patronage being documented in invoices, payments in account books, and entries in bank ledgers. In many instances the relevant furniture was dispersed long ago. However, substantially more accredited pieces from Chippendale's workshop have been traced -- about 600 items -- than from any of his London rivals. He therefore fulfils the essential requirement of any major artistic figure, having left a large body of high-quality work (including designs) that displays a steady development from an early, through a middle, to a late style. 
Chippendale's versatility is demonstrated by the fact that, in addition to furniture, he was willing to design and supply wallpapers (including, for the gallery at Harewood, for example, a paper 'of the Antique Ornament with Palms &c on a fine paper with a pink ground'), carpets, fire grates, decorative ormolu, chimney-pieces, and complete room schemes; on one occasion he devised needlework chair covers for Lady Knatchbull to embroider (Gilbert, 'Chippendale', 1.210). He is known to have visited Paris in 1768 to keep abreast of fashionable taste and the following year was apprehended attempting illegally to import sixty French chair frames. As well as equipping state apartments with luxurious ensembles the firm regularly supplied routine articles for the servants' rooms and domestic offices. Chippendale offered a complete house furnishing service, undertook repairs, removals, hired out furniture, compiled inventories, and was even prepared to direct and furnish funerals for respected customers such as Bridget, Lady Heathcote. 
Obviously Chippendale bought in certain items on behalf of his clients and the extent of his subcontracting to outworkers or specialists is not fully known. Clients might well present their own materials with which Chippendale had to work. William Weddell of Newby Hall, for example, provided him with Gobelins tapestry to make into seat covers. Likewise Edwin Lascelles at Harewood supplied him with green silk damask for the furnishings of the state bed- and dressing-rooms and the oriental lacquer to make the accompanying secretaire, commode, and cabinets. The way in which Chippendale was able to use off-cuts of this consignment of lacquer in order to make a twin secretaire for another client, Robert Child of Osterley Park, Middlesex, is still not fully explained. 
Perhaps the most expensive activity in which Chippendale acted as an upholder or house furnisher was as a supplier of mirror glass. This was exclusively French, imported into England at great cost and cut in special workshops for his clients' bespoke frames and girandoles. By far the most extravagant items in any Chippendale bill are those which refer to mirror glass for piers and overmantels: this was the age in which mirrors were infinitely more prestigious than paintings with which to cover the walls of a state apartment. All these varied commercial activities add enormously to the interest of the firm's work. 
It needs to be stressed that the term 'Chippendale' is now widely used as a convenient generic label to describe any high-quality furniture inspired by his 'Director' designs. However, even if the piece corresponds exactly to one of his published patterns this does not amount to proof of authorship, because many practising cabinet-makers acquired copies of 'The Director' in order to copy the engravings. The partners never employed a maker's mark, so the only unambiguous way of establishing Chippendale's authorship is to find his original bill, usually preserved among estate papers, or equivalent documentation. 
Although most of his identified clients appear to have run up substantial accounts with him, there is ample evidence that Chippendale was perfectly happy to supply relatively inexpensive 'off the peg' items to non-account customers. Thus Lady Irwin of Temple Newsam, although one of the wealthiest women in the country, bought a chic but plain 'Hexagon Table of very fine yellow sattin wood on a neat pillar & Claw' costing $4 14's'. 6died in 1774 (Gilbert, 'Chippendale', 1.268). It was probably a whimsy since she does not appear to have shopped with the firm again until the 1790s. The table itself was probably a variation on a stock model also supplied to the earl of Dumfries, Sir Lawrence Dundas, and Edwin Lascelles. 
Chippendale could supply his clients with furniture in categories ranging from 'neat but substantially good', through 'genteel', to 'de luxe', the difference being not only one of price, but also of decorum or appropriateness -- depending on the sort of interior the furniture was intended for -- and on the individual taste of his customer. Men and women of the professional classes and upwards were by now expected to take an interest in all aspects of decoration. The diaries and journals of Lady Shelburne and the duchess of Northumberland testify to the increased power and discrimination of women in deciding which firms of upholders to patronize. Eva Garrick, wife of the celebrated actor David Garrick, was probably not the only female client of Chippendale to give him a piece of her mind when things went wrong. 
It would be misleading to claim that Chippendale towered head and shoulders above other fashionable London cabinet-makers such as Vile and Cobb, Ince and Mayhew, Hallett, the Linnells, or France and Bradburn. He certainly never enjoyed a monopoly of the most skilful craftsmen in the capital, and their finest furniture was technically equal to Chippendale's. His special claim for artistic fame is as a brilliantly original, innovative, and influential designer who also made masterpieces of furniture. His designs were plagiarized from at least the early Victorian period by the publisher John Weale, and more or less free adaptations from 'The Director' have been a staple product of commercial furniture makers since the mid-nineteenth century. 
James Rannie's connections may explain the partners' early success in attracting Scottish patrons such as Lord Arniston (1757), the duke of Atholl (1758), the earl of Morton ('c'.1759), and, outstandingly, the earl of Dumfries (1759). Virtually all the furniture made by Chippendale for Dumfries House, Ayrshire, survives. It is of exceptional quality and forms easily the finest fully documented repertory of his 'Director' period work. Interestingly Alexander Peter, a leading Edinburgh wright, simultaneously supplied Lord Dumfries with a sideboard table and set of bed cornices which exactly translate 'Director' designs. Likewise the duke of Atholl, having received his pair of candlestands from Chippendale, promptly had another four copied by a local man, John Thomson. The practice echoes the way British visitors to Paris might acquire a single item of French silver by one of the great 'orfevres' and have a complete set copied back home. 
A smaller anthology of rococo pieces at Wilton House, Wiltshire, features the magnificent 'violin' bookcase, regarded as one of Chippendale's greatest masterpieces. Aske Hall, Yorkshire, also contains an important group of 'Director'-style mahogany furniture, much of it made for the London house of that most discriminating of Chippendale's clients Sir Lawrence Dundas. Yet more transitional furniture was supplied to Sir Robert Burdett of Foremark Hall, Derbyshire, and to Sir Rowland Winn of Nostell Priory, Yorkshire. 
The furniture made for Nostell Priory and for Sir Rowland Winn's London house is impressively documented by letters, bills, estimates, memoranda, receipts, and drawings which serve to illustrate how the firm programmed a major commission. Whether there was a special connection between Chippendale and his client on account of their being fellow Yorkshiremen is not proven. The tenor of their correspondence is, on the one hand, that of an impatient and frustrated client, railing against Chippendale's dilatoriness, often threatening to withdraw his custom with dire consequences to his reputation. Chippendale, on the other hand, seemed almost permanently desperate for payment and yet always remained obsequious. By this date he is always referred to as Mr Chippendale -- an important social nicety, implying that he was a distinctly superior tradesman if not quite a gentleman. 
Perhaps the most celebrated piece at Nostell is the carved mahogany library table, delivered in 1766 at a cost of $72 10's'. 0died and described by Chippendale as 'the best work that can be done' (Gilbert, 'Chippendale', 1.175). It should be contrasted with the superb marquetry library table made for Harewood six years later to see the complete change in taste. Likewise the accompanying lyre-back library chair, with its somewhat over-elaborate -- maybe insecure -- neo-classical ornament, should be contrasted with a similar model made for Brocket Hall, Hertfordshire, about five years later and displaying a far more restrained and assured sense of design. Among many distinguished ensembles still 'in situ' at Nostell is the exotic suite of green and gold japanned furniture in the Chinese taste made for the state bed- and dressing-rooms which Chippendale's men hung with hand-painted Chinese (or 'India') paper. Similarly they can be contrasted with pieces delivered for the lodging rooms at Harewood. 
Chinoiserie remained immensely popular, especially for bedrooms, despite the rise of neo-classicism: frequently, as at Nostell, the two styles were combined in quaint juxtaposition. Likewise japanning (painted decoration, not necessarily imitating lacquer) became the last word in chic: David and Eva Garrick, two of the most fashion-conscious people in London, chose it for their villa at Hampton. Simple bedroom furniture, japanned in green and cream with husk flowers, and festive bed cornices, such as examples at Paxton House, Berwickshire, was not necessarily cheap. Lady Shelburne was horrified at Ince and Mayhew's prices for 'two pretty cases... although they are only deal and to be painted white he charges $50 for' (Gilbert, 'Chippendale', 1.239). 
Chippendale's work for Sir Edward Knatchbull at Mersham-le-Hatch, Kent, another Adam house, is amply documented in letters and bills, although comparatively little furniture has been identified. The firm often equipped both London and country houses for clients. For example, Lord Melbourne employed them on his palatial residence in Piccadilly, London, and at Brocket Hall, Hertfordshire (perhaps under pressure from his wife, another Yorkshirewoman). Superb looking-glasses, window cornices, bookcases, and library and dining chairs survive, together with an outstanding pair of marquetry cabinets and a majestic inlaid dressing commode, now at Renishaw Hall, Derbyshire. This latter item, closely related to the Diana and Minerva commode at Harewood, is reputed to have cost a staggering $140, making it by far the most expensive piece of cabinet furniture produced by Chippendale. 
Other important houses are Newby Hall, Yorkshire, where the sumptuous tapestry room contains the only seat furniture by Chippendale to retain all its original upholstery and the only extant window curtains supplied by the firm. His client there, William Weddell, was, together with his other patrons Sir Lawrence Dundas and William Constable, a true connoisseur and man of the Enlightenment. Constable commissioned the firm to furnish the saloon at Burton Constable in 1778 at a cost of over $1000 and it remains one of the most perfectly preserved of Chippendale's grand neo-classical interiors. By contrast the depleted but still extensive collection at Paxton House, Berwickshire, exemplifies Chippendale's ability to cater for the needs of a client, Ninian Home, who preferred japanned or relatively plain mahogany furniture. 
Chippendale's most valuable commission, for Edwin Lascelles at Harewood House, remains the pre-eminent Chippendale country house despite many depletions. At no other place can the full range of the firm's activities be studied or enjoyed in such depth. The programme, begun in 1767, was continued by Chippendale's son until 1797. Its total cost was in the region of $10,000, making it arguably one of the most expensive furnishing schemes anywhere in the eighteenth century. In order to see this figure in context it should be remembered that Lascelles spent nearly $7000 with Capability Brown on landscaping the park, while Sir James Ibbetson, at Denton Park nearby, built and equipped an entire Palladian mansion and park (including furniture by Chippendale) for $10,000 at approximately the same time. Documents at Harewood include invoices, the steward's day work books, letters, and an inventory of 1795, making identification of individual pieces relatively easy as well as providing an extraordinarily interesting case study of a great furnishing commission. The state bed, costing $250 in 1773 (excluding its draperies and trimmings) was removed in the 1840s and assumed lost until its triumphant restoration in 2000. 
There is little doubt that Chippendale was considered one of the most eminent cabinet-makers and designers of his own day, not only by the aristocracy and gentry who were his clients, but also by his peers. After his death the brilliant self-promotion of 'The Director' would seem to have made him immortal: during the nineteenth and for much of the twentieth centuries his name became associated with almost all furniture bearing even the slightest resemblance to examples in his great publication. Thus with the development of a popular market for antique furniture he became synonymous with a whole period in the history of design, not only in Britain but America. This hero-worship culminated in his nomination as the Shakespeare of English furniture makers. Today a more measured view might be to see him as a highly gifted designer and entrepreneur well attuned to changes in taste and the needs of the luxury market. 
Chippendale is well remembered in his birthplace by the Chippendale Society, founded in 1963, who celebrate an annual dinner and own an important collection of furniture and documents, usually on display at Temple Newsam, Leeds. There are no known likenesses of Chippendale: nevertheless in 1986 a bronze statue by Graham Ibbeson was erected in Otley. An idealized statue of him by Albert Hodge (1905) adorns the west facade of the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. 
The younger Thomas Chippendale (bap. 1749, d. 1822/3), cabinet-maker and designer, was baptized in London at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 23 April 1749, the eldest of his parents' nine children. Details of his upbringing and education are obscure but he probably received a formal training in drawing. After his father's semi-retirement and second marriage in 1777 he assumed a central role in running the firm. His earliest known design is a decorative cartouche on a survey of the High Street, Hull, executed in 1772. In 1779 his only publication appeared, 'SKETCHES OF ORNAMENT By Thos Chippendale JUNR'. It consists of six plates illustrating an anthology of refined neo-classical motifs, several of which appear on ambitious looking-glass frames at Harewood House and Burton Constable, Yorkshire. 
Chippendale junior was also an artist and occasional dealer in pictures. He exhibited five genre paintings at the Royal Academy between 1784 and 1801. In 1794 he bought at Christies a large collection of prints by G. B. Cipriani and F. Bartolozzi, together with various drawings, and in 1799 sold fourteen old master and contemporary paintings. In the early nineteenth century he filled a small book with drawings of French furniture entitled 'Sketches by Thomas Chippendale at Various Times', perhaps derived from a visit during the peace of Amiens. Like his father, he was a member of the Society of Arts, between 1793 and 1811. 
On 16 July 1793 Chippendale junior married Mary Anne Whitehead at St Martin-in-the-Fields; no record of any offspring or of his wife's death has been traced. They were probably childless for in his will dated 2 December 1822 and proved 28 January 1823 (where he is described as 'late of St Martin's Lane but of 61 Regent Street, Vincent Square, Westminster') he left all his personal property to a Sarah Wheatley 'of Regent Street aforesaid'. It has not been established whether they were related and his place of burial remains unknown. 
Following the death of his father in 1779 Chippendale carried on the business with Thomas Haig, the accountant who now became senior partner. The firm traded as Haig and Chippendale, with Chippendale responsible for all matters relating to design and craftsmanship. Haig retired in 1796 and on his death in 1803 bequeathed $10,000 to friends and relations to be paid out of 'Monies secured to me on several Bonds of Thomas Chippendale my Successor in Business' (Gilbert, 'Chippendale', 1.15). Unable to pay these large sums, Chippendale was declared bankrupt in June 1804. The subsequent four auctions revealed the extensive nature of his business and stock but the misfortune did not affect his reputation as a furniture maker or designer and he continued trading at 60-62 St Martin's Lane until 1813. Thereafter he moved to 17 Haymarket; between 1818 and 1821 he was at 42 Jermyn Street; possibly then at Great Queen Street before his final address in Regent Street, Vincent Square (now renamed Regency Street). 
When Chippendale's father died there were important furnishing programmes remaining to be completed, including Nostell Priory, Harewood House, and Burton Constable, Yorkshire; Paxton House, Berwickshire; and various properties of the Heathcote family. It seems very likely that Chippendale the younger had been closely involved in these since the early 1770s and the designs of such masterpieces as the Diana and Minerva commode, or the state bed at Harewood may be as much his as his father's. His work at these houses shows the consistent development of an elegant and attenuated style and the ability to remain in the forefront of changes in taste. At Paxton he advised Ninian Hume on all matters concerning furnishing and decoration: colour schemes, wallpapers, carpets, even gate-pier ornaments. The largest accredited body of his work is at Stourhead, Wiltshire, ordered by Sir Richard Colt Hoare between 1798 and 1820, costing about $3500 and including the library furniture in the Egyptian style and suites in an advanced Grecian taste. Charles Hoare of Luscombe Castle, Devon, also ordered Regency furniture costing $1434, much of which survives. One of his last commissions (1820) was an elaborate commemorative armchair for the prince regent made from the wood of a famous elm tree left standing on the battlefield of Waterloo (Royal Collection). 
Although the reputation of Chippendale the younger has been overshadowed by that of his famous father, he was perhaps commercially more successful and equally distinguished (although less influential) as a progressive designer. At least one contemporary, the cabinet-maker George Smith, recognized his qualities and wrote of him posthumously as 'known only amongst a few, [he] possessed a very great degree of taste, with great ability as a draughtsman and designer' ('The Cabinet Maker's and Upholsterer's Guide', 1826, p. 194). An early nineteenth-century unsigned wax portrait inscribed on the back 'Thomas Chippendale' survives in the Victoria and Albert Museum, and a copy of a lost portrait (doubtfully identified) is in the collection of the Chippendale Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 62536


Holditch, Abraham (bap. 1639, d. 1678), naval officer and merchant adventurer, was baptized on 12 May 1639 at Totnes, Devon. He was probably the son of William Holditch (died 1646?) and his wife, Agnes ('bap'. 1617), formerly Jakes. He married at St Magnus the Martyr, London, on 13 November 1661 Elizabeth ('bap'. 1644, died 1702), daughter of Nathaniel Morecock. 
Nothing is known of Holditch's early naval career prior to 1661 when he commanded the 'Sophia', one of the squadron led to the Gambia by Robert Holmes in search of goldmines. He is presumed to have accompanied Holmes on his second expedition to west Africa, and was appointed lieutenant on the 'Revenge' on 14 March 1665, during the Second Anglo-Dutch War. After the battle off Lowestoft Holditch commanded several men-of-war before joining the Royal African Company. In the navy Holditch was regarded as a 'fitt man' and 'stout' (NMM, LBK/47), suitable for appointment by the duke of York to be captain of the 'Mars' at the age of twenty-six. In 1671 he was sent by the Royal African Company to recover Cape Coast Castle, in Guinea, their west African headquarters which had been lost in a local insurrection. The success of the mission, for which he was awarded $500, was significant both for the company and for the subsequent development of the nation's trade. Holditch remained at the castle for a year as the company's agent-general. 
In 1674 Holditch offered to command a ship to deter private trade on the Gold Coast and convey slaves to the West Indies, and in each of the following three years he was elected to the company's court of assistants, during which time he declined the offer of a second tour of duty as agent-general. He was active in the company's affairs, contributing his specialist knowledge to its administration until he was appointed chief searcher of London port shortly before his death, which occurred early in 1678. He was buried at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, on 7 February. His widow later married John Chambers. 
Holditch's son Richard became a director of the South Sea Company. His daughter Agnes (1671?-1749) married in 1689 


@@@@@


doc= 62537


John Strong (c.1654-1693); they had no children. Strong, a privateer and treasure seeker, was chief mate of the 'James and Mary', commanded by William Phipps, which in 1687 recovered treasure from a ship wrecked off the coast of Hispaniola. In 1689, armed with a royal commission, he sailed as commander of the 'Welfare' to recover a Spanish treasure ship, the 1200 ton 'Capitana Jesus Maria de la Limpia Concepcion', sunk in 1654 off the west coast of South America. He made the first undisputed landing on the Falkland Islands, giving the name of Falkland Sound to the channel between the two main islands. Strong passed through the Strait of Magellan in winter, with great difficulty and danger. He failed to find the ship and lost eleven men killed ashore; the capture of two prizes near Ireland on the way home was meagre compensation for his failure, for when the wreck was located in 1997 its bounty was estimated at $2.5 billion ('The Times', 26 March 1997, 15d-h). Strong died at La Coruna on a voyage to the West Indies on 11 November 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 62539


Bennet, John (c.1670-1750), Church of England clergyman, may have been a member of the family of that name settled at Hexworthy near Launceston, Cornwall, over many generations. He was admitted sizar at Queens' College, Cambridge, as 'of Cornwall' on 7 September 1693, proceeding BA in 1697 and MA in 1726. He is said by Charles Wesley, who met him on 13 July 1744, to have claimed to be a contemporary of Wesley's father, but, since the latter must have been at least ten years older and was at Exeter College, Oxford, their acquaintance could not have been at university. Bennet was ordained deacon at Exeter on 19 September 1697 and priest on 16 March 1700, being licensed thereafter in 1705 to the perpetual curacy of North Tamerton, Cornwall, which he retained until his death and to which he added Tresmere in 1720 and Laneast in 1731. 
For much of his life Bennet appears to have been an ordinary country parson of no particularly distinctive views, farming his glebe and associating with the local gentry, but late in 1742 he experienced an evangelical conversion after hearing George Thomson of St Gennys preach on salvation by faith. Subsequently he entertained Whitefield and Wesley on their preaching tours and, like them and Thomson, he peregrinated, and as a result he would incur the wrath of the Methodist-hating bishop of Exeter, George Lavington, who required him in a judgment given on 18 July 1749 to confine his preaching to his own parishes on pain of ecclesiastical censure. Bennet may have continued his itinerant work, but we do know that, whether he did so or not, with Thomson he continued to welcome Whitefield and John Wesley, the latter recording in his journal on 27 August 1750 that Bennet, though still ministering, was 'full of days and by swift steps removing into eternity' ('Journal of... John Wesley', 3.492). Bennet lived for less than two months after this, and was buried at North Tamerton on 13 October 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 62540


Delamotte, William (1718-1743), Moravian evangelist, born on 11 June 1718 in Greenwich, Kent, was the fourth of five surviving children (out of thirteen) of Peter Delamotte (died 1749), a sugar merchant and JP, and his wife, Elizabeth (1685-1771). His brother Charles (1714-1796) accompanied the Wesleys and Benjamin Ingham to Georgia in 1735. 
William matriculated as a sizar of St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in May 1736. During a serious illness he resolved to lead a better life. At home at Blendon Hall, Bexley, Kent, during the 1737 summer vacation he was 'struck to the heart' by Ingham's preaching ('Journal of the Rev. Charles Wesley', 74). Back in Cambridge he began a fellowship group whose members were soon 'stigmatized for Methodists' (Walsh, 257). When Charles Wesley expounded the Moravians' emphasis on justification by faith at Blendon in 1738 Delamotte initially resisted, but on 29 June he experienced the gift of the Spirit. 
Delamotte's Cambridge group coalesced with another centred on Francis Okely. Visiting in December, Ingham found a vigorous group of five students and a society for townspeople. Delamotte supplemented Ingham's preaching in Bedford by expounding scripture in private houses, and may have continued to visit and advise the society which resulted. Having preached to huge crowds in London in 1739, at the Moravians' suggestion he assisted Ingham in the burgeoning Yorkshire revival from November. Delamotte's preaching was long remembered as producing many conversions. Back in Cambridge in October 1740, debts forced him to sell his books and furniture. By November 200 people were attending his thrice-weekly biblical exposition to the town society. However, only two fellow Cambridge Methodists remained in Cambridge, and one of these withdrew, rejecting lay exposition. 
Delamotte was now asked to return to London, probably to fill the vacuum caused by the Wesleys' withdrawal from the Fetter Lane society. He was reluctant to leave his successful work among townspeople, but other undergraduates had begun to disrupt meetings and he felt isolated in college. He removed his name from the college books, but then illness intervened. A swelling which did not respond to treatment kept him at Blendon, and he became gravely ill. He was in London from August 1741, but improvements in his health proved only temporary. 
In June 1742 Delamotte was received into membership of the Moravians' first English congregation, founded to take over Ingham's Yorkshire work. Despite continuing weakness, he travelled north that August. Living in a Moravian community house in the area of his earlier activity, he was deeply contented. He preached again, copied, and translated, helping to prepare the Moravians' 1743 'Watchwords' for publication. However, his running sore refused to heal. In January 1743 he returned to London, dying there on 22 February. He was buried at St Dunstan-in-the-East on 27 February. His sisters Elizabeth Holland (1710-1780) and Esther Kinchin, later Schlicht (1712-1779), remained prominent English Moravians. 


@@@@@


doc= 62541


Scott, Jonathan (1735-1807), Independent minister, was born on 15 November 1735 at Shrewsbury, the second son of Captain Richard Scott of Scott's Hall in Kent and Mary, the daughter and heir of Jonathan Scott of Belton Grange, near Shrewsbury. After 'a polite education' ('Evangelical Magazine', 15.489), he became a cornet at the age of seventeen and subsequently a captain-lieutenant in His Majesty's 7th regiment of dragoons, in which he served for seventeen years including several campaigns in Europe. Intermittently religious from a young age, he was converted by the preaching at a Sussex country house of the leading London evangelical William Romaine, a close associate of the Calvinist Methodist leader Selina, countess of Huntingdon. Thereafter Scott began to preach, first to his own soldiers: in a letter to the religious controversialist Sir Richard Hill, he refers to 'the Lord extending his mercy and his grace' as he congregated his men twice daily in his lodgings from 1766 for prayer and 'Bible' study. A year later, starting in Leicester, he began preaching wherever his regiment was posted, indoors or out, sometimes with violent opposition, so that he acquired the reputation of being 'an arrant methodist'. His correspondence reveals friendship with many evangelical leaders, especially Hill, John Fletcher of Madeley, John Newton, and Henry Venn (Macfadyen, 51-4). 
In 1769, a year after his marriage on 1 June 1768 to Elizabeth Cley (died 1799), a pious heiress of Wollerton in Shropshire, Scott was faced with an ultimatum from his superior officers to choose between his preaching and his military career. As a result he resigned his commission, though he continued to appear in the pulpit in uniform, and was widely known as Captain Scott. More than any other minister, Scott was responsible for the establishment of evangelical congregationalism in Staffordshire; some twenty-two churches trace their origins to his labours, not to mention five churches in Shropshire, six in Cheshire, four or five in Lancashire, and others in Derbyshire which were profoundly influenced or started by him. At Middlewich in Cheshire and Leek in Staffordshire congregations which had adopted Unitarianism were restored through his efforts to evangelical orthodoxy. Pressed to become pastor of the congregation at Lancaster, a position he would have found too restricting, he did consent to be ordained there in September 1776 as 'presbyter at large' (Urwick, 137). 
From about 1776 Scott concentrated his work in the under-provided county of Staffordshire. Beginning in Newcastle under Lyme, where the baptismal registers of the chapel he founded date to 1777, he seven years later purchased land called the Marsh on which a new chapel was erected. The work was soon extended to the potteries where he preached in what he called 'his old cathedral', namely the streets. The 'Tabernacle' in Hanley, the fruit of his labours there, was opened in 1784 in self-conscious resemblance to George Whitefield's chapel in London, where Scott preached frequently for twenty years. Other Staffordshire towns which benefited from Scott's ministry include Lichfield, Stone, Uttoxeter, and Stafford. However, the military parson was not always well received; his preaching in Gnosall in mid-Staffordshire in 1778, with George Burder, provoked a 'formidable riot'. John Wesley, it appears, was also unhappy with some of Scott's activities. Recording the minister's presence at a sermon preached in Newcastle under Lyme in March 1781, Wesley -- apparently laying some kind of proprietorial claim to missionary activity in north Staffordshire -- wrote of how Scott and his preachers 'have lately begun to preach both here and at Burslem. If they would go and break up fresh ground we should rejoice, but we cannot commend them for breaking in upon our labours after we have borne the burden and the heat of the day' ('Journals', 6.309). Scott, as part of the Calvinistic evangelical revival, was unprepared to leave the field to the Arminians, whose record historically he found unsatisfactory. 
During the 1780s Scott entered into a partnership with the evangelical activist Willielma, Viscountess Glenorchy, who financed the training of suitable young men through the Oswestry and Newcastle under Lyme academy. In addition Lady Glenorchy provided funds for underpaid ministers and for the building of new churches, with Scott acting as her secretary, treasurer, and committee, exercising an authority which has been called 'more than episcopal'. On her death in July 1786 Glenorchy left a chapel and house at Matlock to Scott; this became his home and headquarters from 1794, though he preached on alternate Sundays at Matlock and Nantwich. Following the death of his first wife on 31 December 1799 he married in 1802 the widow of a Samuel Barrow of Nantwich. Scott himself died at Nantwich on 28 May 1807 and was buried at Queen Street Chapel, Chester, on 9 June. Commemorations of his life were generous towards a man who, while promoting religious diversity, had proved a loyal subject, marrying 'genuine patriotism with conscientious dissent from the established church'. Such commitment was also readily apparent to congregants appreciative of a minister who, if not blessed with special intellectual gifts, 'was an honest, resolute, autocratic man, with a considerable allowance of practical shrewdness, a warm heart and a complete devotion to the cause which he had espoused' ('Evangelical Magazine', 15.546-7). 


@@@@@


doc= 62542


Taylor, David (1715-1783), evangelist and preacher, was born on 28 April 1715 in Wymeswold, near Loughborough, the son of Joseph Taylor and his wife, Dorothy. He is said to have had a 'tolerable education' (Seymour, 1.43) and was employed in domestic service with Lady Huntingdon's family, though in the 1750s he was described as a husbandman. It is often stated that he was converted by Benjamin Ingham or the Moravians in 1741 and that in the same year Lady Huntingdon encouraged him to preach in Leicestershire. There is, however, some evidence that he was at least 'awakened' as early as 1735, and was preaching and founding societies in the Sheffield area before 1740. Here he probably encountered Ingham and the Moravians, and certainly John Bennet and John Nelson, who later became Methodist preachers. 
Taylor's preaching in Leicestershire for Lady Huntingdon from early 1741 led to the development of religious societies which, however, developed Baptist principles. In 1770 they joined with Dan Taylor's societies to form the General Baptists of the New Connexion. In October 1741 David Taylor was invited by John Bennet to visit Derbyshire, where he influenced some members of the Chinley Presbyterian Chapel and precipitated Bennet's evangelical conversion in January 1742. In 1743 Taylor settled in Mobberley, Cheshire, and preached chiefly in that county, Derbyshire, and Lancashire. Some of his religious societies in these areas were later taken over by the Moravians, others by John Bennet, and through Bennet became part of John Wesley's Methodist Connexion. 
In 1742 Wesley and Lady Huntingdon were already alarmed at Taylor's apparent intention to create an independent organization. His reputation was also damaged by contracting an irregular marriage. He apparently disapproved of the Anglican clergy and Anglican marriage and instead made vows with his partner, Mary (1717-1770), before witnesses after the Quaker manner. He also offended some by his alleged antinomianism. The exact status of his marriage remains unclear. Moravian sources record that he was married in Wrexham in 1745, but also that his first son, David, was born on 13 January 1744, though his baptism is recorded in the Mobberley parish register on 2 January 1743 (NS?). The couple had nine other children (five sons and four daughters), two dying in infancy. Those born before 1751 were baptized as Anglicans, the rest as Moravians. The eldest son, David, later became a Moravian worker in Jamaica. 
Continuing an irregular preacher, Taylor had contacts with the Moravians and Methodists during the rest of the 1740s. In 1747 Bennet said he had left off preaching, but in 1749 he supported Bennet and John Wesley against the mob in Bolton, Lancashire. The parish register of Mobberley in 1749-50 described Taylor as a Methodist 'teacher' (that is, a preacher). However, on 11 January 1751 he was received as a member of the Moravian church, though recorded as a 'backsliding member' by 1755. His letters between 1750 and 1760 suggest that he was in a state of spiritual confusion, with his temporal affairs often in disorder, though he still wanted to preach and perhaps become a Moravian minister. He and his wife were finally expelled by the Moravians on 15 April 1765 for assisting a clandestine marriage. His wife died in 1770 and in 1772 in Manchester, Taylor attempted to convince a Moravian woman that he was guided by God to marry her. In his last years he seems to have vacillated in allegiance between the Moravians, Methodists, and Quakers, and to have lost his preaching gift. 
In appearance Taylor is described as of moderate height, rather stoutly made, grey-headed in later life, and in one place called 'the little beauty' (Tyerman MSS, 3, fol. 500). His career illustrates certain features of the early years of the evangelical revival. Like other local and regional evangelists he pioneered work later taken over by more systematic organizers. His irregularities and changeable allegiances were not due simply to personal weaknesses, but were characteristic of the doctrinal and moral uncertainties created by the experience of revival. Taylor died in Jackson's Row, Manchester, on 8 July 1783 and was buried in the town's Quaker burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 62544


Mitrany, David (1888-1975), political scientist, was born on 1 January 1888 in Bucharest, the son of Moscu and Jeannette Mitrany. He left Romania in 1908 in search of further education, for in that country opportunities in higher education and in the professions were limited for Jews. He spent three years in Hamburg, working and studying at the Kolonial Institut, University of Hamburg, becoming interested in social projects, before moving to London, where he intended to continue his studies in such work. In 1912 he enrolled at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) to study sociology and economics. The outbreak of the First World War changed Mitrany's outlook and the purpose of his career. From 1914 to 1918 he was involved in diplomatic work with the Romanian legation and in intelligence work for the British Foreign and War offices. He contributed to the series of 'Peace Handbooks' prepared under the direction of the historical section of the Foreign Office, and became an active member of the first League of Nations Society. 
A fortuitous encounter with C. P. Scott, editor of the 'Manchester Guardian', led to a position on its editorial board, with a special responsibility for foreign affairs, which lasted from May 1919 to 1922. Mitrany's relationship with Scott was particularly cordial: Scott had confidence in the accuracy of Mitrany's facts and approved of his political views, which were akin to his own. In 1922 Mitrany became assistant European editor for the publications on the economic and social history of the war that were financed by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. This experience was to form the basis for the development of his ideas, through working with authors from many countries and acquiring a detailed knowledge of post-war problems, such as sanctions, minorities, nationalism, and land disputes. On 9 June 1923 he married Ena Victoria Limebeer (1897/8-1986), writer and artist, and they moved to Kingston Blount, Oxfordshire, which was to be Mitrany's home for the rest of his life. 
During this period Mitrany determined his role in the international political scene. His purpose was to work towards the development of effective peace organizations, and in so doing he was resolute in maintaining a personal neutrality. He would not accept membership of any political party, nor would he participate in any organization which was nationalist or religious. This was his strength, but it was to isolate him from the main stream of political scientists. He also found time to conclude his academic studies at LSE: he became BSc (Econ) (war) (1918), followed by PhD (1929), and DSc in economics (1931). 
Through Mitrany's work for the Carnegie Endowment came invitations during 1931-3 to Harvard University and to present the Dodge lectures at Yale University. In these lectures, published as 'The Progress of International Government' (1933), he first outlined his functional ideas. Recognition of his academic standing and of his knowledge of European affairs followed, with the appointment in 1933 as professor in the School of Economics and Politics at the prestigious Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton University. His was the first appointment in the school and the only non-American, and gave him a status in American academic life which he was to lack in the UK. Working in the USA during the depression studying Roosevelt's new deal strengthened his belief in functional solutions. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Mitrany became a member of the Foreign Office's academic intelligence unit, the foreign research and press service, based at Balliol College, Oxford. Mitrany produced a series of innovative documents, and as early as June 1941 was setting out an 'Agenda of peace making'. In another paper, 'Territorial, ideological, or functional organization?', he expanded his own ideas, and at the end of 1942 he resigned to pursue these further. The results appeared in a pamphlet, 'A Working Peace System' (1943), which had an immediate public appeal and was translated into various languages. Mitrany embarked on an extensive programme of lecturing, broadcasting, and writing, with the aim of ensuring that a new peace organization would not be handicapped by a rigid constitution (as had the League of Nations) but would be given the capacity to develop on functional and sociological lines. The validity of the functional approach was accepted and incorporated in the founding documents of the specialized agencies of the new United Nations. Mitrany, in a new edition of his pamphlet in 1946, in analysing the new organization, stressed the importance of its functions in social and economic spheres. 
In 1945 Mitrany was invited by the multinational company Unilever to act as its adviser on international affairs. He accepted the position, as an experiment and a challenge, acknowledging that, with an invalid wife, he was thus given the freedom to stay in the UK and to continue with his academic role at Princeton. The experiment was to continue to his retirement in 1960. His next substantial work was very different, and was based on his experiences with the Carnegie Endowment, on his knowledge of eastern Europe, and his accumulated research material: 'Marx Against the Peasant: a Study in Social Dogmatism' was published in 1951. The book was examined worldwide, translated into European and Asian languages, and received much praise and abuse, though even left-wing critics acknowledged the depth and accuracy of its scholarship. 
Mitrany continued to write and lecture on international politics and functionalism and to probe new ideas in a society where economics and politics were increasingly entwined. He gave up his professorship at Princeton and became a permanent member, with access to the institute, while undertaking extensive university lectures in the USA. In the 1960s there was new interest in functionalism as the organizations of the European Union came into being. Mitrany, although not an advocate of regionalism, which he believed stifled true internationalism, welcomed the functional solutions put forward. The increased interest resulted in the publication of a collection of his writings in 1966, including the text of the original pamphlet. At a conference devoted to functionalism in 1969 he presented the introductory paper, which was published, with a further collection of his writings, in 1975 as 'The Functional Theory of Politics'. This included an autobiographical account of how his functional approach to international government had developed. David Mitrany died in London on 25 July 1975, and was cremated at Golders Green on 29 July. 
In its essence the 'Mitranian' approach is simple and pragmatic: to work with and for people; to co-operate on issues that unite not divide; to allow the 'form' of a solution to follow its 'functions'. Functionalism is the reflection of David Mitrany himself, a man of vision and simplicity, compassion and tolerance, a scholar who, aware of the past, looked to develop a future world community. 


@@@@@


doc= 62574


Wilkes, Joseph (bap. 1733, d. 1805), industrialist and entrepreneur, was the fourth of nine children and second son of Joseph Wilkes (1698-1769), grocer, of Overseal, Derbyshire, and Elizabeth, his wife (died 1762). His grandfather was another Joseph Wilkes (1670-1749), a nailer, of Barton under Needwood, Staffordshire, and Overseal. Wilkes was baptized at Seal church, Derbyshire, on 3 September 1733. Later, three of his brothers, John (1728-1790), William (1737-1781), and Thomas (1745-1795), and one of his nephews, Joseph Pycroft (1758-1833), were partners in his commercial, industrial, and banking enterprises. 
Little is known of Joseph Wilkes's early life, but the family's prosperity increased in the mid-eighteenth century. This prompted a local tradition that at the time of the Jacobite rising in 1745, when the rebels penetrated as far south as Derby, one of the Wilkeses, possibly Joseph's father, 'purchased a barrel of nails which had been taken from his [Bonnie Prince Charlie's] adherents, and upon emptying it, found that the top and bottom only were nails, but the middle was all gold. Thus enriched [Joseph and Thomas Wilkes] became able to take part in or originate various schemes for the improvement of trade which shortly afterwards presented themselves. (Gresley, historical notes, Derbyshire RO, D809 A/PI 431)' Wilkes married Elizabeth (known as Bessy) Wood (died after 1774) at Seale on 11 September 1759. They had three surviving daughters. Joseph moved from Overseal to nearby Measham in Leicestershire about 1780. 
Support for a transport network to open up markets was a lifelong interest of Joseph Wilkes. He and his brother John, both described as 'cheese factors', were partners in the new syndicate that obtained the lease after 1762 of the Trent Navigation which linked Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire, with river and canal wharves throughout the region. New waterways made it economically viable to exploit local coal and ironstone seams, and in 1767 Joseph leased coal mines in Measham and Oakthorpe, Leicestershire, which included rights to dig clay. Brickmaking enabled Wilkes to prosper, but also later encouraged him to develop the innovation still characteristic of his local buildings, the production of double-sized bricks, popularly called 'Wilkes's gobs', to reduce liabilities under the brick tax introduced in 1785. Wilkes diversified into banking, founding in 1780 in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, the first bank outside the county town, together with similar businesses in Burton upon Trent, Measham, and his native Overseal. 
Wilkes was linked in the 1760s with the Sampson Lloyds, senior and junior, ironmasters and later bankers of Birmingham; but his most significant business and financial partnership was from 1780 to 1798 with Robert 'Parsley' Peel (1723-1795) and his son Robert, first baronet (1750-1830). The Peels' cotton-spinning mills in Burton upon Trent opened in 1780 and were followed ten years later by a large-scale textile complex at Fazeley in Staffordshire on a site purchased and developed by Wilkes and Peel, whose activities were further cemented by the formation of the new London and Tamworth bank of Peel, Wilkes, Dickenson, and Goodall. 
Independently at Measham, Wilkes initiated an even greater transformation: in the 1780s he built two spinning mills, many weaving shops, large brickworks and limeworks, and an iron foundry where iron barges, steam-engine boilers, and other metal goods were produced. Local agriculture was improved, in part because water drained from Wilkes's coalmines was used for irrigation, and the town, largely rebuilt, became briefly an important business centre. Wilkes was an early but cautious investor in steam power, buying two Boulton and Watt engines for Measham corn and cotton mills, in 1786 and 1787 respectively; another winding engine, the first in the midland coalfield, for the Oakthorpe coal pit, in 1787; and in 1802 a fourth engine, at that time the largest in the region, for his original Measham corn mill. Coalmining in Brinsley near Nottingham and in Oakthorpe and Measham continued alongside Wilkes's other activities, and his last major project was to promote the Ashby Canal, completed in 1804, and its connection with the Coventry Canal near Bedworth in Warwickshire, and to open up coal markets further afield, not only for himself but also for neighbouring landowners. 
Joseph Wilkes was a leading figure in a group of relatives and colleagues in the forefront of business innovation and development in and around south Derbyshire in the later eighteenth century. In addition to the Peels the group included William Wyatt (1701-1773), estate steward and member of the Staffordshire family of architects; Nathaniel Curzon of Breedon on the Hill, Leicestershire; and the agricultural and livestock improver Robert Bakewell (1725-1795), after whose death Joseph Wilkes became a founder and the first president of the Smithfield Cattle and Sheep Society in London. Where Wilkes differed from contemporaries was in the importance he gave to integrating industrial, commercial, agricultural, financial, and transport facilities to maximize potential markets. 
An energetic and determined character, Wilkes was 'possessed of a strong, intelligent, original and active mind and, whatever he took in hand, was conducted with a spirit which overcame all obstacles' (Pitt, 185). 
Over a period of forty years from the early 1760s he was a prime mover in the midlands in improving communication networks, opening up new markets, exploiting mineral resources, developing banking facilities, introducing new machinery, ameliorating land by drainage and water management, creating innovative building materials, and planning new large-scale manufacturing complexes. All this was achieved without the advantages of high social status or, apparently, a good education. 
Joseph Wilkes moved to Croydon, Surrey, about 1804, and he died there in May 1805. Before his death he transferred his Derbyshire property to his widowed sister, Mrs Elizabeth Gresley (1735-1816), and her children by her first marriage, Joseph and Elizabeth Pycroft. 


@@@@@


doc= 62575


Blanche, Ada (1863-1953), actress, was born at Musely House, Brixton, London, on 16 July 1863, the daughter of the rising music-hall manager Sam Adams (1837-1893) of the Islington Philharmonic, and his wife, the former Mrs Sarah Ann Bellini ('nee' Harris) (1832?-1900), a well-known vocalist and actress, known professionally as Cicely Nott, who had recently played under Chatterton at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. Adams, the son of a Ware-based maltster and banker, was professedly descended from Sir Thomas Adams, a seventeenth-century lord mayor of London. 
Ada's parents had already separated (after producing five children, all of whom would make a name in the theatre) before the young girl first went on the stage in her early teens. She appeared in Chatterton's children's pantomimes at the Adelphi Theatre, in similar productions at Drury Lane and at the Imperial, and was also seen in juvenile roles in drama, often playing on the same programmes as one or both of her mother and youngest sister 'Little' Addie Blanche. She had her first important adult role at the age of nineteen, when she briefly took over the soprano part of Fiametta, to her mother's Peronella, in Emily Soldene's touring company performance of 'Boccaccio'. She left this job to fulfil the kind of substantial pantomime principal boy engagement which would be the backbone of her early career. 
In 1883-4 Blanche toured with Lila Clay's all-ladies operetta company, in 1885 with the Holmes Burlesque Company in America, and in 1886 in Britain with her mother and another sister, Edith Blanche, in Dion Boucicault's comedy 'Forbidden Fruit'. In 1886 she made her first adult appearance at the mecca of modern burlesque, the Gaiety Theatre, cast (alongside Addie) in a small part in the burlesque 'Monte Cristo jr'. At the Gaiety she understudied the theatre's top star, Nellie Farren, and when the burlesques were sent on the road, Ada was cast in Farren's parts. In her twenties, she spent most of her time playing burlesque around Britain, but she returned to London to succeed to the title-role in George Edwardes's production of the burlesque 'Joan of Arc' and also to play both music-hall engagements and, most particularly -- alongside Marie Lloyd, Dan Leno, Little Tich, and other such variety stars -- as principal boy in the pantomimes at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. She also, apparently, though unbilled, latterly had a hand in the staging of the pantomimes, and Sir Francis Burnand reported that 'as a stage manager for farcical pieces with chorus and dances she ran even 'Charley 'Arris' uncommonly hard' ('The Era', 11 April 1908, 21). 
The best theatre part which Ada Blanche found in her middle years was the title-role in 'The Telephone Girl', Burnand's English adaptation of the French vaudeville-operetta 'La demoiselle du telephone', which she played for several seasons around Britain. However, apart from regular pantomime engagements, London offered her only a brief season in the title-role, Stella de Winton, in 'The Royal Star' (1898) and an 'in extremis' take-over of Ada Reeve's star role in the unsuccessful 'The Medal and the Maid' (1903). She came into her West End own only in her forties when Robert Courtneidge, husband of her actress sister Rosie Nott, became prominent as a producer of musical plays. Courtneidge cast her in older comedy characters in a series of his productions, and she thus created the role of the booming, lost-husband-seeking Mrs Smith alongside the Simplicitas Smith of Dan Rolyat in the long-running 'The Arcadians' (1909), the tea-house owner Mitsu, again teamed with Rolyat, in its successor, 'The Mousme' (1911), paired up with Lauri De Frece to supply the chief comedy of 'The Pearl Girl' (1913) as the vulgar nouveau-riche Mrs Baxter Brown, and, in more sedate style, the senior Lady Elizabeth Weston in 'The Rebel Maid' (1921). 
Although Ada Blanche never married, each of her three sisters did. Edith married the producer of 'Forbidden Fruit', John H. Tully, Addie became Mrs William Peacock and the mother of the successful 1910s musical comedy actress Marie Blanche, while Rosie and Courtneidge were the parents of the future comedienne Dame Cicely Courtneidge. Ada spent her retirement years in Yorkshire and west London, and died at St Mary's Guest House, Burlington Lane, Chiswick, on 1 January 1953. She was buried at Nunhead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 62581


Cameron, Violet (1862-1919), actress, was born on 7 December 1862. The birth of a Violet Lydia Thompson, at 38 Argyle Street, St Pancras, London, the daughter of William Melfington Thompson, linen merchant, and his wife, Mary Josephine, 'nee' Brougham, was registered for that date, though on her marriage certificate Violet gave her father's name as Frederick Thompson. She was the niece of the celebrated actress and dancer Lydia Thompson, who, with her husband Alexander Henderson, manager of the Comedy Theatre, played a major part in her upbringing. Violet made her stage debut on 10 April 1871 as Karl in a revival of Dion Boucicault's 'Faust and Marguerite', with the veteran actor Samuel Phelps, at the Princess's Theatre. Such was her success that she obtained a three-year engagement for children's parts in the Drury Lane pantomime. In 1876 Miss Cameron (her stage name) appeared as Perdita in 'The Winter's Tale' in Liverpool, but when later asked why she did not 'go in' for Shakespeare she replied, 'Oh, when one has a voice, I suppose it pays to cultivate that talent', recognizing that big salaries were then paid for 'opera bouffe' ('The Era', 26 Aug 1893). In addition to her vocal gifts Violet Cameron was blessed with extremely blond hair, a fine figure, and of course the support of Lydia Thompson, with whom she appeared in burlesque and opera bouffe at the Folly (subsequently Toole's) Theatre. In 1878 she triumphed at the Folly as Germaine in 'Les cloches de Corneville' by Henry Brougham Farnie and R. Reece, and she acknowledged her debt to Farnie, who, in his capacity as stage manager, helped her to 'work up' these pieces. 
It was at the Gaiety Theatre on 14 October 1882 that Violet Cameron scored a tremendous personal success in the dual role of Gretchen and Alice in Farnie's treatment of Robert Planquette's light opera 'Rip Van Winkle'. The cast included Fred Leslie, Frederick Storey, W. S. Penley, and Lionel Brough. Following further success in 'Falka' in October 1883 Cameron left the stage. On 20 September 1884, at the register office in the district of St George, Hanover Square, she married David de Bensaude, a native Moroccan of Spanish descent and a tea taster by trade. They had one child, probably born in 1885. In that year Cameron reappeared on stage with Lionel Brough in Audran's 'La mascotte', the play with which Alexander Henderson opened the Comedy Theatre: it enjoyed an enormous success and established opera bouffe at the Comedy for some time. 
In 1886 Cameron and her husband were befriended by Hugh Cecil Lowther, fifth earl of Lonsdale (1857-1944), who offered to finance their plan to take a theatre company to America that autumn. Lonsdale was an old acquaintance of Cameron's and the attention that he paid to her soon aroused the resentment and suspicion of her husband. In July 1886 she sought a judicial separation from Bensaude on the grounds of his violent and threatening language, while he in turn sought a divorce on the ground of her alleged adultery with Lonsdale. On 30 July there was an altercation between the two men at Newcastle, and Lonsdale was fined for assault. The following month the weekly paper 'The Umpire' published an interview with Lonsdale that, in the words of the judge who presided over the subsequent libel case, depicted Bensaude as 'a thief, a liar, and a drunkard, and as having sponged on his wife's earnings and pawned her jewellery' ('The Times', 23 May 1887). Bensaude won damages for this 'atrocious' libel. 
In these fraught circumstances the planned American tour went ahead, with Lonsdale in attendance as business manager. The production of the musical plays 'Kenilworth' and 'The Commodore' was judged a success, but further scandalous stories about Bensaude, Cameron, and Lonsdale crossed the Atlantic and appeared in the British press. Husband and wife were by now totally estranged and in July 1887 the parties reached an agreement whereby Bensaude signed a separation deed and withdrew divorce proceedings in return for a settlement of $750. He soon renounced this agreement, however, after discovering that in May 1887 his wife had given birth to a daughter, of whom Lord Lonsdale was the father. Cameron's counsel subsequently admitted that there had after all been 'immoral relations' between the actress and the earl, but it was also claimed that Bensaude had known of all of the circumstances, including the illegitimate child, before signing the separation deed, and that he was motivated purely by money ('The Times', 17 Nov 1887). The scandal obliged Lonsdale to leave London for a time -- in February 1888 he set off on a lengthy expedition to the Canadian Arctic -- while Bensaude, who was prevented by the courts from further confronting his wife, faded into a background of indigence, living in rented rooms in London. He died some time before his wife, whom he never divorced. 
The scandal seems hardly to have affected Cameron's career. On her return from America, she performed in Alfred Cellier's comic opera 'The Sultan of Mocha' at the Strand Theatre (21 September 1887). This was followed by several successes culminating in Alan-a-Dale in 'Maid Marian' at the Prince of Wales (5 February 1891), after which she left the stage for two years. Asked whether she preferred appearing as a boy or a girl Cameron replied emphatically the latter, explaining that 'it was Mr Farnie who used to insist on casting her for boys' parts, because he thought she was rarely gifted therefor in figure and deportment', a view from which her many admirers did not dissent ('The Era', 26 Aug 1893). In 1893 Violet Cameron caught public taste in 'Morocco Bound', a musical farce by Arthur Branscombe which enjoyed great success at the Shaftesbury Theatre (13 April). Thereafter her stage appearances were few. She returned to Drury Lane in January 1901 to take over as principal boy in 'Jack and the Beanstalk' making 'a comely figure in her handsome costumes... all she does in a part, that cannot be said to help her much, bears the mark of refinement, and her singing is as bright and cultural as ever' ('The Stage', 30 Oct 1919). 
Violet Cameron's last performance was as the Abbess (Mother Superior) in Henry Hamilton's and Paul Potter's musical play 'The School Girl' at the Prince of Wales's Theatre (9 May 1903). She died after a short illness at Holindale, Madeira Avenue, Worthing, Sussex, on 25 October 1919, and was buried on 30 October at Broadwater cemetery, Worthing. Though only fifty-six when she died, she had long since departed from the London stage: she was admiringly recalled by a diminishing few who had witnessed her brilliant though intermittent career in comic opera and opera bouffe. 


@@@@@


doc= 62592


Cutler, Kate Ellen Louisa (1864-1955), actress, was born on 14 August 1864 at 28 Queen's Road, Marylebone, London, the daughter of Henry Cutler, an artist and singer, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Tims. She is reported to have studied voice 'at the conservatoire in Watford' and made her first known appearance on the stage with Horace Lingard's touring comic opera company in 1888, taking over, in turn, the principal 'soubrette' part of Pepita (in Manchester) and then the 'ingenue' role of Inez (for London), the two girls who are candidates for the real princess in Charles Lecocq's 'La princesse des Canaries'. She next appeared with the Carl Rosa Light Opera Company in the supporting role of Malaguena in Robert Planquette's 'Paul Jones' (1889) before joining the company of George Edwardes's 'In Town' and beginning a steady rise that would result in a career as the ultimate 'ingenue' of the Victorian and Edwardian musical theatre. 
Kate Cutler was cast in 'In Town' as a take-over to the small 'ingenue' role of Lady Gwendoline, but covered and deputized latterly for the show's star, Florence St John, and she fulfilled the same function in 'A Gaiety Girl', moving up from the small part of Lady Edytha Aldwyn to replace Decima Moore in the juvenile lead of the piece. She succeeded Ada Reeve, when that lady departed, soon after the opening night, in the title role of the Gaiety's highly successful 'The Shop Girl' (1894) and then left the Edwardes organization to take over from Isa Bowman as Connie, the juvenile lady of 'All Abroad' (1895). 
In 1895 Kate Cutler created her own first good musical-comedy role, as Mabel Kavanagh, the 'ingenue' heroine -- alongside the rather more prominent 'soubrette', Kitty Loftus -- of the show starring Arthur Roberts, 'Gentleman Joe', and, in the wake of the craze awakened by Beerbohm Tree's production of 'Trilby', went on to play a burlesque Trilby in Nellie Farren's production of 'A Model Trilby'. She returned to Edwardes's management the following year to create the juvenile lead, May Mildreth, in 'The Clergyman's Daughter' out of town. When the piece was brought into the Gaiety, as 'My Girl', the role was given to Ellaline Terriss, and instead Miss Cutler appeared in town as Dorothy Travers in the less successful 'Monte Carlo' (1896). She came into her own, however, when she was cast, for the piece's London showing, in the title role of Suzette in 'The French Maid' (1897), created in the provinces by the genuinely French Andree Corday. Just how much she had risen in status was shown when she finally left the long-running show and was replaced by the same Kitty Loftus to whom she had played second fiddle in 'Gentleman Joe'. She went on to score another big success in 1898 as Elsie Crockett in 'Little Miss Nobody'. The following year she played Catarina in the operetta taken from the French 'L'amour mouille' and then found her most successful role of all as the 'ingenue', Angela, in the original production of 'Florodora', in which she introduced 'The Fellow who Might'. 
Kate Cutler took on the unenviable task in 1900 of starring as Victoria Chaffers opposite the unpredictable, often inebriated Arthur Roberts in a London season of his touring show 'HMS Irresponsible' -- this time ousting Kitty Loftus, who sued the producer and star (and lost) -- and took over the soprano role of Princess Soo-Soo in the record-breaking 'A Chinese Honeymoon' (1901) when that piece, once its success became evident, began to be cast with star performers. In 1902 she created one of her most appealing roles, as Nora, the befuddled young bride of the classy musical comedy 'The Girl from Kay's' (where she sang 'Papa'), opposite the star comic Willie Edouin. 'The Lovebirds' (1904, in which she played Grace Rockingham) gave her a rare experience of failure, but this was quickly remedied by a delightful star part as the Baroness Papouche in Edwardes's Gaiety Theatre musical 'The Spring Chicken' (1905). By now over forty (though she claimed to have been born in 1870), she abandoned musicals and turned instead to the straight stage and to performing playlets and sketches in the music halls. 
Over the next decade Kate Cutler was seen regularly in the West End in featured roles in plays, appearing with Tree in revivals of 'The Red Lamp' (1907, Felise) and 'A Woman of No Importance' (1907, Lady Stutfield), as the feather-headed little milliner, Madame Henriette, to the 'Bellamy the Magnificent' of Charles Wyndham (1908), the seduced servant girl to 'The Real Woman' of Evelyn Millard, and the pretty widow, Marion Nairn, alongside Charles Hawtrey in Somerset Maugham's 'The Noble Spaniard' (1909). She played the would-be social Mrs Dallas-Baker, alongside Marie Lohr and Robert Loraine, in Somerset Maugham's 'Smith' (1909) and Lydia Languish in Sheridan's 'The Rivals' (1910) with Lewis Waller, took over from Ethel Irving in the leading role of 'The Witness for the Defence' (1911), and performed in 'The Ogre' (1911) and 'The Fire Screen' (1912), then took a turn into the music halls, where she appeared alongside George Alexander in Max Beerbohm's 'A Social Success' and in several other short plays. 
Thereafter Kate Cutler moved towards playing mostly aristocratic and charming character roles and made brief returns to the musical stage as gracious older ladies such as Helen in 'That's a Good Girl' (1928), Mrs Gerard in 'Dear Love' (1929), and the Queen of Vassau in 'Command Performance' (1933). In the 1930s she was still finding good parts in the London theatre: in 1936 she was seen as Old Lady Squeamish, alongside Michael Redgrave and Edith Evans, in 'The Country Wife' at the Old Vic, and in 1938, half a century after her debut, with another graduate of the musical-comedy stage, Marie Tempest, as Belle Schlessinger in 'Dear Octopus'. She also appeared in several films, including the screen versions of 'That's a Good Girl' (1933) and 'Pygmalion' (1938). 
Unfailingly graceful, ladylike, and charming ('she always looks as if she has a sprig of lilac under her nose', reported her contemporary Emily Soldene), and the possessor of a pretty light soprano voice, the young Miss Cutler was, as a genuine and durable 'ingenue', the ideal partner for some of the more rumbustious comedy actors of her time. As an older actress, although she rarely found new roles as important as those she had created on the musical stage, she kept up a full career with very few bald spots, thanks to her always-winning stage presence and demeanour. She married, on 12 April 1900, the director and choreographer Sidney Ellison (whose real name was George Greenleaf), the stager of 'Florodora', but they had separated before his death in 1930, and she subsequently married Major Charles Dudley Ward, who also predeceased her. She died at her home, 41 Onslow Square, London, on 14 May 1955, and was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 62598


Arthur Kinmond Bell (1868-1942), Scotch whisky blender and philanthropist, was born on 4 October 1868 at Moncrieff Terrace, Craigie, Perth. He was educated at Perth Academy and Craigmount School, Edinburgh. After an apprenticeship with a blending firm in Edinburgh, he joined the family wine and spirit business in 1889, at a time when it had considerable unrealized potential for expansion, and his arrival coincided with a rapid growth in demand for Scotch whisky. Profits, a modest $1753 in 1889, rose to $5276 in 1895, when he became a partner with a half-share in the profits. He was joined the following year by his younger brother, Robert Duff Bell, who had established agencies in Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand during a tour in 1892. Until their father's death the profits were shared equally between all three. 


@@@@@


doc= 62601


MacEwen, Ann Maitland (1918-2008), architect and town planner, was born on 15 August 1918 at Saxtead, Marshalls Road, Sutton, Surrey, the daughter of Maitland Radford (1884-1944), doctor and medical officer of health for St Pancras, and his wife, Muriel Ann, 'nee' Lloyd (1889-1983), a doctor working in public health. She was educated at Howell's School, Denbigh, and in 1935 entered the Architectural Association, before graduating in 1940. 
Ann Radford was born into a family tradition of socialism. Her grandparents had been members of the Socialist League alongside William Morris, and her parents were committed socialists also. She continued this tradition, and her commitment to left-wing politics coloured the choices she made throughout her career. It was only natural, therefore, that her time at the Architectural Association saw her participation, alongside a group which included Anthony Cox, Richard Llewellyn Davies, Elizabeth Chesterton, and Leo de Syllas, in the student rebellions that sought the modernization of the school's curriculum in order that architects might be better equipped to design for the needs of a modern age. Importantly for her later career, she gained an early introduction to town planning through her assistance on a collaborative project, known as Tomorrow Town, which the students who formed Unit 15 submitted as their thesis project in 1938. Based on extensive research, and designed by group work, the scheme presaged the sort of techniques which she would practise in her post-war work for the London county council (LCC). 
Ann Radford married one of the Tomorrow Town team, John Wheeler (1916-1945), son of Walter James Wheeler, bank manager, on 21 December 1940 and, like him, became a member of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB). As she wrote later, 'one reason for joining the party was... the conviction that without radical changes in society the skills of the architect could not be used to benefit ordinary people...; one had to work politically as well as professionally and for some of us Marxism and the Communist Party seemed to offer the way forward. (letter to Anthony Cox, December 1989, Cox papers)' The Wheelers' two daughters were born in 1941 and 1943. John Wheeler, who, despite the CPGB's official neutrality between 1939 and 1941, had joined the RAF shortly before their marriage, was killed in a plane crash in September 1945 while out testing a new plane at high altitude. By this date the family had been living in a communal household at 6 Keats Grove, Hampstead, with Ann's brother and sister-in-law, and she had begun work for the architect-planner Judith Ledeboer, assisting her work on neighbourhood planning. Between 1946 and 1947 she then took on a similar role with Geoffrey Jellicoe, assisting on the master plan for the new town at Hemel Hempstead. She married for a second time, on 22 May 1947, the journalist Malcolm MacEwen ['see below']. 
After her marriage Ann MacEwen decided to focus her career on town planning and, following discussions with Jacqueline Tyrrwhit, head of the School of Planning and Regional Reconstruction in Gordon Square, London, it was agreed that she could take its planning diploma in two terms, while pregnant with her third child (a daughter), who was born in September 1948, two months after she completed the course. This allowed her to qualify for work at the LCC and she joined Percy Johnson Marshall's team in 1949, working for the head of planning, Arthur Ling, on the reconstruction of Stepney and Poplar. Despite the progressive politics of many of her colleagues who, like her, were CPGB members, her refusal to work on Saturdays in order to be with her family initially caused her to be denied pension rights and promotion. The repeal of this mode of institutional sexism allowed her to win establishment and promotion, which culminated in her taking on responsibility for the detailed planning of the reconstruction of north-east London. At the LCC she, and her co-workers, reflecting the influence of the pre-war thesis projects of the Architectural Association, brought to their planning schemes a desire to address both the physical and social needs of the rehoused, but budget cuts thwarted their visions for social and health centres, nursery schools, parks, and recreation grounds alongside the new housing estates. 
From the LCC Ann MacEwen (who had left the CPGB in 1956, in protest at its response to the Hungarian uprising of that year) went to the Ministry of Transport in 1961, to form part of the team working under Colin Buchanan on what became the 'Traffic in Towns' report (1963). The report was significant for forming part of a nascent movement against the unquestioned dominance of the motor car and the power of the traffic engineer in post-war planning. The team sought to balance the demands of traffic and commerce with existing historic urban infrastructure and while it retained a fondness for comprehensive redevelopment, its stress on managing the impact of the car, the maintenance of environmental standards, the safety and well-being of pedestrians, and the need for good public transport, represented an important challenge to the contemporary orthodoxy. MacEwen became a partner in Colin Buchanan and Partners from 1964 to 1973, where she produced planning and transport studies of Bath, Edinburgh, and Canterbury, as well as Bergamo, Italy. She succeeded in Edinburgh in getting plans to build a motorway-scale bridge between the Old and New towns abandoned. She also pursued an academic career as a researcher in the transport section of the department of civil engineering at Imperial College, London (1963-4), and later as senior lecturer at the school of advanced studies at Bristol University (1974-7). 
In the late 1970s the focus of MacEwen's attention turned to national parks, then under threat of redevelopment, working in close collaboration with her husband. Based at University College, London, where they were both honorary research fellows from 1977, and funded by the Nuffield Foundation, they were early pioneers of sustainable planning. In particular they advocated the continued validity of national parks, not as nostalgic acts of preservation, but as what they called 'greenprints' for the future. Their two books, 'National Parks: Conservation or Cosmetics?' (1982) and 'Greenprints for the Countryside? the Story of Britain's National Parks' (1987), provided the intellectual rationale for the campaign. The MacEwens had moved to the Manor House, Wootton Courtenay, Somerset, in 1968, the shift from Hampstead to the west country being a key factor in their interest in environmental politics. In retirement Ann MacEwen learned to weave silk and also set up a local branch of the University of the Third Age. She spent much of the 1990s caring for her husband, who had suffered a series of strokes before his death in 1996. 
Ann MacEwen's significance lay not just in her status as the pre-eminent woman town planner of her generation and her ongoing attempts to strike a balance between heritage and modernity in the age of the car. It may also be attributed to her presence among that generation of architect-planners who sought to develop a people-centred mode of planning, however thwarted their intentions may ultimately have been. In 2004 she moved into sheltered accommodation and died at Springdene Nursing Home, 55 Oakleigh Park North, Whetstone, Barnet, of bronchopneumonia on 20 August 2008. 
Her second husband, Malcolm MacEwen (1911-1996), journalist and environmentalist, was born on 24 December 1911 at Brangan, Lower Drummond, Inverness, the son of Sir Alexander Malcolm MacEwen (1875-1941), lawyer and Scottish nationalist, and his wife, Mary Beatrice, daughter of Surgeon-Major George Henderson of the Indian Medical Service. Educated at St Salvator's preparatory school, Inverness, Inverness Academy, and Rossall School, Lancashire, he initially embarked on a degree in forestry at Aberdeen University in 1929, abandoning this after two years for the study of law at Edinburgh University. There he met his first wife, Barbara Mary Stebbing (1910-1944), a geology student, and daughter of George Stebbing, stockbroker. They married on 2 April 1937 and had one daughter. His political engagement began as a young man. Following an initial flirtation with the Scottish nationalism of his father, he turned next to the Labour Party, a conversion he attributed to the loss of his leg in a motorcycle accident in 1933, when the costs of his care convinced him of the need for a free public health service. Between 1938 and 1940 he served as Labour councillor in Ross and Cromarty but his instincts were towards communism and he joined the party in 1939. In 1940 he joined the staff of the 'Daily Worker', becoming its parliamentary correspondent in 1943. He left the post, and the party, in 1956, for the same reasons as his second wife. In this period he was involved in the establishment of the 'New Reasoner' and the 'New Left Review'. 
In 1956 MacEwen entered a second phase of his career, as an architectural journalist and administrator. On the recommendation of Leo de Syllas, he joined the staff of the 'Architects' Journal'. In 1960 he moved to the Royal Institute of British Architects as head of its information services (1960-66), later taking the role of editor of its 'Journal' (1964-71), head of its publishing services (1966-70), and director of public affairs (1971-2). This period saw him become heavily involved in critiques of contemporary urban and transport planning resulting, first in 'Motropolis', a special issue of the 'Architects' Journal' in October 1959, analysing the social and economic disadvantages of the car. This early sign of a concern for the compromising of the promise of post-war reconstruction culminated in his book, 'Crisis in Architecture' (1974), a critique of the RIBA. The move to Exmoor in 1968 inaugurated the final phase of his career and what he called (in the title of his autobiography) 'the greening of a red'. As a nominee of the Ramblers' Association, he became a member of the Exmoor National Park committee and fought from within its support of the ploughing up of moorland. A long and bitter campaign finally succeeded, in 1977, in saving the land. In his later years he worked closely with his wife to advocate sustainable conservation. He died on 11 May 1996 at the Winsor Nursing Home, The Avenue, Minehead, following a series of strokes. His first daughter had predeceased him; he and Ann were survived by their daughter, and by her two daughters with John Wheeler. 


@@@@@


doc= 62607


Clarke, Edwin Sisterson (1919-1996), medical historian and neurologist, was born on 18 June 1919 at Mona House, Crow Hall Lane, Felling-on-Tyne, co. Durham, son of Joseph Henry Clarke, painter and decorator, and Nellie, daughter of Robert Sisterson, a shopkeeper. Brought up in poverty by his mother, he left Jarrow central school at fourteen. During a subsequent apprenticeship (1935-8) in pharmacy at the dispensary of Newcastle General Hospital, his relatives were so impressed with his ambitions and abilities that they paid for him to attend medical school at the University of Durham, which he entered in 1939. 
During the Second World War the Rockefeller Foundation funded a programme whereby a few selected British medical students could expedite their clinical training in the United States. Clarke studied at the University of Chicago from 1943 to 1945 and returned to take his MB BS degrees from Durham in 1945. He graduated MD at Chicago in 1946, and MD at Durham in 1954. He undertook postgraduate neurological and neurosurgical training with Sir Hugh Cairns at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, spent two years (1946-8) as a graded neurological specialist in the Royal Army Medical Corps, and continued his postgraduate studies at the Radcliffe Infirmary (1948-9) and the National Hospital, Queen Square, London (1950-51). From 1951 to 1958 he worked at the department of medicine at the Postgraduate Medical School of London in Hammersmith, where he became a consultant and lecturer in neurology. A steady stream of papers in prestigious journals on many aspects of neurological diagnosis, therapeutics, and pathology reflected his high intelligence, capacity for sustained work, and ambition. 
Sir John McMichael, chairman in the department of medicine at Hammersmith, encouraged Clarke to move to the Wellcome Trust in 1958 as assistant scientific secretary. During these two years Clarke broadened his interests and determined on a new career in the history of medicine. He spent three years studying and teaching the subject in the United States, at Johns Hopkins and Yale universities. He also spent a brief period at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he began a collaboration with C. D. O'Malley that was to result in 'The Human Brain and Spinal Cord' (1968; 2nd edn, 1996), a substantial collection of primary texts edited, introduced, and translated by Clarke and O'Malley. It was much more than a simple anthology, rather a major bio-bibliographical reference tool within neuroscience. 
Clarke returned to Britain in 1963 as a medical historian in the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum and Library. He and the librarian, F. N. L. Poynter, were not compatible, and when Poynter became director of a newly organized Wellcome Institute in 1964 there were tensions between the two men. A solution was reached in 1966, when the Wellcome Trust created a sub-department of the history of medicine within the department of anatomy at University College, London (UCL), with Clarke as senior lecturer and head. Promoted to a readership within the University of London in 1972, Clarke introduced courses in medical history to medical students at UCL and the Royal Free Hospital medical school, trained several postgraduate students and postdoctoral fellows, and worked energetically to create medical history as an academic discipline. 
In 1973 Clarke succeeded Poynter as director of the Wellcome Institute, where he presided over the removal of the museum artefacts to the Science Museum, in South Kensington, and the creation of an academic unit with formal ties with University College. Despite his commitment to academic status for his discipline, he was never entirely comfortable with many of the younger recruits to the field, who brought anthropological, sociological, or social history perspectives to bear on the subject. Clarke continued to work prodigiously hard, edited the quarterly journal 'Medical History', and pursued his own scholarship in the history of the neurosciences. However, he no longer enjoyed teaching or the public aspects of directing a highly visible institute. Consequently he retired at the end of 1979 and spent the next few years creating a library and small museum in the neurosciences at the Sherrington Centre, University of Oxford. The nucleus of the library was one of several personal collections that this ardent bibliophile assembled. 
Clarke was married three times; the first marriage, on 15 December 1949 to Margaret Elsie Morrison ('b'. 1921/2), brought them two sons. After it was dissolved he married on 5 December 1958 Beryl Eileen Brock ('b'. 1924/5), with whom he had a daughter. This union was also dissolved, and on 18 March 1982 he was married a third time -- to Gaynor Crawford ('b'. 1947/8), a journalist, who survived him. 
Clarke was a stickler for factual and bibliographical accuracy, and his own scholarship reflected this. His original contributions built almost exclusively on his professional knowledge of neurology and related fields. Much of it was collaborative. With the psychiatrist-historian Kenneth Dewhurst he wrote 'An Illustrated History of Brain Function' (1972; 2nd edn, 1996), and with the historian L. S. Jacyna he published 'Nineteenth Century Origins of Neuroscientific Concepts' (1987). He also produced, in 1981, an updated translation of Max Neuburger's classic, 'Historical Development of Experimental Brain and Spinal Cord Physiology before Flourens' (1897). He was working on a history of medical history in Britain when he died on 11 April 1996 at his home, the Old Rectory, Donington-on-Bain, Louth, Lincolnshire, of cancer. 


@@@@@


doc= 62612


Burton, Beryl (1937-1996), cyclist, was born on 12 May 1937 at 3 Howard Avenue, Halton, Leeds, the second daughter in the family of three children of John Henry Charnock, motor engineer, and his wife, Jessie May, 'nee' Williamson. As a child she suffered from chronic ill health. Chorea and rheumatic fever kept her in hospital and then in a convalescent home for fifteen months. She had resultant speech difficulties and for a while was paralysed down one side of her body. Her education suffered and she left Stainbeck secondary school, Leeds, at fifteen. She was working as a clerk in a clothing factory when she met Charles Robert (Charlie) Burton, eight years her senior. He was also a clerk, and the son of Abraham Burton, labourer. They married on 2 April 1955. Charlie introduced her to club cycling and then competitive racing, a sport that she dominated for over quarter of a century by winning fifteen world championship medals and 120 British national titles. 
Burton's first season of serious competition was 1957, when she finished second in the national 100 mile time trial. Two years later, at Liege, BB -- as she was affectionately known within the cycling fraternity -- became world 3000 metres track pursuit champion. She successfully defended that title in 1960 in Leipzig and won it three more times, and also gained three second and four third places. Domestically she was national pursuit champion thirteen times. Yet distance-cycling on the road, either in bunched racing or time trials, rather than the shorter track events was her real love. She was world road-racing champion twice and national champion twelve times. In unpaced time trials her record was formidable. Although there were no world or European titles in this genre of the sport, she was British 25 mile champion twenty-five times, 50 mile champion twenty-three times, 100 mile champion eighteen times, and best all-rounder -- where all three events are taken into consideration -- for twenty-five successive years. She was the first woman to beat one hour for 25 miles, two hours for 50 miles, and four hours for 100 miles. In 1967 she became the only woman ever to beat a men's record when in twelve hours she rode 277.25 miles. 
Although she was appointed MBE in 1964 and was advanced to OBE four years later, Burton never felt that her accomplishments were adequately recognized by the media. In Europe she was acclaimed, but in Britain the poor coverage given to women's cycling meant that few heard of her outstanding performances. Charlie Burton worked as an accounts clerk but devoted much of his time to managing his wife's cycling career and acting as her mechanic. Beryl herself earned some income and helped her physical fitness by labouring in local market gardens and rhubarb farms. The Burton family were not well off, especially when they had to finance many of her early trips abroad themselves, but she refused to turn professional despite the entreaties of Raleigh, the British cycle manufacturers. She also stayed loyal to her first club, Morley cycling club, even though it never became one sponsored by the cycle industry. 
Burton's daughter, Denise, was born in January 1956 and was almost literally brought up in the saddle, on a rear seat of her mother's bicycle. As a family the Burton trio cycled the country for pleasure and established a Christmas routine of cycling and staying in youth hostels. Almost inevitably Denise became a competitive cyclist, and mother and daughter twice lined up together to represent Britain in world road-race championships. However, relations became strained as they emerged as racing rivals in the 1970s, a situation aggravated by domestic circumstances, as Denise still lived at home. After Denise outsprinted her mother to win the national road-race title in 1975, the fiercely competitive Beryl Burton refused to shake hands with her on the podium. Nevertheless an emotional public reconciliation followed, and eight days before Burton's death the pair won the team prize in a local time trial. 
In 1978 Burton broke her right leg and shoulder blade and had fifty-six stitches in her face when a motorist knocked her off her bike, but this did not deter her and she continued to ride competitively, always seeking to beat targets that she had set herself. She won her last national title in 1988. Later, although she had no chance of titles, she continued to ride in national championships because she loved the sport. Indeed she was scheduled to ride in the national 10 mile time trial the day before her fifty-ninth birthday. However, on 5 May 1996 she failed to return from a training run and was found lying beside her bike in Skipton Road, Harrogate. She was pronounced dead on arrival at Harrogate District Hospital. An inquest found that she died of natural causes, of heart problems perhaps associated with her childhood illness. She was survived by her husband, Charlie, and daughter, Denise. 


@@@@@


doc= 62618


Shipman, David Herbert (1932-1996), film historian, was born on 4 November 1932 at Lyndale, Waldemar Avenue, Upper Hellesdon, Norwich, the younger child and only son of Alfred Herbert Shipman (1898-1981), a commercial traveller in electrical appliances, and his wife, Ethel May Deakes (1903-1988), clerical worker and daughter of a piano-tuner. Both parents were Londoners, and the family moved back to the capital, to Eltham, in 1940, only for the children to be evacuated in the following year to Pensilva, Cornwall. David was educated variously at primary schools in London, then, on a junior county scholarship, at Callington county school, Cornwall, where he spent 'some of the happiest years of my life' (Shipman). With the end of the Second World War he went to Shooters Hill grammar school, which he left in 1949, aged sixteen, after taking his school certificate, to become a clerk in the architects' office of the London county council. 

'Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs' (1937), seen on holiday in Great Yarmouth when he was five, was the film that ignited Shipman's cine-enthusiasm, but he might have been condemned to the 'sheer boredom' (Shipman) of town-planning paper pushing had it not been for national service. In 1951, against his will, he joined the RAF, on the clerical side, and in its democratic conviviality discovered a self-confidence that he never, despite many buffets and supposed buffets, entirely lost. The following year he spent in Singapore, in Changi, where an RAF chaplain, the Revd James Tinline, introduced him to the films of Greta Garbo and the Marx brothers, and persuaded him to take three A-levels and try for Oxford University. Shipman went up to Merton College in 1954 to read English and, although he failed his first-year preliminary examination twice and was sent down after only one year, he enjoyed himself thoroughly. He acted and sat on the Film Society committee, he fell in love with Judy Garland, and he had found a way out. 
For the next ten years Shipman worked as a publisher's representative, first on staff, for Victor Gollancz, Methuen, and the Curtis Publishing Company, and after 1963 as a freelance, for Paul Hamlyn, Hale, and Panther. His favourite years were from 1961 to 1963, when he lived in Paris for Curtis, acting as European representative for Bantam Books, and travelled the continent, returning, sometimes just for a night, to London for performances at the National Film Theatre. In 1962 he started contributing to the magazine 'Films and Filming'. In December 1964 he met Felix Otto Brenner ('b'. 1923), the New York-born art director of Hamlyn, who was to be his partner for the rest of his life. He moved into Brenner's London flat, at 2 Callow Street, Chelsea, in March 1965, and in September he gave up travelling. In 1968, with an editor from Hamlyn, he hatched the plot of his first great work, 'The Great Movie Stars', published in two volumes as 'The Golden Years' (1970) and 'The International Years' (1973); a follow-up volume, 'The Independent Years', appeared in 1991. In 1982-4, again in two volumes, appeared the book of which he was proudest, initially commissioned in 1972 by Phaidon to be a companion to Ernst Gombrich's 'The Story of Art' (1950): 'The Story of Cinema: an Illustrated History', a vast compendium, from 'Fred Ott's Sneeze' to 'Missing'. 
Before Shipman there had been 'ad hoc' film critics aplenty, but few prepared to take the long view. The history of film was, after all, young; Shipman was to publish his centenary celebration 'Cinema: the First Hundred Years' (1993) only three years before his death. Much cinema literature had been ephemeral, much of it hagiographical, much driven by the studios' marketing departments. Shipman, hailing Paul Rotha as his mentor, combined exceptional diligence and an original amateur's enthusiasm. He kept notes of every film he had ever seen (and refused to write critically of a film he had not). He was as much interested in studio history, budgets, salaries, and box-office returns as in individual actor filmographies. He was passionate about the stars he liked, imperiously acidulous about those he did not. He was a populist who was also devoted to the films of Satyajit Ray and Akira Kurosawa. His tours through star careers could be whirlwinds of excitement or brutal exercises in deprecation. He was for Marilyn Monroe ('she glowed, like a moth in candlelight'; 'The International Years', rev. edn, 1989, 398) and Buster Keaton; he was against Marlene Dietrich ('Age does not wither her, nor custom stale her infinite sameness'; 'The Golden Years', rev. edn, 1989, 166) and Alfred Hitchcock. His vigorous turn of phrase, his large sense of film context, and his independence of judgement marked him out among the swelling ranks of film encyclopaedists. 
Shipman's big books never made him rich, and his publishers seemed reluctant, despite their persistent popularity, to keep them in print. This rankled with the author, who felt he had never been adequately recognized. He was a programme consultant to the National Film Theatre, lectured at the University of East Anglia and for the British Council, and served for eight years as film critic of the 'Contemporary Review' and for eight as principal film obituarist of 'The Independent', but he necessarily derived his income from more ordinary output such as his books 'The Good Film and Video Guide' (1984), 'A Pictorial History of Science Fiction Films' (1985), 'Caught in the Act: Sex and Eroticism in the Movies' (1985), and 'Movie Talk: Who Said What about Whom in the Movies' (1988). He wrote two biographies, 'Brando' (1974, enlarged as 'Marlon Brando', 1989) and 'Judy Garland' (1992). He was working on a third, of Fred Astaire, when he died in his sleep of a heart attack at home, in the house that had been his mother's, 64 Woodlands, Overton, Hampshire, on 22 April 1996. He was cremated at Aldershot crematorium on 2 May. 
David Shipman was outdatedly dapper in appearance, sometimes with a discreet beard, and liked a hat. Outside film his enthusiasms were theatre, opera (Maria Callas), pictures (the early Sienese), and travel. There was something eternally boyish about him. This was usually endearing, occasionally infuriating. 


@@@@@


doc= 62619


Goff, Helen Lyndon (1899-1996), children's writer, was born on 9 August 1899 in Maryborough, Queensland, Australia. She was the first of the three children of Travers Robert Goff (1863-1907), a London-born bank manager (later demoted to a clerk), and Margaret Morehead (died 1928), the granddaughter of Robert Archibald Morehead, who moved to Australia in 1841 as manager of the Scottish Australian Company and whose considerable holdings included Bowen Downs, the largest pastoral station in Australia. 
After her father's death Helen moved with her mother and two younger sisters to live with her great-aunt, Christina Saraset, in Bowral, south of Sydney in the southern highlands of New South Wales. She attended a local grammar school until the age of ten, then was sent to Normanhurst boarding-school in Sydney. As a child she wrote poetry and newspaper-style articles, and during her adolescent years began publishing articles and poems for a variety of Australian magazines and newspapers, including 'The Bulletin' and 'The Triad'; for two years she also wrote a human interest column for a daily Sydney newspaper. Upon completing school, she worked in the cashier's office of the Australian Gas and Light Company and then had a brief stint in the theatre, acting and dancing with the Alan Wilkie Shakespearian Touring Company. In 1924 she left for London, where from 1924 to 1928 she published poems in the 'Irish Statesman' under the encouragement of its editor, George Russell (A. E.). In the mid-1920s she travelled to Fontainebleau, near Paris, where she became a disciple of Russian occultist George Ivanovich Gurdjieff, and to Switzerland to pursue the teachings of psychologist Carl Gustav Jung. In the 1930s she lived in London and at Pound Cottage, Mayfield, near Tunbridge Wells, working as a drama critic for the 'New English Weekly' and publishing poetry and travel essays, including her book 'Moscow Excursion' (1934). During this time she became close friends with George Russell and also met the poet William Butler Yeats. 
Goff took as her pseudonym the name Pamela Lyndon Travers, usually in the form P. L. Travers. Her first literary success came in 1934, when she published 'Mary Poppins'. Translated into over twenty languages, the book became an instant classic of modern children's literature, while Mary Poppins became 'the world's best-known nanny' (Hunt, 214). The book's popularity and the continued success of its sequels can be attributed to Goff's quirky view of the world and her deft incorporation of the elements of myth, fairy tale, and mysticism into everyday life. 'Mary Poppins Comes Back' was published in 1935, and was followed by 'Mary Poppins Opens the Door' (1944), 'Mary Poppins in the Park' (1952), 'Mary Poppins from A to Z' (1963), 'Mary Poppins in the Kitchen' (1975), 'Mary Poppins in Cherry Tree Lane' (1982), and 'Mary Poppins and the House Next Door' (1989). While the series has been considered children's literature since its inception, Goff disliked this label, arguing that the distinctions between literature for children and adults were blurred at best. Whenever asked about the inspiration for the character of Mary Poppins, she commented: 'I never for one moment believed that I invented her. Perhaps she invented me' (Bergsten, 71). 
Despite her literary success, Goff was intensely private about her personal life, and once said that she most identified with Anonymous as a writer. She often voiced her doubts 'that biographies are of any use at all' (Cott, 227), and she granted an interview to the scholar Patricia Demers in 1988 on condition that enquiry into her personal life was forbidden. Throughout her life she remained resolute in her belief about the pointlessness of biographical data and explanations in the quest for literary meaning. Although she never married, during the war years Goff adopted a son, the Dublin-born John Camillus Hone ('b'. 1939), son of Nathaniel and Biddy Hone and a descendant of the eighteenth-century painter Nathaniel Hone. 
In 1940 Goff left for the United States and lived there until 1945 as a wartime evacuee. During this time she published 'I Go by Sea, I Go by Land' (1941), which focused on two children's experiences while being evacuated to America during the Second World War, along with a series of privately circulated new year's gift books, including 'Aunt Sass' (1941), 'Ah Wong' (1943), and 'Johnny Delaney' (1944). She also travelled west on the invitation of her friend John Collier, an administrator for Indian affairs, and stayed on a number of Navaho, Hopi, and Pueblo reservations. Before leaving she was rewarded with a secret Pueblo name, something which honoured her tremendously because of her feeling 'that names are a part of a person, a very private thing to each one' (Burness and Griswold, 227). 
In 1945 Goff returned to England and for the next twenty years continued to publish novels, essays, and lectures. 'The Fox at the Manger', a Christmas story, appeared in 1962. In 1964 'Mary Poppins' was made into a Walt Disney film starring Julie Andrews and Dick Van Dyke. While the film lacked the depth and the mythological elements of the book -- despite her involvement with the production, Goff was not pleased with the end result -- it was a tremendous commercial success, and became a catalyst for renewed critical interest in her work. Modern commentary on the Mary Poppins series has been uneven: while John Rowe Townsend praised its paradoxical humour, he also voiced concerns about the series' propagating illusions about English domestic life. In contrast, Jane Yolen praised Goff for her creation of strong mythical worlds for young readers. In the 1970s several critics became alarmed at apparent elements of racism, sexism, and classism in the 'Bad Tuesday' chapter of 'Mary Poppins'. While Goff staunchly maintained that she intended no offence to anyone, in 1981 she revised the chapter, exchanging non-gendered, raceless, and classless animals for the original human characters. 
From 1965 to 1977 Goff again lived in the United States, working as writer-in-residence at both Radcliffe College in Cambridge, Massachusetts (1965-6), and Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts (1966), and as Clark lecturer at Scripps College in Claremont, California (1970). For the next two decades she continued to publish essays and novels, including 'Friend Monkey' (1971), a three-part novel based on the Indian monkey god Hanuman, 'About the Sleeping Beauty' (1975), and 'Two Pairs of Shoes' (1980). In 1977 she was appointed OBE for her contribution to literature, and in 1978 she received an honorary doctorate of humane letters from Chatham College in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
From 1976 until her death Goff was contributing editor to the American journal 'Parabola: the Magazine of Myth and Tradition', something which perhaps reflected her own quest for meaning. This quest also appeared in her pursuit of a number of spiritual movements throughout her life, ranging from Christianity through Zen Buddhism to Sufism, a branch of Islamic mysticism. Myth and fairy tale recur throughout her later works, and she was particularly aware of the importance of these elements in her life. However, the theme that permeated all her work and, by extension, her life was connectedness, and she borrowed E. M. Forster's phrase 'only connect' to describe her views of the world and her place in it. An essay by this title appears as the concluding piece in her 'What the Bee Knows: Reflections on Myth, Symbol and Story' (1989), a collection of articles originally written for 'Parabola' and her last published book. The phrase is a fitting epitaph. She died at her home, 29 Shawfield Street, Chelsea, London, on 23 April 1996, St George's day; the funeral was held at Christ Church, Chelsea, on 1 May, May day. With her interest in myth and meaning, the two days are curiously significant. At her request, the final place for her ashes is unknown: she did not want it to become a shrine for Mary Poppins admirers. 


@@@@@


doc= 62622


Pertwee, Jon Devon Roland (1919-1996), actor, was born on 7 July 1919 at 3 Sheffield Terrace, Kensington, London. He was the second son of the playwright, painter, and actor Roland Pertwee and his actress wife, Avice Scholtz. His parents separated when he was still an infant, and he and his brother Michael were brought up by their paternal grandmother. 
He had a chequered school career, being expelled from his preparatory school and from Sherborne School before attending the progressive school Frensham Heights and finally the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, where the principal considered him without talent. In 1936 Pertwee secured a place in the final tour of the Arts League of Service Travelling Theatre, directed by Donald Wolfit. In 1937 he joined J. Baxter-Somerville's Repertory Players at the Springfield Theatre in Jersey, and then toured with the Rex Lesley-Smith repertory company for a year before returning to London. During 1938 and 1939 Pertwee obtained several small parts in theatre before the actor John Salew gave him a break into commercial radio, where he stayed for the next two years. To supplement his income, he also worked as an extra at Denham film studios, appearing in productions including 'Dinner at the Ritz' (1936), 'A Yank at Oxford' (1938), 'Young Man's Fancy' (1939), and 'The Four Just Men' (1939). 
When the Second World War broke out Pertwee joined the navy as a wireless operator. On 29 November 1940 he was drafted on to 'HMS Hood', but he was transferred to the 'Dunluce Castle' to train as an officer cadet just before 'HMS Hood' had its fateful battle with the 'Bismarck' on 24 May 1941. Following an incendiary bomb attack on Portsmouth barracks, he suffered a severe blow to the head and was dropped from the officer cadet course to be posted to the Isle of Man as a divisional officer. There he formed a small company of local amateurs and servicemen which became known as the Service Players. In 1946 Pertwee joined the cast of Eric Barker's forces radio show 'Mediterranean Merry-Go-Round', and in 1948 the fictional 'HMS Waterlogged' became the subject of a spin-off show entitled 'Waterlogged Spa', for which Pertwee created a memorable radio character, the Postman, with the catch-phrase 'What does it matter what you do as long as you tear 'em up?' 
Pertwee received star billing for a film for the first time in 1953, with George Cole in 'Will any Gentleman...?', filming which he met the actress Jean (Jeann Lindsey Torren) Marsh ('b'. 1934). They were married on 2 April 1955, but the marriage quickly broke down. It was on a skiing holiday in Kitzbuhel in February 1958 that Pertwee met Ingeborg Renate Rhosa ('b'. 1934/5), a young German dress designer, and immediately fell in love. Pertwee was divorced from Marsh in 1960 and married Ingeborg on 13 August the same year. They had two children, who both became actors. In 1958 Pertwee was asked by the BBC's head of light entertainment if he had any ideas for a new radio comedy series in which he might be interested in starring. Out of these discussions came 'The Navy Lark', a show which ran for eighteen years and 240 episodes, and took full advantage of Pertwee's range of funny voices. 
During the sixties Pertwee continued working in film, including three of the popular 'Carry on' films: 'Carry on Cleo' (1964), 'Carry on Cowboy' (1965), and 'Carry on Screaming' (1966). He also enjoyed successful stage tours in 'A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum' (1963-6) and 'There's a Girl in my Soup' (1966-7). 
In 1969 Pertwee succeeded Patrick Troughton as the star of the long-running BBC science fiction series 'Doctor Who'. Following William Hartnell's original creation of the Doctor as a crotchety old man and Troughton's humorous, somewhat fey interpretation, Pertwee played the Doctor rather more straight, as a flamboyant man of action complete with Edwardian roadster and clothes to match. This Doctor, earthbound by sentence of the Time Lords, confronted and defeated a weekly array of hostile aliens in the English countryside and metropolis, with the help of a team of United Nations soldiers and a girl assistant. The show frequently attracted audiences of over eight million viewers, and for a whole generation Pertwee was simply 'the Doctor'. He stayed with the show for five seasons, his character physically regenerating in 1974 into the irrepressible Tom Baker. After leaving 'Doctor Who', Pertwee for five years hosted the successful quiz 'Whodunnit?' for Thames Television and appeared in the film 'One of our Dinosaurs is Missing' (1975). In 1976-7 he returned to the theatre in the musical 'Irene'. In 1979 he was cast as the scarecrow Worzel Gummidge in Southern Television's series of that name, and he played the part with a fruity Devonian accent for four seasons. It won him another loyal audience of young children, both in Britain and abroad. 
Pertwee continued to work on stage, appearing as Jacob Marley in 'Scrooge -- the Musical' in 1991-2. He returned to the role of the Doctor for several Doctor Who stories and appeared in other television programmes including 'Young Indiana Jones' (1994). He provided character voices for a computer game based on Terry Pratchett's 'Discworld' in 1995. 
Pertwee was in constant demand for appearances at science fiction conventions and in cabaret, for after-dinner speaking, and for guest appearances on television and radio and for charity: he was ever ready to don the costumes of the parts which had brought him celebrity, to please the fans and raise funds. In the early part of 1996 he was touring in two different productions, one an evening of music and comedy, the other his popular one-man show 'Who is Jon Pertwee?' Throughout his career of more than five decades, Pertwee was a staunch supporter of and fund-raiser for the Grand Order of Water Rats, a charity caring for elderly and retired members of the acting profession. 
Jon Pertwee died in his sleep on 20 May 1996 from a heart attack while on holiday in Connecticut, USA, weeks after completing work on his second volume of autobiography, 'I am the Doctor' (1996). He was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 62623


Dawes, Geoffrey Sharman (1918-1996), physiologist, was born on 21 January 1918 at the vicarage, Mackworth, Derbyshire, the youngest of the five children of William Dawes, vicar of Mackworth and later of Elveston-with-Thurlaston in Derbyshire, and his wife, Olive Susannah, 'nee' White. He attended Shardlow Hall, a local preparatory school, and then Repton School, also in Derbyshire. It was planned that he would follow in the footsteps of both his father and grandfather to study at Cambridge, but he won an exhibition at New College, Oxford, where he entered the honours school in physiology in 1936. He took first-class honours in physiology in 1939, and graduated BSc one year later. He graduated BM BCh from the Oxford medical school in 1943, and DM in 1947. After one year as a house physician in the Radcliffe Infirmary he began his scientific career in the pharmacology laboratory in Oxford working on matters related to military questions, such as treatments for gas gangrene or nerve gas exposure. He was precluded from military service because he suffered from asthma. On 15 April 1941 he married Margaret Joan Monk ('b'. 1918/19), daughter of Harold Francis Monk, of the Malay civil service. They had met early in their undergraduate days in Oxford. They had two sons and two daughters. 
After the end of the war in 1945 Dawes was elected fellow and tutor in physiology at Worcester College, Oxford. A year later he won a Rockefeller travelling fellowship to work at Harvard University in the department of pharmacology; he also spent some time with the Johnson Foundation in Philadelphia, learning relevant electrophysiological techniques. In 1947 he returned to Oxford, and a Royal Society Foulerton research fellowship. 
At the very young age of thirty, in 1948, Dawes was appointed director of the Nuffield Institute of Medical Research in Oxford, where he stayed until he retired in 1985. He at first continued his work on cardiac and pulmonary chemo-reflexes. Among his early DPhil students was John Vane, awarded the Nobel prize for medicine in 1982. In 1950 Dawes redirected his interests to foetal physiology, in particular to the powerful mechanisms, previously undefined, that ensure the massive respiratory and circulatory changes necessary for the first breath taken at birth. This evolved into an interest in foetal asphyxia, where his experiments had clinical implications because of the importance of birth asphyxia as a cause of death or long-term disability. His systematic investigations of methods to improve resuscitation were translated into the worldwide practice of measuring and correcting acidaemia of the newborn after birth asphyxia. 
In 1969 Dawes, working with Geoffrey Liggins on sabbatical leave from Auckland, New Zealand, was among the first to establish that the foetus made episodic 'breathing' movements even in the airless environment of the womb, and that these were related to its sleep state. This opened up completely new areas of interest for Dawes, including foetal neurophysiology. He quickly appreciated that spontaneous, cyclical, central nervous system activities (integrated as states of foetal sleep) determine many foetal events, including limb and breathing movements, as well as fluctuations in heart rate variability. In the last five years of his fruitful directorship he translated some of these insights in developing computerized systems for analysing the human foetal heart rate, which depended directly on recognizing changes dependent on foetal sleep state. This system, which he continued to refine until his death, became a clinical standard for assessing the well-being of the unborn child at the turn of the twentieth century. 
Dawes published more than 135 scientific papers and 55 reviews. His first publication, in the 'Journal of Physiology' in 1941, was on the vasodilator actions of potassium; the last, published posthumously in 1999, was a collaboration with his son Nicholas, and described novel findings on patterns of the human foetal heart rate in labour. After his retirement in 1985 he worked for five years as part-time director of the newly created Sunley Research Centre of London University, located at the Charing Cross and Westminster Hospital. During this time he commuted from his home in Belbroughton Road, north Oxford, the family home from 1953, where he continued to live for the rest of his life. 
Dawes received many honours, which reflected his national and international reputation. These included awards from scientific and clinical organizations in the United States, Canada, and Europe. He was made a fellow of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (1969), the Royal Society (1971), the Royal College of Physicians (1972), the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (1974), and the American Academy of Pediatrics (1976). In 1981 he was appointed CBE. Dawes also had many outside interests. He served on the governing body of Repton School for nearly thirty years, and his leisure activities included fly-fishing and gardening. He died of a sudden and massive stroke, at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 6 May 1996. Three days previously he was discussing the next stage of his research investigations with his clinical colleagues, retaining an undiminished creativity, curiosity, and enthusiasm for discovery that were the hallmarks of the man and his scientific career. He was survived by his wife and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 62624


Chermayeff, Sergius Ivan (1900-1996), designer and architect, was born Sergius Ivanovich Issakovitch in Grozny, Chechnya, Russia (though at the time of his naturalization as a British subject he gave his birth place as Odessa), on 8 October 1900, the only son and younger child of Ivan Akimovitch Issakovitch, banker and landowner, and his wife, Rose, 'nee' Sonnschein. The family name revealed their Jewish origins, from which Serge distanced himself when he changed his name by deed poll in 1924. Oil finds on their land had made the family wealthy from the 1890s onwards, and Serge and his sister were educated by governesses of different nationalities before he was sent to Peterborough Lodge School in Hampstead, London, in 1910. His education continued at Harrow School up to 1918, by which time the family property had been lost in the revolution. He spent four years working as a journalist and illustrator, and later a full-time professional ballroom dancer in London, with a two-year spell in Argentina, partly on a ranch, and partly as a partner in a dance hall in Buenos Aires. On returning to London in 1924, he not only changed his name but began his career in design, developing his early talent for drawing. In 1927 he met his future wife, Barbara Maitland May (1904-2000), daughter of Frank Maitland May, contractor. They were married on 22 March 1928, shortly after he had taken British nationality. They had two sons. 
Through his wife's connections Chermayeff was introduced to Lord Waring, who employed him to head the London office of the modern art department of Waring and Gillow, in association with Paul Follot in the Paris branch. The exhibition of 'Modern Art in French and English Furniture and Decoration' (1928-9) occupied a whole floor of the Oxford Street premises, with sixty display rooms, including furniture and textiles designed by Chermayeff and his small but talented staff. This was modernism deliberately tempered for English taste, and was widely acclaimed. The interiors of the Cambridge Theatre, Seven Dials, London, are the most substantial remaining example of this phase of his work. Chermayeff soon made contacts among the small group of enthusiasts for modern design, and moved towards a less luxurious style in interiors for Broadcasting House, London, in 1932, and for a prototype Week End House exhibited in 1933, furnished with a range of standard chairs and units marketed by PLAN Ltd, largely derived from German models. 
In 1933 Chermayeff, who had recently been accepted as a fellow of the RIBA, went into partnership with Erich Mendelsohn (1887-1953), a refugee from Nazism. They won the competition for the De La Warr Pavilion at Bexhill, Sussex, to which Chermayeff contributed the interior design and for which he developed Mendelsohn's original plan concept. It was the first large public building of the modern movement in England and attracted considerable attention. Two houses, Shrub's Wood, Chalfont St Giles (1934-5), and 64 Old Church Street, Chelsea (1935-6), were also built, and a number of speculative designs prepared, before the dissolution of the partnership at the end of 1936. Chermayeff practised on his own as an architect until 1939, building Gilbey House, Oval Road, Camden Town (1937), and the new research laboratories at Blackley, Manchester, for the dyestuffs division of ICI (1938). His own house, Bentley Wood, Halland, Sussex (1938), was widely admired for its simple timber structure, responding to the landscape and containing works of art by Henry Moore, John Piper, and Ben Nicholson. 
In the later 1930s Chermayeff saw himself increasingly in the role of architectural teacher and theorist. He was a frequent public speaker and had considerable ability in debate. Like many of his architect contemporaries, he believed in an inherent connection between a modern approach to design and the achievement of social justice combined with technological progress. His own design work, which had character rather than personal stylistic expression, helped to demonstrate these ideals. His friends were mainly scientists and artists. 
Chermayeff's personal bankruptcy in 1939 led him to seek a new career in the USA. In 1940 he, his wife, and their two sons crossed the Atlantic, and by the autumn had settled in the San Francisco area, where he became involved with architecture, journalism, and lecturing. In 1943 he was appointed chairman of the new design department at Brooklyn College, New York, where he created a comprehensive new course, broadly based on the principles of the pre-war German Bauhaus. In 1947 (the year after the Chermayeff family became American citizens) he became president of the Institute of Design in Chicago, in succession to Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, who had opened the school as 'The New Bauhaus'. With increased enrolment of former servicemen on grants, the institute flourished as a centre for radical education and research, in which architecture was combined with other disciplines. The need to affiliate with a larger and more established body led in 1951 to a merger with the Illinois Institute of Technology, where the ethos was less liberal. Chermayeff found his position untenable and resigned. 
After a year of teaching at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Chermayeff was engaged by the graduate school of design at Harvard University, where he taught first-year students, putting them through a rapid and rigorous introduction to a range of topics which he called 'environmental design'. His goal of a socially conscious and beneficial architecture depended on avoidance of over-specialization, something which his own lack of professional training may have helped him to understand. Despite a broad acceptance of modernism, the tendency in the USA in this period was in the opposite direction, towards self-consciously architectural statements. With his lifelong concern for the design of houses, Chermayeff channelled his energy to the problem of the American suburbs, working with students to produce models for single-storey courtyard houses which achieved privacy and excluded noise, allowing a new means of inhabiting the inner suburbs and preventing migration away from city centres. These solutions and their broader justifications were presented in the book 'Community and Privacy' (1963), which he wrote jointly with Christopher Alexander, and which was widely noticed around the world. It included early examples of the application of computers to the solution of design problems. 
By the end of the 1950s Chermayeff wanted to pursue further research with graduate students, but was not given opportunities to do so at Harvard. He offered himself to Paul Rudolph, the new dean of the school of arts and architecture at Yale University, and began teaching there at the beginning of 1962, where his first class included the young British students Richard Rogers and Norman Foster. Chermayeff's work at Yale was on the scale of the city and region. Problems were examined in abstract terms, informed by the new disciplines of systems theory and cybernetics, and cities were seen in terms of flows and their points of connection and transition. Thus the relationship between architecture and science which Chermayeff pursued in Britain in the 1930s resulted not only in technical means but in new patterns of cognition and understanding of the relationship between human behaviour and the natural environment. The book 'Shape of Community', which Chermayeff and his co-author Alexander Tzonis published in 1971, was a summation of this work, expressing grave concerns for the direction in which the civilized world was heading. 
During his years in America, Chermayeff was too fully occupied in teaching and writing to have much time for practising architecture, although he was ambivalent about whether he would have wished to work on the same scale as before the war. His buildings included two houses in the San Francisco Bay area in the 1940s, which showed a loosening of his formal language, and a series of holiday houses on Cape Cod. In 1943 he began building a small cabin in a woodland area overlooking Slough Pond, near Wellfleet. After several extensions, this became his permanent home in 1973. His own studio near the house, and commissions for two other clients near by, developed an idiosyncratic decorative use of diagonal timber framing with brightly coloured infill panels, while a house for the writer Edwin O'Connor (1956) was plainer but still well adapted to seaside holiday needs. The Payson house at Falmouth Harbour, Portland, Maine (1952), showed Chermayeff's understanding of planning and practical functions brought to the level of fine art by sensitivity to the site and the inclusion of a unified colour scheme running from the exterior through to the furnishings. 
Chermayeff was tall and handsome, with a large head and prominent nose. His manner was often disconcertingly abrupt, and he always spoke his mind regardless of the consequences. Students and colleagues sometimes suffered undeservedly, but recognized that the purpose was to dispel egotism and open up fresh possibilities of understanding. He was always proud of the achievements of his sons, Ivan and Peter, in design and architecture. He produced a number of paintings and drawings, during his years in Chicago and in retirement, which were exhibited. He also published some poetry. After 1980 he ceased to travel widely and became reclusive, hampered by increasing deafness. He organized the deposit of his archives at the Avery Library, Columbia University, New York, although much of his pre-war material had been lost when bombed in storage in London in 1940. He died at Wellfleet, Cape Cod, on 6 May 1996. He was survived by his wife, Barbara, and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 62625


Johnston, George Lawson, first Baron Luke (1873-1943), food manufacturer and philanthropist, was born on 9 September 1873 at 2 Blacket Place, Newington, Edinburgh, the second son of the thirteen children of John Lawson Johnston (1839-1900), nutrition promoter and food manufacturer, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of George Lawson, baker and confectioner of Newington, Edinburgh. Both parents were Scottish. 
Lawson Johnston was initially educated privately in Canada, where his father had significant business interests. He subsequently attended Dulwich College for one academic year, and then Blair Lodge in Scotland, after his parents had returned to live in Britain. He worked for Bovril, his father's company, even before leaving full-time education, and was a cashier at the Paris International Exhibition of 1889. On joining the firm, he was trained on the job and travelled extensively in South America, the main source of raw materials. In 1896 Bovril was floated as a public company by Ernest Terah Hooley (1859-1947), and Lawson Johnston joined the board. Following the death of his father in 1900 he became vice-chairman. He succeeded to the chairmanship in 1916, and in 1932 became joint managing director, both of which positions he held until his death. On 4 December 1902 he married the Hon. Edith Laura St John (1879-1941), fifth daughter of Beauchamp Moubray St John, seventeenth Baron St John of Bletso. They had four daughters and two sons, both of whom joined Bovril. 
Lawson Johnston became the main decision maker in the firm after the death of his father, showing especial care in the marketing and financial fields, and diversifying the company into related products. He considered Bovril's sources of raw materials to be so insecure that it needed to acquire them itself, and so large tracts of land in both South America and Australia were purchased and stocked with beef cattle. Subsidiary companies were established in 1908 and 1909 to run these operations, and in subsequent years he arranged for prize bulls, purchased in England, to be shipped out to improve the quality of the herd. The estates in Argentina eventually exceeded 11/2 million acres, and included a fully fitted factory and river boats to carry the cattle to it. Lawson Johnston took a personal interest in these 'estancias', visiting them most years. The estates in Australia were never as productive or as important to Bovril, because rainfall was inadequate and transport facilities poor. 
The other policy pursued by Lawson Johnston was to reduce Bovril's reliance on a single product by diversifying the range of commodities offered to the public. This strategy concentrated on other foodstuffs with a 'healthy' image. In 1899 a malt tonic, Virol, was introduced and became so popular that a separate company was formed and a new factory was built at the junction of Western Avenue and the North Circular in London. This was soon followed by Stelna corned beef, a by-product of making the meat extract; it was later renamed Bovril corned beef to cash in on the well-known brand name. In the 1920s Bovril acquired the Marmite Company, which had been established in Burton upon Trent in 1902 by Frederick Wissler, a Swiss citizen, to manufacture yeast extract with similar uses to Bovril, but catering for a vegetarian clientele. However, in order to keep the two companies separate in the public mind, no formal announcement of this was made and the shares were owned by a family trust. In the same decade Bovril (through Virol) bought into Ambrosia, which manufactured a range of milk-based products, thus further diversifying its product range. 
Lawson Johnston also reorganized the finances of Bovril, as the flotation by Hooley had left the company over-capitalized and illiquid. Lawson Johnston set about building up a reserve fund and ensuring that the family, who had become only minority shareholders after the launch, albeit holding the single largest block, retained control of the destiny of the firm. The annual profits rose from $125,000 in 1899 to $400,000 in the late 1920s and the reserve fund grew to over $1 million by 1940. Lawson Johnston rearranged the capital base of Bovril, raising finance via eight-year notes, and then redeeming those and the debentures via an issue of pre-preference shares taken up mainly by the family, and giving them greater control by means of double voting rights. When Lawson Johnston died Bovril was financially secure, diversified into a number of strong brands, and had large holdings abroad providing the raw materials. 
Lawson Johnston was on many boards of directors by virtue of large shareholdings, family or business relationships, and his knowledge of certain areas of business. The companies of which he was a director included the 'Daily Express', Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons, Lloyds Bank, the Ashanti Goldfields Corporation, the Forestal Land, Timber, and Railways Company, and the Australian Mercantile, Land, and Finance Company. He was also chairman of the national committee of the International Chamber of Commerce and attended many general congresses. Politically Lawson Johnston began as a Liberal, serving on several committees to do with raw materials in the First World War, for which in 1920 he was knighted. He switched allegiance after the war to the Conservatives, supporting Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain, and helping to establish the Conservative Research Department. In Baldwin's 1929 dissolution honours he was ennobled as Baron Luke. He was throughout his life an active and committed Christian, moving to the Church of England on his marriage, but remaining low church, and abhorring all ritual in church services. Luke endowed the Scripture Knowledge Foundation, sat on its committee, and was president at the time of his death. He also supported the 'Boy's Own Paper' and 'Girl's Own Paper', and established the Luke Trust, the income from which endowed Christian charities. 
A governor of the Regent Street Polytechnic from 1915 to 1943, and a tireless worker to raise funds for voluntary hospitals, Luke served on a number of hospital boards, including those for King Edward's Hospital Fund, the Royal Northern Hospital, and the Thankoffering Fund for George V's recovery. He also introduced clauses to bills in the House of Lords to allow hospitals to recoup from insurance companies the costs of treating accident victims. He was chairman of the Ministry of Health's advisory committee on nutrition from 1935 to 1941 and of the ministry of information's advisory committee on advertising agents from 1941 to 1943. 
Luke was a great patriarch, placing immense store on his large extended family. He took responsibility for the family's financial stability, involving members in his own financial successes through shareholdings, directorships, and other investments. An inveterate worker, perpetually making notes and jotting down ideas, he rarely relaxed, except in the countryside, which he loved. He enjoyed riding to hounds, in spite of an aversion to dogs. He was a poor public speaker, but a firm and effective chairman. The death of his wife in 1941 was a great blow to him, and he himself died from lung cancer on 23 February 1943 at 2 Weymouth Street, London; he was buried at St Paul's Church, Bedford, on the 26th. 
Luke's elder son, Ian St John Lawson Johnston, second Baron Luke (1905-1996), food manufacturer and company director, was born on 7 June 1905. He attended Eton College and read history at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating in 1927. He then joined Bovril, with the understanding that eventually he would take over running the business, and studied beef production in Australia and South America. He married on 4 February 1932 Barbara ('b'. 1911), the younger daughter of Sir Fitzroy Hamilton Anstruther-Gough-Calthorpe, first baronet; they had four sons and one daughter. Lawson Johnston served in the Territorial Army and on the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 became second in command of the 5th battalion, the Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire regiment. In 1940 he was transferred to the 9th battalion, which he commanded, and so escaped the appalling fate of the 5th in Malaya. Released from the army following the death of his father, Luke became chairman of Bovril and its subsidiaries. Under his leadership the business, including Ambrosia and Marmite, expanded and prospered. He continued his family's interest in advertising. He retired in 1970 (shortly after which Bovril was acquired by Sir James Goldsmith's company Cavenham). His other appointments included directorships of Electrolux, Lloyds Bank, IBM, the Gateway Building Society, the Ashanti Goldfields Corporation, and other companies. Like his father, Luke was a devoted Anglican and did much voluntary work, in particular for hospital charities. A friend, admirer, and host of Billy Graham, he criticized Michael Ramsay, the archbishop of Canterbury, in 1967 for unenthusiastic remarks about the evangelist. He was British member of the International Olympic Committee (1951-88) and after his retirement was replaced by the princess royal. He lived at Odell Castle, near Pavenham, Bedfordshire, which had been bought by his father in 1934, and was a county councillor, JP, and deputy lieutenant for Bedfordshire. He was appointed KCVO in 1976. He died on 25 May 1996, survived by his wife and their five children, and was succeeded as third baron by his eldest son, Arthur Charles St John Lawson Johnston ('b'. 1933). 


@@@@@


doc= 62630


Dorothy Wardell Quayle (1914-1996)], was born on 24 December 1914 in Chicago into a theatre family, which moved to London in 1921. She appeared on the London stage as a child actress in Barry's 'Quality Street' (1927) and Daisy Ashford's 'The Young Visiters' (1928) and made her adult debut in Novello's 'Flies in the Sun' (1933). A series of successful roles followed, but in 1934 overwork caused a nervous breakdown. She recovered to return in comedy roles, marrying Robert Douglas Finlayson, the actor, in 1935, 'a failure from the start' ('The Times', 25 May 1996). She met Anthony Quayle in 1936, who was at once dazzled by her beauty; misunderstanding and complications on both sides deferred romance, but they were eventually married in 1947. Hyson had continued to play a variety of comedy roles, but after her second marriage retired from the stage. It was her dislike of Hollywood that caused Quayle to reject the offer of a contract with MGM in favour of the Stratford directorship. During Quayle's years at Stratford, Hyson became a noted hostess there. A striking beauty, her 'perfect heart-shaped face, vivid cornflower-blue eyes and translucent halo of blond hair' ('The Times', 25 May 1996) inspired the Rodgers and Hart song, 'The Most Beautiful Girl in the World'. 


@@@@@


doc= 62632


John Sadler (bap. 1779, d. 1838), chemist and metallurgist, was born in the High Street, Oxford, eldest son of James Sadler and his first wife, Mary, and was baptized at All Saints' Church on 9 March 1779. He made his first balloon ascent with his father in May 1785. By 1793 he was teaching chemistry at Beddoes's Bristol Pneumatic Institution. From 1800 he was chemical assistant at the Royal Institution, London, and assisted Humphry Davy until 1804 when he issued 'An Explanation of Terms used in Chemistry'. By 1806 he was smelting lead at Thomas Richard Beaumont's Dukesfield smelt mill, near Hexham. He was active with the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society from 1806 to 1809 and consulting on metallurgy. In 1810 he moved to Hackney, Middlesex, to superintend the Beaufoy Chemical Works in Lambeth. Here he was active with the Hackney Literary and Philosophical Society as lecturer, and assisted John Clennell (1772-1822) with the new 'Agricultural and Commercial Magazine'. His paper 'On the dislocation of mineral veins' was read to the Geological Society in 1814. He patented (no. 4524) a new method of making white lead in 1821. Sadler and his wife, Mary, had four children. He died at Lavender Place, Wandsworth Road, Battersea, London, on 18 March 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 62633


Austen, William (fl. 1449-1454), metal-founder, is known only for his work on the tomb of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1439), in the latter's chantry in St Mary's Church, Warwick. Documentary evidence for Austen's involvement survives in the form of seventeenth-century transcripts, and eighteenth- and nineteenth-century copies of transcripts, taken from medieval contracts which appear to have been incomplete when the transcripts were made, and which are now lost. 
Described as a citizen of London, Austen is mentioned in five separate contracts for the Beauchamp tomb. His main tasks, assigned between 1449 and 1454, were threefold: first, to cast and make perfectly, according to wooden patterns supplied by the executors, an image of fine latten (an alloy of copper and zinc), of a man armed, carrying a sword and dagger, with a helm and crest under his head and a muzzled bear and a griffon at his feet, and to bring the image to Warwick and install it on the tomb. Second, he was commissioned to make, again using wooden patterns, fourteen images of lords and ladies, dressed as weepers, and eighteen images of angels, which were to stand in housings provided on the monument. Third, he was to collaborate with John Essex, marbler, and Thomas Stevens, coppersmith, in making the base plate on which the effigy would rest, and which would carry the inscription, and the hearse to go over it. He was also involved in preparing the images of angels and weepers for gilding, though all the other preparations for gilding, and the burnishing, polishing, and gilding itself, were done by Bartholomew Lambespringe (fl. 1449-1454), a Dutchman. 
There has been much debate about the extent to which Austen made an artistic contribution to the project and to what extent he was following instructions laid down by the executors or another of the artisans involved. Most scholars have assumed that he was an artisan with no particular artistic pre-eminence. Indeed, what emerges most strongly from an examination of the documents, and of the monument itself, is that the whole enterprise was collaborative, and the roles of all the artisans were interdependent to the extent that it is difficult to attribute the design of the monument, or even any aspect of the finished work, to any individual. 
Thus one of the first of the contracts, requesting Bartholomew Lambespringe, a goldsmith of London, to hone and polish the 'image of latten of a man armed that is in making' (Dugdale, 354) in preparation for its gilding, was drawn up in 1449 between him and John Massingham, woodcarver, Roger Webbe, barber surgeon, and William Austen, founder, giving the impression that Lambespringe was answerable for his work to the three others, who were engaged jointly in the making of the effigy. Perhaps the barber surgeon was employed to ensure anatomical accuracy, evident in the extreme sensitivity of modelling of such details as the veins upstanding on the hands. As for John Massingham's contribution, it is possible that the wooden forms were used to underpin the general shape over which the wax would have been modelled. 
While the enterprise was collaborative, Austen's role was undoubtedly a highly significant one. He was not just required to cast an effigy and figures from forms supplied, but also to 'cast, work and perfectly to make' images whose attributes were listed in some detail, as if he was responsible for ensuring that those attributes and details were present (Dugdale, 354). There can be no doubt of his immense skill as a founder. Modern technical analysis has shown that the metal is indeed as requested, of the highest quality, a complex soft alloy with a very high copper content. The effigy was cast in seven pieces, and as perfectly modelled and finished on the back as on the front. Austen has to be accorded a pre-eminent role among all the artisans involved, as the maker of the figures in their final form. But, just as he was probably not responsible for their design, so he was not entirely responsible for their final appearance. For Bartholomew Lambespringe honed and burnished and polished and gilded the whole monument, and was also contracted to make the heads and hands and all the unclothed parts of the weepers and angels after Austen had cast the figures and they had both prepared them for gilding. Whether this means that Austen's faces and hands were unsatisfactory and had to be replaced, or whether he had not made them in the first place, is not clear. It may also be indicative of their relative status that Lambespringe was paid more than twice as much as Austen for his labour. 


@@@@@


doc= 62634


Birmingham family (per. c.1135-c.1300), gentry, were lords of Birmingham, Warwickshire, Hoggeston, Buckinghamshire, and Shutford, Oxfordshire, and were important tenants and retainers of the lords of Dudley. The earliest known member of the family is William [i] of Birmingham ('fl'. 1135), who may have been of Norman origins, but his son Peter of Birmingham (d. before 1174) is the first about whom much is known. Peter occurs as a witness to a charter of Henry, duke of Normandy, the future Henry II, granting rights to the bishop of Lichfield in 1153/4. Peter is described as steward of Dudley, and was probably representing his master Gervase Pagnell. In 1166 it was recorded that Peter was holding nine knights' fees of Gervase, making him easily the greatest of the tenants of the honour of Dudley. The lands which made up these fees comprised at least ten manors, all but Hoggeston within a few miles of Dudley. Also in 1166 Peter was granted a royal charter of confirmation for a market at Birmingham, adjacent to his castle there. The castle was presumably on the same site as the later manor house, but archaeological excavation has not confirmed this. In 1168 Peter appears in the pipe roll accounting for the pannage of Cannock Forest, Staffordshire, and the following year was supervising work on the bridge at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire. He died before 1174 and was succeeded by his son William [ii] of Birmingham (fl. 1174-1210), often styled William fitz Peter. Another son, Hugh fitz Peter ('fl'. 1174-1210), was granted lands at Bushbury, Upper Penn, and Rushall, Staffordshire, held from his brother as one and a half knights' fees. It is possible that the Robert of Bermingham who was a follower of Earl Richard fitz Gilbert (Strongbow) during the conquest of Ireland in 1169-71 and was granted land at Tethmory, Offaly, was also Peter's son, but this cannot be proved. 
During the 1174 uprising against Henry II Gervase Pagnell rebelled, but, in a notable example of a principal tenant turning against his nominal lord, William fitz Peter commanded a party of knights garrisoning the motte of Warwick Castle for the king. William married Margery de Malpas, whose family were tenants of the earls of Chester, and through her acquired land in Cheshire. In 1191 he went on the third crusade. William fitz Peter was succeeded by his eldest son, Brian of Birmingham ('fl'. 'c'.1222), but Brian died soon after his father leaving no children of his own and was in turn succeeded by his brother William [iii] of Birmingham (fl. 1222-1242). William [iii] and a third brother, Henry of Birmingham, were in litigation regarding demesne land at Morfe, Staffordshire, which Henry subsequently held from his brother as a quarter of a knight's fee. William [iii] married Sybil de Colville and through her acquired two small manors in Buckinghamshire and Berkshire. The marriage produced at least four sons: William [iv] of Birmingham (fl. 1242-1263), who succeeded his father; Brian ('fl'. 1254-1262); Robert ('fl'. 1252-1262); and Roger ('fl'. 1262). Brian was a knight, but Robert and Roger were clerics, respectively rectors of Hoggeston and Enville in Staffordshire. William [iv], Brian, and Robert all accompanied Henry III on the 1254 expedition to Gascony. William [iv] married Maud of Gatcombe ('fl'. 1242-1283) whose dowry was Shutford, Oxfordshire. In 1249 he received a life exemption from serving on assizes, juries, or recognitions, an acknowledgement of favour and enhanced status; and it is probably to his lifetime that the impressive masonry work found during excavation of the site of the manor house at Birmingham belongs. In 1262 he was impleaded by Roger de Somery, lord of Dudley, regarding the extent of the services owed for his lands. William was a supporter of Simon de Montfort, marrying his son, William [v] of Birmingham (d. 1265), to Isabel of Astley, the daughter of Montfort's steward Thomas of Astley, and the granddaughter of Arnold du Bois, another Montfort associate. William [v] fought for Montfort at Evesham on 4 August 1265 where he was killed with many others of Montfort's household knights. His demesne lands and the wardship of his infant son William [vi] of Birmingham (c.1260-1302) were granted by Henry III to Roger de Clifford, but both lands and child were subsequently redeemed under the terms of the dictum of Kenilworth by Roger de Somery. 
William [vi] reached his majority by 1283 but suffered huge financial difficulties. His grandmother and stepfather had life interests in a substantial part of his demesne land, he was indebted to his former guardian Roger de Somery for redemption moneys paid on his behalf, and some redemption fines had never been paid. Small wonder that he sought to avoid the burdens of knighthood; but in 1286 he was judged to have evaded and was fined accordingly. Bowing to the inevitable, he was dubbed knight and in 1297 fought in the Gascony campaign where he was captured and eventually ransomed. He died in 1302, still burdened by debt. 
Dugdale refers to a seal, which he claimed to be that of Peter of Birmingham, showing a shield of arms, a bend lozenge on a plain field. The arms which his descendants bore during the thirteenth century were azure a bend lozenge or, and if they were indeed borne by Peter he would be one of the earliest examples of an armigerous knight. The Birmingham family were active patrons of commerce. In 1189 another confirmation charter was secured for the market at Birmingham, and by the end of the twelfth century there are already indications that it was growing into a small town. In 1232 the townsmen came to an agreement with William [iii] of Birmingham regarding rents and labour services; and in 1250 William [iv] was granted confirmation for a three-day spring fair held at the town. By the second half of the thirteenth century Birmingham was recognizably a borough with burgesses, bailiffs, a court, and bounds which set it apart from the manorial lands of its founders. The relationship between a leading family of knights and an urban foundation is rare, and marks out the Birminghams as highly enterprising -- an enterprise that may account for the abandonment of their Dudley allegiance for the king in 1174 and for Montfort in 1265. 


@@@@@


doc= 62635


Birmingham family (per. c.1135-c.1300), gentry, were lords of Birmingham, Warwickshire, Hoggeston, Buckinghamshire, and Shutford, Oxfordshire, and were important tenants and retainers of the lords of Dudley. The earliest known member of the family is William [i] of Birmingham ('fl'. 1135), who may have been of Norman origins, but his son Peter of Birmingham (d. before 1174) is the first about whom much is known. Peter occurs as a witness to a charter of Henry, duke of Normandy, the future Henry II, granting rights to the bishop of Lichfield in 1153/4. Peter is described as steward of Dudley, and was probably representing his master Gervase Pagnell. In 1166 it was recorded that Peter was holding nine knights' fees of Gervase, making him easily the greatest of the tenants of the honour of Dudley. The lands which made up these fees comprised at least ten manors, all but Hoggeston within a few miles of Dudley. Also in 1166 Peter was granted a royal charter of confirmation for a market at Birmingham, adjacent to his castle there. The castle was presumably on the same site as the later manor house, but archaeological excavation has not confirmed this. In 1168 Peter appears in the pipe roll accounting for the pannage of Cannock Forest, Staffordshire, and the following year was supervising work on the bridge at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire. He died before 1174 and was succeeded by his son William [ii] of Birmingham (fl. 1174-1210), often styled William fitz Peter. Another son, Hugh fitz Peter ('fl'. 1174-1210), was granted lands at Bushbury, Upper Penn, and Rushall, Staffordshire, held from his brother as one and a half knights' fees. It is possible that the Robert of Bermingham who was a follower of Earl Richard fitz Gilbert (Strongbow) during the conquest of Ireland in 1169-71 and was granted land at Tethmory, Offaly, was also Peter's son, but this cannot be proved. 
During the 1174 uprising against Henry II Gervase Pagnell rebelled, but, in a notable example of a principal tenant turning against his nominal lord, William fitz Peter commanded a party of knights garrisoning the motte of Warwick Castle for the king. William married Margery de Malpas, whose family were tenants of the earls of Chester, and through her acquired land in Cheshire. In 1191 he went on the third crusade. William fitz Peter was succeeded by his eldest son, Brian of Birmingham ('fl'. 'c'.1222), but Brian died soon after his father leaving no children of his own and was in turn succeeded by his brother William [iii] of Birmingham (fl. 1222-1242). William [iii] and a third brother, Henry of Birmingham, were in litigation regarding demesne land at Morfe, Staffordshire, which Henry subsequently held from his brother as a quarter of a knight's fee. William [iii] married Sybil de Colville and through her acquired two small manors in Buckinghamshire and Berkshire. The marriage produced at least four sons: William [iv] of Birmingham (fl. 1242-1263), who succeeded his father; Brian ('fl'. 1254-1262); Robert ('fl'. 1252-1262); and Roger ('fl'. 1262). Brian was a knight, but Robert and Roger were clerics, respectively rectors of Hoggeston and Enville in Staffordshire. William [iv], Brian, and Robert all accompanied Henry III on the 1254 expedition to Gascony. William [iv] married Maud of Gatcombe ('fl'. 1242-1283) whose dowry was Shutford, Oxfordshire. In 1249 he received a life exemption from serving on assizes, juries, or recognitions, an acknowledgement of favour and enhanced status; and it is probably to his lifetime that the impressive masonry work found during excavation of the site of the manor house at Birmingham belongs. In 1262 he was impleaded by Roger de Somery, lord of Dudley, regarding the extent of the services owed for his lands. William was a supporter of Simon de Montfort, marrying his son, William [v] of Birmingham (d. 1265), to Isabel of Astley, the daughter of Montfort's steward Thomas of Astley, and the granddaughter of Arnold du Bois, another Montfort associate. William [v] fought for Montfort at Evesham on 4 August 1265 where he was killed with many others of Montfort's household knights. His demesne lands and the wardship of his infant son William [vi] of Birmingham (c.1260-1302) were granted by Henry III to Roger de Clifford, but both lands and child were subsequently redeemed under the terms of the dictum of Kenilworth by Roger de Somery. 
William [vi] reached his majority by 1283 but suffered huge financial difficulties. His grandmother and stepfather had life interests in a substantial part of his demesne land, he was indebted to his former guardian Roger de Somery for redemption moneys paid on his behalf, and some redemption fines had never been paid. Small wonder that he sought to avoid the burdens of knighthood; but in 1286 he was judged to have evaded and was fined accordingly. Bowing to the inevitable, he was dubbed knight and in 1297 fought in the Gascony campaign where he was captured and eventually ransomed. He died in 1302, still burdened by debt. 
Dugdale refers to a seal, which he claimed to be that of Peter of Birmingham, showing a shield of arms, a bend lozenge on a plain field. The arms which his descendants bore during the thirteenth century were azure a bend lozenge or, and if they were indeed borne by Peter he would be one of the earliest examples of an armigerous knight. The Birmingham family were active patrons of commerce. In 1189 another confirmation charter was secured for the market at Birmingham, and by the end of the twelfth century there are already indications that it was growing into a small town. In 1232 the townsmen came to an agreement with William [iii] of Birmingham regarding rents and labour services; and in 1250 William [iv] was granted confirmation for a three-day spring fair held at the town. By the second half of the thirteenth century Birmingham was recognizably a borough with burgesses, bailiffs, a court, and bounds which set it apart from the manorial lands of its founders. The relationship between a leading family of knights and an urban foundation is rare, and marks out the Birminghams as highly enterprising -- an enterprise that may account for the abandonment of their Dudley allegiance for the king in 1174 and for Montfort in 1265. 


@@@@@


doc= 62637


Birmingham family (per. c.1135-c.1300), gentry, were lords of Birmingham, Warwickshire, Hoggeston, Buckinghamshire, and Shutford, Oxfordshire, and were important tenants and retainers of the lords of Dudley. The earliest known member of the family is William [i] of Birmingham ('fl'. 1135), who may have been of Norman origins, but his son Peter of Birmingham (d. before 1174) is the first about whom much is known. Peter occurs as a witness to a charter of Henry, duke of Normandy, the future Henry II, granting rights to the bishop of Lichfield in 1153/4. Peter is described as steward of Dudley, and was probably representing his master Gervase Pagnell. In 1166 it was recorded that Peter was holding nine knights' fees of Gervase, making him easily the greatest of the tenants of the honour of Dudley. The lands which made up these fees comprised at least ten manors, all but Hoggeston within a few miles of Dudley. Also in 1166 Peter was granted a royal charter of confirmation for a market at Birmingham, adjacent to his castle there. The castle was presumably on the same site as the later manor house, but archaeological excavation has not confirmed this. In 1168 Peter appears in the pipe roll accounting for the pannage of Cannock Forest, Staffordshire, and the following year was supervising work on the bridge at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire. He died before 1174 and was succeeded by his son William [ii] of Birmingham (fl. 1174-1210), often styled William fitz Peter. Another son, Hugh fitz Peter ('fl'. 1174-1210), was granted lands at Bushbury, Upper Penn, and Rushall, Staffordshire, held from his brother as one and a half knights' fees. It is possible that the Robert of Bermingham who was a follower of Earl Richard fitz Gilbert (Strongbow) during the conquest of Ireland in 1169-71 and was granted land at Tethmory, Offaly, was also Peter's son, but this cannot be proved. 
During the 1174 uprising against Henry II Gervase Pagnell rebelled, but, in a notable example of a principal tenant turning against his nominal lord, William fitz Peter commanded a party of knights garrisoning the motte of Warwick Castle for the king. William married Margery de Malpas, whose family were tenants of the earls of Chester, and through her acquired land in Cheshire. In 1191 he went on the third crusade. William fitz Peter was succeeded by his eldest son, Brian of Birmingham ('fl'. 'c'.1222), but Brian died soon after his father leaving no children of his own and was in turn succeeded by his brother William [iii] of Birmingham (fl. 1222-1242). William [iii] and a third brother, Henry of Birmingham, were in litigation regarding demesne land at Morfe, Staffordshire, which Henry subsequently held from his brother as a quarter of a knight's fee. William [iii] married Sybil de Colville and through her acquired two small manors in Buckinghamshire and Berkshire. The marriage produced at least four sons: William [iv] of Birmingham (fl. 1242-1263), who succeeded his father; Brian ('fl'. 1254-1262); Robert ('fl'. 1252-1262); and Roger ('fl'. 1262). Brian was a knight, but Robert and Roger were clerics, respectively rectors of Hoggeston and Enville in Staffordshire. William [iv], Brian, and Robert all accompanied Henry III on the 1254 expedition to Gascony. William [iv] married Maud of Gatcombe ('fl'. 1242-1283) whose dowry was Shutford, Oxfordshire. In 1249 he received a life exemption from serving on assizes, juries, or recognitions, an acknowledgement of favour and enhanced status; and it is probably to his lifetime that the impressive masonry work found during excavation of the site of the manor house at Birmingham belongs. In 1262 he was impleaded by Roger de Somery, lord of Dudley, regarding the extent of the services owed for his lands. William was a supporter of Simon de Montfort, marrying his son, William [v] of Birmingham (d. 1265), to Isabel of Astley, the daughter of Montfort's steward Thomas of Astley, and the granddaughter of Arnold du Bois, another Montfort associate. William [v] fought for Montfort at Evesham on 4 August 1265 where he was killed with many others of Montfort's household knights. His demesne lands and the wardship of his infant son William [vi] of Birmingham (c.1260-1302) were granted by Henry III to Roger de Clifford, but both lands and child were subsequently redeemed under the terms of the dictum of Kenilworth by Roger de Somery. 
William [vi] reached his majority by 1283 but suffered huge financial difficulties. His grandmother and stepfather had life interests in a substantial part of his demesne land, he was indebted to his former guardian Roger de Somery for redemption moneys paid on his behalf, and some redemption fines had never been paid. Small wonder that he sought to avoid the burdens of knighthood; but in 1286 he was judged to have evaded and was fined accordingly. Bowing to the inevitable, he was dubbed knight and in 1297 fought in the Gascony campaign where he was captured and eventually ransomed. He died in 1302, still burdened by debt. 
Dugdale refers to a seal, which he claimed to be that of Peter of Birmingham, showing a shield of arms, a bend lozenge on a plain field. The arms which his descendants bore during the thirteenth century were azure a bend lozenge or, and if they were indeed borne by Peter he would be one of the earliest examples of an armigerous knight. The Birmingham family were active patrons of commerce. In 1189 another confirmation charter was secured for the market at Birmingham, and by the end of the twelfth century there are already indications that it was growing into a small town. In 1232 the townsmen came to an agreement with William [iii] of Birmingham regarding rents and labour services; and in 1250 William [iv] was granted confirmation for a three-day spring fair held at the town. By the second half of the thirteenth century Birmingham was recognizably a borough with burgesses, bailiffs, a court, and bounds which set it apart from the manorial lands of its founders. The relationship between a leading family of knights and an urban foundation is rare, and marks out the Birminghams as highly enterprising -- an enterprise that may account for the abandonment of their Dudley allegiance for the king in 1174 and for Montfort in 1265. 


@@@@@


doc= 62638


Birmingham family (per. c.1135-c.1300), gentry, were lords of Birmingham, Warwickshire, Hoggeston, Buckinghamshire, and Shutford, Oxfordshire, and were important tenants and retainers of the lords of Dudley. The earliest known member of the family is William [i] of Birmingham ('fl'. 1135), who may have been of Norman origins, but his son Peter of Birmingham (d. before 1174) is the first about whom much is known. Peter occurs as a witness to a charter of Henry, duke of Normandy, the future Henry II, granting rights to the bishop of Lichfield in 1153/4. Peter is described as steward of Dudley, and was probably representing his master Gervase Pagnell. In 1166 it was recorded that Peter was holding nine knights' fees of Gervase, making him easily the greatest of the tenants of the honour of Dudley. The lands which made up these fees comprised at least ten manors, all but Hoggeston within a few miles of Dudley. Also in 1166 Peter was granted a royal charter of confirmation for a market at Birmingham, adjacent to his castle there. The castle was presumably on the same site as the later manor house, but archaeological excavation has not confirmed this. In 1168 Peter appears in the pipe roll accounting for the pannage of Cannock Forest, Staffordshire, and the following year was supervising work on the bridge at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire. He died before 1174 and was succeeded by his son William [ii] of Birmingham (fl. 1174-1210), often styled William fitz Peter. Another son, Hugh fitz Peter ('fl'. 1174-1210), was granted lands at Bushbury, Upper Penn, and Rushall, Staffordshire, held from his brother as one and a half knights' fees. It is possible that the Robert of Bermingham who was a follower of Earl Richard fitz Gilbert (Strongbow) during the conquest of Ireland in 1169-71 and was granted land at Tethmory, Offaly, was also Peter's son, but this cannot be proved. 
During the 1174 uprising against Henry II Gervase Pagnell rebelled, but, in a notable example of a principal tenant turning against his nominal lord, William fitz Peter commanded a party of knights garrisoning the motte of Warwick Castle for the king. William married Margery de Malpas, whose family were tenants of the earls of Chester, and through her acquired land in Cheshire. In 1191 he went on the third crusade. William fitz Peter was succeeded by his eldest son, Brian of Birmingham ('fl'. 'c'.1222), but Brian died soon after his father leaving no children of his own and was in turn succeeded by his brother William [iii] of Birmingham (fl. 1222-1242). William [iii] and a third brother, Henry of Birmingham, were in litigation regarding demesne land at Morfe, Staffordshire, which Henry subsequently held from his brother as a quarter of a knight's fee. William [iii] married Sybil de Colville and through her acquired two small manors in Buckinghamshire and Berkshire. The marriage produced at least four sons: William [iv] of Birmingham (fl. 1242-1263), who succeeded his father; Brian ('fl'. 1254-1262); Robert ('fl'. 1252-1262); and Roger ('fl'. 1262). Brian was a knight, but Robert and Roger were clerics, respectively rectors of Hoggeston and Enville in Staffordshire. William [iv], Brian, and Robert all accompanied Henry III on the 1254 expedition to Gascony. William [iv] married Maud of Gatcombe ('fl'. 1242-1283) whose dowry was Shutford, Oxfordshire. In 1249 he received a life exemption from serving on assizes, juries, or recognitions, an acknowledgement of favour and enhanced status; and it is probably to his lifetime that the impressive masonry work found during excavation of the site of the manor house at Birmingham belongs. In 1262 he was impleaded by Roger de Somery, lord of Dudley, regarding the extent of the services owed for his lands. William was a supporter of Simon de Montfort, marrying his son, William [v] of Birmingham (d. 1265), to Isabel of Astley, the daughter of Montfort's steward Thomas of Astley, and the granddaughter of Arnold du Bois, another Montfort associate. William [v] fought for Montfort at Evesham on 4 August 1265 where he was killed with many others of Montfort's household knights. His demesne lands and the wardship of his infant son William [vi] of Birmingham (c.1260-1302) were granted by Henry III to Roger de Clifford, but both lands and child were subsequently redeemed under the terms of the dictum of Kenilworth by Roger de Somery. 
William [vi] reached his majority by 1283 but suffered huge financial difficulties. His grandmother and stepfather had life interests in a substantial part of his demesne land, he was indebted to his former guardian Roger de Somery for redemption moneys paid on his behalf, and some redemption fines had never been paid. Small wonder that he sought to avoid the burdens of knighthood; but in 1286 he was judged to have evaded and was fined accordingly. Bowing to the inevitable, he was dubbed knight and in 1297 fought in the Gascony campaign where he was captured and eventually ransomed. He died in 1302, still burdened by debt. 
Dugdale refers to a seal, which he claimed to be that of Peter of Birmingham, showing a shield of arms, a bend lozenge on a plain field. The arms which his descendants bore during the thirteenth century were azure a bend lozenge or, and if they were indeed borne by Peter he would be one of the earliest examples of an armigerous knight. The Birmingham family were active patrons of commerce. In 1189 another confirmation charter was secured for the market at Birmingham, and by the end of the twelfth century there are already indications that it was growing into a small town. In 1232 the townsmen came to an agreement with William [iii] of Birmingham regarding rents and labour services; and in 1250 William [iv] was granted confirmation for a three-day spring fair held at the town. By the second half of the thirteenth century Birmingham was recognizably a borough with burgesses, bailiffs, a court, and bounds which set it apart from the manorial lands of its founders. The relationship between a leading family of knights and an urban foundation is rare, and marks out the Birminghams as highly enterprising -- an enterprise that may account for the abandonment of their Dudley allegiance for the king in 1174 and for Montfort in 1265. 


@@@@@


doc= 62639


Birmingham family (per. c.1135-c.1300), gentry, were lords of Birmingham, Warwickshire, Hoggeston, Buckinghamshire, and Shutford, Oxfordshire, and were important tenants and retainers of the lords of Dudley. The earliest known member of the family is William [i] of Birmingham ('fl'. 1135), who may have been of Norman origins, but his son Peter of Birmingham (d. before 1174) is the first about whom much is known. Peter occurs as a witness to a charter of Henry, duke of Normandy, the future Henry II, granting rights to the bishop of Lichfield in 1153/4. Peter is described as steward of Dudley, and was probably representing his master Gervase Pagnell. In 1166 it was recorded that Peter was holding nine knights' fees of Gervase, making him easily the greatest of the tenants of the honour of Dudley. The lands which made up these fees comprised at least ten manors, all but Hoggeston within a few miles of Dudley. Also in 1166 Peter was granted a royal charter of confirmation for a market at Birmingham, adjacent to his castle there. The castle was presumably on the same site as the later manor house, but archaeological excavation has not confirmed this. In 1168 Peter appears in the pipe roll accounting for the pannage of Cannock Forest, Staffordshire, and the following year was supervising work on the bridge at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire. He died before 1174 and was succeeded by his son William [ii] of Birmingham (fl. 1174-1210), often styled William fitz Peter. Another son, Hugh fitz Peter ('fl'. 1174-1210), was granted lands at Bushbury, Upper Penn, and Rushall, Staffordshire, held from his brother as one and a half knights' fees. It is possible that the Robert of Bermingham who was a follower of Earl Richard fitz Gilbert (Strongbow) during the conquest of Ireland in 1169-71 and was granted land at Tethmory, Offaly, was also Peter's son, but this cannot be proved. 
During the 1174 uprising against Henry II Gervase Pagnell rebelled, but, in a notable example of a principal tenant turning against his nominal lord, William fitz Peter commanded a party of knights garrisoning the motte of Warwick Castle for the king. William married Margery de Malpas, whose family were tenants of the earls of Chester, and through her acquired land in Cheshire. In 1191 he went on the third crusade. William fitz Peter was succeeded by his eldest son, Brian of Birmingham ('fl'. 'c'.1222), but Brian died soon after his father leaving no children of his own and was in turn succeeded by his brother William [iii] of Birmingham (fl. 1222-1242). William [iii] and a third brother, Henry of Birmingham, were in litigation regarding demesne land at Morfe, Staffordshire, which Henry subsequently held from his brother as a quarter of a knight's fee. William [iii] married Sybil de Colville and through her acquired two small manors in Buckinghamshire and Berkshire. The marriage produced at least four sons: William [iv] of Birmingham (fl. 1242-1263), who succeeded his father; Brian ('fl'. 1254-1262); Robert ('fl'. 1252-1262); and Roger ('fl'. 1262). Brian was a knight, but Robert and Roger were clerics, respectively rectors of Hoggeston and Enville in Staffordshire. William [iv], Brian, and Robert all accompanied Henry III on the 1254 expedition to Gascony. William [iv] married Maud of Gatcombe ('fl'. 1242-1283) whose dowry was Shutford, Oxfordshire. In 1249 he received a life exemption from serving on assizes, juries, or recognitions, an acknowledgement of favour and enhanced status; and it is probably to his lifetime that the impressive masonry work found during excavation of the site of the manor house at Birmingham belongs. In 1262 he was impleaded by Roger de Somery, lord of Dudley, regarding the extent of the services owed for his lands. William was a supporter of Simon de Montfort, marrying his son, William [v] of Birmingham (d. 1265), to Isabel of Astley, the daughter of Montfort's steward Thomas of Astley, and the granddaughter of Arnold du Bois, another Montfort associate. William [v] fought for Montfort at Evesham on 4 August 1265 where he was killed with many others of Montfort's household knights. His demesne lands and the wardship of his infant son William [vi] of Birmingham (c.1260-1302) were granted by Henry III to Roger de Clifford, but both lands and child were subsequently redeemed under the terms of the dictum of Kenilworth by Roger de Somery. 
William [vi] reached his majority by 1283 but suffered huge financial difficulties. His grandmother and stepfather had life interests in a substantial part of his demesne land, he was indebted to his former guardian Roger de Somery for redemption moneys paid on his behalf, and some redemption fines had never been paid. Small wonder that he sought to avoid the burdens of knighthood; but in 1286 he was judged to have evaded and was fined accordingly. Bowing to the inevitable, he was dubbed knight and in 1297 fought in the Gascony campaign where he was captured and eventually ransomed. He died in 1302, still burdened by debt. 
Dugdale refers to a seal, which he claimed to be that of Peter of Birmingham, showing a shield of arms, a bend lozenge on a plain field. The arms which his descendants bore during the thirteenth century were azure a bend lozenge or, and if they were indeed borne by Peter he would be one of the earliest examples of an armigerous knight. The Birmingham family were active patrons of commerce. In 1189 another confirmation charter was secured for the market at Birmingham, and by the end of the twelfth century there are already indications that it was growing into a small town. In 1232 the townsmen came to an agreement with William [iii] of Birmingham regarding rents and labour services; and in 1250 William [iv] was granted confirmation for a three-day spring fair held at the town. By the second half of the thirteenth century Birmingham was recognizably a borough with burgesses, bailiffs, a court, and bounds which set it apart from the manorial lands of its founders. The relationship between a leading family of knights and an urban foundation is rare, and marks out the Birminghams as highly enterprising -- an enterprise that may account for the abandonment of their Dudley allegiance for the king in 1174 and for Montfort in 1265. 


@@@@@


doc= 62640


Birmingham family (per. c.1135-c.1300), gentry, were lords of Birmingham, Warwickshire, Hoggeston, Buckinghamshire, and Shutford, Oxfordshire, and were important tenants and retainers of the lords of Dudley. The earliest known member of the family is William [i] of Birmingham ('fl'. 1135), who may have been of Norman origins, but his son Peter of Birmingham (d. before 1174) is the first about whom much is known. Peter occurs as a witness to a charter of Henry, duke of Normandy, the future Henry II, granting rights to the bishop of Lichfield in 1153/4. Peter is described as steward of Dudley, and was probably representing his master Gervase Pagnell. In 1166 it was recorded that Peter was holding nine knights' fees of Gervase, making him easily the greatest of the tenants of the honour of Dudley. The lands which made up these fees comprised at least ten manors, all but Hoggeston within a few miles of Dudley. Also in 1166 Peter was granted a royal charter of confirmation for a market at Birmingham, adjacent to his castle there. The castle was presumably on the same site as the later manor house, but archaeological excavation has not confirmed this. In 1168 Peter appears in the pipe roll accounting for the pannage of Cannock Forest, Staffordshire, and the following year was supervising work on the bridge at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire. He died before 1174 and was succeeded by his son William [ii] of Birmingham (fl. 1174-1210), often styled William fitz Peter. Another son, Hugh fitz Peter ('fl'. 1174-1210), was granted lands at Bushbury, Upper Penn, and Rushall, Staffordshire, held from his brother as one and a half knights' fees. It is possible that the Robert of Bermingham who was a follower of Earl Richard fitz Gilbert (Strongbow) during the conquest of Ireland in 1169-71 and was granted land at Tethmory, Offaly, was also Peter's son, but this cannot be proved. 
During the 1174 uprising against Henry II Gervase Pagnell rebelled, but, in a notable example of a principal tenant turning against his nominal lord, William fitz Peter commanded a party of knights garrisoning the motte of Warwick Castle for the king. William married Margery de Malpas, whose family were tenants of the earls of Chester, and through her acquired land in Cheshire. In 1191 he went on the third crusade. William fitz Peter was succeeded by his eldest son, Brian of Birmingham ('fl'. 'c'.1222), but Brian died soon after his father leaving no children of his own and was in turn succeeded by his brother William [iii] of Birmingham (fl. 1222-1242). William [iii] and a third brother, Henry of Birmingham, were in litigation regarding demesne land at Morfe, Staffordshire, which Henry subsequently held from his brother as a quarter of a knight's fee. William [iii] married Sybil de Colville and through her acquired two small manors in Buckinghamshire and Berkshire. The marriage produced at least four sons: William [iv] of Birmingham (fl. 1242-1263), who succeeded his father; Brian ('fl'. 1254-1262); Robert ('fl'. 1252-1262); and Roger ('fl'. 1262). Brian was a knight, but Robert and Roger were clerics, respectively rectors of Hoggeston and Enville in Staffordshire. William [iv], Brian, and Robert all accompanied Henry III on the 1254 expedition to Gascony. William [iv] married Maud of Gatcombe ('fl'. 1242-1283) whose dowry was Shutford, Oxfordshire. In 1249 he received a life exemption from serving on assizes, juries, or recognitions, an acknowledgement of favour and enhanced status; and it is probably to his lifetime that the impressive masonry work found during excavation of the site of the manor house at Birmingham belongs. In 1262 he was impleaded by Roger de Somery, lord of Dudley, regarding the extent of the services owed for his lands. William was a supporter of Simon de Montfort, marrying his son, William [v] of Birmingham (d. 1265), to Isabel of Astley, the daughter of Montfort's steward Thomas of Astley, and the granddaughter of Arnold du Bois, another Montfort associate. William [v] fought for Montfort at Evesham on 4 August 1265 where he was killed with many others of Montfort's household knights. His demesne lands and the wardship of his infant son William [vi] of Birmingham (c.1260-1302) were granted by Henry III to Roger de Clifford, but both lands and child were subsequently redeemed under the terms of the dictum of Kenilworth by Roger de Somery. 
William [vi] reached his majority by 1283 but suffered huge financial difficulties. His grandmother and stepfather had life interests in a substantial part of his demesne land, he was indebted to his former guardian Roger de Somery for redemption moneys paid on his behalf, and some redemption fines had never been paid. Small wonder that he sought to avoid the burdens of knighthood; but in 1286 he was judged to have evaded and was fined accordingly. Bowing to the inevitable, he was dubbed knight and in 1297 fought in the Gascony campaign where he was captured and eventually ransomed. He died in 1302, still burdened by debt. 
Dugdale refers to a seal, which he claimed to be that of Peter of Birmingham, showing a shield of arms, a bend lozenge on a plain field. The arms which his descendants bore during the thirteenth century were azure a bend lozenge or, and if they were indeed borne by Peter he would be one of the earliest examples of an armigerous knight. The Birmingham family were active patrons of commerce. In 1189 another confirmation charter was secured for the market at Birmingham, and by the end of the twelfth century there are already indications that it was growing into a small town. In 1232 the townsmen came to an agreement with William [iii] of Birmingham regarding rents and labour services; and in 1250 William [iv] was granted confirmation for a three-day spring fair held at the town. By the second half of the thirteenth century Birmingham was recognizably a borough with burgesses, bailiffs, a court, and bounds which set it apart from the manorial lands of its founders. The relationship between a leading family of knights and an urban foundation is rare, and marks out the Birminghams as highly enterprising -- an enterprise that may account for the abandonment of their Dudley allegiance for the king in 1174 and for Montfort in 1265. 


@@@@@


doc= 62641


Bevan, Bridget (bap. 1698, d. 1779), educational benefactor, baptized on 30 October 1698 at Merthyr church in Llannewydd, Carmarthenshire, was the youngest daughter of John Vaughan (1663-1722) and his wife, Elizabeth Thomas (died 1721), of Derllys, Carmarthenshire. She married Arthur Bevan (1689-1743), of Laugharne, on 30 December 1721 at Merthyr church. Her husband served as recorder of the Carmarthen Boroughs (1722-41), and as member of parliament for Carmarthen Boroughs (1727-41), and was appointed judge of equity in north and south Wales in 1735. He died on 6 March 1743, and was buried at Laugharne church. 
John Vaughan was a great patron of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) and was responsible for the organization of the society's schools in Carmarthenshire between 1700 and 1722. His daughter inherited his interest in education and philanthropy and displayed this chiefly through her patronage of Griffith Jones and his system of circulating schools. Jones, rector of Llanddowror, was already renowned for his powerful preaching, and had served as schoolteacher for the SPCK school at Laugharne under John Vaughan's supervision. Building on this experience, and with the welfare of his parishioners foremost in his mind, he established his first school at Llanddowror in 1731; the schools multiplied greatly from then on and many thousands had received instruction by the time of Jones's death, in 1761. Madam Bevan provided him with financial support and acted as adviser and confidante. An attractive woman, she and her husband moved in fashionable circles in London and Bath, and were friends of Lord Chesterfield. These connections were to prove useful in enlisting support towards the upkeep of the schools. 
Following the death of his wife in 1755, Griffith Jones moved to Madam Bevan's house at Laugharne, where his cantankerous nature led the servants to dub him 'Old Peevish'. He remained there until his death, in 1761, after which Madam Bevan took sole responsibility for the management and upkeep of the circulating schools for the following eighteen years. During that time she displayed considerable business acumen and organizational skills. Although this period in the history of the circulating schools is usually afforded scant attention by historians, the number of schools increased under her direction, particularly in the more Anglicized areas of the country. By 1764 news of the success of this educational initiative had reached the ears of Catherine the Great of Russia, who ordered her ministers to make enquiries about the scheme. 
This chapter in Welsh educational history effectively came to a close with the death of Bridget Bevan, at Laugharne, on 10 December 1779; she was buried at Llanddowror church on 17 December 1779. Her will, dated 27 October 1779, left the funds entrusted to her by Griffith Jones, along with her own personal estate, to ensure the continuance of the circulating schools. However, two of the trustees, her niece Lady Elizabeth Stepney, and nephew Rear-Admiral William Lloyd, disputed the will and took possession of the money. The remaining two trustees, George Bowen, of Llwyn-gwair, and Zachary Bevan, of Laugharne, took the case to chancery in an attempt to recover the funds for the benefit of the schools. The legal dispute lasted until 1804, when it was finally judged that Madam Bevan's will should stand, but by this time the circulating schools had already perished for lack of funds. The work undertaken by Griffith Jones and Bridget Bevan was, in a sense, continued by the new Sunday schools, established from the late eighteenth century onwards in Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 62642


Brereton, Jane (1685-1740), poet, was born at Bryn Gruffydd near Mold in Flintshire, the younger daughter of Thomas Hughes and his wife, Ann Jones. Her father educated her at home, so that by the time of his death in 1701 she had 'already discovered a peculiar genius for poetry' ('Account', ii). On 29 January 1711 she married Thomas Brereton (1690/91-1722), at that time a commoner of Brasenose College, and the only son of a major in the army who had fought under the duke of Marlborough and left Thomas a large fortune. They had two sons, Thomas and John, who both died in infancy, and two daughters, Lucy (the elder) and Charlotte. After Oxford, Thomas pursued a literary career in London, publishing verse and plays and a periodical ('The Critick') in 1718, while Jane also published some occasional verses ('The Fifth Ode of the Fourth Book of Horace, Imitated' in 1716 and 'An Expostulatory Epistle to Sir Richard Steele upon the Death of Mr Addison' in 1720). Domestically, however, their life was turbulent: Brereton soon squandered his fortune, despite his wife's household economy, and revealed an ugly temper: 'his first fit of passion, after their marriage, was like a thunder-clap to her' (ibid., vi). 
About 1721 Jane Brereton took her daughters to live in Wales, risking censure for having separated from her husband. He obtained a position in the customs office at Parkgate, near Chester; in February 1722 he was returning across the estuary to Chester from visiting his family when he was drowned by the incoming tide. Soon after this Jane Brereton moved to Wrexham in Denbighshire, for the sake of her daughters' education. There she became part of a genteel female social group, and addressed a number of poems to various members of this circle. In general, she eschewed publication, although 'Merlin: a Poem' was published as a quarto pamphlet in 1735 (dedicated to Queen Caroline, the poem engages with the modish myth of Merlin, who becomes a mouthpiece for some fulsome praise of the house of Brunswick); and from 1734 onwards she published some verse in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' under the pseudonym Melissa. This provoked some humorous verse ripostes from a certain Fido, whom Brereton discovered (only after his death by suicide) to be Thomas Beach, a wine merchant and a Wrexham acquaintance of hers who had encouraged her writing. Apparently to console Brereton for the loss of this literary friendship, Edward Cave, the editor of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', put her in touch with Elizabeth Carter: they corresponded from 1738 onwards. However, Jane Brereton died at Wrexham on 7 August 1740, after a five-week attack of 'the gravel' ('Account', vii). She was buried on 10 August 1740 in Wrexham church. She was survived by her daughters: Lucy went to live in Cork with Jane Brereton's brother Thomas, a successful brewer, while Charlotte went to live in Essex and herself wrote poems. 
Probably for the benefit of her daughters, proposals for printing Jane Brereton's 'Poems on Several Occasions' were published in 1741 and 1742; subscribers included Elizabeth Carter and John Cleland, and the volume eventually appeared in 1744, with a valuable 'Account of the life of Mrs Brereton', almost certainly written by Charlotte. The 'Account' plays down her literary career ('writing was her darling entertainment, and was to her a relaxation from her cares'; 'Account', xii), and emphasizes her exemplary qualities as wife, mother, widow, and Christian. Brereton's body of poetry displays a flair for tactful occasional writing, and represents a transitional moment in women's writing in the eighteenth century, a moment at which being a published writer while retaining respectability was becoming a real possibility. 


@@@@@


doc= 62643


Bulkeley, William (1691-1760), diarist, was born on 4 November 1691 at Brynddu in the parish of Llanfechell, Anglesey, the second son of William Bulkeley (died 1699) and Lettice (died 1750), daughter of Captain Henry Jones of Llangoed in Anglesey. His father died when he was a mere boy and his mother married a second and third husband. 
William Bulkeley received a sound education and may have attended the grammar school at Beaumaris. On 22 March 1710 he married Jane (1693-1714), the daughter of Ambrose Lewis, rector of Llanrhuddlad, a neighbouring parish. After bearing three children, Catherine, Mary, and William, Jane died in January 1714 on the day her son was baptized; William Bulkeley did not remarry. On coming of age he had inherited his father's estate which consisted of Brynddu and some scattered farms in nearby parishes. 
Bulkeley lived a fairly uneventful life, but he recorded the latter part of that life in two volumes of a personal diary, the first covering the period from 30 March 1734 until 8 June 1743, the second 1 August 1747 to 28 September 1760. These diaries, along with other complementary sources, provide a valuable insight into the daily life of a fairly typical Anglesey landowner: Bulkeley's running of his estate, cattle-dealing in the local fairs, his duties as justice of the peace, his extended visit to Dublin and its playhouses, his references to Anglesey politics, and his religious convictions. The diaries also disclose that he was burdened with a heavy debt, that he opposed the unfortunate marriage in 1738 of his daughter Mary to Fortunatus Wright, the famous privateer from Liverpool, and that he accepted resolutely the waywardness and death of his only son and heir in 1751. 
Although references to William Bulkeley's adherence to Welsh culture in the diaries are brief, for example his patronizing of Welsh harpists, other sources confirm his interest in Welsh poetry, music, and antiquities. He was distantly related to Lewis Morris, and it was probably due to the latter's influence, which had begun in 1725, that he undertook the task of copying into one volume (NL Wales, MS 832) a variety of Welsh poems, a substantial number of which are seventeenth-century works in free metre. He was an active member of Lewis Morris's group of friends in Anglesey until 1742, but his fairly strict religious attitude would have prevented him sharing in Morris's experiments with ribald poetry and prose. 
When Bulkeley was fifty-one years old nonconformity took a hold in central Anglesey. The Anglican clergy actively resisted the nonconformists, who were persecuted in their homes, in their public worship, in the civil and especially the ecclesiastical courts, and through the printed word. True to his character Bulkeley was incensed by the opposition of the clergy to the nonconformists and made his views on the subject public. His stand reached a climax in 1747, when the Revd Thomas Ellis of Holyhead published the first edition of a Welsh tract, 'Byrr Grynhoad', attacking the nonconformists, to which Bulkeley responded with a handwritten tract which was circulated, but of which no copy has survived. In a second edition of Ellis's tract there are hurried additions which are a direct response to Bulkeley's tract, and include an invitation to him to set a farm to the chief nonconformist. Needless to say Bulkeley set one of his farms to William Prichard, the leader of the Anglesey nonconformists. There are several other references which confirm Bulkeley's sympathetic attitude to the beleaguered nonconformists in Anglesey. 
William Morris, brother of Lewis Morris and himself a staunch churchman, wrote in 1754 that Bulkeley was an unhypocritical and honest person, a view which he restated when he heard of Bulkeley's death in October 1760 at Brynddu. Bulkeley was buried on 28 October 1760 at the parish church of Llanfechell. 


@@@@@


doc= 62644


Carter, Isaac (d. 1741), printer, is a figure whose origins and early life are obscure, but he may have been a native of Carmarthenshire. He is credited with being the first legal and overt printer in Wales. On 11 January 1721 Carter married Ann Lewis at Cenarth. 
Carter set up his printing press in Trerhedyn on the Cardiganshire side of the River Teifi at Newcastle Emlyn, where the first of his publications are dated 1718. This area in south Cardiganshire and north Carmarthenshire, around the Teifi valley, was, in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, a notable centre for a great deal of literary activity, both religious and antiquarian. It was almost inevitable that a press should be established in the area, more for religious and educational reasons, perhaps, than strictly commercial ones. Carter is said to have been encouraged in his venture by the Carmarthen printer Nicholas Thomas, and at Trerhedyn he printed at least five (possibly six) titles. The earliest are two moralizing ballads, one against smoking and the other an appeal to heed the voice of conscience: 'Can o senn iw hen feistr tobacco', by Alban Thomas, appeared in 1718, followed by 'Can ar fesur triban ynghylch cydwybod a'i chynheddfau' (1718). Carter then printed a translation of Thomas Vincent's 'Explicatory Catechism: Eglurhaad o gatechism byrraf y gymanfa' (1719; trans. J. P. and T. J.), and other devotional and instructional works. These included 'Dwysfawr rym buchedd grefyddol' (1722), a translation by Alban Thomas of William Melmoth's 'The Great Importance of a Religious Life Considered'; 'Y Christion cyffredin' (1724), a translation of Edward Wells's catechism 'The Common Christian Rightly and Plainly Instructed'; and perhaps a parochial charge, 'Annogaeth difrifol gweinidog iw blwyfolion' ('c'.1722). 
In 1725 Carter moved his press to the flourishing market town of Carmarthen, where he was active at least until 1733. There was, however, no change in the nature of his output, and most of his titles reflect the concern of local clergy (Anglicans and dissenters) and of the gentry, who frequently commissioned or were patrons of both the translating and publishing of these works, for the spiritual life of the community. Some are translations of popular English books of devotion and instruction: 'Maddeuant i'r edifairiol' (1725) was a translation by William Lewis and Evan Pryce of John Goodman's 'The Penitent Pardoned'; another was 'Llythr bugailiaidd oddiwrth Weinidog at ei blwyfolion' (1729), Alban Thomas's translation of William Assheton's 'A Pastoral Letter from a Minister to his Parishoners'. Other titles were sermons or selections of writings from other published works. 
Carter died early in 1741 and was buried at St Peter's Church, Carmarthen, on 4 May 1741. 


@@@@@


doc= 62645


Davies, David (d. 1807), Independent minister and journal editor, is a figure whose parentage and date of birth are unknown, but he was probably born at Llanybydder in Carmarthenshire. A student at the dissenters' academy in Swansea in 1786, he was ordained in 1787. His ministry began with two Independent churches, Capel Sul in Kidwelly and Pen-y-graig, near Carmarthen. In 1790 he moved to Holywell, Flintshire, to be the minister of the Independent church there. 
Davies is remembered as the publisher and editor of the most radical Welsh language periodical of the 1790s: 'Y Geirgrawn, neu, Drysorfa Gwybodaeth' ('The Magazine, or, Treasury of Knowledge'), a fourpenny monthly. Nine numbers were published between February and October 1796. The periodical covered the debate on the 'Seren tan gwmmwl' ('Star under a Cloud'), a pamphlet written by John Jones in 1795 influenced by Thomas Paine's 'Rights of Man' (1791). David Davies participated in the debate and defended the work of John Jones against its detractors. Paineite influence may also be seen in Davies's summary of the causes of the French Revolution. The poetry in the periodical had a distinct Jacobin tone, most notably 'Can Rhyddid' ('Poem on Liberty'), a Welsh translation of the 'Marseillaise', which appeared in the May number. In a prefatory note, the author (probably Thomas Evans, Glyn Cothi) claimed that the song had inspired the 'invincible' French forces and had wafted to Britain on the wings of a breeze. This was at a time when Britain and France were at war. The 'Geirgrawn' was a well-produced periodical and there were no indications of financial problems. Its sudden end in late 1796 was almost certainly the result of threats from the authorities. 
Davies was forced to leave Holywell for a few months during the winter of 1796-7. His church may also have been perturbed by the political implications of their minister's work. They complained to the Independent Association at Denbigh in 1797 that his ministry had been ineffective for years, and 'the hearers are becoming thinner' (Jenkins, 30). Davies left Holywell in October 1800. His movements are not known between October 1800 and 1802. Some time in 1802 he became a minister at Welshpool. He was there for a short while and in 1803 he moved to the Stoneway church in Bridgnorth, Shropshire, where he ministered and also kept school. He was held in esteem by his congregation, and when he died at Bridgnorth in 1807 he was buried in the walls of his church. 


@@@@@


doc= 62647


Edwards, Thomas (1738-1810), poet, was born between 1 and 8 January 1738 in Penporchell Isaf in the parish of Llannefydd, Denbighshire, the son of Evan Edwards, a smallholder, and his wife, Mary. He became known as Twm o'r Nant on account of his parents' moving to Y Nant Isaf, near the village of Nantglyn, in the parish of Henllan, about 1741. He married Elizabeth Hughes (1738/9-1808) of Llanfair Talhaearn in 1763, and the first of the couple's three daughters was born before the end of the same year. 
Twm recorded the details of his early life, and sketched his subsequent movements, in a short autobiographical tract which appeared in 'Y Greal' in 1805. He mentions his meagre schooling -- a few weeks at the Nantglyn Free School and a fortnight's instruction in the English tongue at Denbigh -- and boasts of his exploits as a timber haulier which were unfortunately arrested when his horses fell victim to a disease and died. Further tribulations were to follow with the bankruptcy of an uncle for whom Twm had agreed to act as surety. Twm chose to outwit his debtors by leaving Denbigh, where he had settled shortly after his marriage, and fleeing first to Dolobran in Montgomeryshire and eventually to Llandeilo in Carmarthenshire where he again undertook haulage work before returning to his native county in 1786. 
Twm sought to overcome his financial plight by writing interludes. His involvement with this form of popular entertainment began around 1749 when he was invited to join a local company of touring actors. By the time he was twenty Twm had written seven interludes, all of which have since disappeared. There remain in print and in manuscript seven works written between about 1766 and 1789 which the author performed throughout north Wales and which brought him, according to his own testimony, considerable pecuniary reward, enhanced by the sale of printed versions. His interludes were republished after his death -- no other writer received this treatment -- and six of his works appeared collectively in an Isaac Foulkes publication of 1874, 'Gwaith Thomas Edwards'. 
His explicit commentary on the social evils of his day helps to explain Twm's renown as an interlude writer. The unpopularity of the various taxes levied by the authorities is frequently mentioned. Landowners are castigated on account of their exorbitant rents, their greed, and their absenteeism. The representatives of the church are shown to be immoral, unconcerned with the spiritual welfare of their flocks, and unable to communicate effectively with the masses due to their lack of fluency in the Welsh language. The legal profession, central in Twm o'r Nant's personal drama of misery, is portrayed as a haven for conniving swindlers. Yet, paradoxically, Twm parades as the upholder of the social order, especially so in 'Pedair colofn gwladwriaeth', published three years prior to the French Revolution. Social tension, Twm argues, is caused not by an unjust system but rather by the inability of the individual, whatever his status, to respect his predestined place and perform his required duties. 
The interludes also proclaim the author's moral and religious values. Man is shown to be at the mercy of his nature and his sins are symbolized by the two stock characters, the miser and jester, and by parallel allegorical characters. 'Tri chryfion byd', possibly Twm's last interlude, ends not with the conventional death of the former, but with his conversion. The miser's rejection of the transient serves to remind the public of a pivotal theme in the teaching of the Methodists, and also explains how Twm became 'persona grata' in the eyes of the movement's leaders, who naturally despised the interlude and the lewd actions and speech of its characters. Nineteenth-century commentators were less impressed with the religious undertones in the interludes. 
The most prominent interlude writers in eighteenth-century Wales were also prolific ballad writers, and Twm o'r Nant was no exception. There remain approximately 200 extant pieces in print and in manuscripts, and as many poems again in 'cynghanedd', mostly 'englynion', awaiting the services of an editor. Interestingly, scraps of poetry by two of Twm's offspring, Margaret and Lowri, survive in their father's manuscripts. The poet prepared an anthology of his works (again as part of his efforts to establish himself financially); 'Gardd o gerddi' appeared in 1790, and Twm gleefully informed readers of his autobiography that he had sold 2000 copies. The strict-metre 'cywyddau' in the collection bear the hallmark of hurried composition. Their style and subject matter however -- his elegies and eulogies to the north Wales gentry take a prominent place -- indicate that their author was well acquainted with the poetry of the 'cywyddwyr' of the late middle ages. Twm himself was the proud owner of several early manuscripts which he eventually sold to the Gwyneddigion Society (the London-Welsh Society founded in 1770). 
Twm o'r Nant participated in the eisteddfodau held under the auspices of the same society during the latter years of the eighteenth century, but the cherished main honour eluded him, possibly as a consequence of an earlier dispute between Twm and the Gwyneddigion, which deemed the impromptu composition of its favourite, Gwallter Mechain (Walter Davies), superior to Twm's effort, in spite of the entreaties of Twm's protagonist, David Samwell, Captain James Cook's surgeon, who dubbed his hero the Cambrian Shakespeare. 
Twm survived his wife by two years. He died on 1 April 1810 and was buried in the parish church of Denbigh. The Gwyneddigion funded a tablet in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 62649


Iddison, Roger (1834-1890), cricketer, was born at Bedale, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, on 15 September 1834, the eldest of the four children of Roger Iddison ('b'. 1809) and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Jefferson; his father was a ropemaker. Having begun life as a butcher Iddison played cricket for Bedale as early as 1849. He made his first professional appearance for The 14 of Yorkshire against the United All England eleven in 1853. Iddison was an all-rounder; he fielded at point and was originally regarded as a round-arm fast bowler, but later changed his technique to deliver 'insidious' lobs. As a batsman he favoured the off drive, and in both 1867 and 1869 he was third in the national batting averages. At the Oval in 1870 he won a silver cup given by a Yorkshire gentleman for the best all-round performance by one of the Yorkshire eleven. 
From 1853 until 1876 Iddison played for Yorkshire in seventy-four matches and, from 1863 to 1872, was the county's first captain. Throughout the 1860s he was among the leading batsmen in England and in October 1861, one of only two northerners, he joined the first team to tour Australia, led by H. H. Stephenson. The All England eleven sailed on the 'SS Great Britain' and won six out of their twelve matches, in all of which Iddison played. He took the most wickets in Australia, had the fourth highest batting average, and made twenty-seven catches; in Melbourne he was presented with two commemorative bats. By 1864 he had moved to Manchester, where with his younger brother, William Holdsworth Iddison (1840-1898), a professional cricketer for Lancashire, he set up a sports equipment business in Corporation Street. In the years 1865-70 Roger Iddison also played for Lancashire, in sixteen matches; against Surrey at the Oval in 1866 he became the first batsman to score a century for the county. He featured in the north versus south division in cricket and, with four others of the Yorkshire team, refused to play against Surrey in 1865. 
In 1869 Iddison moved to York, where he worked as a commission agent and cattle auctioneer and set up a sports goods shop at 20 Blake Street. In the same year he founded the United North of England eleven and was its first secretary; he was also joint secretary of the short-lived Yorkshire United eleven, founded in 1874 under the patronage of Lord Londesborough, president of the MCC in 1876. In 1872, when the MCC played Yorkshire, Iddison took the wicket of W. G. Grace. Iddison was given a benefit match (29-31 July 1872) at Bramall Lane, Sheffield, against Gloucestershire; this was the first time that Grace played at Sheffield, and he scored 150 not out. The legendary bowler George Freeman came out of retirement for the match, which was watched by some 17,000 spectators, who saw Iddison caught and bowled by Grace for 4 runs. Iddison was cricket coach at various public schools, including Uppingham (1866-72). He made his last professional appearance in 1876, for Yorkshire against Middlesex, but continued to play in local games, such as that at Malton in 1885. 
Relatively under-appreciated as a cricketer, Iddison clearly had organizational qualities and was known to be 'effusive in his vernacular' style of speech on the field (West, 44). Like Grace, Iddison had become increasingly portly by the end of his cricket career, allegedly weighing some 17 stone. He died at his family home, 8 Portland Street, York, on 19 March 1890 and was buried three days later in the city cemetery, where his grave still can be found. Large crowds attended his funeral, to which the city butchers sent 'a handsome wreath... in a glass case' ('Evening Press', 21 March 1890). He was survived by his wife, Elizabeth Webster ('b'. 1834) of Halifax, whom he had married on 19 January 1857, and by their only child, Elizabeth Jane (1858-1938); his widow later married again. 


@@@@@


doc= 62663


Cheny, John (fl. 1727-1750), writer on horse-racing, hailed from the Arundel area of Sussex. Little else is known about him save that in 1727 he compiled the first version of the 'Racing Calendar', which for over 200 years has been the official public organ of the Jockey Club. His title-page for the initial volume was an all-encompassing table of contents: 'An Historical List or Account of all the Horse-Matches run and of all the Plates and Prizes run for in England (of the value of ten pounds or upwards) in 1727, containing the names of the owners of the horses etc., that have run, as above, and the names and colours of the horses also, with the winner distinguished of every match, plate, prize, or stakes; the conditions of running, as to weight, age, size, etc., and the places in which the losing horses have come in. (Cheny, title-page)' Put more simply, it was a gentleman's guide to 'matching or betting with greater advantage', by the provision of knowledge of form, albeit somewhat dated, and breeding. 
Cheny funded the calendar by asking subscribers for a seven-year commitment with a half-crown to be paid with the order, 5's'. annually for the first six years, and, as a reward for loyalty, only a further half-crown in the seventh year. This sum was to be paid to various named persons but could also be given personally to the author 'as he travels to take his accounts' (Cheny). In fact Cheny rode all over England to attend race meetings, obtain breeding information, and solicit subscriptions. He continued to publish his calendar until 1750, some twenty-four issues in total. From 1743 these included particulars of the pedigrees of all the significant racehorses of the day. 
Sadly Cheny's name features in few histories of horse-racing, not least because James Weatherby, who later took on the task of producing the 'Racing Calendar', appropriated all the information in Cheny's publication without giving any acknowledgement. He mentioned Cheny only once, in his preface to the 1791 edition, where he remarked that Cheny was in error in his identification of the sires of two particular horses. Ironically most turf enthusiasts falsely identify the 'Racing Calendar' with Messrs Weatherby, its publishers for over two centuries, and not with Cheny whose entrepreneurial ability coupled with his racing intelligence launched the racing fraternity's bible. Even Charles Prior, the historian of the 'Racing Calendar', who acknowledges Cheny's pioneering work, misspells his name as Cheney. 


@@@@@


doc= 62666


Hamilton, Gavin George, second Baron Hamilton of Dalzell (1872-1952), horse-racing administrator, was born on 29 June 1872 at Garscube House, Newkilpatrick, Dalziel, near Motherwell, Lanarkshire, the second of the four sons and the fifth of the eight children of John Glencairn Carter Hamilton, first Baron Hamilton of Dalzell (1829-1900), landowner and MP, and his wife, Lady Emily (1840-1882), daughter of David Leslie-Melville, eighth earl of Leven and seventh earl of Melville. His family, whose seat was Dalzell House, Dalziel, had been prominent landowners in Lanarkshire for several centuries and his father, a Gladstonian Liberal, was raised to the peerage in 1886. 
Educated at Eton and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Hamilton was a regular soldier until 1898 and later served in the South African War and in France in the First World War, during which he rose to the rank of major in the Scots Guards and was awarded the Military Cross. Having inherited the barony in 1900, he became a knight of the Thistle in 1909 and a lord in waiting to Edward VII and George V, and remained a friend of the latter after leaving the court in 1911 on being cited as co-respondent in his future wife's undefended divorce case. On 24 July 1912 he married Sybil Mary (1867-1933), daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir Frederick Marshall and formerly wife of William Lawson, later third Baron Burnham. 
Though a racehorse owner on only a small scale, Hamilton proved the outstanding turf administrator of his time, with a progressive outlook and reforming zeal which marked him out among the members of the Jockey Club. Even before his election to horse-racing's conservative governing body in 1908 he was responsible for a policy of racecourse stewards' initiating post-race inquiries rather than waiting for an objection to be lodged, and in 1919 he was the principal author of a report, subsequently ignored, which suggested that facilities for racegoers could be improved by using the savings resulting from possible racecourse mergers. 
Hamilton was the senior steward of the Jockey Club for three terms of twelve months each and during the second of them, in 1927-8, he set about realizing his ambition of making betting contribute financially to horse-racing. He chaired a Jockey Club committee which recommended the introduction of the totalizator ('tote'), a pool betting service whose profits, unlike those of bookmakers, would be used to the benefit of the sport, as in many other countries. The enabling legislation, the 'Racecourse Betting Act' 1928, was introduced as a private member's bill in the House of Commons by Ralph Glyn (later first Baron Glyn), but Hamilton was its driving spirit and he helped to outmanoeuvre strong lobbying from an unlikely alliance of bookmakers, who feared competition, and moralists, in particular the church, which opposed all gambling as a social evil. However, during the bill's stormy passage through the Commons many concessions had to be made and the original intention that the tote should be run by the Jockey Club had to be abandoned. 
The tote started operations in July 1929, managed by the Racecourse Betting Control Board (later the Horserace Totalisator Board), a statutory body of which Hamilton was a member until 1949. The tote overcame considerable teething problems, and though it did not gain as big a share of the betting market as he had hoped, it did eventually prove a significant source of revenue for the sport. 
The father of the tote also introduced Jockey Club rules requiring all horses to run on their merits and banning dead heats from being run off in a decider. From 1934 to 1945 Hamilton was the king's representative at Ascot racecourse, where he effected many improvements. He was lord lieutenant of Lanarkshire from 1938 until his death, revived Lanark and Hamilton Park racecourses, and ran a model dairy farm on his 2500 acre Dalzell estate. 
Gavin Hamilton, a man of austere appearance and of few words, was a practical visionary. Always seeking ways to benefit the sport he loved, he possessed both the foresight to identify the tote as a potential new source of revenue and the drive to bring about its creation. Few men have left such a lasting legacy to the sporting world. He died on 23 June 1952 at Dalzell House and was buried there three days later. He had no children and was succeeded in the barony by his nephew, John d'Henin Hamilton (1911-1990). 


@@@@@


doc= 62668


Nagle, Florence (1894-1988), racehorse trainer, was born at Woodleigh, Wilbraham Road, Fallowfield, Manchester, on 26 October 1894, the daughter and eldest child of William George Watson (1861-1930), a merchant for Manchester goods who was created a baronet in 1912 and settled at Sulhampstead, Berkshire, and his second wife, Bessie (died 1942), daughter of Thomas Atkinson of Workington, Cumberland. She had two brothers. On 1 July 1916 she married James Nagle, an Irishman who had returned from Toronto to serve in the King's Royal Rifle Corps during the First World War. In 1920 she began a racing partnership with him. Their first winner, trained by Harry Powney, was Fernley in the River handicap at Kempton Park. Unhappily her husband's heavy and unsuccessful gambling forced a withdrawal from turf activities. They were divorced in 1928; he died in 1933. She resumed in 1934, using an inheritance from her father to finance a stud at Sulhampstead and a small training establishment at Savile House, Newmarket, with Hugh Powney, a brother of Harry. From here emerged Sandsprite, who ran second in the 1937 Derby. During the Second World War Nagle moved her stud to Westerlands, formerly part of Lord Woolavington's stud, and purchased Rose of England, the 1930 Oaks winner, as her foundation mare. 
In due course Nagle also began to train there -- and later at Petworth in Sussex -- and in 1947 saddled her first winner, Thoroughwort, at Lingfield. However, it was not her name that appeared as trainer on the race card, but that of her head lad. The Jockey Club in Britain had constantly refused to grant licences to women to train and hence the subterfuge of using a male nominee had to be resorted to. This prohibition on women training racehorses had more to do with authority structures in the sport than the perceived physical demands of the job. During times of emergency, such as illness and accident, many women had run their husband's stables, but racing propriety demanded that where a widow took over the licence be held by her head lad. Similarly when Norah Wilmot inherited her father's training enterprise in 1931 she was not allowed to hold the licence, this despite having been his assistant for twenty years. Not all racing authorities were as rigid. In correspondence to the Jockey Club Nagle pointed out that women had been granted training licences in the United States, Australia, Germany, Kenya, several Scandinavian countries, and Belgium, from where Madame du Bois had had entries accepted for races at Ascot. She added that the situation was hypocritical, as everyone in the industry knew that she and Norah Wilmot were trainers in all but name. Even the queen had sent the occasional horse to the Wilmot stables. She never received any statement from the Jockey Club giving reasons for their stance. 
Finally, after two decades of fruitless campaigning, Florence Nagle took the club to court in 1966. She was seventy-one at the time with hardly a career to look forward to, but argued 'there was a principle involved in my fight. I am a feminist and believe that things should be decided on ability and not sex' ('Daily Telegraph'). The Jockey Club initially resisted, but threatened with High Court action capitulated, accepting legal advice that they had no case, as there was nothing in their rules to justify their action. They immediately said that they were prepared to grant her a licence provided that she acknowledged that it was given at the absolute and unfettered discretion of the stewards. This was no different to what was accepted by any trainer. In July they stated that they would be prepared to grant training licences to 'suitable women' and on 3 August Florence and Norah Wilmot received their permits. Wilmot, at the age of seventy-seven, had the honour of saddling the first flat-race winner by a recognized female trainer when Scobie Breasley rode Pat to victory in the South Coast Stakes at Brighton that same day. By 1973 seventeen women held licences and between them they had trained over 300 winners since 1966. 
Florence Nagle died at her home, Little Mayfield, Lordings Lane, West Chiltington, Pulborough, Sussex, on 30 October 1988. Her training record was moderate, though she won eight races with Elf Arrow, including the Liverpool St Leger. Nevertheless her action, as she put it, 'in dragging the Jockey Club into the twentieth century' (Ramsden, 117) paved the way for Jenny Pitman, Venetia Williams, Mary Reveley, and others who have competed with -- and beaten -- male trainers. 


@@@@@


doc= 62679


Griffin, Elizabeth (bap. 1691, d. 1762), landowner, was baptized on 30 November 1691 at Dingley, Northamptonshire, the eldest daughter of James Griffin ('bap'. 1667, died 1715) and his wife, Anne (1667/8-1707), the daughter of Richard Raynsford, of Dallington, Northamptonshire. The Griffin family had served the Stuart monarchs for several generations, and Elizabeth's grandfather, Edward Griffin, had been made a baron a few days before James II left England in 1688. James Griffin, who had been tory MP for Brackley in the 1685 parliament, succeeded as second Baron Griffin in 1710, but never assumed the title. Elizabeth's paternal grandmother was Lady Essex Howard, the eldest daughter and coheir of James Howard, third earl of Suffolk; through her the Griffins had a then disregarded claim to the Howard estates in Suffolk and Essex, centred on the mansion of Audley End. 
Elizabeth Griffin's father, although a Roman Catholic, seems to have educated his children as members of the Church of England. On 14 May 1720 Elizabeth Griffin married Henry Grey (1683-1740) at St Anne's, Soho. Grey was the second son of Richard Neville of Billingbear, Berkshire, and his wife, Catherine, the sister of Ford Grey, earl of Tankerville; the Grey and Neville families, unlike the Griffins, were whig and protestant supporters of the post-1688 revolution settlement. At the time of their marriage Grey was whig MP for Wallingford; he was later MP for Berwick upon Tweed from 1723 to 1727, and for Reading from 1734 until his death. They had no children. Grey's landed property in Northumberland and Berkshire was said to bring in an annual income of $9700. Grey died on 9 September 1740, leaving Elizabeth his estate, including his country house at Billingbear, Berkshire, and a town house at 10 New Burlington Street, London. On 9 June 1741 Elizabeth married, as her second husband, John Wallop, first Viscount Lymington (1690-1762). Her marriage settlement ensured that she would retain control of her property, rather than its becoming that of her new husband. This marriage was also childless. Elizabeth became countess of Portsmouth when her husband was created an earl in 1743. 
Lady Portsmouth's younger brother Edward, third Baron Griffin, died in 1742, leaving his estates and his claim to nominate the mastership of Magdalene College, Cambridge, to his illegitimate son Edward, who then sold the main Griffin residence of Dingley Hall. Lady Portsmouth and her sister Anne Whitwell were left as the legitimate representatives of the Griffin family, but without the family property. An opportunity for restoring the Griffin family fortunes arose in 1745 on the death of Henry Howard, tenth earl of Suffolk. Under a Howard family agreement of 1721 his main residence, Audley End, and the estates passed to a remote kinsman, Thomas Howard, second earl of Effingham. Lady Portsmouth challenged Effingham's right to Audley End in the courts; her solicitor found a draft of a deed of 1687 which showed the third earl of Suffolk had intended to leave the property to his daughter. In 1747 Lady Portsmouth and her sister Anne were adjudged to have inherited the estate of Saffron Walden, but the house and park remained with Effingham. However, Effingham had no clear plan for the dilapidated house and Lady Portsmouth bought Audley End in 1752 for $10,000, having forced down Effingham's price by $5000. 
Lady Portsmouth found the contents of the house sold and parts of the building close to collapse. Sections of the once immense house (largely an early seventeenth-century creation, bought by Charles II in 1668 but subsequently returned by the crown to the Suffolks) had been demolished in the early eighteenth century. Lady Portsmouth was personally involved with all aspects of the reconstruction, which was always carried forward in her own name, not in that of her husband nor that of her nephew John Griffin Whitwell (1719-1797), who changed his name to John Griffin Griffin in 1749 as a condition of his becoming Lady Portsmouth's heir. She evolved a carefully considered plan that balanced the conservation of the house's Jacobean appearance with mid-eighteenth-century taste. The crumbling east wing of the house, with its gallery measuring 226 feet, was demolished, and replaced by a colonnade which imitated Jacobean designs elsewhere in the building. Materials from the east wing were either sold or used for the repair of the remainder of the building. The house's great hall was saved and its stone facade was emphasized as the main face of the house, stressing Lady Portsmouth's descent from Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk, lord treasurer to James I. The seventeenth-century formal gardens were replaced with a less regulated parkland setting. The alterations left a building of Jacobean appearance that none the less conformed to the eighteenth-century fashion for country houses of a concentrated symmetrical design rather than a series of courts. 
Lady Portsmouth's acquisition of Audley End had been motivated by the desire to exercise the patronage appropriate to her noble status as well as to regain a lost family home. Her research following the tenth earl of Suffolk's death had shown that the right the Griffins claimed to nominate the master of Magdalene College, Cambridge, was attached to the manor of Brooks Walden, where Audley End was built and which was retained by Lord Effingham in 1747. She purchased the right of nomination with the house in 1752, and in 1760, when the mastership fell vacant, she was assiduously courted by Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, who hoped to persuade her to appoint a government candidate. She rejected his attempts to influence her choice and appointed George Sandby, of whom Newcastle knew little, although he turned out to be a government supporter. Lady Portsmouth's right to appoint the master was never questioned, nor was she expected to defer to advice from men. 
Lady Portsmouth -- described by William Cole as being 'as proud as Lucifer; no German princess could exceed her' (Jeffreys, 33) -- died on 13 August 1762, a few months before her second husband; she was buried near her first husband in the parish church of Waltham St Lawrence, Berkshire. Her will confirmed the arrangement by which John Griffin Griffin would inherit Audley End. In addition, Billingbear was left to her husband's nephew Richard Neville Aldworth (1717-1793) ['see 'Neville, Richard Neville Aldworth], who was also named as Lady Portsmouth's residual legatee at Audley End should John Griffin Griffin die without a surviving son and heir. She made provision for her sister Anne Whitwell, her nieces Elizabeth and Mary Whitwell, and her cousin Jane James, which was specifically reserved for their own use and kept from the control of any husband. Codicils attempted to ensure that her successors in her estates would always bear the name of Griffin, and provided a legacy of $5000 for her niece Mary provided that she married with the consent of John Griffin Griffin and Lord Portsmouth. Thus, although Lady Portsmouth had no children of her own and was happy to be known by the title of her Wallop husband, by nomination she established a hierarchy of male and female heirs who would perpetuate the Griffin name, maintain the estates she had assembled by inheritance, litigation, and purchase, and exercise the political power appropriate to their wealth and status. 


@@@@@


doc= 62681


Bristed, Charles Astor (1820-1874), literary critic and writer on English university life, was born in New York on 6 October 1820, the son of John Bristed (1778-1855), an English-born clergyman in the protestant Episcopalian church in the USA and a prolific author, and his wife, Magdalen (1788-1832), the divorced wife of Adrian Bentzon and eldest child of John Jacob Astor. The marriage soon failed, and after his mother's death in 1832 Bristed was brought up by his grandfather in a bachelor establishment where he had frequent contact with the poet Fitz-Greene Halleck and the Anglophile writer Washington Irving. After being taught classics at the Revd T. Huddart's school by the eccentric Englishman Henry Herbert (Frank Forester), he entered Yale in 1835, gaining several prizes and graduating in 1839. In the following year he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, gaining further prizes and, in 1845, second-class honours in the classical tripos. The friends he made in Cambridge included William Johnson (later Cory), Henry Maine, Tom Taylor, and Henry Hallam; his experiences were recorded in 'Five Years in an English University' (1852), perhaps the best account of the student experience ever written in English. 
Both before and after his return to the USA in 1846 Bristed contributed to journals on a wide variety of topics; he published over 200 articles in all, many under the pseudonym Carl Benson. The income and Manhattan property that J. J. Astor left him at his death in 1848 enabled Bristed to live a life of leisure, much of which he devoted to writing. A series of articles in 'Fraser's Magazine' later became 'The Upper Ten Thousand: Sketches of American Society' (1852), a vivid account of the life of the New York social elite at home and on holiday. In 1851 Bristed moved to Paris with his wife, Laura Brevoort (died 1861), whom he had married on 14 January 1847. He witnessed the 1851 'coup d'etat', and described it, and Parisian social life, in a series of articles for the 'Literary World'. In the mid-1850s the Bristeds moved to Baden-Baden, his grandfather's birthplace; here he had printed a collection of his articles, 'Pieces of a Broken-Down Critic' (4 vols. in 1, 1858-9). After his wife's death in 1861 Bristed returned to the USA. During the Civil War he was active in support for the Union, working for the Loyal Publication Society and publishing several polemical pamphlets. Throughout his adult life Bristed suffered from rheumatism, from which he died on 14 January 1874 at his home, 1715 Kalb Street, Washington, DC; he was survived by his second wife, Grace Sedgwick (1833-1897), whom he had married in August 1867, two sons, and one (illegitimate) daughter. 
The wealth Bristed inherited enabled him to live where and how he wished, and he travelled extensively. The two books he published in 1852 offered insights into English life for Americans and vice versa; several later articles described and interpreted French society and culture for his countrymen. He was an early reader of Baudelaire, whom he probably met, and defended the life and work of George Sand against her moralistic American detractors. In the 1860s he wrote for 'The Knickerbocker', the 'Round Table', and 'The Galaxy', New York magazines which pioneered the untrammelled discussion of literature and art and sought to break free of the puritanism of the Boston elite. Bristed had a lifelong interest in the classics and in comparative philology. His essay 'The American language' ('Cambridge Essays 1855', 1855) was described by H. L. Mencken as 'the most intelligent brief discussion of the subject ever penned... The first really full-length defence of American by an American' ('The American Language', 1949, 69-71). He also contributed papers on the pronunciation of Latin to the first meetings of the American Philological Association in the early 1870s. Bristed was remembered by his friends as a witty and generous host and a man of high principle; his writings, though at times self-centred, are marked by a refreshingly acid intelligence. On his death, his contemporary George Templeton Strong remarked that 'In spite of certain foibles and oddities, 'Carl Benson' is a great loss. We have few such scholars, and nobody more honest of purpose and resolute in expression' (J. A. Nevins and M. H. Thomas, eds., 'The Diaries of George Templeton Strong', 1952, 4.510). 
Bristed's wealth, his leisured life, and the nature and range of his writings have led to an understandable but unjustified neglect. His 'Five Years in an English University' stands out, in its vivid description and richness of detail, in a genre it helped to create: the extended account of university life. Its status as a personal memoir gives it more immediacy than V. A. Huber's lengthy survey 'The English Universities' (1843, translated from a German original of 1839); it certainly tells us more about Cambridge than the later account by Bristed's fellow-countryman William Everett ('On the Cam', 1866). It has in fact become an important primary source, drawn on heavily in modern accounts. The book was written, Bristed tells us, principally to show Americans what could be learned from the English universities; he is scathing about his earlier alma mater, Yale, and in his final chapter urges reforms in some detail. Cambridge too came in for criticism; but for the most part, 'Five Years' reads like the recollection of a lost paradise. Charles Bristed, an Anglophile in the USA but an American patriot when in England, a long-term resident in four different countries, perhaps found it difficult to be completely at home anywhere. The life of his nephew William Waldorf Astor took a different, though also transatlantic, course: he emigrated from the USA to England in 1890, to become Viscount Astor and the founder of an English dynasty. 


@@@@@


doc= 62685


Blease, (Walter) Lyon (1884-1963), barrister and civic activist, was born on 30 May 1884 at 5 Beech Street, Fairfield, Liverpool, the second son and second of three children of Walter Blease ('c'.1853-1940), chartered accountant, and his wife, Mary Cecilia (died 1936), daughter of James Harvey of Manchester and his wife, Anne. Lyon, as he was known, grew up in comfortable circumstances, a devoted son of affectionate parents. His father, whose family were Baptists, worked strenuously to expand an accounting firm established by his father and an uncle. Mrs Blease's family were Presbyterian and committed to temperance, free trade, and other Liberal causes. Both parents were active in charities. Mrs Blease served as a poor-law guardian. 
Brought up a Presbyterian, Lyon Blease attended Parkfield School, Liverpool ('c'.1891-1899), and was then sent to Sedbergh School but soon returned home with a knee injury. He then went to Shrewsbury School (1900-02). An able student, he was made praeposter and head of house, but was ill at ease with his peers. Principled and prudish, he was treated with contempt. Devastated, he feigned illness, neglected his schoolwork, and contemplated suicide. Finally, his father agreed that he should not return to school. By then, however, Blease had acquired an enduring commitment to serious reading and self-study. History and literature were his favoured subjects, but he was also interested in the arts. Intensely high-minded, he was bent both on self-improvement and on preparing himself for public life. At a time when he was shifting to agnosticism, he found a sense of ethical purpose in the prospect of public service. 
At his father's urging, Blease read for a law degree and the bar at the University of Liverpool, keeping terms at Lincoln's Inn. He received his LLB and was called to the bar in 1906. Awarded a studentship at the bar final examination (1906), he took an LLM at Liverpool in 1908. He practised as a Chancery lawyer in Liverpool, and in 1910 was appointed lecturer in the law and custom of the constitution at Liverpool University. 
More drawn to politics and letters than the law, Blease campaigned on behalf of temperance, free trade, and other Liberal causes before the First World War and in the January 1910 general election unsuccessfully contested Lancashire's Chorley division for the Liberals. A strong suffragist, he was president of the Liverpool committee of the Men's League for Women's Suffrage from 1908. Together with his occasional writings, Blease's 'The Emancipation of English Women' (1910) and 'A Short History of English Liberalism' (1913) brought his views before a wider public. An exponent of the new Liberalism, he urged state welfare provision to enable individuals to develop their abilities and contribute to the common good. 
During the First World War Blease served with hospital units in Serbia, Russia, and Romania. In Serbia he worked as a gentleman orderly in a medical mission led by the surgeon James Berry, co-authoring an account, 'The Story of a Red Cross Unit in Serbia' (1916). Here Blease met his future wife, Harriott Davies (1884-1972), a spirited trained nurse. Both later served at the Anglo-Russian hospital in Petrograd. With Russia's military collapse, members of the staff travelled east to Japan. 
Blease and Davies were married in Tokyo in 1918 and remained in Japan for a year. He worked as assistant editor of the 'New East' and with Harriott's help prepared his study 'Suvorof' (1920), using material gathered in Russia. The couple had three daughters, and Blease proved very solicitous for their education. 
From 1919 to 1949 Blease was Queen Victoria professor of law at Liverpool University, serving twice as dean of the law faculty (1919-25 and 1942-5). He combined the appointment with practice at the bar. Consistently with the faculty's emphasis on professional training rather than on research, his legal scholarship was limited to textbooks on conveyancing. Eloquent and charming, he was public orator of the university from 1931 to 1949. 
Throughout his life, Blease remained a tireless champion of humane and liberal causes. His concerns ranged from the university's ban on married women staff (which he vigorously opposed) to work for Jewish refugees. In the general elections of 1945 and 1950 he contested Liverpool's East Toxteth and Garston divisions for the Liberals, again unsuccessfully. An accomplished, many-sided man, he used his talents to enrich the life of his community. He lectured on literary and other subjects to diverse groups (including the Workers' Educational Association); participated in radio broadcasts and amateur theatricals; served as chairman of the Liverpool Philharmonic Society, the Merseyside Film Institute Society, and the Liverpool executive council of the National Health Service (1952-60). 
Blease's distinction rested not on any one achievement but on many good works. Although the parliamentary career he dreamed of eluded him, his life lent substance to his liberal vision, linking self-development with civic virtue. He died of coronary thrombosis on 12 April 1963 at his home, 12 Eaton Road, Cressington Park, Liverpool, and was cremated in Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 62687


Redfern, Lawrence (1888-1967), Unitarian minister, was born at Great Hucklow, Derbyshire, on 27 December 1888, the third son of Robert Stuart Redfern (1851-1922), Unitarian minister at Great Hucklow, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Connell. Educated at the Unitarian College, Manchester, where he was Gaskell scholar, he graduated from Manchester University BA (1911), MA (1912), and BD (1914). A year as Hibbert scholar at Harvard University was followed by appointment as minister to the Unitarian Octagon Chapel in Norwich, where he served from 1914 to 1918. He married on 2 September 1915 Eleanor (1890-1983), daughter of John Rhodes, accountant, of Great Hucklow; they had three sons. 
In 1918 Redfern was appointed minister of Ullet Road Unitarian Church in Liverpool, whose congregation included some of the city's most influential families. Tall and dignified -- notable for wearing winged collars long after they were thought fashionable -- he was a committed pastor, teacher, charismatic preacher, and active member of the local community in Liverpool, playing tennis for a local club. He became well known in the region, serving as chaplain to the high sheriffs of both Cheshire and Lancashire and, for a time, as chairman of the Royal Liverpool Children's Hospital. For more than twenty-five years he was on the committee of the Manchester Unitarian College, and served as college president in 1954. 
Redfern's contribution to British Unitarianism included, in 1928, membership of the delegation that created the general assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian churches from the amalgamation of the British and Foreign Unitarian Association and the national conference. A member of the general assembly from its inception, he was associated with the compilation of 'Hymns of Worship' (1927) and the 'Order of Worship' (1932); he was elected president in 1947. International connections included membership of the visit by the Anglo-American commission to religious minorities in Transylvania and Romania (1922); of the British delegacy to the USA, to celebrate the centenary of the British and Foreign Unitarian Association and the American Unitarian Association (1925); and, representing the general assembly, membership of the official tour of Unitarian churches in South Africa, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand (1937). 
Redfern made an impression outside north-western and Unitarian circles owing to the publicity accorded him during what became known as the 'Liverpool controversy'. He became chaplain to Sir Sydney Jones when the latter was appointed high sheriff of Lancashire in 1929. That the high sheriff and his chaplain were both dissenters -- Sir Sydney belonged to Ullet Road church -- created a problem for the local Anglican church establishment. At the opening of the assizes it was customary for the justices to attend morning service at the local parish church or cathedral and for the high sheriff or his chaplain to preach. Between 1929 and 1933 the invitation to the pulpit was extended neither to Sir Sydney nor to Redfern in any of the Lancashire assize towns of Lancaster, Manchester, or Liverpool, although Redfern had sometimes been invited to read a lesson. But in 1933 the newly appointed dean of Liverpool, F. W. Dwelly, unhappy at this break with tradition which he saw as freighted with unnecessary rejection, invited Redfern to preach at the cathedral assize service on 22 October. Observing events from London, Lord Hugh Cecil demanded that Dwelly and the bishop of Liverpool, A. A. David (who had allowed the Unitarian scholar L. P. Jacks to address a Liverpool Cathedral congregation), be arraigned before the convocation of York for allowing a Unitarian to preach. In June 1934, following a resolution in the upper house proposed by the bishop of Durham, Hensley Henson, both bishop and dean were condemned by convocation, which had been asked whether Unitarians could be considered Christian (Henson thought not) and, therefore, whether they ought to be allowed to be preach at a regular Anglican service. 
Dwelly and Charles Raven, canon of the cathedral, sent a letter of apology to Redfern for the decision of convocation. In response Redfern regretted that the cathedral was condemned for acting as an inclusive civic centre: he later published 'The Unitarian Church and Christian Unity' (1935), outlining the Unitarian claim to be part of the Christian church. In spite of the controversy relationships locally appear to have remained good and Redfern appeared with other senior Liverpool clergy on some important occasions. After the May blitz of 1941 he represented the free churches at the mass burial of 559 bodies in Anfield cemetery, alongside the bishop of Liverpool and his Roman Catholic counterpart. 
In 1947 Redfern was elected president of the general assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian churches. He left Ullet Road in 1950 to take up his final post as minster of Bournemouth Unitarian Church, a smaller and less demanding church than in Liverpool. He retired in 1960 and died at 38 Queens Park Avenue, Bournemouth, on 17 April 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 62688


Bentley, Elizabeth (bap. 1767, d. 1839), poet, was baptized on 26 November 1767 at All Saints', Norwich, the only child of Daniel Bentley ('bap'. 1735, died 1783), a journeyman cordwainer, and his second wife, Elizabeth Lawrence, the daughter of a Norwich cooper. Most of what is known of Bentley's life comes from a letter of 23 July 1790, addressed to her patron and first editor, the Revd John Walker, and included among the prefatory materials to both her volumes of verse. She reports that her father, having received a good education himself, taught her reading, spelling, and writing but never gave her 'the least idea of grammar'. When she was ten, her father suffered a stroke that disabled him from working as a shoemaker. He hawked garden produce for a living until being made bookkeeper to the London Coach, only a few months before he died, aged forty-eight. 
Two years after her father's death, Bentley discovered in herself 'an inclination for writing verses', and although she 'had no thought nor desire' for them to be seen by anyone, her mother showed them to acquaintances, who encouraged her ('Genuine Poetical Compositions', sigs. A3'v'-A4'r'). 
So impressed was William Cowper with 'the Norwich maiden's' 'strong natural genius', that he not only subscribed to her first volume, 'Genuine Poetical Compositions, on Various Subjects' (1791), but compared her verse with Mary Leapor's of forty years before, discerning 'more marks of true poetical talent' than he had observed 'in the verses of any other male or female, so disadvantageously circumstanced' (Hayley, 3. 295-6). The list of 1935 subscribers includes peers, gentry, members of parliament, clergymen, Cambridge dons, surgeons, attorneys, and such literati as Cowper, Elizabeth Carter, Elizabeth Montagu, and Hester Chapone. Bentley appears in the frontispiece portrait as a robust, broad-faced girl with a snub nose, crisply neat in a starched cap and neckerchief. Dedicated by permission to 'William Drake, Jr., Esq., M.P.', the volume announces itself as designed to fund an annuity for the author and her mother. As we might expect, there are odes to 'Benevolence', 'Content', and 'Chearfulness', as well as concluding 'Lines, Addressed as a Tribute of Gratitude to the Subscribers in General', in which Bentley regrets that she cannot 'follow where seraphic MILTON led' (line 20). Since her 'lot' has been 'fix'd' to 'sing in humbler strain', she must make do with the self-effacing modesty suitable for a poet of plebeian origins, 'content to be the last and lowest of the tuneful train' ('Genuine Poetical Compositions', lines 30-32). In spite of her frequent reliance upon Popean rhymed couplets, Bentley most often evokes a Cowperian mood, inviting her readers to 'quit the bustling town, where busy, anxious care your bliss destroys', to pursue instead 'the country's joys' ('On a Summer Morning', lines 20-24). 'On Cruelty to Animals' and 'On the Abolition of the African Slave-Trade' are notably compassionate contributions to contemporary debates. 
After the success of this volume, Bentley kept a small boarding-school in the London Road. Except for occasional poems in the 'Norfolk Chronicle', a small collection of verses for children, sold for a shilling, and a short ode on Nelson's victory at Trafalgar (reprinted in her second volume), she published nothing until 'Poems; being the Genuine Compositions of Elizabeth Bentley' in 1821. Dedicated to John Wodehouse, lord lieutenant of Norfolk, this collection represents her as more than ever a local poet and elegist. The frontispiece portrait represents her as thoughtful and hollow-cheeked, in a shawl and frilled cap and collar. 
Bentley died at Doughty's Hospital in the parish of St Saviour's, Norwich, an almshouse for aged poor men and women, on 13 April 1839 and was buried at St Stephen's, Norwich, on 17 April. In her will she bequeathed to Seth William Stevenson, of the firm of printers who had published her work, the sum of $10, and the residue of her estate, to cover funeral expenses, to Elizabeth Lawrence Whiting. 


@@@@@


doc= 62689


Martin, Edward (c.1763-1818), mineral surveyor and civil engineer, was born at Matterdale, Cumberland, the youngest of the eight children of Joseph Martin (1712-1790) and his wife, Susanna Rumney (1717-1810). Nothing else is known of Martin's life until 1781, when John Bateman (1749-1816), the chief colliery engineer of Sir James Lowther (1736-1802) at Whitehaven, Cumberland, reported that Martin was then viewer at the nearby Whingill colliery. It seems likely that this was his earliest post; the geologist John Farey (1766-1826) later wrote that Martin 'was brought up and taught his art as a Coal-engineer in the coal district near Whitehaven' (Farey 1813, 172). 
By 1787 Martin was in south Wales acting as agent to John Smith (died 1797) at Gwern-llwyn-chwyth, Llansamlet. On 23 January 1788, at Llansamlet, he married Martha (1763-1844), daughter of the Swansea timber merchant Thomas Lott ('c'.1735-1808). In the mid-1790s they settled at Morriston, Glamorgan; they had at least four sons and two daughters. (This may have been his second wife; there is a record of an Edward Martin's marrying at Distington, Cumberland, in 1785.) 
Martin was busy as a civil engineer by the mid-1790s. He was elected harbour trustee in 1794 and was much involved with first attempts to develop the port of Swansea. In 1803-4 he reported, with William Bevan, on how the harbour could be improved and river water there impounded for a floating harbour, and between 1805 and 1809 he was involved in improving the lighthouse on Mumbles Head. He was also active as a canal and tramroad engineer and surveyor. In 1790, by which time he was the principal Welsh colliery agent for the sixth duke of Beaufort, he had surveyed for the Swansea Canal -- ultimately becoming a shareholder. With the contemporary Welsh 'canal mania' and enthusiasm for other improvements (as at Milford Haven by Charles Greville) Martin was in constant demand. Also in 1803-4, he promoted an extension to the Swansea Canal via the Oystermouth tramroad, 'using Mr [Richard] Trevethick's very ingenious machine' ('The Cambrian', 10 March 1804). 
Martin's most significant work, however, was as mining consultant. In 1797 he opened collieries in the Twrch valley. In 1799 he reported to the first marquess of Bute's agent, John Bird (1761-1840), that 'there would be Coal and Ore enough on Caerphilly Common [alone] to employ an Iron Furnace for one hundred years' (H. M. Thomas, 'The Diaries of John Bird of Cardiff', 1987, 117). In 1801 Martin reported (for Capel Hanbury-Leigh) on improving the Gnoll collieries in the Vale of Neath; in 1803 he reported on the nearby Maesmarchog stone coal (anthracite) colliery. In June 1804 he was consulted on how coal supplies for the revitalized Pontypool ironworks might be improved. 
From 1804 Martin was involved as colliery-letting agent throughout south Wales. In June of that year, he took out his only patent -- for making pig and cast iron from local ironstone with steam coal. It showed how aware he was of the mineral potential of the region. In 1806 he was involved in sinking a pit at Bryn-coch, the first deep pit in Wales, to about 600 feet depth. By 1809 he was operating his own coalmining partnership, the Penyvilia Vein Company at Llangyfelach, having inherited collieries on his father-in-law's death in 1808. 
Martin's mineral surveying work culminated in his 'Description of the mineral bason in the counties of Monmouth, Glamorgan, Brecon, Carmarthen and Pembrokeshire', read to the Royal Society by Charles Greville on 22 May 1806. It described the distribution of the principal varieties of coal and iron strata and their lateral variation, with a sketch map showing their extent. It was widely reprinted, appearing in (for example) 'The Cambrian', on 20 July 1807, and Nicholson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy' for 1807-8. The paper also took Martin to London in April 1806, where he exchanged much geological data with John Farey (1766-1826). 
Martin was working in the Llanelli coalfield from July 1806: his report contains the earliest known plan of the Llanelli syncline -- he was aware of the nature of faulting in this region, a matter misunderstood by others at that time. In 1807 he took into partnership his future son-in-law, David Davies (1786-1819) of Morriston. Together they surveyed for the Pen-clawdd Canal in 1810-11 and were busy with the Kidwelly and Llanelli Canal in 1811-12. In 1811 Martin, with William Smith (1769-1839), reported on the state of the collieries at and near Nailsea for the Bristol and Taunton Canal, a work reprinted in the 'Philosophical Magazine', as by 'two eminent mineral surveyors' (38, 1811, 321). 
On Martin's death on 6 May 1818 at Ynystawe, whence he had moved from Morriston, the local newspaper called him 'a man of sterling integrity and worth, eminent for his extensive knowledge of collieries' ('Cambrian', 16 May 1818). Charles Wilkins later confirmed that Martin's 'extensive local and general mining knowledge made him indispensable in the early days of the Neath and Swansea collieries' (Wilkins, 240). Martin was buried at St John's Church, Swansea, on 16 May 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 62691


Plummer, Charles (1851-1927), historian, was born at St Leonards, Sussex, on 24 January 1851, the fifth son of the Revd Matthew Plummer (1808-1898), vicar of Heworth, Durham, and his wife, Louisa, daughter of J. D. Powles. Alfred Plummer (1841-1926), biblical scholar and master of University College, Durham, was his elder brother. Schooled at St Michael's College, Tenbury, and Magdalen College School, Oxford, Charles matriculated in 1869 at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he remained for fifty-eight years. He was awarded a first in classics moderations in 1871 and a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1873; in 1873 he graduated BA, and he took his MA in 1876. 
Plummer was a fellow of Corpus from 1873 and college chaplain from 1875 until his death. He lectured in modern history only from 1875 to 1883 and, despite his great learning and best will, was quite ineffective (his lectures were thought not 'good for the Schools'). Having been ordained deacon in 1875 he was never priested, 'from the conscientious but mistaken belief that his work in college was not pastoral enough to justify his seeking the priesthood', Blagden has commented (Blagden, 75). Yet he performed his duties as chaplain with great seriousness: he was responsible for nearly all the college services; for Sunday evensong he played the organ; and he is remembered for his plaintive music. He also served as divinity lecturer for Corpus from 1878 to 1902, and as librarian, dean, and vice-president of the college. He was remembered (and once caricatured) as a little bearded man with a shabby black coat, and loved as one who valiantly, if fumblingly, tried to know most of the undergraduates, inviting each to 'lunch and walk' with him, which comprised offering the student a Gold Flake cigarette after lunch and sherry and then taking them on a vigorous two-hour walk along Oxfordshire lanes. He was a university representative on the Cowley board of poor-law guardians, and for more than thirty years took a strong pastoral interest in the fatherless boys of the Cowley workhouse school, 'helping them, and following them when they went out into the world, with letters and gifts' ('Letters of P. S. Allen', 252). 
Plummer produced an unbroken series of distinguished contributions to Anglo-Saxon, Celtic, and medieval Latin scholarship. Most impressive and most permanent of Plummer's more than a dozen books and numerous scholarly articles is his edition of Bede's 'Ecclesiastical History' in two volumes (1896; new edn, 1946). To commemorate the 1000th anniversary of the death of King Alfred, Plummer was invited to be Ford's lecturer in English history in 1901, and his lectures were published as 'Life and Times of Alfred the Great' (1902). He moved early into the field of Icelandic literature, then added Old Irish to his field of studies, publishing a 'Vitae sanctorum Hiberniae' in 1910 and writing on Irish litanies and scribes at the end of his life (1925, 1926). Elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1924, he was also honoured with honorary doctorates from Durham (1921), Dublin (1924), and the National University of Ireland (1925). He was made an honorary member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1925. A list of Plummer's writings is to be found in the 'Proceedings of the British Academy', 15 (1929), 463-76. 
Plummer, who never married, died in the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, on 8 September 1927 following minor surgery, and was buried in Oxford. He was the last of the life fellows at Corpus. Much of the force of living tradition at Corpus in the twentieth century was owing to him; much of his learning found its way into the work of colleagues and former students whom he encouraged. One of these was Percy Stafford Allen, who in 1892 began his life's work on the letters of Erasmus in Plummer's rooms in college. In 1924 Plummer was the prime mover in Allen's election to the presidency of Corpus. Plummer's own editorial work in Anglo-Saxon, Celtic, and later medieval history, liturgy, palaeography, and law -- richly illuminated by his own rare breadth of learning -- is still relevant and valuable, even after a century of substantial scholarship in medieval studies. His text of Bede, especially, has been described as final. For his generation, which was such a pivotal one for the transition from Victorian to modern, Plummer exemplified uniquely Arnoldian sweetness and light. 


@@@@@


doc= 62692


Tiedeman, May Louise Seaton- (1864?-1948), campaigner for divorce law reform, was born in Boston, Massachusetts, the daughter of Alfred Herbert Seaton, an export merchant and lay preacher. She claimed descent from Scottish Presbyterians on one side of her family and from English Anglicans on the other. The Seaton family moved from America to England when she was in her teens. On 5 January 1886 she married Frederick Henry Lewis Tiedeman (1847-1915), a Dutch journalist and editor of the 'Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant'; they had one son, Henry Seaton Tiedeman. Although the couple were based in London they travelled around the world and had a wide circle of friends, including many writers, politicians, and social reformers. May Tiedeman's happy marriage of thirty years ended with her husband's death in 1915; within the year, on 31 July 1916, she married Edward Woolf Abrams (1865-1945), a metal mining agent and a long-time family friend. This marriage also lasted nearly thirty years, ending only with Abrams's death in 1945. 
May Seaton-Tiedeman's role in the divorce law reform campaign of the inter-war years has been overlooked because the organization of which she was honorary secretary, the Divorce Law Reform Union, left few traces in the history books. This is partly owing to the fact that most of its records were destroyed during the Second World War. A more significant reason is that, despite the union's best efforts, its primary contribution to divorce reform was as a resource centre, drafting and promoting bills for parliamentary allies, rather than as a high-profile mass-membership pressure group: accordingly, the union did not receive any public recognition when its central object, the enactment of reform based on the recommendations of the 1909-12 royal commission on divorce and matrimonial causes, was achieved with the passage of A. P. Herbert's 'Matrimonial Causes Bill' in 1937. 
As a courageous and indefatigable campaigner Seaton-Tiedeman was the driving force behind the Divorce Law Reform Union, rather than its famous figureheads such as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and Lord Birkenhead. Herbert described her as a 'brave fighter [who] had been at it for I know not how many years, speaking in Hyde Park on Sundays, lobbying the House of Commons and all the time keeping her little Union alive with hardly any resources' (Herbert, 73). As the union's primary propagandist she was the editor of its quarterly paper, 'The Journal', which was published from 1919 to 1931. She was not motivated by personal experience of an unhappy marriage, but rather by her belief that immorality, injustice, and unnecessary human suffering were not to be tolerated. A member of the Ethical Union, her secular humanism found its fullest expression in the divorce reform movement not least because the primary ideology of opponents of reform was Christianity; for her the extension of matrimonial jurisdiction was as important as the extension of the divorce grounds themselves. She therefore advocated the establishment of courts of domestic relations, and in 1925 submitted evidence to a lord chancellor's committee set up to investigate the working of the poor persons' rules, devised to assist litigants with low incomes to pursue divorce petitions in the High Court. 
Despite her membership of the World League for Sexual Reform on a Scientific Basis, May Seaton-Tiedeman was not a libertarian; indeed, in many ways she was a conservative reformer. She did not believe that sexual relations were solely a private concern, and she wished to see legal marriage become coterminous with a loving relationship, thereby ending society's tolerance of promiscuity and non-marital unions. This led her to campaign for the abolition of permanent legal separation and the extension of fault-based divorce grounds: although she believed that divorce should be permissible on the ground of incompatibility of temperament, she remained hostile to divorce being granted on the ground of mutual consent. 
May Seaton-Tiedeman campaigned for further divorce law reforms after 1937, but retired during the Second World War. She moved first to Hove and then to London to be with her son, before dying at Friern Hospital, New Southgate, Middlesex, on 22 October 1948. She was cremated privately on 26 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 62693


Fox, Caroline (1767-1845), diarist and correspondent, was born on 3 November 1767 at Lord Holland's house at Piccadilly, London. She was the daughter of Stephen Fox, second Baron Holland (1745-1774), and his wife, Lady Mary Fitzpatrick (1746/7-1778), sister of John, second earl of Upper Ossory. Caroline Fox was the elder of two children, her brother, Henry Richard Fox, succeeding as third Baron Holland on the death of their father in November 1774. Her mother died in October 1778 and she was placed in the care of her step-aunt Henrietta Vernon, wife of George Greville, second earl of Warwick. Three years later she was removed to the household of Gertrude, duchess of Bedford, her great-aunt, who had three orphaned grandsons to bring up. In 1779 her mother's sister Lady Louisa Fitzpatrick married Lord Shelburne and after 1781 Caroline Fox found more congenial society at the Shelburne house at Bowood in Wiltshire. She developed a deep attachment to her youngest step-aunt, Elizabeth Vernon, Aunt Ebey ('c'.1763?-1829). This was based partly on the shared interests of the Enlightenment, though the relationship did limit her social and political activities. Between 1804 and 1829 they lived together at Little Holland House until Elizabeth Vernon's death. 
Though educated by private tutors, Caroline also learned much from her affectionate uncle, Charles James Fox, and the savants of Bowood, who included Jeremy Bentham, Etienne Dumont, Samuel Romilly, and Jan Ingenhousz. Bentham, not her only suitor, dared to propose marriage and, though refused, retained a romantic attachment to her. Of a modest and patient disposition, she could be forthright in conversation. In politics Caroline Fox was a firm supporter of the Foxite whig party. As a young woman her opinions verged on the republican and Jacobinical. She kept the party's transcripts of the trial of the leading United Irishmen before secret committees of the Lords and Commons (1798), so that these could be compared to the official version. Her papers and commonplace books contain accounts of political negotiations and important political events associated with her family, and her correspondence, particularly with Charles James Fox and the third and fourth lords Holland, contains vignettes of politicians and lively comment. Her journals also give details of her travels in Europe. 
An aristocratic outsider, 'dear little auntie' was beloved in the family for her high principles and tolerant religious views. In later life Caroline Fox gathered round her a group of women of literary and historical tastes which included Caroline Norton, Lady Callcott, Helena Blackwood, and Mary Russell Mitford. Her essay on the Abbe Sicard was printed in 'Friendly Contributions' (1838), edited by Lady Mary Fox in aid of educational charities. It demonstrates her interest in the education of children, especially deaf mutes, as well as her continuing support for the Bonapartist cause. She founded and enjoyed visiting an infant school with playground in Kensington on land purchased from the Holland estate about 1840. 
An intellectual woman of independent means, Caroline Fox had a stroke in June 1844; she died at Little Holland House on 12 March 1845 and was buried at Millbrook church, Bedfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 62695


Mirrlees, (Helen) Hope (1887-1978), writer and poet, was born on 8 April 1887 at Erpingham, Chislehurst, Kent, the eldest child of William Julius Mirrlees (1860-1923) and Emily Lina Moncrieff (Mappy to her family) (1861-1948). Both her parents were Scots, and her father 'WJ' had trained in Glasgow as an engineer, though he later became an immensely successful businessman, with interests in various manufacturing firms, as well as in a large sugar plantation near Durban. Her grandfather had established the firm of Mirrlees-Blackstone, which made diesel engines for many years. Her mother's family were cultured Edinburgh lawyers. Although six children had been born, only three survived to adulthood: Hope (known as Hopy), William (Reay), who eventually became a major-general, and Margaret (Margot), who married an army officer. Hope grew up in Scotland and South Africa, which she loved -- she learned to speak Zulu. She was educated first at home, then at the age of eleven attended the Besires School as a boarder, and later St Andrews preparatory school and St Leonard's School, St Andrews. As a young woman she was presented at court, and then, under the influence of Mrs Patrick Campbell, attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, but soon found herself more interested in languages; above all, she wanted to learn Greek. 
In 1910 Mirrlees went up to Newnham College, Cambridge, having already met the great classical scholar Jane Ellen Harrison (1850-1928), who became her tutor. Hope became deeply attached to her and, in turn, became Jane's favourite pupil. After Hope went down in 1913 the two remained in close contact, writing to each other in a private language in different personae, sometimes as the elder and younger walrus, or else as the two wives of 'the Old One', Jane's ancient teddy bear. Late in 1913 Hope visited Paris with her friend Karin Costelloe (soon to marry Virginia Woolf's brother Adrian); she went back again in 1914, 1915, and 1919, staying at the Hotel de l'Elysee, 3 rue de Beaune, on the Left Bank. Paris provides the scene for her first novel, 'Madeleine, one of Love's Jansenists' (1919), set in the seventeenth century among the circle of 'precieuses' around Mme de Scudery (who fancies herself as 'Sappho'). The novel seems to be a 'roman a clef' recording Mirrlees's flirtation with Left Bank lesbianism (Mme de Scudery may be an unflattering portrait of the writer and literary hostess Natalie Clifford Barney). As a young woman, Hope was striking, with dark hair, bright blue eyes, and a beautiful voice. Virginia Woolf described her as 'her own heroine -- capricious, exacting, exquisite, very learned, and beautifully dressed' ('Letters of Virginia Woolf', 3.200). 
In 1919 Mirrlees was studying Russian at the Ecole des Langues Orientales in Paris where she observed events in the city and read avant-garde poetry including that of Apollinaire, Pierre Reverdy's journal 'Nord-sud', and Jean Cocteau's sequence 'Le Cap de Bonne-Esperance', which she claimed 'liberated' her into writing her own experimental poem. Hope had met Virginia and Leonard Woolf the previous year, when they invited her to write for the Hogarth Press: 'Paris' (1920) became their fifth publication (T. S. Eliot's 'Poems' was the fourth). It was hand set by Virginia herself in an edition of 175 copies -- only the smallness of the edition can explain the subsequent neglect of this extraordinarily daring and brilliant poem, which was arguably her greatest achievement. A 600-line modernist poem, it describes the city recovering from the First World War, haunted by its dead, yet springing back to life as it hosts President Wilson and the peace conference delegates. 'Paris' is written partly in English, partly in French, citing or reciting Metro station names, posters, shop signs, and memorial plaques. Highly allusive and typographically original, it has claims to be the missing link between French avant-garde poetry and Eliot's 'The Waste Land' (1923). 
In 1922 Jane Harrison retired from Cambridge, and she and Hope moved to Paris, where they stayed at the American University Women's Club. Together they translated from Russian 'The Life of the Archpriest Avvakum by himself' (1924), to which their friend Prince Mirsky contributed an introduction, and 'The Book of the Bear' (1926), a collection of folk-tales. The bear was part of their private mythology, and the constellation of Ursa Major appears not only at the end of 'Paris' but also as the tailpiece to Hope's three novels. Her second, 'The Counterplot' (1924), is a contemporary story of family life (said to be based on her own), ending with a play set in a Spanish convent which reworks the family's relationships in fantasy mode. It numbered Christopher Isherwood among its admirers and in 1929 was translated into French as 'Le choc en retour', with an afterword by Charles Du Bos. Her third novel, the fantasy 'Lud-in-the-Mist' (1926), is the story of Master Nathaniel Chanticleer, mayor of Lud, who struggles to save his town from an invasion by sinister fairy fruit that induce strange states of mind. In May 1925 Hope and Jane found they could no longer stay at the club, and returned to London, to 11 Mecklenburgh Street, where Jane died in 1928, leaving Hope bereft. 
In the wake of Jane's death, probably at some time in 1929, Hope became a Roman Catholic convert, and during the 1930s she lived with her mother at Thurloe Close, next to the Brompton Oratory. Here she worked on her fanciful biography of the seventeenth-century antiquary Sir Robert Cotton (part of which was published as 'A Fly in Amber' in 1962) and a projected but never completed biography of Jane Harrison. The material she collected for the latter and various drafts for it are deposited at Newnham. T. S. Eliot had become a close friend in the 1920s, and during the Second World War he stayed with Hope and her mother in their house at Shamley Green, near Guildford, where he wrote 'Dry Salvages' and 'Little Gidding'. In 1948 her mother died, and Hope moved to South Africa, to the Cape of Good Hope, where she wrote occasional elegant poems and continued working on her life of Cotton. 
By now, Hope Mirrlees had grown heavy, with a booming contralto and a passion for dogs -- at different times, she owned chows, pugs, and dachshunds. In 1963 she finally returned to England to live at Headington, Oxford. Here she was briefly rediscovered by Suzanne Henig, who in 1972 wrote an article about her for the short-lived 'Virginia Woolf Quarterly', which also reprinted a version of 'Paris', bowdlerized by its author, who now disapproved of its blasphemies. In 1970, in the wake of Tolkien, Lin Carter recommended 'Lud-in-the Mist' to Ballantine Books, and since then it has been reprinted several times in Britain and the United States. Joanna Russ wrote a pastiche of it as 'The Zanzibar Cat' (in her collection 'The Zanzibar Cat'), and it remains very popular and influential as a 'fantasy novel of ideas' (Swanwick); Henig drew attention to its allusions to Plato's 'Allegory of the cave', and its philosophical enquiries into the nature of reality and the imagination. Forty of Mirrlees's poems were published in 'Moods and Tensions' (1976), with a preface by an old friend, Raymond Mortimer. 
Hope Mirrlees died at Thames Bank, Goring, on 1 August 1978. There were no obituaries, though the newspapers noticed the size of her estate. She had always had everything she needed in a material sense, and it has been suggested that she might have written more had she found it necessary to earn her own living. Yet what is most striking about her work is the way in which she never repeated herself: her achievements are of amazingly different kinds, united only by the continuous need to relate the inner life of fantasy and passion to a stubborn and unresponsive world of fact. 


@@@@@


doc= 62696


Edmonds, Rosemary Lilian (1905-1998), translator, was born on 20 October 1905 at Clifton, Coldfall Avenue, Muswell Hill, Middlesex, the daughter of Walter Herbert Dickie, a private secretary, and his wife, Lilian Worthington. After her schooling at St Paul's Girls' School, she spent some time at the Sorbonne in Paris studying French. In 1927 she married James Edmonds; their marriage was subsequently dissolved. 
During the Second World War, Rosemary Edmonds worked as multilingual translator to General de Gaulle at his Free French headquarters in London. She was appointed (in 1940) at the insistence of Winston Churchill and the British government on having a native English speaker as de Gaulle's official translator. De Gaulle, who had wanted an all-French staff, had been obliged to compromise, although during the time she spent working for him in London, Edmonds remained the only non-French person on his staff. 
After the liberation, at de Gaulle's request, Edmonds returned to Paris with him, continuing to work as a translator on his staff. He personally paid for her to take Russian courses at the Sorbonne. She greatly admired de Gaulle and respected the way he had treated her; she recalled, for instance, how he had been careful to arrange for her to be compensated for the British taxes on her earnings, in order to ensure that she remained on an equivalent salary to her untaxed French colleagues. She was soon forced to resign her post, however, in order to retain her British citizenship. 
Back in London, Edmonds was approached by E. V. Rieu, founder editor of the series 'Penguin Classics'. Rieu set her to work on a translation of Tolstoy's 'Anna Karenina' (which she preferred to call 'Anna Karenin') in 1950; this work, which took her three years, helped to establish her as one of the country's foremost translators of Russian literature. Rieu immediately followed this up with a commission for a translation of 'War and Peace', which appeared in 1957. 
These were followed by several other translations of Tolstoy; this very prolific period produced 'The Death of Ivan Ilyich', 'The Cossacks', and 'Happy Ever After' (1960), 'Childhood, Boyhood, Youth' (1964), and 'Resurrection' (1966), as well as several works by other Russian writers including Pushkin ('Queen of Spades, and other Stories', 1962), Turgenev ('Fathers and Sons', 1965), and Gogol ('Divine Liturgy', 1960). 
Tolstoy, whom she called both 'a prophet' and 'a moralist', was, for Edmonds the greatest humanist: '[His] subject is humanity', she wrote in her introduction to 'War and Peace'; 'Tolstoy does not contrive: he records, recoiling from nothing'. Her translations of Tolstoy are today considered among the most successful in English, and her work has made a substantial difference to how he has subsequently been read in the English-speaking world. At the time of her death her Tolstoy translations had sold over four million copies. 
During her time in Paris, Rosemary Edmonds had met the Archimandrite Sophrony; it was this acquaintance which introduced her to Russian Orthodox spirituality, of which she remained a fascinated student until the end of her life -- she even, with Sophrony's help, became proficient in Old Church Slavonic. Her interest in the religion extended to helping Sophrony establish an Orthodox monastery community in England (near Maldon, Essex) in 1959. Both before and after her work for the 'Penguin Classics', Edmonds produced translations of Sophrony's writings about his mentor Father Silouan in 'The Monk of Mount Athos' (1973) and 'Wisdom from Mount Athos' (1974). She spent much of the later part of her life researching Old Church Slavonic texts, and brought together Old Church Slavonic service books with their corresponding Greek texts to produce a translation of the Orthodox Church liturgy, which was published by the Oxford University Press in 1982. 
Throughout her life Rosemary Edmonds was an advocate for numerous charitable causes of all kinds. In 1979 she was awarded the freedom of the City of London, considering it a great honour, though she was essentially an intensely private person, with just a small circle of close friends. She reserved her devotion mainly for her work, which she continued almost full-time into the last years of her long life. 
She died of Parkinson's disease on 26 July 1998 at a nursing home, Joan Bartlett House, 3 Beatrice Place, Marloes Road, in Kensington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 62697


Mirsky, Dmitry Svyatopolk (1890-1939), Russian scholar, was born on 9 September (28 August OS) 1890 on his father's country estate at Gievka, near Kharkov, Ukraine, the second of the four children and eldest son of Prince Pyotr Dmitryevich Svyatopolk-Mirsky (1857-1914), army officer and civil servant, and his wife, Countess Yekaterina Alekseyevna Bobrinskaya (1864-1926), the daughter of Count Aleksey Alekseyevich Bobrinsky of Tula. On the father's side the Svyatopolk-Mirskys claimed descent from Ryurik, the founder of the Russian state, and the mother's side was descended from the illegitimate son of Catherine the Great and Grigory Orlov. Prince P. D. Svyatopolk-Mirsky rose to become minister of the interior for five months in 1904-5; he stepped down after the events of 'bloody Sunday', 9 January 1905, and lived out his life in retirement. Dmitry was tutored at home until the age of fourteen, an especially valued mentor being his English nanny, Miss Trend, the sister of J. B. Trend, who became professor of Spanish at Cambridge University. 
Mirsky then attended the imperial 'lycee' in Moscow for two years, and for a further two years from 1906 the elite Tenishev Gymnasium in St Petersburg. From 1908 to 1911 he studied oriental languages at the University of St Petersburg, then served for two years as an officer in the imperial guards rifle regiment. He went back to the University of St Petersburg and graduated in classics in 1914. His poems and critical articles first appeared in a school publication in 1906, and he brought out a collection of poetry in 1911. He rejoined his regiment on the outbreak of the First World War and served on the German front for two years, and then in the Caucasus. He was wounded in 1916 and during convalescence married a nurse named Flevinova, but never saw her again after he left the hospital; the marriage ended in divorce. Just before the February revolution of 1917 Mirsky passed out from the Academy of the Imperial General Staff, and was posted to Armenia. In June 1918 Mirsky made his way back to Gievka, studied briefly at the University of Kharkov, and in December fled with his family to the Crimea. In March 1919 he joined the White Army of General Denikin, and served with the rank of captain as adjutant in various regiments, emigrating via Poland to Athens when this army was defeated in 1920. 
In the autumn of 1921 Mirsky went to London at the invitation of Maurice Baring, who had known his family in Russia. Sir Bernard Pares, who also knew Mirsky's family, appointed him as lecturer in Russian at the School of Slavonic Studies, King's College, University of London, in May 1922. In emigration, Mirsky preferred not to use his title of prince, and simplified his name to D. S. Mirsky. People who knew him well in England remembered particularly his phenomenal verbal memory, his astonishingly fluent command of English, French, and German, and his imposing stature, with black beard, bald head, and oriental eyes. Besides carrying out his teaching duties in London, where his pupils included the future Professor Dame Elizabeth Hill, Mirsky was active in British and French literary circles, and was personally acquainted with, among others, T. S. Eliot, E. M. Forster, Jane Ellen Harrison, Leonard and Virginia Woolf, and Andre Gide. Among his closest associates in the Russian literary emigration was the poet Marina Tsvetaeva; he brought her to London to give a reading in March 1926. 
Mirsky was the first critic in Russian or English to appreciate and write about the significance of all four of the great Russian poets of his generation: Akhmatova, Mandelshtam, Pasternak, and Tsvetaeva. He also pioneered the serious discussion of Babel, Pilnyak, and many other important Russian writers. His most important work, which he wrote in English, was published in two volumes, 'Contemporary Russian Literature' (1926) and 'A History of Russian Literature from the Earliest Times to the Death of Dostoevsky, 1881' (1927). These volumes were condensed by Francis J. Whitfield into the standard 'A History of Russian Literature' (1949). During his time in London, Mirsky published six books and about 150 articles in English on Russian literature, culture, and history. 
Mirsky also played an important part in the intellectual and political life of the Russian emigration as a prominent figure in the Eurasian movement, which was subsidized by the English philanthropist H. N. Spalding. Mirsky's political evolution was shaped by his observing the social and political conditions in Britain, continental Europe, and the United States in the period beginning with the general strike of 1926, and was particularly influenced negatively by the rise of fascism, and positively by the five-year plans and collectivization of agriculture that began in the USSR under Stalin in 1929. The evolution of Mirsky's political views was attested in his 'Russia: a Social History' (1931), 'Lenin' (1931), and 'Why I became a Marxist' ('Daily Worker', 30 June 1931). His actions were also affected by his relationship with Vera Suvchinskaya 
('nee' Guchkova; 1906-87)
, who in 1930 refused to marry him and live in London. 
In June 1931 Mirsky joined the Communist Party of Great Britain. His work for the party included a celebrated speech on dialectical materialism to the Heretics at Cambridge University. In the autumn of 1931 he applied simultaneously for Soviet and British citizenship, taking the Soviet because it arrived first. His relations with Sir Bernard Pares became acrimonious, and he resigned from his post at the School of Slavonic and East European Studies in March 1932. In September he went back to Russia. Often referred to privately as 'Comrade Prince' Mirsky, he then began a tumultuous career as a Soviet literary critic. In his first year in Moscow he was friendly with the 'Manchester Guardian' correspondent, Malcolm Muggeridge, and in the summer of 1935 he came to know Edmund Wilson. Mirsky published a scathing valedictory book drawing on his 'emigre' years, which was translated into English as 'The Intelligentsia of Great Britain' (1935). He was arrested on 3 June 1937 during Stalin's great purge, found guilty of 'suspected espionage', and sentenced to eight years' correctional labour. He was transported to Siberia, put to work on tree felling, rapidly became ill with dysentery and frost-bite, and died in the labour camp Invalidnaya Hospital near Magadan on 6 June 1939. He was buried at Invalidnaya the following day. 
An underlying logic and sense of purpose may be discerned beneath the vicissitudes of Mirsky's life and thought: he remained rooted in the aristocratic service mentality of his forebears, but was driven by a personal need for commitment to some force that would overcome the degeneration he eventually diagnosed in the social milieu into which he was born. As the author of 'A History of Russian Literature' Mirsky can claim to be one of the most important single mediators between the Russian- and English-speaking literary worlds. His restless mind and impulsive temperament compelled him to deal with the fateful choices facing the Russian men of his generation in an extraordinarily dramatic and instructive way. 


@@@@@


doc= 62699


Sprott, Walter John Herbert (1897-1971), sociologist, was born at Sillwood Place, Crowborough, Sussex, on 19 April 1897, the son of Herbert Sprott, a country solicitor, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Williams. He was dominated in infancy by his mother, was sent to Felsted, a boarding-school with a rigorous regime, and then in 1919 entered Clare College, Cambridge, to read the moral sciences, in which he took a double first. 
Perhaps this is the central characterization of Edwardian childhood among the English professional classes. But Sprott was eccentric. Charm and wit and oratorical skill led him effortlessly into the magic circle of John Maynard Keynes's close friends; he became an intimate of E. M. Forster, who eventually made him his literary executor, and of Lytton Strachey. He became 'Sebastian' in the overlapping circles of Cambridge and Bloomsbury. He was elected to the exclusive society of the Apostles in 1920. He regularly went riding with Keynes, accompanied him on a holiday to Algeria and Tunisia in 1921, and was probably his last male lover. This intimacy, though not the friendship, ended with Keynes's marriage to Lydia Lopokova in 1925. 
In that year Sprott, who had been a demonstrator in the psychological laboratory at Cambridge since 1922, moved to a lectureship in psychology at Nottingham University, though the habit of frequent, almost daily, letters customary between Bloomsberries continued to include the name Sebastian. Much of this correspondence was later destroyed. Thus many of the letters from Sprott were burnt either by Maynard himself or by his brother Geoffrey. However, a few survived. One, written in April 1921 after reading Hirschfield's 'History of Sex', reads 'I suspect I am tainted with Transvestitismus, Autonomosexualitat, and Hermaphroditismus... to say nothing of Homosexualitat and Onanie... My love, Yours ever Sebastian' (Skidelsky, 35). That was to Keynes. 
The combination of intellect with aestheticism was much admired after the First World War -- so much so that 'sprott' was generalized in Cambridge argot as a label for fashionable cleverness. Yet Sprott made no secret of his sexual tastes. He pioneered the path to the nightclubs of Berlin, being subsequently followed by Christopher Isherwood and W. H. Auden. Between the wars, with his friend Joe Ackerley, he sought 'low-life adventure' in the pubs of Dover and Portsmouth. In Nottingham he lived in a squalid Victorian terrace, where academic colleagues and their wives were served by discharged prisoners. Here the Bloomsbury appellation Sebastian was dropped in favour of the more matey and proletarian forename Jack. 
All this threw a shadow of loneliness and sadness over Sprott's personal life, but it did not darken the charming courtesy or cloud the manners of the old-fashioned don which he unfailingly presented to the respectable world. Nor did it blight his academic performance. He was applauded on every side as a lecturer of outstanding wit and eloquent exposition. Invitations to give public lectures came in a steady flow throughout his career. Caustic and ruthless demolition of theories, especially those promoting salvation through simplistic politics or the 'quick fix', came readily to his lips, and colleagues and students relished his private conversation. 
Moreover Sprott ranged freely over a wider intellectual territory than is now academically fashionable. He held chairs in philosophy and in psychology at Nottingham. Above all he held fast to his belief in sociology as an academic discipline throughout the time in which it was resisted by the British establishment -- that is, from his translation to a lectureship in psychology at Nottingham in 1925, through his incumbency first in the readership of philosophy there from 1928 to 1948, then in the chair of philosophy from 1948 to 1960. He served Nottingham University with steadfast loyalty and was its public orator from 1948 to 1964. 
Sprott published 'Physique and Character' (1925) and 'New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis' (1933), translations of works by Kretschmer and Freud respectively. But his sociological writings, though little read today, remain important in sociology's history. All were written with lucid elegance. He was the first English sociologist to offer an informed, critical, and sympathetic view both of European writing in 'the grand manner' and of the sophisticated functionalism of the American R. K. Merton. There were only three named chairs of sociology in the UK when he gave the Josiah Mason lectures at the University of Birmingham in 1953. His 'Sociology' (1949), 'Science and Social Action' (1954), and 'Sociology at the Seven Dials' (1962) form a bridge from Hobhousian evolutionism to the functionalism which dominated the subject after the Second World War; they also link Parsonian general theory to more modest theories of the middle ground. So Sprott challenged functionalism by quoting Talcott Parsons: 'the combination of an occupationally differentiated industrial system and a significantly solidary kinship system 'must' be a system of stratification in which the children of the more highly placed come to have differential advantages' ('Social System', 161). He thereby showed that the evolution of industrial societies has functional limitations ('Science and Social Action', 139). He was a genial and articulate link between the older founders of sociology in Britain, such as Hobhouse and Ginsberg, and the new professionals emerging in the aftermath of the Second World War. He was hailed by Sir Leon Radzinowicz ('The Times', 14 Sept 1971) as an influential figure in the development of criminology as an academic subject. Sprott died on 2 September 1971 of acute heart failure at his home in Langham Road, Blakeney, Norfolk. He was childless and unmarried but was mourned by many friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 62701


Unwin, George (1870-1925), historian, was born at 2 Brook Street West, Stockport, Cheshire, on 7 May 1870, the eldest of the six children of Edward Unwin, innkeeper, and his wife, Priscilla, 'nee' Whitaker (died 1919), of a local nonconformist tradesman's family. Having attended the Edgeley Wesleyan day school in the town, he left at thirteen to work in the office of Carrington's hat firm, where he wrote for his employer speeches and letters to the press. 
In 1890 Unwin won a scholarship to the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire, Cardiff; he lodged with an uncle and had to skimp on $20 per annum. Three years later, a classical scholarship took him to Lincoln College, Oxford; in 1897 he gained a first in Greats and a bursary from Oriel College for six months' residence in Germany. There he studied economic history under Gustav Schmoller, reacted against Schmoller's championing of the state, and acquired a cosmopolitan outlook. 
In 1899, after his return to England, he became secretary to Leonard Henry, first Baron Courtney, a Liberal politician and convinced individualist. Courtney's mistrust of imperialism, so destructive of indigenous cultural heritages, complemented Unwin's view that the mainspring of progress in society was to be found in voluntary associations of people for the common good, whether in guild, trade union, or chapel. 
On 7 March 1902 Unwin married Frances Mabelle ('b'. 1869/70), an artist and third daughter of the Revd Mark Guy Pearse, a prominent Wesleyan minister whose biography she later wrote (1930). They had no children. His first full-length book, 'Industrial Organization in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries' (1904), analysed the growth of corporate and other bodies in England, with plentiful cross-references to similar continental arrangements. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Historical Society in 1906. 
In 1908, the year in which he published -- again in a European context -- 'The Gilds and Companies of London', Unwin was appointed a lecturer in economic history at Edinburgh University. The harsh climate took its toll on his slight frame, weakened by the undernourishment of his earlier years, and in 1910 he accepted the professorship of economic history at Manchester, the only chair of that subject in the British empire. He projected full-scale works on several topics, but most remained unwritten. For he was a man with a mission, resolved to carry his ideas about voluntary groups and the social geology of towns to as many intra- and extra-mural audiences as possible. He regularly rewrote his lectures, pasting new versions over the old until each sheet had the thickness of cardboard. If many listeners were baffled by his complex train of thought, they became inspired by his enthusiasm. He was at his best with graduate students, being supervisor or mentor to, among others, Richard Henry Tawney, Thomas Southcliffe Ashton, and Alfred Powell Wadsworth. 
A small man, with a triangular face and lofty brow fronting an outsize brain, Unwin had an elfin quality which was emphasized by his semi-ironic, if sometimes passionate, way of talking. In the First World War, regarding violence as abhorrent, he joined the Union of Democratic Control and other peace-seeking groups, but did his bit by covering for absent colleagues with extra teaching and administration. He also stepped up his extension lectures and classes. 
Prematurely aged by the war, insomniac, dyspeptic, and increasingly deaf, Unwin remained industrious in peacetime. No less prolific of new ideas for books, he published two, partly written by others: 'Finance and Trade under Edward III' (1918) and 'Samuel Oldknow and the Arkwrights' (1924). The latter, in portraying the firm and its industry as growing organisms, marked him out as the forerunner of a coming academic discipline. In the words of H. M. Larson, there 'he came to the very threshold of business history' ('Guide to Business History', 1948, 14). 
Unwin's weak heart was by then inflicting on him spells of physical exhaustion; as a pick-me-up, he relied on long-vacation visits to continental cities, whose histories he enjoyed tracing. During the summer of 1924, however, atrocious weather in Italy terminally weakened him. Mentally buoyant and a music-lover to the last, on his deathbed he and his wife resolutely sang their way through Handel's 'Messiah'. His heart gave out on 30 January 1925, at his home, 47 Heaton Road, Withington, Manchester. His widow subsequently wrote a life (1928) of the Bristol philanthropist Ada Vachell. 


@@@@@


doc= 62702


Talbot, James Robert (1726-1790), vicar apostolic of the London district, was born at Shrewsbury House, Isleworth, Middlesex, on 28 June 1726, the fourth son in a family of six sons and three daughters of the Hon. George Talbot (died 1733) and Mary (died 1752), daughter of Thomas, fourth Viscount FitzWilliam of Merrion. The younger brother of George, fourteenth earl of Shrewsbury, he was educated at Twyford School in Hampshire, a famous Catholic establishment run by the secular clergy, before being sent abroad in 1738 to the English College, Douai. 
Ordained at Cambrai on 19 December 1750, Talbot joined the Douai teaching staff as professor of philosophy and later of theology. From his private income, he established a preparatory school at nearby Esquerchin and became its first president. In 1759 Richard Challoner, vicar apostolic of the London district, was taken seriously ill and requested Talbot as coadjutor, hoping that his aristocratic connections would make him an effective intermediary with the government and provide funds for impoverished Catholics. Talbot was consecrated by Challoner on 24 August 1759 as titular bishop of Birtha. 
Challoner recovered, but thereafter stayed put, writing devotional and controversial works and ministering to his flock in London. Meanwhile, Talbot carried out episcopal visitations and confirmations throughout the district, covering all parishes every year and earning a reputation for eloquence as a preacher. He was very close to his younger brother, Thomas Joseph Talbot (1727-1795), who in 1766 was appointed coadjutor bishop in the midland district. While being conscientious and devout pastors, both brothers were diffident and fearful of the limelight. 
Talbot's proneness to self-effacement was intensified when he became a target of informers, scheming to exploit for gain the widely disregarded penal laws against Catholics. In 1768 Talbot was indicted for the offence of saying mass as a priest, only to be acquitted on a technicality. This did not deter Talbot from founding a Catholic school and mission at Old Hall Green, Hertfordshire, in October 1769. Then in February 1771 he was brought to trial at the Old Bailey alongside John Fuller. The lord chief justice, William Murray, later first earl of Mansfield, threw out the case as no evidence was offered about ordination. Talbot and Fuller were the last Catholic priests in England to be tried for the offence; in 1775, after informers had reported his presence at St Edmund's College, Ware, officials unsuccessfully searched the lofts for him. 
The task of lobbying the government to ease civil disabilities against Catholics was undertaken not by Talbot but, from 1778 onwards, by the Catholic Committee. The committee's efforts secured the passing that year of a limited 'Catholic Relief Act', depriving informers of their rewards; that led to the No Popery riots of 1780, instigated by Lord George Gordon. The aged Challoner died shortly afterwards, in 1781, and Talbot succeeded him as vicar apostolic; an inborn lack of decisiveness dogged him for the rest of his life. 
Talbot corresponded regularly with the president of Douai, William Gibson, over whose regime he had jurisdiction. He took exception successively to the college's curriculum, discipline, and financial extravagance, but he lacked the strength of will to dismiss Gibson. Likewise, he omitted to control the Catholic Committee, which strove to disclaim certain religious tenets which protestants found objectionable and proposed an oath of allegiance to the crown. Unsettled by these moves, which in his view usurped the bishops' functions, in 1787 Talbot joined the committee in the fruitless hope of reining it in. He thought about having a coadjutor appointed, but failed to apply formally to Rome. He moved from London to reside quietly in a convent at Hammersmith; his mind began to fail, and he lost so many teeth that he could scarcely be understood. 
Talbot died on 26 January 1790 at the convent, declaring on his deathbed that if he were to recover he would take stern measures against the committee. He was buried at St Paul's, Hammersmith (his remains were reinterred at St Edmund's College, Ware, in 1900). For his piety and his generosity to any number of charities from his inherited wealth he earned the name of the Good Bishop Talbot. His appearance is unknown, as he was too modest to sit for his portrait. 


@@@@@


doc= 62703


Fraser, John (1794-1879), Chartist and publisher, was born in Johnstone, Renfrewshire, the younger of two sons of Thomas Fraser and Isabella McIntosh, both of whom came originally from Inverness-shire. His father, who had been pressed into the navy and had been a prisoner for a time during the American War of Independence, acquired some medical knowledge and started business as a druggist in Johnstone. John briefly attended Paisley grammar school but some accident prevented his continuing and he completed his education at Cameron Green's school in Johnstone. Leaving school at the age of nine he went to work in a cotton mill for three years before taking up an apprenticeship as a handloom weaver. On finishing his apprenticeship he then worked for various employers in Johnstone. It was from one of these, Robert Henry, that he caught an enthusiasm for the temperance movement and, in time, became a committed total abstainer. 
Fraser was again struck by an unidentified illness and did not work for nearly two years. On his recovery he was able to get a job as a teacher in Kilmacolm and there, in 1814, he married Marjorie Roy (died 1869). He also came under the influence of an independent, radical preacher, Niel Douglas, who believed in universal atonement, and Fraser remained a believer. His brother, Thomas, opened a school in Kilbarchan and John became his assistant before opening his own school in Johnstone. 
Although he does not seem to have taken any active part in the radical uprising in the west of Scotland in April 1820, Fraser was arrested and held for four months after receiving a letter from one of the fugitive rebels. In the 1820s he founded the Mechanics' Institute in Johnstone and contributed some articles on political reform to the 'Glasgow Free Press'. He chaired Johnstone's Working Men's Radical Association in the early 1830s and also became an enthusiast for James Morison's 'hygeist' universal pills. In 1836 he moved to Edinburgh as a bookseller and newsagent and took part in the formation of the Edinburgh Abstinence Society in September 1836. In July 1838 he launched the 'Edinburgh Monthly Democrat and Total Abstinence Advocate', a twopenny unstamped paper, to report on Chartist and temperance activity. He and his associate, Abram Duncan, travelled around Scotland giving lectures on Chartism and preparing for the launch of a weekly paper, the first number of which appeared on 20 October 1838. The title, the 'True Scotsman', was aimed directly at the whig 'Scotsman' newspaper which had been deriding the intellectual ability of Edinburgh Chartists. It was for 'sober, industrious tradesmen' and its tone remained one of trying to bring moral improvement to the working classes. 
Anxious to maintain links between Chartism and the temperance movement, Fraser was critical of any language threatening violent action. On 4-5 December 1838 he organized a conference of some Scottish Chartist delegates and, at a rally on Edinburgh's Calton Hill, resolutions were passed condemning violent language and proposing that there should be no collaboration with those who advocated physical force. He was accused of betraying and dividing the movement. The Chartist Association in Edinburgh split and Glasgow Chartists produced a rival paper clearly intended to compete with the 'True Scotsman'. In May 1839 he was at the forefront of a committee which nominated W. Sharman Crawford against T. B. Macaulay for a vacant Edinburgh parliamentary seat. 
At its peak the 'True Scotsman' had a circulation of some 3000, but it declined to fewer than 500 copies a week by the time the last number appeared on 27 March 1841. Its pages were regularly filled with denunciation of even the slightest hint that force might be necessary and with bitter invective against its Glasgow rival. Fraser believed that a union between middle class and working class was essential to restrain the latter from violence and insurrection, but he had no sympathy with the Anti-Corn Law League, believing that farmers needed protection. As a result he still had loyal followers in the borders, and in the July 1841 general election he came forward as Chartist candidate for Roxburghshire, although he did not go to the poll. 
By this time Fraser had two grown-up sons and four daughters. Two daughters, Jane and Margaret, were singers. They had been entertaining temperance meetings, and in August 1841 Fraser took them on a very successful concert tour of the borders, accompanying them on the piano, doing readings, and providing historical information on the background to the mainly Scottish songs. Even more successful tours of the north of England followed in 1841 and 1842, and in October 1843 they embarked on a seven-month concert tour of London and the south-east. The tours were clearly lucrative, for in 1847 Fraser was able to purchase Newfield House, Kilbarchan, Renfrewshire, and to lease a farm nearby, where he encouraged experiments in high farming. A first tour of the United States was made at the end of 1851, but Jane was taken ill there, and after a long illness, she died in 1853. Fraser returned to Scotland and, having given up his farm, briefly resumed teaching at Newfield. He continued to interest himself in local political issues, opposing the moves to make Johnstone an independent burgh and campaigning against compulsory vaccination. His wife died in November 1869 and he himself died from liver failure at Newfield House on 3 March 1879, aged eighty-four. He was buried in the churchyard of the Relief Church in Kilbarchan. 


@@@@@


doc= 62705


Moir, James (1806-1880), tea merchant, Chartist, and local politician, was born in Stenhousemuir, Stirlingshire, on 18 May 1806, the son of Benjamin Moir, an ironfounder, and Janet Burgess. Nothing is known of his schooling, but he went to work with James Wallace, a tea merchant in the Gallowgate of Glasgow. Early in the 1820s he opened his own retail and wholesale tea business at 179 Gallowgate, a business that he retained until shortly before his death. He may have been part of his father's second family since he had at least one brother, or more probably half-brother, Benjamin, born in 1781 or 1783, and a younger sister, Janet, who was not born until 1815. Benjamin, a labourer, was one of those sentenced to death for high treason for his part in the radical uprising which ended at Bonnymuir in April 1820. The sentence was commuted to transportation for life and he was still in Australia in 1849. Intriguingly, judging from two letters from Benjamin in James Moir's few remaining papers, in all these years James never wrote to Benjamin. 
James Moir became active in the Glasgow Political Union during the parliamentary reform agitation of 1831-2. He also campaigned for local government reform, and in 1835 made his first unsuccessful bid for membership of the Glasgow town council. He was one of the founders of the movement for the 'People's Charter' in Glasgow at the end of 1837. In the debates within the Universal Suffrage Association he held out strongly for the focus being exclusively on the six points and resisted efforts to link it to the campaign for repeal of the corn laws. At the end of 1838 Moir's name went forward as a Chartist candidate for the town council, but he withdrew before the poll. In a hostile press he was lampooned as 'wild Rory O'More'. He was the Glasgow delegate to the Chartist convention in 1839 and, although his contribution to debates seems to have been quite slight, he was a useful chairman and helped canvass signatures for the Chartist petition with a tour of Devon. Moir never ruled out the possibility of the use of physical force should the petition be rejected, but he argued that any actions had to be co-ordinated across the country. 
After the break-up of the convention Scottish Chartists established their own universal suffrage central committee of which Moir became chairman. In the debates within Chartism he generally remained loyal to Feargus O'Connor, rejecting William Lovett's so-called 'new move' in 1841 as 'a new utopian humbug', and he kept clear of the Complete Suffrage Association with its call for a union between the middle and working classes. Chartist churches were an important part of the movement in Scotland, but Moir does not seem to have participated in them, and he parted company with those of his colleagues who were most active in the churches. He also differed from O'Connor on the issue of getting involved in local government politics. In 1843 he stood unsuccessfully as a candidate for the Glasgow police commission, but was elected in the following year. On 2 February 1846 he married Martha Roxburgh McGavin (1808-1876), daughter of Robert McGavin, a mildly radical councillor, and later that year he stood, again unsuccessfully, for the town council. He did, however, achieve success in 1848 when, in the second ward, he defeated the lord provost and MP Alexander Hastie, claiming to represent the city's east end against the expanding middle-class suburbs in the west. He continued these struggles in the 1860s with a campaign to ensure that the city's west end park was open to all as a public right of way. 
On Glasgow's town council Moir concerned himself particularly with police and sanitary matters (he brought about the introduction of public urinals to the city in the 1860s), but he retained his interest in wider political issues, supporting the north in the American Civil War and espousing the cause of the Peace Society. He was influential in Liberal Party circles and became president of the Scottish National Reform League in 1867, campaigning for a further extension of the franchise. He pulled out of the town council election of 1865 when it was clear that he was likely to be defeated, but was returned in 1868, after a campaign to prevent encroachments on Glasgow Green. In 1871 he was elected unopposed for the fourth ward and raised to the magistrates' bench as a bailie. He was now very comfortably off, some of the radicalism had mellowed, and he was caricatured as 'Rory O'Bore' who had 'flourished, waxed fat, laughed and grew rich' ('The Bailie', 4, 13 Nov 1872). A slight pomposity had entered the tone of his speeches and much was made of his 'dignity and decorum'. In 1874, having opposed demands for a 'permissive bill' to enable local areas to prohibit the sale of alcohol, he was defeated by a temperance advocate. In 1875, however, he was returned unopposed for the tenth ward and he retained that seat until his death. 
Moir and his wife had had three children, but they all died in infancy and his wife predeceased him in April 1876. In his later years he lived with his sister, Janet, at 1 Broomhill Avenue in Partick. He bequeathed his extensive collection of books and pamphlets to the city's Mitchell Library together with the residue of his estate. The library received an endowment of $11,460 and he is commemorated in the city's Moir Hall. He died at 1 Broomhill Avenue of the effects of an abscess on 1 December 1880 and was buried in Sighthill cemetery, Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 62723


Lind, Letty (1861-1923), actress and dancer, was born Letitia Elizabeth Rudge on 21 December 1861, at her father's residence, Back 159, Irving Street, Birmingham. Letty was the eldest daughter in the family of five daughters and three sons of Henry Rudge, in turn a gas fitter, brass worker, chandelier maker, and brass founder, and his wife, Annie Elizabeth, 'nee' Hemming. Some sources indicate that her parents had theatre connections; all of their five daughters went on the stage and achieved varying degrees of success. Letty began to dance at the age of four, taking lessons from a 'Signor Guerino' -- possibly John Guarrino Warren (1828/9-1876), then working in the midlands. In 1867 she made her first stage appearance as Eva in 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham. In 1872 and 1873, billed as La Petite Letitia, she was seen in several ballets at Day's Crystal Palace in the same city and by 1874, as Letty Rudge, she was in Mme Collier's ballet 'La Plaisir' at the Metropolitan in London. In the following year she had a minor role in the Drury Lane pantomime 'Aladdin!' About this period she toured for a while with Emily Saker's company before joining Howard Paul (1830-1905) in his 'musical, comical and fanciful entertainments'. By 1877 she had assumed the stage name of Letty Lind and had replaced Paul's wife, both in a professional and a private capacity. 
On 10 July 1878, still only sixteen, Lind gave birth to a daughter at Howard Paul's home, 6 Great Russell Street, London. The child, also named Letty Rudge, died a few days later. The father's name was not registered on the birth certificate. On 9 October 1880 Letty gave birth to a son, named Henry Howard Paul Rudge, although in adulthood he became known as Horace Howard. The father's name was not registered, but he was acknowledged to be Howard Paul, with whom Letty and their son were living at 19 Montague Place, London. Soon after the birth Howard Paul ceased his theatrical activities, reverting to his original career in journalism. After a brief period working with Charles du Val, Lind pursued an independent career, achieving some success in plays and musical theatre in London and performing principal roles in provincial pantomimes. 
Early in 1887 Lind began her long and successful association with George Edwardes, initially in the last of the burlesques which he staged at the Gaiety Theatre in London, and subsequently in his early musical comedies at Daly's Theatre. She first joined the cast of the burlesque melodrama 'Monte Cristo, Junior', taking over a role previously played by Lottie Collins. Although she apparently had little voice Lind was frequently given songs with which she managed, with the addition of a dance and much charm, to make herself a great popular favourite. At Christmas 1887 she found herself 'on loan' to Augustus Harris at Drury Lane, appearing as Princess Sweetarte in 'Puss in Boots', but she was back with the Gaiety company in 1888, achieving some personal success during their tour of Australia and the USA. After returning to London she created minor roles at the Gaiety in the burlesques 'Ruy Blas and the Blase Rue' and 'Carmen up to Data'. In the latter she performed two solo songs, one of which deployed her talent for animal imitations (especially birds and farmyard animals), and a solo dance which incorporated moves of the skirt dance with its 'swift rush of floating draperies through the air' (Hindson, 71), pioneered at the Gaiety by her predecessor Kate Vaughan. 
Letty Lind became perhaps the foremost skirt dancer during the height of the dance's popularity at the end of the 1880s and in the early 1890s. 'Light-footed' and 'lissom-limbed' ('The Times'), she was one of the few skirt dancers who had the advantage of a 'classical' training, but she was not averse to adding the odd acrobatic touch, especially to the conclusion of her dances. For nearly two decades she was universally acclaimed in the press as the foremost dancer in her sphere, the embodiment of charm and grace but also with a lively sense of humour. Widely represented on picture postcards, she was the subject of a portrait by Hubert von Herkomer conveying 'the poetry and vivacity of the 'serpentine dance'' which she had parodied with her own 'imitations and novel ideas' in 1893 (Shaftesbury Theatre advertisement in 'The Times', 31 July 1893). She appeared in many charitable and 'try-out' matinees, and benefit performances. 
On 15 January 1892, at Stanhope Street, Hyde Park Gardens, London, Lind gave birth to her second son, John Reginald Harraton Rudge (whose surname was later changed to Harraton). The father's name was not registered but he was acknowledged to be John George Lambton (1855-1928), third earl of Durham, whose wife was by 1891 a patient in an asylum (Lambton's action in 1885 to nullify his marriage on the ground of her insanity had been dismissed). In May 1892, back at the Gaiety, Lind succeeded to the title role, created by Nellie Farren, in 'Cinder-Ellen up Too Late'. During 1893 and 1894 she scored immense personal success, becoming the talk of the town, under a new management, in two 'musical farcical comedies', 'Morocco Bound' and 'Go-Bang' at the Trafalgar Square Theatre. The illustrated sheet music of her songs was in great demand. She received much press coverage, and even published a short story and articles on dancing and costume. The accomplished mimic Cissie Loftus gave impersonations of both Lind and her sister Millie Hylton ['see below'] as part her act at the Palace Theatre, in London, and around the country. 
Towards the end of 1894 Lind returned to George Edwardes's management to take over the leading role in a musical comedy, 'A Gaiety Girl', on its transfer to Daly's Theatre. A string of notable performances by Lind followed, in which she co-starred with Marie Tempest (1864-1942) in further musical comedies 'An Artist's Model', 'The Geisha', and 'A Greek Slave', all at Daly's. Meanwhile, in 1895, she composed a song, with lyrics by Adrian Ross, for her sister Adelaide Astor to sing in 'A Lady Slavey' at the Avenue Theatre. In 1899 she took a lengthy engagement in a variety programme at the Alhambra, where she received $90 a week (more than any other solo artist on the bill), followed by a week or two at the London Pavilion. At the end of that year she made her last appearance in pantomime as Princess Ivy in 'Puss in Boots', at the Garrick Theatre. In 1902 she made her last appearance in a West End show, again under the banner of George Edwardes, in a musical play, 'The Girl from Kay's', at the Apollo Theatre. 
After her relatively early retirement from the stage Lind settled at her country property, Brookside, situated on the Bath Road at the fashionable Salt Hill, Slough, near Windsor, in five acres of grounds, well stocked with trees, where she could indulge her passion for gardening and her pets. Her relationship with Durham seems to have continued until her death, at Brookside, on 27 August 1923. Her funeral took place at St Mary's Church, Slough, and she was buried in Windsor cemetery. She left her country house to Durham 'for his lifetime', after which it was to pass to their son, John R. Harraton. 
Letty's four younger sisters, all of whom were born in Birmingham, followed her on to the stage at an early age and at one time or another all worked for George Edwardes. The eldest, Millie Hylton (1870-1920), was born at 22 Hope Street, Birmingham, on 8 February 1870, and was reputedly only four years old when she first went on the stage at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham. Carving herself a career as a male impersonator in music hall before she was eighteen, she was engaged by George Edwardes for the Gaiety, where she made a success in 'Monte Cristo, Junior'. After returning to the halls she made successful trips to New York in 1888 and 1889 to appear with Tony Pastor's company. She also became established in pantomime, making the first of her many appearances around the country, as principal boy, at the Theatre Royal, Brighton, in 1890. It would appear that in about 1891 she lived, for about two years, as his common law wife, with the prestigious variety agent Hugh J. Didcott (1836?-1909), who had represented her since 1887. After returning to the regular stage Millie appeared in the Gaiety pieces 'In Town' and 'Don Juan' (in the title role), 'The Circus Girl' on tour, and in 'Biarritz' at the Prince of Wales's. Among Millie's most successful songs were 'The Rowdy-dowdy Boys', 'Linger Longer Loo', and 'The Last of the Dandies'. On 30 April 1894 she married 'a young gentleman of means', Henry Edward Clulow Sim (1872/3-1901), son of William Clulow Sim of the Indian civil service, and in 1895 gave birth to their daughter Millie Sim, who later, for a while, had a promising career as an actress. In 1896 Millie sued Harry Sim for divorce, alleging physical and verbal abuse, but they remained married until his early death, from consumption, in 1901. In her later years Millie successfully appeared in a number of West End plays for various managers including her brother-in-law George Grossmith and Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree. She died of cancer, aged fifty, at her home, 13 Langdale Gardens, Aldrington, Hove, Sussex, on 31 August 1920 and was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 
Letty Lind's youngest sister, Fanny Dango (1878-1972) was born at 31 Anderton Street, Ladywood, Birmingham, on 20 October 1878. It would appear that she also started her career in pantomime at Birmingham, but she was soon to be found under George Edwardes's banner at Daly's Theatre and on tour in 'The Geisha' (1896/7). In 1897 she took over roles in 'A Runaway Girl' (Gaiety Theatre) and 'Little Miss Nobody' (Lyric Theatre). Under the management of Tom B. Davis ('b'. 1867) she appeared in 'Floradora' at the Lyric, but left to undertake a more important role in his touring production of the same piece (1901/2) and then repeated this pattern in 'The Silver Slipper'. In 1903 she toured with George Dance's company in 'Three Little Maids', assuming the role played by her sister Lydia Flopp in London. In 1904 she was back with George Edwardes, playing the title role in the tour of 'San Toy' and, in 1905, at the Gaiety in 'Spring Chicken'. Meanwhile she had appeared as principal girl in pantomimes at Newcastle and Liverpool in 1903 and 1904. In 1907 Fanny was invited by J. C. Williamson to join his Royal Comic Opera Company in Australia, where she had much success playing supporting roles in 'The Dairymaids', 'The Belle of New York', 'The Merry Widow', and 'The Girls of Gottenburg' on tour in Australia and New Zealand. On 28 November 1910 she married, in London, Samuel Peter Mackay (1863-1923), a wealthy Australian with wide pastoral property and racehorse interests, the son of Duncan Mackay; he had previously been married to Florence Gertrude Taylor, from whom he was divorced. After a honeymoon in Scotland they settled in Melbourne. Before the Second World War their son, Peter Angus Mackay (1911-1951), was engaged in film production with London Films, where his cousin, George E. T. Grossmith (1906-1997), was a casting director. After her husband's demise Fanny lived on in Melbourne, in some comfort, until her own death, at Mount Waverley, Victoria, Australia, on 15 July 1972. She was buried with her husband, son, and step-daughter, the actress Elsie Mackay (1894-1963), at Brighton General cemetery, Melbourne. 
Of the remaining two Rudge sisters, Elizabeth Gertrude Rudge (1873-1951) had a shorter career, first in music halls as Cissie Lind, but mainly in musical comedy using the name Adelaide Astor. In 1895 she married the actor-manager George Grossmith (1874-1935), and appears to have retired from the stage soon after the birth of the first of their three children. She died in London in 1951. Meanwhile Lydia Flopp 
('real name' Lydia Agnes Rudge; 1877-1963)
followed in the wake of her sisters in musical comedy. In 1904 she married Maurice ffolliott Rhys Wingfield (1878-1941). They had a child, Muriel Violet, in 1905 but they divorced unhappily in 1911 after he left her. She continued working for several years including a brief spell in 1909/10 with her sister Fanny Dango for J. C. Williamson in Australia. She died in Northwood, Middlesex, in 1963, never having been reconciled with her daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 62730


Moore, (Lilian) Decima (1871-1964), actress, was born on 11 December 1871 at 21 Regency Square, Brighton, one of the family of nine daughters (three of whom died in childhood) and one son of Edward Henry Moore, chemist, and his wife, Emily Strachan. Her sisters Eva (1870-1955) and Jessie (died 1910) were also successful actresses. She was educated at Miss Pringle's school in Brighton, and sang in the church choir; she won a scholarship to Blackheath Conservatory. At seventeen she approached Richard D'Oyly Carte at the Savoy Theatre for a voice trial, and was offered the part of Casilda in the original production of 'The Gondoliers', the last great success of the partnership of W. S. Gilbert and Sir Arthur Sullivan, which opened on 7 December 1889 and ran for eighteen months with 554 performances. She took part in the command performance before Queen Victoria at Windsor Castle on 6 March 1891, the first theatrical entertainment to take place at court since the death of Prince Albert thirty years earlier. After her success as Casilda she appeared in another operetta, 'Captain Billy', at the Savoy Theatre. This opened in June 1891 and when it closed in January 1892 she moved on to take over the title role in the comic opera 'Miss Decima' by F. C. Durand at the Criterion Theatre, and acted in 'A Pantomime Rehearsal' by Cecil Clay at the Royal Court before heading the cast of 'The Wedding Eve', and starring in the title role in a revival of 'Dorothy' by B. C. Stephenson. Returning to the Savoy Theatre in May 1893, she played the schoolgirl Bab in 'Jane Annie', a new comic opera, with a libretto by J. M. Barrie and Arthur Conan Doyle and music by Ernest Ford, which was poorly received and closed after six weeks. 
Moore came under the influence of the theatre manager George Edwardes when she created the ingenue role of Rose Brierly in 'A Gaiety Girl' by Owen Hall, with music by Sidney Jones, one of the first of the new musical comedies; it opened at the Prince of Wales Theatre on 14 October 1893 and ran for eleven months. She remained in the cast of 'A Gaiety Girl' when Edwardes sent the company to New York in September 1894 for a two-month season on Broadway, with Granville Bantock as musical director, before touring the United States, covering eight more American cities in four months. While in New York she married, on 18 September 1894, Ceil Ainslie Walker-Leigh. When the company moved on to Australia she starred as Bessie Brent in 'The Shop Girl' by H. W. Dam (music by Ivan Caryll and Lionel Monckton) and the Prima Donna of the Ambiguity Theatre in 'In Town' by Adrian Ross and J. T. Tanner, when these were added to the repertory. 
After returning to England, Moore left Edwardes and pursued a singing career in the theatre for the next ten years, starring in 'The White Silk Dress' by A. McLean (1896) at the Prince of Wales Theatre; 'Lost, Strayed or Stolen' (1897); Sir Arthur Sullivan's operetta 'The Rose of Persia' (1899) at the Savoy Theatre; and the musical comedy 'Florodora' (1900-01) by Owen Hall at the Lyric Theatre. She played the Swineherd in the Christmas musical 'The Swineherd and the Princess' (1901) at the Royalty Theatre, toured in the 1902 production of 'The Gay Cadets', and took the role of Alice Coverdale in 'My Lady Molly' by G. H. Jessop (music by Sidney Jones) (1903), which ran for 341 performances. She and her husband separated in 1902 and divorced two years later; they had a son. 
On 15 August 1905 Moore married Sir (Frederick) Gordon Guggisberg (1869-1930), son of Frederick Guggisberg, merchant, of Galt, Ontario, Canada. She was his second wife. Guggisberg, an officer in the Royal Engineers, was appointed director of surveys in the Gold Coast in 1905, returning to England in 1908. She accompanied him to the Gold Coast, and together they published an account of their survey journeys, 'We Two in West Africa' (1909). When in England she made occasional appearances in the theatre, but no longer in musicals; she appeared in Ben Jonson's 'The Vision of Delight' in 1908, his masque 'The Hue and Cry after Cupid' in 1911, and for the last time on the London stage in a matinee performance of 'Vantage out' in 1914. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Guggisberg rejoined the army, and Decima Moore set up the Women's Emergency Corps, a clearing-house for women's voluntary war work, with its headquarters at the Little Theatre. Thousands of women enrolled, ready to be called on to meet any emergency. She attached herself to the French army in January 1915, and ran the Leave Club in Paris for British soldiers. After the armistice, she was one of the first women to enter Cologne, where she organized a club for the army of occupation, before travelling across the battlefields, from Ypres to Verdun. She was appointed CBE and awarded the overseas medal and the 'Medaillon de reconnaissance'. 
In 1919 Guggisberg was appointed governor of the Gold Coast and Moore intermittently spent time there with him until 1925. She did not accompany him to British Guiana, where he was governor from 1928 until his resignation in 1929. Guggisberg died in 1930, and his widow lived on until her death, aged ninety-three, on 18 February 1964 at 92 Redcliffe Gardens, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 62762


Drummond, Mary, Countess Marischal (1675-1729), Jacobite sympathizer, was the daughter of James Drummond, fourth earl, and Jacobite first duke, of Perth (1648-1716), and his first wife, Lady Jane Douglas (died 1678), the fourth daughter of William Douglas, first marquess of Douglas. According to the 'Red Book of Grandtully' Mary (or Maria) was born in Scotland on 14 July 1675. About 1690 she married 
William Keith succeeded to the earldom in March 1694. In politics an anti-union tory, he took the oaths to the 'de facto' monarchy and his seat in the Scottish parliament in July 1698 and was sworn of the privy council in June 1701. Created a knight of the Thistle by James III (James Francis Edward Stuart) in 1705, his known Jacobite leanings led to his imprisonment in Edinburgh Castle during the rising of 1708 (when his father-in-law accompanied King James to Scotland) and to his being sent for trial in London in its aftermath. Notwithstanding, he was made one of the sixteen representative peers at Westminster in 1710 and remained so until his death in London on 27 May 1712. The earl founded, but did not endow, a chair of medicine at Marischal College, Aberdeen. John Macky described him in colourful terms which enrich his committed but sober political career: 'He is very wild, inconstant and passionate; does everything by starts; hath abundance of flashy wit, and by reason of his quality, hath good interest in the country; all Courts endeavour to have him at their side for he gives himself liberty of talking when he is not pleased with the Government. He is a thorough Libertine, yet sets up mightily for Episcopy; a hard drinker; a thin body; a middle stature; ambitious of popularity. (GEC, 'Peerage', 8.484)' The marriage of Lady Mary and Lord Keith produced an heir, George Keith, later tenth and last Earl Marischal, a second son, James Francis Edward Keith, and two daughters: Mary (died 1721), who married John, sixth earl of Wigtown, and Anne (died 1728), who married Alexander, sixth earl of Galloway. As the name of her second son suggests, Lady Mary was a committed Jacobite throughout her life. She died on 7 March 1729 at Edinburgh and was buried at Holyrood Abbey. The ascription to her of the song 'When the king comes o'er the water', sometimes called 'Lady Keith's lament', has no solid foundation, and the song itself (printed in James Hogg's 'Jacobite Relics' of 1817) has been dated to later in the eighteenth century. Consequently, while in her kinship networks and their combination of Roman Catholicism and Episcopalianism she is representative of the private sphere in which Jacobite sympathies were sustained among the Scottish elite, her principal contribution to Jacobite history remains the parenthood of her soldier sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 62764


Malcolm Macheth, earl of Ross (d. 1168), may have rebelled in 1124 against King David I. He was certainly 'out' in 1130 with Angus, earl of Moray, who claimed the Scottish throne as a descendant of King Lulach (died 1058); they were defeated, and Angus killed, at Stracathro. In 1134 Malcolm again rebelled and David I sought and may have received Norman help; in the same year Malcolm was captured and imprisoned in Roxburgh Castle, where he spent the next twenty-three years. There were no more rebellions against David I for the rest of his reign. 
The ancestry of Malcolm Macheth and the reasons for his revolts have been variously explained. Orderic Vitalis describes him as the illegitimate son of Alexander I, but although Orderic is usually reliable, this seems unlikely. Ailred of Rievaulx, writing of the wars of 1138, refers to him as 'the heir of his father's hatred and persecution' (Anderson, 'Scottish Annals', 193), a phrase which has been taken to mean that he was the son of Angus of Moray. John Fordun, writing in the fourteenth century, asserts that he claimed, falsely, to be Angus's son, an assertion which misled later historians into confusing Malcolm with Wimund, bishop of the Isles, who undoubtedly contended that he was the son of Angus. But all these suggestions ignore the problems raised by Malcolm's patronym, and it seems more likely that he was the son of an Earl Aed 
(Heth; died before 1130?)
recorded early in the twelfth century, who may have held the earldom of Ross. A family link with Earl Angus is possible, but cannot be proved. However it was derived, Malcolm's eminence is clearly demonstrated by his marriage, in or before 1134, to a sister of Somerled, lord of Argyll; it may also explain his later imprisonment, since the usual fate for defeated rebels was execution. David I's mercy, or political judgement, could have been decisive in this, however, for Malcolm's rebellious descendants were not treated so leniently. 
Malcolm's sons (their exact number and, with one exception, names are not known) joined Somerled in his revolt against Malcolm IV late in 1154; one son, 


@@@@@


doc= 62765


Donald Macheth (fl. 1156), was captured at Whithorn in 1156 and sent to join his father at Roxburgh. In 1157 Malcolm Macheth was reconciled with the king and was probably loyal thereafter. He was granted the earldom of Ross, which he held from 1162 at the latest until his death in 1168. 
King William the Lion appointed no successor as earl; nothing more is known about Malcolm Macheth's sons except that Donald had a son, 


@@@@@


doc= 62766


Aed Macheth (d. 1186), who kept alive the family claims. Ross was a focus of unrest, probably from Macheth activity, in 1179; by 1181 a major rising was well under way, led by Donald Ban of the Macwilliam family, with whom the Macheths were often associated thereafter. Aed, son of Donald Macheth, took part; by now an outlaw, with an unnamed nephew and fifty-eight followers he was trapped and killed at the abbey of Coupar Angus in 1186. 
After the defeat of the Macwilliams at 'Mam Garvia' on 31 July 1187 the Macheths were quiet for nearly ten years. Malcolm Macheth also had a daughter, 


@@@@@


doc= 62767


Hvarflod Macheth, countess of Orkney and Caithness (fl. 1196), the bigamous second wife of Harald Maddadson, earl of Orkney and Caithness (1133/4-1206). She was thus the sister-in-law of Malcolm, earl of Atholl, who had been responsible for the death of her nephew Aed in 1186; she is said to have instigated the revolt of Earl Harald against King William in 1196. In 1197 Thorfinn Haraldsson, the earl's son from his first marriage, was defeated in battle near Inverness and Harald was captured and put in Roxburgh Castle; having made his peace with the king, he then left Thorfinn as a hostage in his place. About 1201, after further troubles in Caithness, Thorfinn was blinded and emasculated and died later in prison. John and David, the sons of Harald and Hvarflod, were recognized as earls of Orkney and Caithness after Harald's death. Perhaps warned by Thorfinn's fate, neither pressed any claims based on their Macheth blood. David died, apparently childless, in 1214; John (died 1231) succeeded as sole earl, and King William in the last months of his reign went to Moray and received John's (unnamed) daughter as a hostage. Her fate is not known; nor is the date of death of her grandmother Hvarflod. 
The Macheths may have been responsible for the invitation from the lords of Ross which encouraged Guthred Macwilliam's invasion in 1211. If so, at least one survived Guthred's defeat in 1212, since Aed's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 62768


Kenneth Macheth (d. 1215), took part in the next Macwilliam rising in 1215, when the rebels invaded Moray (more likely Ross). They were defeated in May or June and their severed heads, including Kenneth's, were presented to Alexander II on 15 June 1215. Nothing more is known of the family thereafter; a conjecture that they were the ancestors of clan Mackay is no more than that. If any were still alive their claims to Ross were denied when the earldom was granted to Farquhar Mactaggart, who had put down the rebellion of 1215, some time between 1221 and 1226. 


@@@@@


doc= 62769


Donald Ban Macwilliam (d. 1187), a son of William fitz Duncan and an unknown mother, and by then the male heir of all the family's claims, took advantage of the absence of the king and his brother in France and led a full-scale revolt in Moray and Ross. 
This uprising was a serious blow to the king, who was also at that time trying to restore order in Galloway. A later assertion that Donald Macwilliam controlled the earldoms of Ross and Moray for some considerable time seems to be well founded. The king is not known to have issued charters in Moray between probably 1179 and 1187, and there was no bishop of Moray for nearly two and a half years, from 17 September 1184 to 1 March 1187. A royal servant surrendered the castle of Auldearn and went over to the rebels. That a band led by Aed, son of Donald Macheth, was able to strike as far south as Coupar Angus in 1186 suggests how weak the king's position in the north was. In 1187, however, a major effort by the royal forces brought the rebels to battle on 31 July at 'Mam Garvia' (unidentified, but perhaps north or north-west of the Beauly Firth). Donald Macwilliam and, it is said, 500 of his men were killed, and Donald's head was sent to the king. 
After this defeat the Macwilliams, unlike the Macheths, are not known to have taken part in the unrest caused by Harald, earl of Orkney and Caithness, and his wife, Hvarflod (a Macheth), between 1196 and 1203. But a probable result of the expedition of King John of England to Ireland in 1210 was the expulsion of 


@@@@@


doc= 62770


Guthred Macwilliam (d. 1212), son of Donald Ban, who, invited by the lords of Ross, arrived there with Irish forces in January 1211. Redcastle and Dunskeath were refortified; a foray by King William's army in 1211 accomplished nothing, and after its withdrawal one of the castles was surrendered and burnt. At a meeting of the Scottish and English courts at Durham in February 1212 the dispatch of mercenaries was probably agreed. Whether they were effective is unlikely; a little later in the same year Guthred was betrayed, captured, presented to the king's son, the future Alexander II, at Kincardine, and decapitated; the corpse was then left hanging by the feet. 
In 1212 and 1214 Alan of Galloway and his brother Earl Thomas of Atholl attacked probable centres of help for the Macwilliams in Ulster. These measures and the death of Guthred were no deterrent. In 1215 there was an invasion (said to be of Moray, but Ross is more likely) by another 


@@@@@


doc= 62771


Donald Ban Macwilliam (d. 1215); his exact relationship to Guthred is unknown. He was accompanied by Kenneth Macheth and the son of an Irish king. But the attacks on Ulster had had an effect; the 1215 invasion was probably weaker than earlier ones and the rebels were defeated in May or June by Farquhar Mactaggart (lord of Applecross in Wester Ross and later earl of Ross) without royal intervention; their heads were presented to the king on 15 June 1215. 
The family's last fling was in the 1220s, possibly as early as 1223 but certainly by September 1228, when a certain 


@@@@@


doc= 62772


Gillescop Macwilliam (d. 1229) and his sons (again the exact relationship to other Macwilliams is unknown) fired a wooden castle in Moray, burnt part of Inverness, and about 8 September plundered some royal lands. William Comyn, earl of Buchan, was made responsible for law and order in the area; in 1229 Gillescop and his sons were captured and killed, and their heads were brought to the king. Then, or possibly in 1230, the last known member of the family, an infant daughter, was publicly put to death in Forfar, when her head was dashed against the market cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 62773


Parker, Theresa (1745-1775), art patron, was born in Vienna on 1 January 1745, the daughter of Thomas Robinson, first Baron Grantham (1695-1770), then ambassador to the Habsburg court in Vienna, and Frances Worsley (1716-1750). She was named for her godmother Empress Maria Theresa of Austria. She probably had a traditional aristocratic education at home that included drawing; a picture-puzzle letter that she drew in 1761 is preserved in Leeds (W. Yorks. AS, VR6015), and two etchings of landscapes that she made before her marriage are in the British Museum. On 18 May 1769 at Twickenham, Middlesex, she married, as his second wife, John Parker (1734/5-1788), MP for Bodmin in 1761-2 and for Devon from 1762 until 1784, when he was created Baron Boringdon. 
In 1768 John Parker inherited extensive family estates in the west country, including Saltram House in Devon. While her husband was gambling, hunting, shooting, racing, or otherwise occupied with politics Theresa Parker focused her attentions on Saltram. She had a close relationship with her elder sister Anne (Nanny) and brothers Thomas Robinson, second Baron Grantham, and Frederick (Fritz), and much of what is known about her character and views on life, and the decoration of Saltram, comes from her lively and engaging letters to them. She was a warm, intelligent woman whose 'amiable disposition, her softness and gentleness of manners, endeared her to every one that had the happiness of knowing her' (Reynolds, 'Character', 75) and whose sophisticated taste transformed Saltram into one of the showpieces of south-west England. 
In 1768 Robert Adam, then at the height of his career, was commissioned to design two grand new rooms -- the saloon and the library (now the dining room) -- for the east wing; in 1772 he also designed the stag lodges and a ceiling for the Parkers' Sackville Street house in London. Adam's design extended to the carpets, fittings, and some of the furniture for the rooms. The Parkers spent about $10,000 on the saloon alone. The Saltram account books record payments to Thomas Chippendale in 1771 and 1772, and the suite of furniture in the saloon was probably designed and made by him; Matthew Boulton made the four six-branch candelabra in 1772. The velvet drawing room leading into the saloon was redecorated in 1770, when Theresa 'with her usual taste orderd all the mouldings, & parts of the Capitals of the Columns to be Gilt, which makes the Room much chearfuller & handsommer'; mirrors and tables designed by Adam were added about 1772 (Johnson, 11). 
Theresa Parker chose many of the decorative objects for the house, including ceramics -- she had a preference for unglazed black Wedgwood -- and designed some pieces in silver herself. In 1772 Grantham wrote to Nanny of an inkstand: 'I am delighted with her Design, and am choaking with Jealousy and Admiration of it' (Johnson, 47). Grantham, a noted connoisseur and amateur architect, commissioned copies of works by Murillo for Saltram while he was ambassador to Spain, and designed the summer house known as The Castle in 1771. Theresa oversaw the landscaping and planting of the grounds, and the creation of hothouses, kitchen gardens, lodges, and a greenhouse; in 1774 she described how she wanted to decorate the new orangery with 'good Medallions and Bas Reliefs in Artificial Stone, which properly arranged over Niches may make it clever' (ibid., 60). 
Sir Joshua Reynolds was a close friend of the Parkers. He grew up in nearby Plympton, and according to family tradition John Parker's mother gave Reynolds his first drawing pencil. Reynolds enjoyed hunting and gambling at Saltram, and advised the Parkers on paintings for the house; two are known to have belonged to him. The Parkers purchased paintings by Philippe Jacques de Loutherbourg and George Stubbs, as well as old masters and copies. Other works were commissioned from artists such as Antonio Zucchi, who provided the ceiling paintings for the new rooms, and Angelica Kauffman, who painted Theresa's portrait in 1773 (priv. coll.). Theresa claimed responsibility for acquiring at least four history paintings by Kauffmann for Saltram in a letter to Fritz of 24 August 1775. 
There are thirteen paintings by Reynolds at Saltram, including a studio replica; three others were sold in the late nineteenth century. He painted a full-length portrait of Theresa Parker between 1770 and 1772. In 1773 Theresa wrote to Grantham: 'I have some thoughts (that is) Mr. Parker talks, of having the little Boy [her son, John] put into the half length [of] Sir Joshua's which remains just as you left it, only in bright yellow, which he is very fond of at present but I do not approve of. (Lummis and Marsh, 32)' A sitting that year was unproductive; the painting lay unfinished until a more successful result was achieved in 1775. Her son was John Parker, first earl of Morley (1772-1840). 
After contracting a fever Theresa Parker gave birth to a girl prematurely on 20 September 1775; she died of complications following the birth on 21 December and was buried at Plympton St Mary, Devon. Her daughter, Theresa, later married the Hon. George Villiers, and died in 1856. In the obituary of Mrs Parker written by Reynolds (BL, Add. MS 48252, fol. 15) and published anonymously in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' he says that her death was: 'occasioned by a stroke of the palsy, which happened soon after her lying-in of a daughter. Of this she appeared to be recovering; but receiving a second stroke, and soon after that a third, it put an end to the life of one of the most valuable of women. (Reynolds, 'Character')' He continued his tribute: 'In so exalted a character it is scarce worth mentioning her skill and exact judgment in the polite arts. She seemed to possess, by a kind of intuition, that propriety of taste and right thinking, which others but imperfectly acquire by long labour and application.' 



@@@@@


doc= 62774


Lewis, Essington (1881-1961), industrialist, was born on 13 January 1881 in Burra Burra, South Australia, the third son and third child in the family of four sons and two daughters of John Lewis (1844-1923), a partner in Bagot, Shakes, and Lewis Ltd, a stock and station agency, and later a member of the legislative council of South Australia, and his wife, Martha Ann Brook (died 1894), daughter of an excise inspector. He was educated at the collegiate school of St Peter, Adelaide, and from 1901 to 1904 at the South Australian School of Mines and Industries, Adelaide, where he trained as a mining engineer. 
In 1904 Lewis took a job as a miner with the Broken Hill Proprietary Company Ltd (BHP) at Broken Hill, New South Wales, founded in 1885 to mine the silver and lead deposits, a company which was to become one of the largest industrial concerns in Australia. In 1905, after gaining his diploma, he was transferred to the company's smelting works at Port Pirie, on the South Australian coast. On 12 April 1910 he married Gladys Rosalind (died 1954), social worker, daughter of James Cowan, mining investor and grazier: they had two sons and three daughters. By 1913 Lewis had been promoted assistant manager, with the challenge of expanding the output of ironstone at the quarry at Iron Knob, across Spencer's Gulf from Port Pirie, ready for the opening of the steelworks at Newcastle, New South Wales. When the steelworks, a new venture for BHP, opened in 1915, it prospered owing to the increased demand for steel during the First World War. Lewis was then put in charge of the BHP contract to manufacture light artillery shells. His attempt to enlist in the army in 1916 was blocked by G. D. Delprat, general manager of BHP, and in 1919 he was promoted to the post of assistant general manager. In 1920, with Harold Darling, a director of BHP, who was to become one of his closest friends, he went on a tour of steelworks and iron mines in North America and Britain, his first overseas tour: his next world tour took him to South Africa in 1925, and from then on he made an overseas tour about every five years. The BHP steelworks were unable to compete in the early 1920s with the cheaper steel imported from Europe, and were forced to close from 1922 to 1923. General manager from 1921, in 1926 Lewis was appointed managing director by Harold Darling, then chairman of BHP, and was given a seat on the board. 
After the economic depression of the early 1930s, with the reduced demand for steel, the fortunes of BHP began to revive at the end of 1932. By the mid-1930s the company was producing steel at prices comparable to those in Europe, despite having to pay higher wages because of the Australian labour laws, and output grew to twice that of before the depression. When, in 1935, BHP merged with Australian Iron and Steel Ltd, the other Australian steelworks, the new subsidiary company, with Lewis as manager and Darling as chairman, became the largest steel producer in the British Commonwealth. 
In 1934 Lewis visited Japan on his tour of the Far East, and, although he was allowed to see only two steelworks, he became aware of the rapid expansion of the Japanese steel industry and saw that war with Japan was inevitable. Convinced that Australia would be unable to meet an armed attack, Lewis from then on organized BHP to prepare for war. The company began to stockpile coal and iron ore and raw materials, opened a new factory in Newcastle to manufacture shell cases, organized the manufacture of special steel needed to make machine tools, and in 1939 began to build a shipyard at Whyalla, which launched its first ship in 1941: this became the largest shipyard in Australia. Because Australia had few fighter aircraft, in 1938 Lewis formed a syndicate, the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation, with BHP as the major shareholder, to build aircraft for the Australian government, and the first forty Wirraway fighter bombers went into production in 1938. It was Lewis more than anyone else who helped Australia prepare for the war against Japan. 
Appointed chief general manager in 1938, Lewis was invited to chair the advisory panel on industrial reorganization, a panel of businessmen set up by the government to advise on the mobilization of industry for war. He was also business consultant to the department of defence. But it was not until the fall of France in May 1940 that the prime minister, Robert Menzies, realizing that Australia could no longer rely on Britain to supply munitions, set up a new department of munitions, and appointed Lewis director-general. With a seat on the defence committee, and very wide powers, he was able to control the production of all munitions and vehicles, and the tools with which to make them. From his headquarters in Melbourne he planned new factories and converted hundreds of existing factories to the manufacture of munitions, while recruiting leading industrialists to form a board of directors: within six months he had quadrupled the output of munitions. At the same time Lewis remained, throughout the war, chief general manager of BHP, refusing to be paid by the government, and because of this many politicians and union leaders called for his removal, on the suspicion that he was jeopardizing the Australian war effort for the sake of higher profits for BHP. This was despite the fact that BHP was supplying steel at a lower price than the American and British steelworks were charging their governments. With the fall of Menzies in August 1941, and the subsequent appointment of John Curtin as prime minister, Lewis was given even more power when in January 1942 he was appointed director-general of the department of aircraft production and was able to organize the manufacture of Boomerang fighter aircraft, capable of defending Australian cities from Japanese bombing attacks. By the time Japan entered the war in December 1941, Australia was largely self-sufficient in munitions and was in a position to supply munitions and aircraft to the allies in the fight against the Japanese in the Pacific. Lewis refused to be considered for a knighthood, but he was appointed a CH in 1943. 
Lewis resigned his government positions in May 1945 to concentrate on BHP. He led the way in the mechanization of the coal industry, opened new ironstone quarries at Whyalla, and in 1948 began to build a new complex of mills at Port Kembla to produce tin plate. Elected chairman of BHP in 1950, he stepped down in 1952, remaining as deputy chairman. 
Lewis held many public appointments, and was chairman of the Industrial Design Council of Australia. He helped to create the Australian Administrative Staff College at Mount Eliza, Victoria, and served as chairman from 1954 to 1959. He was instrumental in the establishment by BHP of chairs of mineralogy at the universities of Melbourne and Adelaide, and as an honorary fellow of the Australian Academy of Science he chaired the fifth Mining and Metallurgical Congress in 1953. Among his many awards were the Bessemer gold medal of the Iron and Steel Institute, London, awarded in 1944, and the gold medal of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, London, in 1954. He published three books about the Australian iron and steel industry, including 'The Importance of the Iron and Steel Industry to Australia' (1948). 
An excellent sportsman in his youth -- star of Australian rules football and a celebrated polo player -- Lewis remained energetic all his life, displaying great stamina during his frequent journeys to all the BHP plants, quarries, mines, and mills. He died on 2 October 1961 of a heart attack while riding round Landscape, his 3500 acre sheep station at Tallarook, Victoria, and was cremated on 4 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 62775


Addinsell, Richard Stewart (1904-1977), composer and pianist, was born at 31 Woburn Square, London, on 13 January 1904, the younger of the two sons of William Arthur Addinsell, chartered accountant, and his wife, Annie Beatrice Richards. His adoring mother arranged for him to be educated at home, and this seemingly made him allergic to institutions thereafter. He went to Hertford College, Oxford, in 1922 to study law, but was there for only eighteen months and failed to take a degree. His thoughts were by now on music, and he enrolled at the Royal College of Music in 1925, but lasted there only two terms. In 1926 he made his West End debut as a composer with his songs for 'Charlot's Revue', which were followed by contributions to a further Charlot revue, 'Jumbles', in 1927. The following year saw the start of a collaboration with Clemence Dane on 'Adam's Opera' for the Old Vic, and in 1929 he began a journey around Europe, visiting Berlin, Vienna, and other major theatrical and musical centres. 
The 1930s brought songs for further West End plays. These included dramatizations of J. B. Priestley's 'The Good Companions' (1931) and Lewis Carroll's 'Alice in Wonderland' (1932), as well as various works by Clemence Dane -- 'Come of Age' (1933), 'Moonlight is Silver' (1934), 'L'Aiglon' (also 1934), and 'The Happy Hypocrite' (1936) -- and Shakespeare's 'The Taming of the Shrew' (1937). He later collaborated with Dane on her religious play cycle for radio, 'The Saviours', and in 1943 on a new version of 'Alice in Wonderland', incorporating 'Through the Looking Glass'. Addinsell wrote music for many other BBC productions, as well as for Emlyn Williams's plays 'The Light of Heart' (1940) and 'Trespass' (1947) and also for Christopher Fry's theatre adaptation of 'Ring Around the Moon' (1950). 
By then, however, Addinsell was associated more particularly with films. In 1933 he had visited Hollywood for an aborted project involving the Czech-born actor Francis Lederer, but in 1936 his association with Dane and Douglas Fairbanks junior (co-star of 'Moonlight is Silver') led to him composing music for the film 'The Amateur Gentleman'. There followed a long succession of film scores, notably for 'Fire over England' (1937), 'The Lion has Wings' and 'Goodbye Mr Chips' (both 1939), and 'Dangerous Moonlight' and 'Gaslight' (both 1940). The pseudo-Rakhmaninov 'Warsaw' concerto in 'Dangerous Moonlight', played on screen by Anton Wallbrook and on the soundtrack by Louis Kentner, enjoyed a sensational international success. This had been produced in conjunction with Addinsell's arranger and orchestrator from 1937 to 1942, Roy Douglas, Addinsell's method of working being to compose at the piano and hand the result to his assistant. Besides Douglas, other collaborators included Leonard Isaacs (between 1936 and 1948) and Douglas Gamley (from 1957 to 1965). 
Addinsell proved one of the most inventive of all British composers of the period. His further film scores included 'Love on the Dole' (1941), 'The Day will Dawn' (1942), 'Blithe Spirit' (1945), 'Diary for Timothy' (1946), 'The Passionate Friends' (1948), 'Scrooge' (1951), 'Tom Brown's Schooldays' (1951), 'Sea Devils' (1953), 'Beau Brummel' (1954), 'The Prince and the Showgirl' (1957), 'The Admirable Crichton' (1957), 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1958), 'The Roman Spring of Mrs Stone' (1961), 'The Greengage Summer' (1961; released in America as 'Loss of Innocence'), 'Waltz of the Toreadors' (1962), and finally 'Life at the Top' (1965). 
Addinsell also composed concert works, which included a miniature piano concerto, 'The Smokey Mountains' (1950). In addition he worked for many years as accompanist and composer for the actress Joyce Grenfell, whom he met in 1942. His post-war theatre work included music for revues such as 'The Lyric Revue' (1951), 'Penny Plain' (1951), 'Airs on a Shoestring' (1953), and various one-woman shows given by Joyce Grenfell until 1965, when failing health prevented him from playing the piano and led to his retirement from film composition. Addinsell was a quiet and introverted man, but one who could be generous to his close circle and who came alive at the piano. In retirement at his home at 1 Carlyle Mansions, Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, he helped his partner, Victor Stiebel ('b'. 1907), the couturier, through the ravages of muscular sclerosis. Stiebel died in 1976, and Addinsell himself died from bronchopneumonia and osteoporosis at 1 Carlyle Mansions on 14 November 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 62776


Joyce, Archibald (1873-1963), composer, was born Arthur Joyce on 25 May 1873 at 68 Winchester Street, Pimlico, London, the son of William Benjamin Joyce, a band sergeant in the Grenadier Guards, and his wife, Minna Mary, 'nee' Hankinson. He went to school in Paddington, sang as a boy chorister, and learned the piano and violin. From his teens, Joyce worked as a pianist at various dance schools in the West End, occasionally also playing for music-halls, hotels, restaurants, transatlantic liners, and private balls. He also adopted the performing name of Archibald. About 1900 he began taking bookings for his own ensemble, the Archibald Joyce Dance Orchestra, whose reputation grew until he needed no other employment. Its numbers varied: a large orchestra supplied music for aristocratic balls during the London season; the core musicians then went on tour, performing at seaside pavilions and great houses. 
From arranging dance medleys, Joyce progressed to composing. His first publication, a two-step, 'The Moke's Parade' (1905), made no great mark. The waltz 'Sweet Memories' did better in 1908, when he hit on his winning formula with 'Songe d'automne'. A succession of similar waltzes followed: 'Vision d'amour' (1909), 'A jamais' (1909), 'A Thousand Kisses' (1910), 'Charming' (1912), 'Maiden's Blush' (1913), 'Entrancing' (1914), 'Love's Mystery' (1915), and others. The appeal of 'Vision of Salome' (1909), with transient modulations to minor keys to evoke the mysterious East, warranted three sequels with her name in the title. By far his greatest triumph, however, was 'Dreaming' (1911), which swept the ballrooms of the world, selling a million copies in a decade. Over forty different recordings of it were made in the twentieth century. 
Joyce's publishers, Ascherberg, Hopwood, and Crew, marketed him as 'The English Waltz King', implying a comparison to Johann Strauss the younger that cannot be taken seriously. He was more directly inspired by Franz Lehar -- in particular, by the waltz duet from act II of 'The Merry Widow' (running in London 1907-9), which established the vogue for dreamy smoothness as opposed to exuberant brilliance. The typical Joyce waltz comprised a very brief introduction followed by three slow, sentimental melodies, with the main one much repeated before a soft coda. Even if he never quite equalled the sensuous quality achieved by Lehar or Leo Fall, he did well to compete at all, for British composers had failed to produce much original dance music in the nineteenth century. Joyce announced himself the first Englishman to have waltzes published on the continent. Then, in 1912, Sydney Baynes's 'Destiny' and Charles Ancliffe's 'Nights of Gladness' joined Joyce's 'Dreaming' as defining examples of 'the English waltz'. 
The Archibald Joyce Dance Orchestra ceased to be a permanent body after 1914, as many of its members enlisted. By then, its founder owned a large house beside Clapham Common and a car (for motoring was his hobby). He married Florence Mary ('b'. 1888/9), daughter of William Alfred Latter, a farmer's manager, on 28 July 1919. 
Though Joyce had sometimes conducted in the theatre, notably for Ellen Terry, and his style echoed musical comedy, he wrote only twice for the stage. 'Toto', a flimsy tale of 'Gay Paree', jointly composed with Merlin Morgan, ran a mediocre seventy-seven nights in London in 1916 but toured until 1920. He collaborated with G. H. Clutsam on 'Gabrielle', which, without ever reaching the West End, did good enough business in the provinces 1921-4. 
The visit of the Original Dixieland Jazz Band to London in 1919 transformed popular dance music. Like many Edwardian musicians, Joyce fled saxophones, banjos, and syncopated foxtrots, leaving the dance-halls to younger men. He found refuge in the emergent genre of British light music, and, although he was no Albert Ketelbey or Eric Coates, resort orchestras and amateur pianists happily filled out their repertories with his polka 'Frou Frou', suites like 'Caravan', and sundry marches and novelty pieces. 
Joyce abandoned inner London in 1927, moving to Bexhill-on-Sea and then in 1932 to his last home in Sutton, Surrey. After a fallow decade, the advent of 'old tyme' dancing in the 1940s elicited a flurry of late works, such as 'Brighton Hike', a sprightly military two-step, but even the nostalgia market had faded away by the time of his death from heart failure at 75 Langley Park Road, Sutton, on 22 March 1963. Thereafter his name appeared only in connection with the claim that 'Songe d'automne' was the final piece played on the 'Titanic'. However, a compact disc in 1996 salvaged a selection of his music from oblivion. 


@@@@@


doc= 62800


Coronio, Aglaia (1834-1906), embroiderer, bookbinder, and art patron, was the second child and elder daughter of Alexander Ionides (1810-1890) and his wife, Euterpe, 'nee' Sgouta ('b'. 1816), who was described in George Du Maurier's novel 'Trilby' (1894) as 'so beautiful and stately and magnificently attired' (Ormond, 100). Alexander emigrated to England from Greece in 1827 to work in the Manchester business started by his father, Constantine Ionidis Iplikzis (1775-1852), which exported cottons to Turkey and Greece and imported a variety of goods into Britain. Alexander became a British subject and took an Anglicized surname from Ionidis. In later life he became managing director of the Banque of Constantinople and director of the Crystal Palace Company. From 1840 the Ionides family lived in Tulse Hill, London, moving in 1864 to a large house at 1 Holland Park. Both homes became the headquarters for a group of wealthy, influential Anglo-Greek families and through their interest and patronage of the arts, centres for artistic London society. The Ionides women were admired for their independent personalities and striking looks, especially Aglaia, who was tall and slender with a pale face and haunting black eyes; she, her equally beautiful cousin Maria Zambaco, and Marie Spartali, another member of London's Anglo-Greek circle, were known as 'the three graces'. They were painted by D. G. Rossetti, G. F. Watts, and notably by Edward Burne-Jones in 'The Mill', completed between 1870 and 1882 (V&A). 
From 1854 to 1866 Alexander Ionides served as the Greek consul-general in London, Aglaia acting as his official hostess. She became known as one of the most gracious, intelligent, and witty women of the period. After her marriage in 1855 to Theodore John Coronio ('c'.1828-1903) Aglaia lived at 1 Lindsey Row, moving in 1869 next to her parents at 1A Holland Park. Her daughter, Calliope, was born in 1856 and her son, John, a year later. She became a keen patron of the arts owning works by Rossetti, Whistler, and Fantin-Latour and she practised the arts of bookbinding and embroidery. The only known existing example of her work is a pair of embroidered curtains designed by William Morris in the 1870s. These and their design, which is marked with her name, are owned by the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
Aglaia Coronio and William Morris became close friends and their long-lasting correspondence illustrates how deeply Morris confided in her. He visited her frequently and encouraged her artistic pursuits. In a letter to his wife, Jane, in 1870 he refers to her making 'quite a fine thing' of bookbinding (Kelvin, 1.128). He supplied her with embroidery threads and she, in return, secured for him samples of the rare, red dye kermes, and packets of unspun Levantine wool. Her refined tastes were also invaluable in the selection and arranging of textiles and drapery in the paintings of Edward Burne-Jones, another of her prodigies. 
References to Aglaia's melancholic character portend her dramatic and tragic end. On 20 August 1906, the day following the death of her daughter, she committed suicide at her home in London by repeatedly stabbing herself in the neck and chest with her embroidery scissors. 


@@@@@


doc= 62808


Fairbairn, Sir Thomas, second baronet (1823-1891), art administrator and patron, was born on 18 January 1823 at The Polygon, Ardwick, Manchester, the third of the eight surviving children of Sir William Fairbairn, first baronet (1789-1874), engineer, and his wife, Dorothy (1788/9-1882), daughter of John Mar of Morpeth. He was educated privately, and in 1840 joined his father's firm, William Fairbairn & Co. This entailed sacrificing an intended university career; however, a ten-month tour of Italy in 1841-2 enabled him to consolidate his interest in the arts. His immediate course lay in the metropolis, where he became the partner in charge of the ailing Millwall shipbuilding works. Although by baptism and upbringing a Unitarian (his father was a stalwart of the famous Cross Street Chapel in Manchester), on 23 March 1848 he married Allison Callaway (1827-1907), the daughter of a London surgeon, in an Anglican church in Greenwich. That year the Millwall concern was sold off at a great loss, but this was absorbed by the Manchester works, which went on to make considerable fortunes for all the partners. 
Fairbairn's means enabled him to make a valuable contribution to national life as an art patron, collector, and exhibition organizer. Based in Manchester from 1848, he began buying contemporary works from the exhibitions of the Royal Manchester Institution (where his father was a governor), but seeing the works of William Holman Hunt at the 1853 Royal Academy exhibition was a turning point in the development of his collection. Fairbairn sponsored completion of 'The Awakening Conscience' (1853-4; Tate collection), the first of his many Hunt purchases. Friendship between the two men channelled the patron's taste towards the Pre-Raphaelites, leading to commissions from Thomas Woolner of a marble statue of Fairbairn's eldest surviving children entitled 'Constance and Arthur, or, Deaf and Dumb' (1857-62; priv. coll.) and a marble bust of James Brooke, raja of Sarawak (1858; priv. coll.). Through Hunt, Fairbairn bought paintings by John Brett and Robert Braithwaite Martineau, and in 1858 and 1862 commissioned three landscapes from Edward Lear, to whom the Pre-Raphaelite described Fairbairn in early 1860 as a patron who 'has really got an immense instinct for what is good in Art which makes him enjoy the right thing when he comes across it' (Bronkhurst, 597). 
As chairman of the great Manchester Art Treasures Exhibition of 1857, Fairbairn was responsible for its inclusion of the Soulages collection of decorative art; this had been purchased by the committee for $13,500 and was sold on to the South Kensington Museum (later the V&A) from 1859 to 1865. The chairman was deeply involved in the selection of contemporary pictures, and, by putting Augustus Egg in charge of their hanging, Fairbairn ensured that progressive artists as well as academicians were well represented. For the first time in Britain, Pre-Raphaelite art was widely shown, while the old master exhibits were arranged chronologically, with Italian art hung opposite other paintings of the same date. Having refused the offer of a knighthood for his efforts, in January 1860 Fairbairn launched a campaign to establish a free art gallery and museum in Manchester, as 'a sure means of strengthening the feelings of mutual regard and dependence which, in a free and advancing country, knits the different ranks and interests of society together' ('Manchester Guardian', 25 Sept 1860, 3). Fairbairn was no stranger to class conflict: his series of letters to 'The Times' under the pseudonym Amicus had championed the employers' cause in the Manchester lock-out strike of 1851-2. 
The museum project foundered, and Fairbairn channelled his energies into the metropolitan art world, as a member of the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 (to which he was elected in May 1861), and as commissioner for the International Exhibition of 1862 with responsibility for the fine art department. About this time he acquired Burton Park, near Petworth in Sussex; 'The Children's Holiday' (Torre Abbey, Torquay), the group portrait of his wife and five children commissioned from Holman Hunt in 1864, was probably painted to hang at the head of the staircase there. Furnishing both a London and a country establishment accelerated the pace of his collecting. Records of his acquisitions indicate that his taste was very catholic -- an inventory of 1870 lists paintings by Constable, Turner, Richard Wilson, and Zoffany, by contemporary French artists, and by academicians such as Frederick Goodall and Thomas Creswick, as well as those of the British avant-garde. 
By July 1866 Fairbairn had moved to Brambridge House, Bishopstoke, near Southampton, and four years later he was appointed high sheriff of Hampshire. The portrait which he commissioned from Holman Hunt in 1873 (priv. coll.) memorably conveys his thickset and imposing appearance. Its backdrop was of the interior of the South Kensington Museum -- an apt reflection of his role as commissioner for the international exhibitions of 1851, 1862, 1867, and 1871. After he succeeded to the baronetcy in 1874, the depression in the iron industry led Fairbairn to wind up the Fairbairn Engineering Company. He now employed his administrative abilities as a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for Hampshire. In 1889 he gave up his London home at 42 Wilton Place, Belgravia, and retired to Brambridge House, where he died of a stroke on 12 August 1891; he was buried six days later at Twyford church. Bequests in his will included gifts presented to him by the emperor Napoleon III, the crown prince of Prussia, and the emperor of Austria, in recognition of his role as promoter of the arts. No provision was made for his extensive art collection to remain intact, and some of his pictures were auctioned at Phillips on 3 May 1892. A further sale took place at Christies on 2 March 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 62814


Heaton, Ellen (1816-1894), art collector and philanthropist, was born on 18 November 1816 at 7 Briggate, Leeds, the elder of the two children of John Heaton (1769-1852), bookseller and printer, and his wife, Ann Deakin (1774-1841), who came from a family of West Riding farmers. Ellen Heaton and her younger brother, the physician John Deakin Heaton, received their earliest schooling from a Baptist minister, Mr Langdon, in Infirmary Street, Leeds. Both, however, became members of the Church of England as children. When she was ten years old, Ellen Heaton was sent to a school run by the Misses Plint in Wellington Street, Leeds; she remained there until 1833 when she became a boarder at Roe Head School, Mirfield. 
Although Ellen Heaton was a brighter pupil than her brother, she was not encouraged to continue her studies because of the prevailing bias against advanced female education. She stimulated her intellect by joining the Leeds Literary and Philosophical Society, which was presided over by her brother and where she later delivered a paper entitled 'The care of health' (1875); she is also said to have been the proprietor of the Leeds Subscription Library. She also regularly attended meetings of the British Association throughout the British Isles and was a fellow of the Royal Botanical Gardens. After coming into an inheritance on the death of her father, Heaton was determined to lead an independent life. She indulged her love of travel with frequent visits to the continent, and in 1867 even ventured as far afield as Poland and Russia. She often travelled with Fanny Haworth, with whom she had formed a domestic relationship while abroad in 1853. Her spending and disregard of convention often exasperated her more conservative brother: Dr Heaton objected to her unchaperoned sojourn at the seaside with the married artist Thomas Richmond and, as her trustee, disapproved of her making a loan of $1200 to the artist, from whom in 1849 she had also commissioned her portrait. Her serene appearance belied her forceful and energetic personality. 
Ellen Heaton cultivated literary and artistic relationships with some of the leading talents of her time, including Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Robert Browning, and John Ruskin. The Brownings were somewhat overwhelmed by her aggressive overtures of friendship and her insistence in 1859 that they sit for portraits by the artist Field Talfourd at her expense. That spring Elizabeth Barrett Browning confided to her sister Arabel: 'she comes here every day though not for long I must admit, just when people come. I find it trying sometimes. Only of course you won't repeat this -- she has made herself famous in Rome by 'pushing' here & there & everywhere & people laugh -- they laugh! -- she gave twenty pounds for my picture -- partly for me, & partly for the artist -- & I am afraid we are both of us ''des ingrats''. ('Sublime and Instructive', 261)' Heaton donated both portraits to the National Portrait Gallery in 1870. 
Unlike the Brownings, Ruskin was not daunted by Heaton's unbridled enthusiasm for his friendship and relished the opportunity to be her mentor. She first approached him in 1855 after reading the early volumes of 'Modern Painters' to seek advice about some sketches by J. M. W. Turner which she was interested in purchasing, having seen his work at the Royal Academy. Happy to oblige, Ruskin approved her selection of Turners and proceeded to guide her art collecting activities in the direction of the young Pre-Raphaelite artists. He suggested that she patronize Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Arthur Hughes, J. W. Inchbold, and Edward Burne-Jones. Heaton followed Ruskin's advice in each instance with the exception of Burne-Jones, whose art did not appeal to her. She far preferred that of Rossetti, from whom she purchased seven watercolours and one oil painting. That number would have been greater by one had Ruskin not intervened in her purchase of 'Paolo and Francesca' (1855, Tate collection). The pandit commandeered the watercolour for himself on the grounds that it represented the couple kissing, telling her that 'Prudish people might perhaps think it not quite a young lady's drawing' (Surtees, 37). In awe of Ruskin's reputation, and in the absence of more determined role models among women collectors, Heaton did not object to his interference. 
Heaton remained loyal to Ruskin even after she stopped collecting art in the 1860s. Under his influence she turned her attention to philanthropy, working at Winnington Hall School for Octavia Hill and initiating charitable projects of her own in Leeds. She offered to pay the admission for Leeds working men to attend lectures on the university extension courses and planned teas for them in her home. She also collaborated with another Ruskin protegee, Lady Trevelyan, in promoting the products of poor lace makers in Devon and Cornwall. Ellen Heaton remained active in social causes until the last year of her life. After contracting bronchitis, she suffered a fatal heart attack at her home, 6 Woodhouse Square, Leeds, on Christmas day 1894. She was buried in St George's Church, Leeds. She left her estate to her nephew Beresford Rimington Heaton, who bequeathed her art collection to the Tate Gallery in 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 62820


Ionides, Alexander Constantine (1810-1890), art collector and patron, was born on 1 September 1810 in Constantinople, the fourth of eleven children of Constantine Ipliktzis (1775-1852) and his wife, Mariora Sendoukaki (1784-1857). Constantine had established a branch of his trading firm in London about 1815 and Alexander came to England at the age of sixteen, in 1827, completing his education at Mr Hine's school, Brixton. In 1832 he married Euterpe, 'nee' Sgouta (1816-1892), in Constantinople and settled in Cheetham Hill, Manchester; the couple had three sons and two daughters. He founded the firm of Ionides & Co., trading in textiles and wheat with the Balkans and the Near East, changing his name to Ionides at about the same time. The family moved to London in 1834, living first at 9 Finsbury Circus, and from 1838 or 1839 at Tulse Hill. He was naturalized in 1837, was Greek consul-general in 1854-66, became a director of the Crystal Palace in 1855, and had several directorships in banks. 
Ionides, who joined in several of his father's charitable endowments, including the university at Athens, began his patronage of artists about 1829-30 when he acquired a set of engravings by his friend Edward Calvert, and in 1837 he commissioned the young G. F. Watts to copy a portrait of his father. He remained a patron and personal friend of Watts. In 1860 he was introduced by his son Alexander 
(Aleco; 1840-1898)
to several artists who had befriended him in Paris, including Whistler, Edward Poynter, Thomas Armstrong, and George Du Maurier. At this time his house in Tulse Hill was a regular meeting place for artists, musicians, and writers who took part in the family's musical and theatrical entertainments. Rossetti was introduced to the circle in 1862 and he, in turn, introduced Edward Burne-Jones. 
Philip Webb remodelled the interior of 1 Holland Park, to which the Ionides family had moved in 1864, and in 1870 Thomas Jeckyll was commissioned to decorate several rooms, notably the billiard room which was in the Japanese style with inset Japanese paintings. After 1875 the refurbishment was continued by Aleco, who commissioned William Morris and Walter Crane to undertake extensive decoration, and by 1890 the house had become a showpiece of the aesthetic movement. With Aleco also, Ionides built up a collection of Greek vases and tanagra figures. Of his other children, Constantine Alexander Ionides (1833-1900), Aglaia Coronio (1834-1906), confidante of Morris and friend of Rossetti, and Luke Ionides (1837-1924), a lifelong friend of Whistler, were also art patrons and collectors. 
Ionides bought mainly from his artist friends. About 1870 he was asked by the dealer Murray Marks to help finance an agency to deal in works by Watts, Burne-Jones, Rossetti, and Whistler. The partnership came to nothing, but Ionides acquired sixteen plates of Whistler's 'Thames' set, from which he had 100 sets printed. His will lists eighty-six paintings and drawings, several by the artists mentioned and also, among others, by Fantin-Latour and Albert Moore. He is immortalized in Du Maurier's 'Trilby', in which the character of Sir Lewis Cornelys is based on both Alexander Ionides and Arthur Lewis. Ionides moved to Hastings in 1875, and died there at his home, Windycroft, on 10 November 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 62823


Arthur Kay (1861-1939), whom she had known for many years. He was born at 11 Whittingham Villas, Studley Road, Clapham Road, London, on 11 November 1861, the son of John Robert Kay, a merchant, and his wife, Eliza Perks. Kay joined his father on the board of Arthur & Co. Ltd, the major Glasgow wholesale warehousing firm, in 1887. Educated at Rossall School and Glasgow University, he was a very cultured man with a wide range of interests. A true connoisseur and a discriminating collector, he devoted the whole of his leisure time to art for almost sixty years. He was one of the first in Britain to recognize the true worth of the impressionists, at one time owning Degas's 'L'absinthe' (Louvre Museum, Paris). He died at his home, 11 Regent Terrace, Edinburgh, on 1 January 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 62831


Maw, John Hornby (1800-1885), entrepreneur and artist, was born on 12 April 1800 at Ferry, in Lincolnshire, the eldest of four children of George Maw (1770-1834), a local farmer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Hornby (1769-1828). His parents married in 1799. In 1807 they and their (then) three children moved from Lincolnshire to London, and George Maw established a wholesale druggist business with his wife's cousin named Hornby. In 1814 he parted from Hornby and set up a pharmaceutical manufacturing business by purchasing a surgical plaster factory. Other sundries were soon added, including surgeons' instruments. 
John Maw received schooling at Aspley Guise, Bedfordshire, and at Merchant Taylors' School, London. His father placed him, at fifteen, with a chemist at Croydon for two years and afterwards entered him at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in order to gain first-hand knowledge that might benefit the family business. In 1826 he was taken into partnership with the family firm. In the same year he married Mary Anne Johnson (1795-1853). He and his younger brother Solomon married sisters, the only daughters of John Johnson of Maiden Lane, assayer to the Royal Mint and to the Bank of England. His brother-in-law Percival N. Johnson founded the famous firm of Johnson Matthey, in Hatton Garden, London. 
The family business prospered and in the early 1830s provided a secure financial basis for Maw to begin to indulge in the collection of paintings. His three children were born at this time: Anne Mary (1830), George (1832), and Arthur (1835). In 1835 he retired from the business for health reasons but its considerable commercial success continued throughout the nineteenth century under his brother Solomon and nephew Charles. 
In 1839 Maw and his family moved to Hastings, Sussex, where they lived at West Hill House. There his friends included many well-known artists, such as William Hunt, David Cox, and J. M. W. Turner. He took lessons from Peter DeWint and fitted up a studio at his home. He was a member of the Society of Painters in Water Colours and exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1840 and 1848. His 'Interior of West Hill House' ('c'.1842) is in the collection of Hastings Museum and Art Gallery. While at Hastings he served as mayor of the town and was involved with good works, including the provision of a water fountain for fishermen to wash their nets. 
In 1849 the family left Hastings for the west country, living at Tavistock, west Devon, for a few months and then at Bideford, north Devon. It was there that Maw's interest in decorative tile-making was aroused. His daughter's journal (written 'c'.1890) records visits with her father to a local potter who still used inlaid clays in the medieval fashion. 'It struck my father that it would not be difficult to imitate ancient encaustic tiles' (Wood). Designs were traced in local churches and the prototypes were fired by a local potter. Maw saw 'the germ of the business for his boys for which he had been searching and praying' (ibid., 53). 
In 1850 Maw purchased a disused tile works at Worcester, and for two years floor tiles were made there. In 1852 the family, their workforce, and equipment moved (by special train) to Benthall, in Ironbridge Gorge, Shropshire, to be closer to sources of coal and suitable clay. The family firm grew rapidly over the next decade, the demand for decorative floor tiles being fuelled by the building and restoration of churches and grand civic buildings. Wall-tiling and glazed architectural faience were added to the product range, and designs were commissioned from leading architects. Meanwhile, the Maw family was locally involved with establishing the Coalbrookdale School of Art, lending pictures from their private collection for an exhibition at the opening of the new building in 1859. The firm achieved considerable success at the 1862 International Exhibition in London in connection with its majolica fireplace tiles in the Moorish style. Maw's sons, George and Arthur, became more prominent in running the tile works, but all members of the family travelled widely in Europe and north Africa, using the opportunity to draw and trace tile designs from other cultures. A great many tiles were exported to the British empire and the United States. By the 1880s the Maws manufacturing site at Benthall had become too restricted, and land was purchased at Jackfield, a mile downstream on the River Severn, where a new Benthall works was erected and opened on 1 May 1883. Maw's wife died on 20 August 1853, after a long illness. During the latter part of his life Maw was a devout member of the Plymouth Brethren. This led to friction within the family when his daughter fell in love with Richard Wilton, curate of Broseley. Somewhat unusually, both sides of this tragic relationship are recorded by its participants (see Wood, 59; Young, 111-27). 
Maw's achievements fall into three distinct phases. His entrepreneurial flair was first demonstrated during his early years in London in the family manufacturing chemists' business. His time in Hastings was one of personal artistic development and achievement. The last thirty-three years of his life, in Shropshire, saw his business flair linked to successful artistic manufacture -- the epitome of a Victorian art industry. He saw decorative tile-making develop from a few crude, handmade prototypes in 1849 to the opening of the largest decorative tile works in the world in 1883. 
Maw died at his home, Barratt's Hill House, Broseley, on 28 June 1885 and was buried, with his wife, in the graveyard of the Baptist Chapel at Broseley. The largest and most representative collection of Maws tiles is held in the Jackfield Tile Museum, part of the Ironbridge Gorge Museum, Shropshire; tile designs (on paper) are held at the museum's library in Coalbrookdale. Important examples of Maws tiles 'in situ' are at Shrub Hill railway station, Worcester, where majolica tiles fill panels ('c'.1865) in the cast-iron waiting room; a geometric tiled floor (1857-60) at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, Canada; and extensive and varied floor tiles (1861-2) in Battlefield church, Shrewsbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 62834


McCulloch, George (1848-1907), mine owner and art collector, was born on 23 April 1848 in Lanark, the youngest child in the family of four sons and one daughter of James McCulloch (1797-1849), a road contractor, and his wife, Isabella Robertson. He was educated at Glasgow high school and Anderson's University, Glasgow. He travelled in Mexico and South America to study farming before, in the 1870s, deciding to seek his fortune in Australia. Here his cousin, Sir James McCulloch, a politician in Victoria, appointed him manager of a large sheep station, Mount Gipps, near Broken Hill, giving him an eighth share in the business. It was at Broken Hill that Charles Rasp discovered large deposits of silver in 1883: McCulloch thus became a member of the syndicate owning the mine, and went to London to raise more capital in 1885. He later rose to be manager and chairman of the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd, and thanks to this, and other investments in west Australian goldfields, became enormously rich, a multi-millionaire by Victorian standards. 
There is an enduring legend that McCulloch won the Broken Hill mine in a game of penny nap with another miner. The truth is more prosaic: McCulloch already owned a share in the syndicate, and he acquired a further fourteenth share in a game of euchre (an American card game resembling whist) with an English prospector. He is described as 'large in build... [a man who] delighted in feats of strength and practical jokes' ('AusDB'). McCulloch was portrayed by contemporaries as a self-made man, but his background was respectable, middle class, and educated. 
In 1893 McCulloch returned to Britain, and on 11 May at the Strand register office he married Mary Agnes Mayger (1857-1945), the widowed daughter of a miner, William Smith. He promptly set about acquiring the trappings of wealth and social position, buying a large house at 184 Queen's Gate, London, to which he added several large galleries, and thereafter devoting himself to forming a major collection of modern art. His adviser was David Croal Thomson, who was an art dealer, connoisseur, and critic: he was editor of the prestigious 'Art Journal', and a director of the Goupil Gallery, and later Agnews, but at the time such a combination of roles was not considered to represent a conflict of interests. 
In little over ten years McCulloch spent more than $200,000, buying over 300 pictures. His taste was conventional, and he preferred narrative pictures and landscapes, both English and French. He was, however, a friend of J. S. Sargent, and acquired pictures by him and by Whistler and Orpen. He also admired the works of Scottish artists, such as William Quiller Orchardson, John Pettie, David Murray, and John Lavery. McCulloch's collection was certainly one of the most remarkable late Victorian accumulations, and among its stars were major works by Millais, Leighton, G. F. Watts, Burne-Jones, J. W. Waterhouse, and George Clausen. These included 'Sir Isumbras at the Ford' by Millais (Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), 'The Garden of the Hesperides' and 'The Daphnephoria' by Leighton (also both Lady Lever Art Gallery), 'Fata Morgana' by Watts, 'Saint Cecilia' and 'Ophelia' by Waterhouse, and 'Love among the Ruins' (Wightwick Manor) and 'The Wedding of Psyche' (Museum of Modern Art, Brussels) by Burne-Jones. McCulloch also bought one of the sets of 'Holy Grail' tapestries designed by Burne-Jones for Morris & Co. 
McCulloch died on 12 December 1907 at 184 Queen's Gate, leaving an estate of $436,000. In 1909 his collection was shown at the Royal Academy winter exhibition, arousing considerable controversy: the academy was accused of commercialism in exhibiting a private collection which was about to be sold. Eventually McCulloch's collection was dispersed in 1913 at a series of sales at Christies, from 23 to 30 May. The 326 lots made a total of $136,859, showing a poor return on McCulloch's investment. A major buyer at the sale was William Lever, first Lord Leverhulme, later the founder of the Lady Lever Art Gallery. In 1909 McCulloch's widow married the Scottish artist James Coutts Michie (1861-1919). During the First World War 184 Queen's Gate became a hospital, known as the Michie Hospital, and in 1920 Mary Coutts Michie was made CBE for her war work. She returned to Broken Hill in 1925 and later lived in Cobham, Surrey, where she died on 29 November 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 62845


Paul (d. 1098/9), earl of Orkney, succeeded to the earldom conjointly with his younger brother, Erlend (d. 1098/9), earl of Orkney, on the death of their father, Earl Thorfinn (II) Sigurdson, 'c'.1065. They were closely related to the ruling dynasties of Norway and Scotland, their mother, Ingebjorg (died 'c'.1070), daughter of Finn Arnason, being cousin to Thora, wife of Harald Hardrada, king of Norway, and their paternal grandmother being a daughter of Malcolm II, king of Scots. Moreover, Ingebjorg is said in 'Orkneyinga Saga' to have married Malcolm III Canmore after the death of Earl Thorfinn. Paul, the first earl to have been given a Christian baptismal name, and Erlend are said to have been 'tall, handsome men, shrewd and gentle' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 31) and taking rather more after their mother's side of the family. They did not divide the earldom initially, being 'for the most part on friendly terms' (ibid., chap. 33), but Paul is specifically said to have been the one who was very much in charge. There is no mention of them having authority or raiding in any of the Scottish or Hebridean or Irish territories controlled by their father, suggesting that -- as the saga says -- these areas came under local rule and broke away from earldom control after Thorfinn's death. 
Paul and Erlend had indeed to cope with a much more energetic exercise of authority by their Norwegian overlords in the earldom than their father had had to face, and soon after his death they were drawn into the ambitious campaign of Harald Hardrada to win the throne of England after the death of Edward the Confessor and the seizure of power by Harold Godwineson. The Norwegian king sailed to Orkney in the summer of 1066 with his fleet of over 200 ships and stayed there for a while gathering more forces; the earls would have been under an obligation to join him with their following of manned ships from their own territories. When the king and the earls sailed south, Harald's queen and his daughter remained behind in the Orkneys. Having raided the coastal parts of Northumbria 'en route' for York, the Norwegian and Orcadian fleet then anchored at Riccall on the River Wharfe and launched an attack against Earl Morcar at the gates of York on 20 September. Four days later Harald and his Norwegian forces went to York to receive the submission of the city, leaving Paul and Erlend, along with the young Olaf Haraldsson, in charge of the ships. At Stamford Bridge the invading force was confronted by the English army, which had marched north with King Harold II (Harold Godwineson), and was defeated in the ensuing battle, in which the Norwegian king was killed. Somewhat surprisingly, as the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' tells, quarter was given 'to Olaf, the son of the king of the Norwegians, to their bishop, to the earl of Orkney, and to all those who were left aboard the ships' ('ASC', s.a. 1066, text D). They had, however, to go to meet King Harold to swear oaths that they would maintain peace and friendship, and 'the king let them sail home with twenty-four ships' (ibid.). Olaf spent that winter in Orkney 'on the friendliest terms with the earls' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chaps. 33, 34) before returning to take power jointly with his brother Magnus in Norway. 
Paul's support for the episcopal structures established in the earldom by his father can be seen from a letter written (before 1073) by Thomas, archbishop of York, in which the earl is named (the first earl to be named in a non-Norse source) as having sent a bishop to him for consecration. This letter leaves no doubt about the earl's control over episcopal appointments, and shows that he concurred with York's claim over the Orkney diocese (although this may have been because the alternative archbishopric, Hamburg, was vacant at this time). It is unlikely that the two earls were supporting rival candidates, although that appears to have been the situation in the twelfth century. 
Earl Paul married a daughter of the powerful Norwegian 'jarl', Hakon Ivarsson, and of Ragnhild, daughter of King Magnus the Good. Paul and his wife had one son and four daughters. The son, Hakon ['see under 'Magnus Erlendsson (1075/-1116?)], named after his maternal grandfather, wanted to be foremost among all the cousins, considering himself 'more highly-born than the others'. Earl Erlend, however, 'wasn't going to see his sons back down to anyone there in the islands' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 34): so differences arose between the cousins and although their fathers tried to keep the peace they eventually parted on hostile terms. At a peace meeting held on the mainland of Orkney (perhaps at Tingwall) they agreed to divide Orkney into two parts -- as in the time of earls Thorfinn (II) and Brusi. It seems clear that Erlend and his sons, Magnus and Erling, commanded more support at this time, for Hakon was induced to leave the islands and he went first to Norway where he visited King Olaf towards the end of his life (1091-2), and then to Sweden. 'Orkneyinga Saga' also says that while Hakon was in exile Erlend and his sons had control of everything and Paul 'took little part in governing the earldom' (chap. 37). 
Hakon Paulsson is represented in the saga as being the instigator of the first expedition west undertaken by King Magnus Barelegs of Norway, in 1098, primarily to assert royal authority in Orkney and the Hebrides. Once more Paul and Erlend had to face the arrival of their Norwegian overlord in their earldom, but on this occasion there was direct action to bring the islands under royal control. The highly unusual step was taken of sending the two earls to Norway -- under duress -- and the young royal prince Sigurd was made overlord of the islands 'with regents to govern the earldom' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 39). Magnus continued west on his successful raiding expedition and took Hakon Paulsson and the Erlendssons in his retinue, clearly to tie them into his own military following as a preliminary to tightening royal control over the earldom. Authority was also asserted over the Hebrides, where the Norwegian entourage spent the winter. When King Magnus sailed north to Orkney the next spring he heard that Erlend had died and been buried at Trondheim, while 'Earl Paul was buried at Bergen' (ibid., chap. 42). According to 'Magnus Barelegs' Saga' Erlend died of disease. 


@@@@@


doc= 62848


Kettle, Thomas Michael (1880-1916), politician and writer, was born on 9 February 1880 at Artane, co. Dublin, the seventh of the twelve children of Andrew Kettle (1833-1916), farmer, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Laurence McCourt of St Margaret's, co. Dublin. He was exposed to politics from an early age. His father, who had been active in the Tenant League in the 1850s, presided at the first meeting of the National Land League in 1879 and was instrumental in persuading Charles Stuart Parnell to become involved in the Land League. Andrew Kettle was an exacting man, stern, demanding, and stubborn, but his imprisonment in 1881 for involvement in land agitation and his enduring support for Parnell provided his son Thomas with considerable cachet when he embarked on his own political career. 
Tom Kettle was raised in comfortable rural surroundings, and like his brothers he attended the Christian Brothers' O'Connell Schools at Richmond Street, Dublin, where he excelled. In 1894 he was sent as a boarder to the Jesuit-run Clongowes Wood College. Quick-tempered, mischievous, and clever, he became known as a wit and an athlete. He enjoyed cycling and cricket and, true to his upbringing, he was also a keen debater and a devout Catholic. After leaving Clongowes with honours in English and French, in 1897 Kettle entered University College, Dublin, a Jesuit-administered constituent college of the Royal University of Ireland. Surrounded by ambitious and politically minded young men, Kettle quickly established himself both as a leading student politician and as a brilliant scholar. He was elected to the prestigious position of auditor of the college's literary and historical society for the 1898-9 session. He distributed pro-Boer leaflets during the early months of the South African War and protested against the Irish Literary Theatre's production of W. B. Yeats's 'The Countess Cathleen' in 1899. His studies were marred by a mysterious illness which prevented him from taking his bachelor of arts examinations in 1900. He was prone to colds, but it is likely that the 'nervous condition' he suffered was in fact a nervous breakdown. Irregular but revealing references in his diaries, notebooks, and correspondence disclose a melancholy disposition which was prone to depression. He renewed his spirits, as he often did, by travelling on the continent and improving his French and German. Upon his return to Dublin he resumed his studies and took his BA in mental and moral science in 1902. 
Kettle was admitted into the Honourable Society of King's Inns to read law in 1903, but even after qualifying in 1905 he rarely practised and devoted most of his time to political journalism. He also maintained his contacts with University College and his fellow students, continuing to participate in debates, contributing to and becoming editor of the college newspaper, and helping to found the Cui Bono Club, a discussion group for recent graduates. A vocal supporter of the Irish Parliamentary Party, Kettle strengthened his links to the constitutionalists by co-founding and becoming president of the Young Ireland branch of the United Irish League in 1904. He had by this time earned the attention of John Redmond, Irish party leader, who hoped that he would stand for a parliamentary seat. Kettle declined the offer and turned instead to the founding and editing of 'The Nationist', an unconventional weekly journal. 'The Nationist' pursued an unashamedly pro-Irish party line, but it also reflected Kettle's liberal and often controversial views on a wide range of topics which included education, women's rights, and the Irish literary revival. He resigned from the editorship over a controversy about an allegedly anti-clerical article in 1905. 
Kettle accepted the candidature for the vacant parliamentary seat of East Tyrone at a by-election in July 1906, and secured the seat by the narrow margin of eighteen votes to become one of the very few young men to gain admission to the ageing ranks of the Irish Parliamentary Party in the first two decades of the twentieth century. Lauded as a future party leader, in late 1906 he went to America, where he engaged in a series of successful fund-raising and propaganda meetings. An amusing and often caustic speaker in the House of Commons, he remained a staunch supporter of the Irish party and of the constitutional path to home rule, but turned his attention to a number of topical questions, including the provision of higher education for Irish Catholics, and to Ireland's economic condition. Increasingly busy and in demand as a speaker, Kettle began to earn a reputation as a heavy drinker and a frequent visitor of bars and clubs. 
On 8 September 1909 Kettle married Mary Sheehy ('b'. 1884), a fellow graduate of the Royal University, a suffragist, and, like Kettle, a member of a well-known nationalist family (her father, David Sheehy, was a nationalist MP). Their daughter Elizabeth (Betty) was born in 1913. Kettle was appointed professor of national economics at University College, a constituent college of the new National University of Ireland. Critics claimed that Kettle could not combine academic life with his work as an MP, and although he held his East Tyrone seat in January 1910, he did not contest it at the general election held in December 1910. Even after he was out of parliament, he remained an active party member and in 1910 he published a collection of essays which reiterated his dedication to home rule by constitutional means. A popular teacher, he was known at University College as a 'professor of all things', but his genuine interest in economics was reflected in a number of publications on financial matters. He greeted the removal of the Lords' veto and the 'Home Rule Bill' of 1912 with great optimism, but his brusque dismissal of Unionist objections to the bill reflected his misunderstanding of their fears about the bill's possible effects. He also crossed swords with Irish feminists who condemned the bill; although he was a vocal and long-time supporter of women's suffrage, Kettle disapproved both of attacks on private property and of placing any cause before the implementation of home rule. 
In contrast to most middle-class commentators, Kettle refused to condemn striking workers in 1913 and published a series of articles which outlined the living and working conditions of Dublin's poor. He presided over the formation of a peace committee which endeavoured to negotiate an agreement between workers and their employers; this organization enjoyed little success, and Kettle's own reputation was tarnished by his appearance at an important meeting in a less than sober state. His excessive drinking became more obvious to friends and colleagues and his work was affected; he appeared to be depressed and he was sent in 1913 to a private hospital in Kent for treatment for 'dipsomania'. Despite this, he became deeply involved with the nationalist Irish Volunteers, a quasi-military organization established in 1913 in opposition to the militant Ulster Volunteer Force. Sent in 1914 to continental Europe to buy arms for the volunteers, Kettle witnessed at first hand the outbreak of the First World War. He travelled through Belgium and France as war correspondent for the 'Daily News', praising the courage of the Belgians and warning against the dire threat to Europe of Prussian militarism. A firm believer in the rights of small nations, Kettle supported Irish involvement in the British war effort, and volunteered for active service upon returning to Dublin in 1914. He was refused an immediate commission on the grounds of ill health (in reality, because of his heavy drinking); he received the rank of lieutenant, but his activities were restricted to recruiting throughout Ireland and England. 
Kettle presented himself as an Irish party candidate for a forthcoming by-election at East Galway in December 1914. He was not selected, but his support for the party did not abate and he continued to publish tracts advocating home rule. By 1916 Kettle had published more than ten books and pamphlets and had contributed numerous articles to journals and newspapers, including the 'Fortnightly Review', the 'Irish Ecclesiastical Review', and the 'Freeman's Journal'. Many of his works were concerned with Irish politics, but he also published literary reviews, philosophical treatises, and translations from French and German. A prolific and well-regarded poet and essayist, he is probably best remembered for a poem composed shortly before his death, 'To my Daughter, Betty, the Gift of God', which is often included in anthologies of First World War poetry. 
Although disillusioned with the war as it dragged on, and questioning British war aims, Kettle maintained that Irish soldiers had a moral duty to join the allied stand against Germany. He was frequently warned and disciplined for being intoxicated while in uniform, but he none the less continued to apply to be sent on active service. His appeals were refused until 1916, when the commanding officer of the 16th division took a chance on Kettle and commissioned him into the Dublin fusiliers. Kettle's health had evidently improved by this time, but it remained delicate. Appalling conditions in the trenches broke his health and he was given a rear area job shortly before the Somme battles. However, he refused offers of a permanent staff position and sick leave, and insisted on returning to his battalion, the 9th Dublin fusiliers. 
Before he finally left Ireland in July 1916, Kettle prophesied that the Easter rebels of 1916 would be remembered as heroes while Irishmen serving in the British army would be deemed traitors. His prediction was remarkably astute. Kettle was killed on 9 September 1916, while taking part in the Irish brigade's capture of Ginchy and he was buried near by. The news of his death provoked a wealth of tributes, testifying to Kettle's brilliance, generosity, and wit; he was widely acknowledged as the leading constitutional nationalist of his generation. But the radicalization of Irish politics and the denunciation of the men and women who had supported home rule and the war effort ensured that his fame faded together with the primacy of the constitutional agenda. An attempt to erect a commemorative portrait bust of Kettle was beset by controversy until it was finally placed -- without an official unveiling -- in St Stephen's Green, Dublin, in 1937. 


@@@@@


doc= 62849


Darwall, John (1796-1833), physician, was the son of the Revd John Darwall (died 1828), the incumbent of St John's Chapel, Deritend, and master of the Free School (King Edward VI Grammar School) in Birmingham, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Whately. At the age of five he was sent to a preparatory school, and from eight he was educated by his father at the grammar school. In 1808 he was placed under the tuition of the Revd John Cooke, the school's headmaster, and took great pleasure in classical learning. His father, grandfather and great-grandfather had been Church of England ministers, and his own religious learning was equally noted. 
On leaving school in 1813, Darwall became a pupil of George Freer, surgeon to the General Hospital, Birmingham, and founder of the Birmingham orthopaedic charity. A serious-minded student, with little interest in amusements, Darwall claimed never to have entered a public ballroom and openly condemned 'frivolous diversions' (Conolly, 493). In October 1816 he gained further surgical training in London, attending John Abernethy's lectures and ward rounds at St Bartholomew's Hospital. In May 1817 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. His case notes demonstrate an early interest in medicine, not just surgery. Not content with the 'superficial manner' (ibid., 495) in which medicine was at that time taught in the capital, he travelled to Edinburgh the following autumn. 
At Edinburgh Darwall studied physic under James Gregory, anatomy with Alexander Monro III and John Barclay, materia medica with James Home and physiology with John Gordon. He joined the Edinburgh Medical Society, where he made some close friends, but generally pursued his studies in a manner that was detrimental to both his social life and health. He returned to Birmingham after his first winter in Edinburgh to assist his former master, Freer, whose health was declining. During the summer of 1820 he began investigations into the health of working people in Birmingham, visiting them in workshops and in their homes. He presented his findings before the Edinburgh Medical Society in 1820, later developing the study into a thesis, 'De Morbis Artificum' (1821), a decade before Charles Thackrah published what became the classic English study on occupational health. He contributed 'Diseases of Artisans', among five other entries, to the four-volume 'Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine' (1831-5), edited by John Forbes, Alexander Tweedie, and John Conolly. During his second winter in Edinburgh he became acquainted with Conolly, the mental health pioneer, who wrote Darwall's biography. The two graduated together in August 1821. Some months prior to taking his degree, Darwall married Mary, the only daughter of Philemon Price, of Birmingham. Immediately on graduating Darwall returned to Birmingham to establish himself in practice. Two years later, Conolly settled in Stratford and the two continued their friendship for the remainder of Darwall's life. 
Appointed physician to the Birmingham General Dispensary, Darwall was anxious to build his practice. He treated many poor patients free of charge at his home, often prescribing for more than eighty in a single morning. He used the newest technologies, including the stethoscope, and kept careful notes on all his cases, especially those that ended fatally. He wrote many articles for periodicals, including the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal', some of which reveal his use of the microscope and attention to pathology. For two years he assisted Dr James Copeland in editing the 'London Medical Repository', contributing reviews of German medical literature and monthly reports on prevalent diseases. His association with 'The Repository' ended in 1827 following his success in private practice, but his business concerns never disappeared. He rarely ventured outside Birmingham, though in 1824 he travelled to London where he pursued medical matters with George Birkbeck and Mr Abernethy. He also briefly visited Gloucester to view the town's asylum and hospital. His articles on dropsy, nervous disease, and medical topography in the 'Midland Medical and Surgical Reporter', which he edited with Charles Hastings, convey much about Birmingham and its region. His 'Plain Instructions for the Management of Infants' (1830) referred to cases he treated while serving in the Birmingham Orthopaedic Hospital (established 1817), and reveals his conservative medical approach. In 1831, on the death of Gabriel De Lys, he was elected physician to the General Hospital, Birmingham, thereby fulfilling his ambition to join the district's leading hospital, which his father had served as house clergyman. On assuming his post, he instituted clinical lectures. 
Outside his medical practice, Darwall supported the establishment of both a general and medical library in Birmingham, and the town's botanical gardens. He was a governor of the grammar school. He attended meetings of the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge, occasionally delivering lectures, and joined the Medical Benevolent Society. 'Zealously attached to the Church of England', he was also a strong Tory in politics (Conolly, 531, 534). He regarded the rise of popular movements in an age of reform with considerable anxiety and the state of the country in the early 1830s 'filled him with dejection and distress' (ibid., 535), physically affecting his digestion, circulation, and sleep, to the point that he discontinued frequenting reading-rooms, so as to avoid the newspapers. 
Darwall's condition, already vulnerable due to overwork, deteriorated rapidly when a final illness struck on 30 July 1833, soon after undertaking the post-mortem examination of a patient in the general hospital who had died of a 'medullary sarcoma of the bronchial glands'. Having contracted an infection, he woke early the following morning with a fever, and his condition gradually deteriorated over the next eleven days. He died on 10 August 1833 and was interred in the family vault at Christ Church, Birmingham, on 16 August. He was survived by his wife and their two daughters. Conolly described him as 'pale, restless, sad', his letters often revealing 'a most deplorable depression of mind'. He was of middle stature, 'strongly made, but without clumsiness or corpulency', had light brown, straight hair and small grey eyes, but with a penetrating countenance. His quick walk and general rapid movements were described by Conolly as indicative of his general character. Possessing a 'somewhat ungraceful figure', he was 'socially awkward' and prone to a 'severe and sarcastic mode of public address', though scrupulous in his dress and agreeable in his conversation. In private society, with young persons, and with ladies, he was 'animated and even playful' (Conolly, 500-01). In his last years, 'He was fastidious as to the society of females, indifferent to music, he never played cards, and conviviality had no charms for him' (ibid., 527). Despite Conolly's memoir, Darwall's untimely death deprived him of the wider recognition that the significance of his work in several fields warranted. 


@@@@@


doc= 62851


Plint, Thomas Edward (1823-1861), stockbroker and art collector, was born in Leeds, the son of Thomas Plint, woollen merchant and radical reformer. His father was co-founder, with Samuel Smiles, J. G. Marshall, and Homer Stansfield, of the Leeds Parliamentary Reform Association, which advocated household suffrage. A Liberal, like his father, Thomas Edward Plint endorsed Smiles's notion of self-help, which he combined with the ideals of the Christian socialist movement promoting the benefits of educational opportunities and tract societies for the working classes. He was a dedicated evangelical and served as a lay preacher and superintendent of the East Parade Congregational Chapel's Sunday school in Leeds. Plint was also the author of the posthumously published 'Hymns and Sacred Poetry' (1862). 
Plint's social and religious beliefs were transformed into a visual manifesto in the painting he commissioned from Ford Madox Brown entitled 'Work' (1852-63; Manchester City Galleries). A celebration of the protestant work ethic, it features a range of physical, religious, and intellectual activities that both artist and patron considered essential to the success of society. The artist's son-in-law noted that Plint 'looked upon the picture as destined to effect an important moral, almost more than an artistic, revolution of thought' (Hueffer, 112). This evangelical spirit permeated other paintings in Plint's collection, such as Brown's 'Christ Washing Peter's Feet' (1851-6; Tate collection), John Everett Millais's 'Christ in the House of his Parents' (1849-50; Tate collection), and William Holman Hunt's 'Finding of the Saviour in the Temple' (1854-60; Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery). 
Plint's art collecting, however, was not solely motivated by his religious convictions. That he also enjoyed images of beautiful women is evidenced by his purchase of 'Queen Guinevere' (1858; Tate collection), painted by the relatively unknown William Morris, and 'The Blessed Damozel' (1860; Fogg Art Museum, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA), which he first commissioned from the young Edward Burne-Jones in 1857. Like the professional risks that he regularly took on the stock market, Plint gambled on new talent in the art market. His eagerness for Pre-Raphaelite art led Dante Gabriel Rossetti, from whom he purchased nine works, to liken Plint, with the Newcastle collector James Leathart, to 'twin lambs at the altar of sacrifice' ('Letters', 1.355). But Plint diversified his artistic investments to cover more than one school of art. He also owned works by earlier British artists, including J. M. W. Turner, Copley Fielding, Clarkson Stanfield, Samuel Palmer, and John Martin, as well as a few canvases by contemporary French and Flemish artists. 
It is estimated that Plint spent $25,000 on his art collection. He continued to commission works from artists even after his fortunes plummeted. While his shares in the stock market profited as a result of the buoyant mid-Victorian economy, his portfolio was diminished during the economic recession of the late 1850s. Plint's anxiety over his mounting debts precipitated his premature and sudden death, at the age of thirty-eight, on 11 July 1861 at his home, 2 Hyde Terrace, Leeds. According to his doctor, the cause of death was due to 'great feebleness, temporarily intensified, rather than actual disease of the heart' ('Leeds Intelligencer', 3 Aug 1861). Sadly, his wife Ellen ('b'. 1825/6), daughter of Mary Ann Southgate -- whom he had married on 7 May 1846 -- died two months later, after giving birth to their eleventh child. To provide for his orphaned children, Plint's collection was auctioned at Christies on 7-8 March 1862. While his more conservative purchases fetched good prices, some of his more arcane Pre-Raphaelite commissions fell in value, with the result that the 326 objects in the sale netted only $18,265. A second, smaller sale took place at Christies on 17 June 1865. Plint was buried in Woodhouse cemetery, Leeds. 


@@@@@


doc= 62863


(Thomas) Eustace Smith (1831-1903), a member of one of Tyneside's most prosperous shipping families. He was born in Newcastle upon Tyne on 3 June 1831, the son of William Smith ('bap'. 1787, died 1860) and Margaret Werge (a cousin of Martha's mother). William, with his elder brother Thomas ('c'.1784-1856), had built up their father's rope making business into a major concern, which came to embrace the ownership of ships and docks as well as shipbuilding. On his father's death in 1860 Eustace Smith became heir to business interests worth $60,000 a year. Eustace and Martha Smith had ten children, born between 1856 and 1868. The latter year also marked Eustace Smith's election as Liberal MP for Tynemouth, a seat he held until his resignation in 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 62864


Smith, Martha Mary (1835-1919), art patron, was born on 14 October 1835 in Madras, India, the eldest daughter of Captain (William Henry) Clarence Dalrymple (died 1838) and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Oswald Werge. Little is known of her upbringing: she presumably went to Britain as a small child on the death of her father -- a naval captain who in 1835 became master attendant and a member of the marine board in Madras -- and may then have grown up on the family estates in Northumberland. Through a distant cousin, Sir John Dalrymple (whose wife, Sophia Pattle, was the sister of Lady Somers and of the photographer Julia Margaret Cameron), Martha Dalrymple gained an entree to Little Holland House, Kensington, in the 1850s and 1860s the hub of the most vibrant artistic clique of the day. As well as Tennyson and Browning, she would have encountered the young painters Frederic Leighton and Val Prinsep (whose mother was another of the Pattle sisters); G. F. Watts lived in the grounds as painter-in-residence. 
In 1855 Martha Dalrymple married 
Between about 1865 and 1875 the Smiths assembled one of the most spectacular collections of paintings of the nascent aesthetic movement. Initially, most were hung at Eustace's family home of Gosforth Park, near Newcastle, then after about 1874 in London, at 52 Prince's Gate, opposite Hyde Park in the fashionable suburb of Kensington. There they were installed in interiors designed by George Aitchison, with the participation of Walter Crane and Thomas Armstrong. Their importance is reflected by Whistler's comment in 1876 or 1877, on completing the 'Peacock room' for Frederick Leyland, their neighbour three doors away at no. 49: 'it eclipses Mrs Eustace Smith!' (Wilcox, 49). 
Watts's portrait of Ellen Terry, 'Choosing' (1865; NPG), was one of the first works to be acquired by Eustace Smith, a purchase datable circumstantially to about 1865. He retained a special affection for Watts, who painted his portrait ('c'.1872; Tate collection). For the remainder of the collection, the surviving records reveal the initiative to have been taken almost entirely by Martha Smith, who adopted the name Eustacia as much as an act of identification with the new classicism in painting as with her husband. Her favoured artist was Leighton, who not only painted her portrait ('c'.1870; priv. coll.) but may also have used her as the model for one of his most provocative nudes, prominently displayed at Prince's Gate, 'Venus Disrobing' (1867; priv. coll.). Eustacia teasingly admitted to modelling solely for the feet. 
Rosetti's 'Pandora' (1869; Faringdon Collection Trust), Albert Moore's 'A Garden' (1870; Tate collection), Watts's 'The Wife of Pygmalion' (1868; Faringdon Collection Trust), and Burne Jones's 'Cupid and Psyche' (1867; Cecil French collection, Fulham Public Library) were all ground-breaking essays for their respective artists and their purchase revealed Eustacia Smith's complete commitment to the avant-garde. She showed more than generosity in supporting two indigent proteges of Leighton, George Heming Mason and the Frenchman Alphonse Legros, whose largest and most ambitious works entered the collection about 1872-3. In the case of Mason's 'The Harvest Moon' (1872; Tate collection) the purchase was made posthumously. There is no evidence that any further works were added to the collection after about 1875, although in 1882 Mrs Smith apparently commissioned a statuette from Alfred Gilbert which was never completed. 
The adventurousness of Eustacia Smith's collecting also typified her private life. In 1868 she engaged in an affair with Charles Dilke MP, one of her husband's Liberal colleagues at Westminster; the liaison re-ignited briefly in 1874-5 on the death of Dilke's wife. In 1876 Dilke's brother Ashton married the Smiths' eldest daughter, Margaret. The web of connections between the families became fatally tangled when in 1885 Charles Dilke was named as co-respondent in a divorce suit filed by Donald Crawford, the husband of another of the Smiths' daughters, Virginia, a scandal described by Henry James as 'queer and dramatic and disagreeable'. The case against Dilke remained unproven, but the shameful implications led Eustace Smith to sell the Prince's Gate house, complete with the paintings, privately to Alexander Henderson, later first Baron Faringdon. The Smiths spent the next fifteen years in self-imposed exile in Algeciras, Spain, their name virtually unmentionable in English society. They eventually returned to England about 1900 and commissioned from W. R. Lethaby a house, High Coxlease, in Lyndhurst, Hampshire, where they lived a retired existence far from the public gaze. Eustace Smith died there on 5 December 1903 following several years' poor health; his wife survived him and died at High Coxlease on 29 December 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 62873


Wells, William (1768-1847), shipbuilder and art collector, was born at Canister House, Chislehurst, Kent, the second of the four children of William Wells (1729-1805), shipbuilder, and Susanna Neave (died 1810). His ancestors had been connected with shipbuilding from the seventeenth century. Wells loved the sea and cultivated a rollicking sea captain's walk, even though he only once commanded a ship, on a voyage to China in 1794-5. Joseph Farington, the noted diarist, explained that it was not lack of opportunity that led Wells to give up his career on the high seas, but family obligations -- he was needed to supervise the building of battleships at his family's shipyards at the Blackwall docks during the Napoleonic wars and to supervise their investment in Meux brewery. Wells sold his shipbuilding interests in 1811 and retired with his wife, Mary Hughes (died 1818), to Redleaf, Penshurst, Kent, where he spent his time gardening, hunting, and adding to his art collection. He was an active member of the Church of England. 
Wells inherited paintings from his grandfather, who had commissioned marine subjects from Charles Brooking, and from his father (whose portrait was engraved by Sir Joshua Reynolds). He added a large selection of old masters, on which he spent over $18,000. He began to add modern pictures to his collection after his retirement, purchasing paintings directly from William Mulready, Thomas Webster, and David Wilkie. Most of his attention, however, was directed at Edwin Landseer, from whom he bought almost thirty pictures, and at the young landscape painter Frederick Richard Lee, who provided nearly fifty. Wells selected paintings which were compatible with what he already owned: for instance, his animal scenes by Landseer harmonized with the bovine and equine subjects he had acquired by such Dutch seventeenth-century artists as Cuyp, Wouwerman, and Berchem, while Lee's untroubled landscapes blended in with the Hobbemas and Claude Lorrains which were already in place at Redleaf. His insistence on measuring his contemporary purchases against his old masters rankled with John Constable. The artist vented his frustration in a letter written to his friend C. R. Leslie on 2 March 1833: 'I had, on Friday, a long visit from Mr. Wells alone. He saw hundreds of my things -- I sincerely believe nothing amongst them made any impression upon him or did they come into his rules, or whims, of the art' ('Constable's Correspondence', 94). 
Wells shared many of the biases of his class in preferring art that did not deviate too far from the traditional norm. A trustee of the National Gallery and a director of the British Institution, he preferred artists such as Landseer, who had trained himself to model his habits after those of the upper classes. Landseer became a permanent fixture at Redleaf, where his patron had a special painting seat constructed for him in his garden. Landseer's deeply toned paintings were more in accord with Wells's taste than anything in Constable's studio, or in Turner's for that matter. Wells told Constable that he thought 'Turner was 'quite gone' -- lost and possessed by a yellow which he could not see himself, therefore could not avoid' ('Constable's Correspondence', 97). Yet the fact that Wells collected the works of contemporary artists at all indicates that he was sensitive to the emerging dynamism of the early-Victorian middle class which was beginning to make its mark in matters of taste, politics, and finance. Childless, Wells died at Redleaf on 7 August 1847, aged seventy-nine years, leaving his estate to his grandnephew, William Wells (1818-1889), whose agricultural experiments depleted most of his fortune. Following his death, Wells's collection was sold at Christies on 10-14 May 1890. 


