@@@@@


doc= 62881


McGill, Alexander (c.1680-1734), mason and architect, was the son of George McGill, minister of Arbirlot in Forfarshire ('c'.1641-1691x1702), and his wife, Margaret Guthrie. In 1697 he was apprenticed to Alexander Nisbet, an Edinburgh mason with strong professional connections in Forfarshire. Nisbet was also married to a Mary McGill (died 1692), which may imply some family connection. Apart from these details, McGill's early life and training are obscure. 
Nisbet was a member of the trades' incorporation in Edinburgh and McGill's name might have been expected to emerge in its membership rolls by 'c'.1703. Instead, he first appears as a mason, independent of Nisbet, as early as 1701, at Kellie Castle, near Dundee. For whatever reason, his formative years were not influenced solely by his mason's training and from an early stage in his career he made use of other connections, so that by the time he was admitted to the Edinburgh masons' lodge in 1710 it was as an 'architector' rather than a stone mason. 
One possibility is that McGill's career was influenced by his connection with James Maule, fourth earl of Panmure, who was the patron of Arbirlot parish. Kellie Castle belonged to the earl's brother Harry Maule of Kellie, and McGill collaborated on alterations to this property (1699-1705) with Alexander Edward, an Episcopalian minister who was closely associated with the Panmures and who turned to architecture after the revolution of 1688. It is possible that Edward and McGill already knew each other, having lived in the same area, but the importance of the Edward connection is that the minister was also associated with Sir William Bruce of Kinross, and McGill was thus linked with this key architectural figure from an early stage of his career. In 1708 McGill worked on the latter stages of Craigiehall, a small house on the outskirts of Edinburgh designed by Bruce and an important precursor to Hopetoun House near by. McGill was also involved in Bruce's very last project, House of Nairne, Perthshire, designed partly by the countess of Atholl with advice from Bruce and Edward, and taken over by McGill after Bruce's death in 1710. In the Craigiehall project McGill worked with John Erskine, twenty-second or sixth earl of Mar, the leading aristocratic amateur architect in Scotland at that time. He continued to be associated with Mar even after the latter's exile after the Jacobite rising of 1715. 
McGill was also closely associated with James Smith, another major figure in Scottish architecture in this period, who established himself as the main architectural rival to Bruce by the 1690s. McGill and Smith worked together on Yester House (Haddingtonshire) for the marquess of Tweeddale, 'c'.1700-1715. The design for this very elaborate house is mainly credited to Smith, but McGill was responsible for a number of houses on his own that are distinctive and interesting in their own right, notably Blair Drummond in Perthshire (1715-17) and Donibristle in Fife (1719-23). McGill shared Bruce's interest in the wider setting of the house, both in the design of landscapes, for Hugh Campbell, third earl of Loudoun, at Loudon Castle in Ayrshire in 1716, and in a concern with the architectural setting of courts and pavilions around the house. At both Blair Drummond and Donibristle he combined a series of simple and functional elements to make highly formal and monumental layouts of courtyards and pavilions. At Donibristle, in particular, this includes a dramatic series of terraces between the house and the River Forth, to the south. 
McGill was first city architect of Edinburgh between 1720 and 1725. It was a significant post for a number of reasons. First, the city chose someone from outside the incorporation of trades and the emphasis was on his status as an architect rather than an operative mason. Second, it connects McGill with the beginnings of the great eighteenth-century project of improvement in Edinburgh, best exemplified by the New Town, but which also involved a whole series of social and economic improvements, many of which required architectural changes to the city. One of the key figures behind this scheme was Lord Provost George Drummond, who became city treasurer in 1717 at the very time that McGill was finishing Blair Drummond for George Drummond, the namesake and kinsman of the Edinburgh treasurer. Using the proceeds of an ale tax, the treasurer set out a substantial programme of improvements with McGill as architectural adviser from 1718, before his official appointment; the architect continued to advise the city on an 'ad hoc' basis even after his salary of $50 per annum became more than the city could afford and the post was suspended. His work ranged from water supply and other infrastructure improvements to a new charity workhouse and a colony of houses and workshops for French weavers brought to the city in the 1720s to initiate a trade in cambric. His most important contribution to the city, however, was undoubtedly Greyfriars Kirk: partially destroyed in an explosion in 1718, it was expanded and remodelled by McGill to provide accommodation for two congregations between 1719 and 1723. 
McGill's career was ultimately eclipsed by that of William Adam, who rose to prominence in the 1720s and dominated Scottish architecture for the next thirty years. However, McGill is a significant figure as, like Adam, he represents the move towards the architectural profession and away from the craft of the mason, and because he is associated with the early impulse towards improvement in Edinburgh. He died in Edinburgh in May 1734 and was survived by his wife, Margaret Hamilton (died 1736). 


@@@@@


doc= 62890


Baird, John (1798-1859), architect, was born at Dalmuir, Old Kilpatrick. He was apprenticed to an architect relative, John Shepherd, in Glasgow in 1813, during which time the firm was apparently responsible for completing the west terrace of Peter Nicholson's Carlton Place. (Baird's future chief assistant, Alexander 'Greek' Thomson, was to marry Nicholson's granddaughter.) On his uncle's death in 1818, Baird took on the firm with his apprenticeship far from complete, and there are no identified projects for the next three years. Gildard implies that Baird may, simultaneously, have continued training in John Herbertson's office. 
In 1821 Baird began the first of three Glasgow churches -- Greyfriars United Presbyterian (1821), Wellington church (1823), and St John's Chapel (1823) -- which were noted for their strong modelling and spare Grecian detail; Anderston parish church (1839) was perhaps the simplest example of this design approach, achieving grandeur with minimum effort. In all, he designed twelve churches, more than any other building type, which -- outside Glasgow -- were in fashionable but unconvincing Gothic; notable examples are the Congregational churches in Greenock and Dunfermline. 
Baird is known to have worked on seven country houses or country house extensions -- including possibly Garscube, Dunbartonshire (1827), Clober, Dunbartonshire (1833), Stonebyres, Lanarkshire (1844), and Urie, Aberdeenshire (1855) -- mostly in the crisply decorative but architecturally unconvincing Jacobean of Cairnhill, Airdrie, Lanarkshire (1841). The office was much occupied at Woodlands Hill, Glasgow, preparing plans for the estate, for the simply classical Somerset Place (1840), for the grander, effulgently porticoed Claremont House, grandiose centrepiece of the later Claremont Terrace (1842-7), and for Woodlands Terrace (1849). Baird was the natural choice of designer for the relocation of Glasgow University to Woodlands Hill, and prepared three abortive schemes in 1846-9, in double-courtyard Jacobean style in homage to the original. In 1837 he had married Janet McKean from Bonhill. They had two daughters, Flora and Agnes. 
Baird's principal buildings were commercial and innovative, helping to create the character of downtown Glasgow. They included the iron hammerbeam-roofed Argyle Arcade (1827), the austere Princes Square (1840), and vast warehouses or commercial buildings in West Nile Street (1851), in Buchanan Street and Ingram Street (both 1854), and in Argyle Street (1856). He was also responsible for the city block between South Hanover and Queen and Ingram streets (1854). Sir James Campbell's desire for an 'old Scottish' facade for Campbell's Warehouse (1854) was met -- at Baird's suggestion -- by an idiosyncratic and highly unScottish facade by R. W. Billings. The facade of the pioneering Gardner's Warehouse in Jamaica Street (1855), thought to be attributable to James Thomson, with a structure using Robert McConnell's patent iron beams, comprises plain structural columns, beams, and mullions only. 
Taking over an architectural practice before one is fully trained often results in business taking higher priority than design, which depends instead upon the skills of assistants. Baird's early assistants are not known. In 1836 he was joined by Alexander Thomson, who was first his apprentice and then his assistant until 1849. In 1859 James Thomson became a partner in the firm, now called Baird and Thomson. Baird apparently never took part in architectural competitions, regarding them as 'a species of professional speculation -- to use a mild epithet -- which he consistently protested against to the last', although he had been prepared to act as judge with David Hamilton on the necropolis competition ('View of the Merchant's House of Glasgow', 362, 382). Being 'a man not only of upright character and sound judgement but of also great experience in all that related to house property', he was extensively used as a building valuer and arbitrator, in recognition of which his business colleagues presented him with his portrait by Sir Daniel Macnee in 1857 (Honeyman, 1.23). Culturally, however, the office will be remembered for its contribution to early Victorian Glasgow. In John Honeyman's opinion, 'to the influence of such men we undoubtedly owe the excellence of our street architecture' (ibid., 1.24). One of the 'background' architects of early to mid-nineteenth century Glasgow, Baird was responsible for at least forty projects of consistently high quality. Gildard, fifty years later, referred to his 'large practice', second only in importance and public esteem to David Hamilton's; which, together with his substantial wealth and extensive list of creditors at his death, implies the existence of other building projects as yet unidentified. Baird died at his home, Westfield, Partickhill, Glasgow, on 18 December 1859, after which date the practice continued as Baird and Thomson. 


@@@@@


doc= 62891


Hughes, Ezekiel (1766-1849), settler in America, was born at Cwm Carnedd Uchaf, Llanbrynmair, Montgomeryshire, on 22 August 1766, the second son of Richard Hughes (1734/5-1815), freehold farmer, and his wife, Ann Jones. Hughes received some education at Shrewsbury, and in May 1786 he was bound apprentice to John Tibbot, a clock- and watchmaker at Newtown, Montgomeryshire. After completing his apprenticeship in 1789, Hughes established his own clock-making business at Machynlleth. It was during this period that he came under the influence of the republican and radical William Jones (1726-1795) of Llangadfan. Inspired by Jones's dream of establishing a new Welsh community in a land free from religious, social, and political oppression, Hughes, together with his cousin Edward Bebb, George Roberts (1769-1853) -- the younger brother of the Revd John Roberts (1767-1834) -- and others, decided to emigrate to America. In mid-July 1795 they led a small party of emigrants from Llanbrynmair and walked to Carmarthen, from where they sailed to Bristol. On 6 August they left Bristol and sailed in the 'Maria' for Philadelphia, where they arrived on 25 October. After spending the winter in the city, Hughes and Edward Bebb set off in April 1796 on the long trail to the River Ohio. Within three months they had reached Fort Washington, now known as Cincinnati, a town which Hughes estimated to be 'as large as Machynlleth (a town in Wales of about 800 inhabitants)' (Peate, 'Ezekiel Hughes's autobiography', 133). There, near the Miami River, Hughes and Edward Bebb (whose son William Bebb became governor of Ohio) bought 100 acres of land, which they began to cultivate. In September 1802 Hughes returned to Wales and in May 1803 married Margaret Bebb of Brynaerau, Llanbrynmair. The couple returned to America, but within less than a year Margaret died, and was buried in the first grave to be opened at Berea. In 1808 Hughes married Mary Ewing, a native of Pennsylvania, and they had nine children. 
Hughes undertook many important public and official roles in his adopted country. In 1805 the governor of Ohio appointed him and two others to plan and construct a new road from the mouth of the Miami River to the town of Hamilton, and the following year he was appointed the first justice of the peace in the district. As the years went by he bought a great deal of land which he leased at reasonable rates to his tenants. Hughes also generously supported the religious life of the district. He played an instrumental role in the establishment of the Welsh Congregational chapel at Paddy's Run in 1803, some 10 miles from his home. In 1828 he became a member at Berea, a Presbyterian chapel which was erected in 1822 upon land which he himself donated. William Henry Harrison, who later became president of the USA, attended the same class as Hughes at Berea Sunday school, and the two became great personal friends. As well as helping to build the chapel, Hughes was largely responsible for supporting the work of the ministry. 
Despite suffering a serious fall in 1820 which left him lame, Hughes continued to serve his church and his community for many years. He was an extremely popular man who was fondly remembered by his tenants and by the dozens of Welsh emigrant families whom he warmly welcomed to the area. He died on 2 September 1849 at Miami, Ohio, and was buried the following day at Berea cemetery. At his funeral he was described as 'a friend of the poor, a true patriot, and a loyal Christian' ('Y Cenhadwr Americanaidd', Dec 1849). The tale of his eventful journey from Llanbrynmair to Ohio was fictionalized by W. Ambrose Bebb (1894-1955) in the novel 'Dial y tir' ('The land's revenge'), published in 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 62892


Jones, Hugh (d. 1782), ballad writer, was for most of his life associated with Llangwm in Denbighshire (and known as Huw Jones o Llangwm), but little or nothing is known about his origins. He married, but the name of his wife is unknown. References in his works suggest he had at least a son and a daughter. 
Jones's literary output is known to have included five interludes, and four of these, commissioned by unknown groups of players and composed between 1760 and 1770, have survived. One, 'Y Brenin Dafydd', was written jointly with Sion Cadwaladr. The lost interlude was based on the story of Myfanwy of Castell Dinas Bran. However, there is no evidence that Hugh Jones himself, unlike his contemporary Twm o'r Nant, acted in interludes. He would have received payment for his works, and he also profited by independently printing and selling his interludes throughout north Wales. He was imprisoned on two occasions, once, it seems, for non-payment of a printing debt. 'Protestant a neilltuwr', composed about 1769-70, appeared in 1783, following the author's death. Several references are made in his interludes to the custom of learning English and to the sending of children to schools across the border to acquire that language. 
Although described as 'a comon ballad singer', Hugh Jones was one of the most prolific ballad writers in eighteenth-century Wales, and 100 or so of his ballads survive. These are based on traditional themes, and were composed mainly between 1749 and 1780. His ballads on drunkenness, for example, testify to the inventiveness of the ballad singers and their ability to rework the same themes. One presents a debate between a drunkard and his conscience, while another records the conversation between an impoverished drunkard and an innkeeper's wife. A conversation between a drunkard and his caring wife forms the basis of a third, and in another a cuckoo reprimands the drunkard as he leaves the tavern, early one Sunday morning, and advises him to change his ways. 
Hugh Jones published in 1759 an anthology of ballads, composed by himself and his peers, entitled 'Dewisol ganiadau yr oes hon'. The first part, however, was dedicated to the works of Goronwy Owen, Ieuan Fardd (Evan Evans), William Wynn, and others, the neo-classicists of the eighteenth century whose compositions were patterned on the works of the 'cywyddwyr' of the later middle ages. In justifying the dual constitution of his volume, Hugh Jones expressed his hope that the light entertainment of the second part would lead young, uneducated (in the poetical sense) readers in the direction of the real substance found in the first. 

'Dewisol ganiadau' was followed in 1763 by 'Diddanwch teuluaidd'. The well-known writer and antiquary Lewis Morris claimed in his preface that the volume was published by Hugh Jones 'for his own benefit', and there is no doubt that the project was his own. Inspired by the success of 'Dewisol ganiadau', he approached Lewis Morris with a request for a collection of his poems for inclusion in his anthology, and it was Jones who saw to the printing of the proposals and the poems, and to the distribution of the material once published. And profit he did; the London printer, William Roberts, was never paid for his work. 

'Diddanwch teuluaidd' was nevertheless very much a Cymmrodorion Society publication. The poets whose works were published were society members who actively sought subscribers, and Richard Morris, brother of Lewis, corrected the proofs. Since 1758 the society had contemplated publishing Goronwy Owen's work, but no progress had been made, and Lewis Morris's 'Tlysau yr hen oesoedd' (1735) had long been abandoned. Although distrustful of Hugh Jones, the Cymmrodorion had no option but to co-operate with him, and the works of Goronwy Owen, Lewis Morris, and others were made available, thanks to the efforts of this humble farm labourer from Llangwm. 
Jones died in December 1782, and was buried at Efenechdid, Denbighshire, on 29 December. According to the 'Dictionary of Welsh Biography' 'his literary labours did a great deal to kindle and keep burning the interest of the country people in the Welsh language' ('DWB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 62893


Jones, Robert (1745-1829), schoolmaster and author, was born on 13 January 1745 at Suntur, a farm in Rhos-lan, in the parish of Llanystumdwy, Caernarvonshire, the only child of John Williams (died 1783), a smallholder, and his wife, Margaret Owen (died 1776). His mother taught him to read the 'Bible' and the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Apart from that the only education which he had was at a school conducted by Thomas Gough, who based the lessons on the catechism published by Griffith Jones of Llanddowror ('bap'. 1684, died 1761). He also taught him the rules of the strict metres of Welsh poetry. 
In his adolescence Jones suffered from acute agonies of conscience, but was converted after studying once again a copy of Griffith Jones's catechism that he had bought and through hearing an unknown preacher in 1762. He then joined the Calvinistic Methodist society meeting at Brynengan in the parish of Dolbenmaen, Caernarvonshire. He became deeply concerned about the ignorance and immorality of young people and persuaded Bridget Bevan (1698-1779) to set up one of her circulating schools in north Wales. In 1768 he opened a school at Capel Curig and then moved to Rhuddlan, Flintshire, where he suffered much public opposition. Later at Brynsiencyn, Anglesey, the incumbent of the parish wrote to Madam Bevan asking her to dismiss him. She took no notice of the request and Jones continued to conduct schools at Llangybi, Caernarvonshire, and Brynengan. 
Jones was a very successful schoolmaster despite the harassment and had an instinctive talent for teaching children. His first published work was a satirical attack on the Revd Zaccheus Hughes, a graduate from Jesus College, Oxford, who resided at Trefan, Llanystumdwy, and died on 1 January 1796. Hughes had instigated a disturbance during a service conducted by Jones. The first edition bore the title 'Ymddiffyn Cristionogol' ('Christian defence') and appeared in 1770, but the second edition in 1776 had a more colourful title, 'Lleferydd yr asyn' ('The voice of the ass'), and ran to six editions during the author's lifetime. On 2 December 1772 Jones married Magdalen Prichard ('c'.1750-1813), the daughter of Richard Griffith (died 1779) of Cae'rtyddyn in the parish of Llangybi, Caernarvonshire, and his wife, Mary Francis. Robert Jones and his wife had two daughters and two sons, including Samuel (1789-1875), one of the most prominent figures among the Calvinistic Methodists of Liverpool. 
In 1774 Jones took a seven-year lease upon Tir-bach, a farm in the parish of Llanystumdwy, and added to it a room that could be used as a chapel. In 1776 Robert Roberts, the incumbent of the parish, reported to the bishop of Bangor, John Moore, that it was where the Methodists assembled every Sunday and twice in the week, but the house was not licensed. The landlord ejected Jones and he moved to Ty Bwlcyn in the parish of Llaniestyn, Caernarvonshire, and remained there until 1815. 
Jones had begun to associate with the Calvinistic Methodists in 1768 and in time became one of the leaders of second-generation Methodists. He was a constant attendant at their assemblies and his services as a preacher were in demand all over the country. In 1784 he came into contact with Thomas Charles (1755-1814) of Bala and became one of his closest confidants. He produced an elementary manual for use in Charles's schools in 1788, entitled 'Drych i'r anllythyrennog' ('Mirror for the illiterate'), as well as the first miscellaneous collection of hymns for use in the private societies, the 'Grawn-syppiau Canaan' ('Cluster of Canaan's grapes') of 1795. After some initial hesitation, he supported the decision of the Methodists to sever their links with the Church of England by ordaining their own ministers. He declined to be ordained himself but took a prominent part in the first ordination at Bala in 1811. He also assisted Charles in editing the Welsh 'Bible', the first to be published by the British and Foreign Bible Society. Jones's literary reputation today rests on his book 'Drych yr amseroedd' ('Mirror of the times') (1820). It has come to be recognized as a minor literary classic on account of Jones's mastery of strong, idiomatic Welsh. A historic document of continuing value, it preserved snippets of information, mainly about Methodism in north Wales, that would otherwise have been lost, and as a piece of Methodist historiography the work exemplifies both the belief that at the beginning of the evangelical revival religious life was all but extinct and the large part played by the rhetoric of martyrdom in later Methodist thinking. 
After 1815 Jones left Ty Bwlcyn and spent some time in lodgings until a house was built for him next to the chapel at Dinas, Llaniestyn, where he spent the remainder of his life. He died there on Saturday 18 April 1829, at eighty-four years of age, and was buried alongside his wife on 21 April in Llaniestyn churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 62894


Archibald Matthias Dunn (1832-1917), architect, was born at Wylam, Northumberland, on 23 October 1832. He was educated at Ushaw College and Stonyhurst College, then apprenticed in Bristol to the architect Charles Francis Hansom. Archibald set up a practice in Newcastle in 1854, and married there, on 2 January 1862, Sara Ellen (or Helen) Armstrong (1841-1917), daughter of Hugh Clayton Armstrong, timber merchant. They had two sons. In 1870 he was elected president of the Northern Architectural Association, and in 1871 Edward Joseph Hansom, Charles Francis Hansom's son, became his partner. The partnership was commercially successful and they opened an office in London in 1880. The firm became Dunn, Hansom, and Fenwicke on W. Ellison Fenwicke becoming a partner in 1894. 


@@@@@


doc= 62900


Jones, Thomas (1648-1713), publisher and almanac maker, was born on 1 May 1648 at Tre'r-ddol, near Corwen, Merioneth. His parents' names are unknown, but his father was a tailor, a trade which his son inherited. At some time in 1666 he joined the stream of masterless men who journeyed to London in search of fame and fortune. Having gained little success as a tailor, he turned to bookselling and began to describe himself as 'a lover of Learning, and Student in Astrology, and Autodidactus' (Jenkins, 'Sweating Astrologer', 163). In January 1679 he was granted sole rights for the compilation, printing, and publishing of an annual Welsh almanac, and from then until his death in 1713 he was known throughout Wales as Thomas Jones yr Almanaciwr (Thomas Jones the Almanac Maker). 
Jones lived in Lower Moorfields and sold his wares in a variety of shops in Paul's Alley, Cobbs Court in Blackfriars, and Tower Hill. He rubbed shoulders with celebrities of Grub Street fame, including Tom Brown, Francis Moore (compiler of 'Old Moore's Almanack'), and Tom D'Urfey, but came to despise the cut-throat world of printers and publishers and the crime and debauchery prevalent in the capital. Although he was a sharp and resourceful businessman, he was seldom able to steal a march over his rivals, and in faraway Wales shameless pedlars and booksellers made off with his profits. He yearned for the opportunity to return to his native land, and when the 'Printing Act' was allowed to lapse in 1695, thereby enabling printers and publishers to set up presses in the provinces, he and his wife, Mary, packed their bags and established a printing office in the fashionable residential area of Hill's Lane in Shrewsbury, a thriving provincial town which served as the natural capital of mid-Wales. From that time onwards until his death in 1713 Jones established a reputation as the most inventive and successful publisher of Welsh books. Indeed, he was chiefly responsible for Shrewsbury's pre-eminence as the printing capital of Wales in the first half of the eighteenth century. 
Between 1680 and 1713 Jones published an annual Welsh almanac, and became widely known in Shrewsbury as the Stargazer and in his native land as the Sweating Astrologer. An irremediable hypochondriac, he contracted a variety of ailments and maladies, including a bizarre version of the sweating sickness which, he claimed, drew from his body twenty-eight barrels of sweat over a period of six years in the 1690s. His eagerly awaited almanacs sold much better than other ephemera not only because of their intriguing astrological guides (which were invariably couched in obscure and delphic language) but also because they included fascinating details of his medical condition. The Welsh almanac was also sprinkled with passages of wry humour and biting satire. Jones's forthright views about Welsh quislings and popish traitors, together with his running battles with rival almanac makers, kept sales buoyant and enlivened the printing scene in Wales and the borders. 
Jones's thriving press, however, was not exclusively concerned with the production of entertaining, hastily prepared, and shoddily bound almanacs and ballads. An ardent patriot and champion of his ailing native tongue, Jones was determined to infuse new life into 'the old and most excellent British language'. His most valuable contribution in this direction was the publication of 'Y Gymraeg yn ei disgleirdeb / The British Language in its Lustre' (1688), a substantial Welsh-English dictionary, and an enlarged version of Foulke Owen's 'Cerdd-lyfr' (1696), an anthology of Welsh poems. He feared that the Welsh had been 'blotted out of the Books of Records' and that they were in serious danger of losing their language, literature, and history. As the patronage of the gentry dwindled alarmingly, he believed that it was necessary for the Welsh press to print the works of leading poets such as Huw Morys, Dafydd Manuel, and Owen Gruffydd, and also to publicize the newly revived eisteddfodau, which were held annually in convivial taverns in Welsh market towns from around 1700 onwards. His prefaces to his books and almanacs invariably extolled the merits of the Welsh language and disparaged the Anglicizing gentry who were swiftly abandoning their native tongue. 
A devout churchman and a fierce enemy of Catholicism and dissent, Jones ensured that his publications not only stiffened the cause of Anglicanism but also nourished anti-popish sentiments and Francophobia among readers. He published a Welsh version of the Popish Plot in 1684, a Welsh edition of the book of matins in 1683, a Welsh prayer book in 1687-8, and large numbers of devotional books, the most successful of which was a Welsh translation of Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' in 1699. Even his best-selling ballads, which included tales of monstrous births, grisly murders, and ill-fated courtships, had a moral sting in the tail. 
Apart from the pecuniary motive, Jones's principal aim as a publisher was to provide humble readers with cheap, popular, and accessible reading material. With the aid of agents, booksellers, clergymen, and shopkeepers he established a remarkably successful system of book distribution which enabled his publications to reach the growing numbers of farmers, craftsmen, and artisans who were acquiring the reading habit in late Stuart Wales. During the 1680s the only literate parishioner in Llanfihangel Tre'r-beirdd, Anglesey, was a cooper, who taught the father of the celebrated Morris brothers to read by using Thomas Jones's publications. 'Who knows', wrote William Morris, 'but that you and I would be illiterate were it not for that old fellow... who taught our father... and so started the blessed gift' (Jenkins, 'Sweating Astrologer', 175). Welsh poets, understandably pleased to see their work in print, sang his praises loudly, though highbrow Welsh scholars were fiercely critical of him. Moses Williams was so infuriated by Jones's plagiarism and arrogance that he annotated his personal copy of 'Y Gymraeg yn ei disgleirdeb' with the epithets 'Tom the Tailor' and 'Tom-ass'. 
Thomas Jones died in Shrewsbury, aged sixty-five, on 6 August 1713, and was buried two days later in St Mary's parish church, Shrewsbury. A man of considerable, if sometimes misplaced, energy, Jones was rather more than a plausible rogue. His books, almanacs, and ballads reached a wider cross-section of Welsh society than ever before, and his contribution to the cultural and religious life of Wales was not inconsiderable. There is much truth in William Morris's grudging posthumous tribute: '[he was] an old fellow who, in spite of his ignorance, did a lot of good' (Jenkins, 'Sweating astrologer', 175). 


@@@@@


doc= 62902


Davis, Arthur Joseph (1878-1951), architect, was born on 21 May 1878 at 25 Leinster Square, London, one of the four gifted sons of Montague Davis (died in or before 1923), a merchant, and Ada, 'nee' Moss. His father and mother, both of Jewish descent, were of Canadian and Australian origin respectively. The family moved to Brussels, where Arthur was educated privately from about 1888 to 1893, before going to Paris at the early age of sixteen to study architecture in the preparatory atelier of J.-A. Godefroy and J.-E. Freynet. In 1895 he entered the atelier at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts of Jean-Louis Pascal, winner of the Prix de Rome in 1866. Davis won the first-class prize in the 'concours' of 1896 and entered the office of Charles Mewes (1858-1914) in 1898, assisting him in his competition designs for the Grand and Petit Palais at the Paris Exhibition of 1900. 
Trained, like Davis, under Pascal, Mewes combined the mastery of planning for which the Beaux-Arts was celebrated, with knowledge of French eighteenth-century interior design and decoration. Mewes's brilliant creation of the Ritz Hotel in 1898-1900, behind facades of the 1690s in the place Vendome, Paris, led Cesar Ritz to employ him and Davis in London: first, to design the Palm Court and restaurant of the Carlton Hotel, Haymarket (1898-1901; dem.), and then to build the Ritz Hotel, Piccadilly (1903-6). In 1898 Mewes sent Davis to London to take charge of work on the Carlton Hotel at the astonishingly young age of twenty. The bursts of febrile creative activity of this youthful genius seem associated with his condition as a manic depressive. In 1898 he left the Ecole des Beaux-Arts without graduating, partly because, as a British subject, he was debarred from entering for the Prix de Rome. 
Having joined Mewes's practice as junior English partner in 1900, Davis collaborated with him from 1902 on the design of the Ritz Hotel in London. As always, they worked so closely together that it is impossible, stylistically, to separate their respective contributions. Despite its Parisian arcade and high mansard roof, the Ritz is one of the first steel-framed structures in England, the steelwork made in Germany from designs by the Swedish engineer Sven Bylander, who had worked in Chicago, home of the skyscraper. Much of the internal decorative work in a sophisticated Louis XVI style was provided by French craftsmen, the finest being in the dining-room, which has been described as the most beautiful in Europe. 
The elegant and light interiors of Mewes and Davis's hotels led to the commissions for Inveresk House, designed as offices for the 'Morning Post', in Aldwych (1906-7; alt.), and for the Royal Automobile Club, Pall Mall (1908-11), with a magnificent Pompeian swimming-bath. They also carried out much domestic work in both London and the country for the kind of wealthy patrons, often with South American or South African connections, who were welcomed at the court of Edward VII. One of the finest was their remodelling in a lavish French manner of Luton Hoo, Bedfordshire (1902-4), for Julius Wernher, for whose first employer and subsequent friend Jules Porges Mewes had built the chateau of Rochefort-en-Yvelines in 1898. In Surrey they remodelled Coombe Court for Lord de Grey, treasurer of the household to Queen Alexandra, and Polesden Lacey for Mrs Ronald Greville, the leading Edwardian hostess. 
Albert Ballin, head of the Hamburg-Amerika Line, now decided to install Ritz-style restaurants in his fleet of luxury ships, then being built in Hamburg and Belfast. Mewes and Davis thus worked on interiors in 1905-6 for the 'Amerika' and the 'Kaiserin Auguste Victoria'. The revolution which they effected in the layout and decoration of liners, echoing what they had already done for hotels, led to Davis receiving the commission from the Cunard Line for the design of the 'Aquitania' in 1913. With the Liverpool architects Willink and Thicknesse, Davis also designed the Cunard Building, Pierhead, Liverpool (1914-16), a memorable contribution to the waterfront, recalling some massive Florentine palazzo. 
Mewes died suddenly, under surgery, in August 1914. After dealing with uncompleted projects in the office, Davis joined HM forces in April 1916, serving as a temporary second lieutenant attached to a hospital unit behind the French lines, until he was invalided out, with the rank of captain, with a severe breakdown in November 1917. After convalescence at Craiglockhart Hospital, he returned to practice, continuing the firm of Mewes and Davis in partnership with Charles H. Gage. 
In 1910 Mewes and Davis had designed the first overseas branch bank for the Westminster Bank in Brussels, which led to commissions for banks in Antwerp, Nantes, and Valencia, and, after the war, to Davis's Threadneedle Street branch of the Westminster Bank in 1922 and London headquarters of the bank in Lothbury in 1925. Recalling Peruzzi's Palazzo Massimo, the former won him the RIBA London architecture bronze medal in 1930. It was followed by his Morgan Grenfell's Bank, Great Winchester Street (1925), and offices in Bishopsgate for the Hudson's Bay Company (1928-9). He designed the exquisite interiors of the Cunard liners 'Franconia' (1922) and 'Laconia' (1923), as well as Cunard House, Leadenhall Street, London (1930; dem.). 
An unexpected work was Davis's Armenian church of St Sarkis, Iverna Gardens, Kensington (1928), commissioned by Calouste Gulbenkian, for whom the partners had designed houses in both Paris and London. The design of St Sarkis was inspired by study of churches in Armenia, including that in the cloisters at Haghbat. On 1 November 1923 Davis married Rona Jean Duncan (1898/9-1940), the daughter of Ernest Alfred Lee, a marine engineer; the couple had a daughter, Ann, and a son, Ronald. His friends included the architects Sir Edwin Lutyens, A. E. Richardson, Charles Reilly, Oliver Hill, and Herbert Austen Hall. His 'long residence in Paris had given him a perfect command of the French language, and this, combined with his distinguished appearance and friendly personality, made him for many years a welcome and influential figure at international conferences of architects and similar gatherings. ('The Builder', 27 July 1951)' He was a trustee of Sir John Soane's Museum, and a member of the faculty of architecture at the British School in Rome, the Royal Fine Arts Commission, and the Royal Society of Arts. He became a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur and was awarded the Belgian order of the Couronne, but considered his election to the Royal Academy, as an associate in 1933 and a Royal Academician in 1942, as the highest honours conferred upon him, particularly as they were reserved to so few members of his profession. 
Distressed by the insistence of the directors of the Cunard Line that his interiors for the 'Queen Mary' should be in an art deco style of which he disapproved, Davis suffered a nervous breakdown on their completion in 1935. He died suddenly on 22 July 1951 at home at 35 Hornton Court, Campden Hill Road, Kensington, his last years having been overshadowed by the rejection in the modern movement of what he saw as the civilized values inherent in traditional classical architecture. He regarded this as wholly unnecessary, since he and Mewes had shown how the classical language was entirely compatible with new building types such as modern hotels and liners. 


@@@@@


doc= 62903


McMorran, Donald Hanks (1904-1965), architect, was born on 3 May 1904 at 22 Hillside Road, Wallasey, Cheshire, the son of William Edwin McMorran (1875-1930), accountant, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Hanks (1873-1968), a dressmaker. He was educated at Harrow county grammar school from 1915 and at Regent Street Polytechnic, London (1921-6), where he received a second-year medal. At the end of his third year he was awarded a Pugin travelling studentship by the Royal Institute of British Architects, which he used to tour and study the architecture of Northumberland and southern Scotland. While studying he worked as an assistant to Horace Farquharson (1874-1966), a former assistant of Sir Edwin Lutyens, at 14 North Audley Street, London. From May 1926 until 1935 he worked as an assistant to Emmanuel Vincent Harris (1876-1971), during which time he entered numerous architectural competitions and passed his architectural examination in December 1930. He became an associate of the RIBA in April 1931 and a fellow in 1943. On 10 October 1935 he left Harris's office to rejoin Horace Farquharson, with whom he formed Farquharson and McMorran. In March of the following year he became engaged to Margaret Cox (1908-1995), a nurse at St George's Hospital, London, and daughter of the Sussex county cricketer George Rubens Cox. They were married at St Margaret's Church, Warnham, Sussex, on 30 April 1937 and in the following year they had the first of their four children, Susan (died 1989), later an art historian and author of 'The New Sculpture' (1983). In 1941 they moved to Dorking, Surrey, where a second daughter and two sons were born. 
McMorran had been taken on by Farquharson to assist with the design of the police station and section house at Greenwich, London (1935-9). In 1946, when the building was belatedly awarded an RIBA bronze medal, it was described by the institute's president, Sir Lancelot Keay, as being 'not too traditional to upset the modernists and not too modern to upset the traditionalists' ('The Builder', 14 Nov 1947, 541). In drawing attention to the building's 'perfect proportions' Keay also observed what was to become a hallmark of McMorran's fastidious and scholarly approach to architecture. Their next project, Hammersmith police station (1938-9), was a more conventionally classical design described as 'aesthetically nearly perfect' (Goodhart-Rendel, 292) and later as 'the best building that never got a London Architecture Medal' ('The Builder', 13 Aug 1965, 331). Assisting Farquharson and McMorran on the commission for Hammersmith police station was the student George Whitby. 

George Frederick Whitby (1916-1973), architect, was born on 17 August 1916 at 42 Creighton Road, Ealing, Middlesex, the son of Cyril Simms Whitby (1879-1957), police clerk, and Mabel Rust, 'nee' Jennings (1881-1945). Educated first at Ealing grammar school, he entered Regent Street Polytechnic in 1935. While studying architecture he worked as an assistant to Welch, Cachemaille-Day, and Lander before joining Farquharson and McMorran. At the outbreak of the Second World War he joined the Royal Engineers and was appointed MBE for his bravery in assembling Bailey bridges in the deserts of north Africa, where he was wounded; he spent two years in hospital in Jordan. In May 1945, during military training in Wales, George met (Rhona) Charmian Butler ('b'. 1924), army nurse and daughter of Arthur William Butler, farmer. On 3 April 1946 the couple married at St Bartholomew's Church, Tardebigge, Worcestershire, and in the following year the first of their six children (four sons and two daughters) was born. 
During the Second World War Donald McMorran joined the St Paul's watch to protect the cathedral from bomb and fire damage, and also worked on the drawing team that designed the concrete casings for the Mulberry harbour used during the Normandy landings in 1944. After a hiatus in architectural projects during the early 1940s Farquharson and McMorran's work increased significantly later in the decade due to the urgent need for public housing and the accommodation of such vital services as education, policing, and public administration. Most of their work during this period was in and around London. The Phoenix School (1950-52) for children with special needs on Bow Road for London county council ['see also 'London county council architects] was notable for its unpretentious design and careful spatial planning of interconnected concrete-framed and glass blocks arranged around grassed courtyards, creating a safe and stimulating atmosphere. The project won an RIBA London architecture bronze medal in 1952. 
The 1950s was a period of transition for Farquharson and McMorran as the elder partner neared retirement and the practice gained a growing list of commissions, including several housing and schools projects in London, the new campus of the King's School, Chester (1956-66), and, most significantly, the new offices for Devon county council, in Exeter (1954-63). George Whitby now moved into the spare rooms on the top two floors at 14 North Audley Street. Having passed his architectural examination in December 1946, he had been appointed an associate and a fellow of the RIBA in 1947 and 1954 respectively. After a brief period as a partner in the firm of Walters and Kerr-Bate, Whitby lectured at Hammersmith College of Art while pursuing architecture through competitions. In 1950 he came third in the contest for a new secondary school at Hunstanton, won by Alison and Peter Smithson. Four years later he designed Plashet county secondary school for girls (1954) in East Ham, London, a seven-storey building made from pre-cast, pre-stressed components and lauded for its economical use of materials and its standardized design. 
In 1958 George Whitby formally joined Farquharson's and McMorran's practice, which soon after became McMorran and Whitby after Farquharson's retirement. The new partner brought renewed energy to the office, his exuberance complementing McMorran's discipline, and in many ways theirs was an ideal mix of talents. The period between 1958 and McMorran's death in 1965 proved the most prolific and successful of their careers. Principal commissions from these years included the superbly crisp Cripps Hall at Nottingham University (1957-9), the dignified collection of offices of West Suffolk county council at Bury St Edmunds (1957-68), the beautifully planned housing estates at Lammas Green (1955-7) and Holloway Road (1959-75) for the corporation of London, and the perfectly composed city police station, Wood Street, London (1959-66). 
The corporation of London became a major client, for whom McMorran and Whitby worked on their last joint project, the central criminal court extension at the Old Bailey, London (1960-72). Described as a 'splendid fortress of the law' (Sir John Betjeman to Charmian Whitby, 14 Mar 1973, priv. coll.), its design was largely finalized by McMorran though construction was not completed until nearly seven years after his death. The court's facade is dominated by giant recessed segmental-arched window openings; these allow dramatic vertical strips of stone (containing ventilating shafts) to cascade down to beautifully angled chamfers that drive into the wall above the four low doorways. It is a structure that appears hewn, not built. Both peerless and ageless in an era of radical design ideologies, the central criminal court extension was later said to have 'stepped effortlessly beyond modernism without the struggles and indecision which have characterized the same step among others' (Appleyard, 'The Times', 20 Nov 1982). It encapsulated also McMorran and Whitby's approach to architecture -- their attention to detail, their consideration of materials and the craft tradition, the symbiosis of plan and elevation, and an emphasis on humanist values in design. Often labelled traditionalists, McMorran and Whitby were nothing of the sort. Both believed passionately in progress, but were not convinced by the rhetoric of the modernist movement dominant at the time, seeking instead -- as the architect William Eden noted shortly after McMorran's death -- 'a means of humanizing the monster buildings demanded by our present society' ('The Times', 14 Aug 1965). Thus, in his capacity as assessor to the Golden Lane estate, London (1952), which preceded the neighbouring Barbican estate (1957-82), McMorran had awarded the project to Geoffrey Powell (later of Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon) precisely because of his exceptional planning of a modern design incorporating housing, shops, and community and sports facilities. 
With his strong views and conviction that the craft of building should be a central part of architectural education, McMorran's forthright attitude earned him respect and reprobation in equal measure, with relations being particularly strained with Sir Basil Spence, president of the RIBA from 1958 to 1960. He fought his ground on the various professional posts he held, including the RIBA's education committee (1952-4), for which he produced the 'McMorran report' (1955) on architects' training, a passionate denunciation of the growing trend for theoretical over practical studies. In 1956 he became master of the Art-Workers' Guild and was elected an associate and then a full academician of the Royal Academy of Arts, in 1955 and 1962 respectively. In 1965 he served briefly, and unhappily, as treasurer of the academy, where his views on education and training -- also pursued through the media and in regular letters to 'The Times' -- revived his feud with Spence. 
Donald McMorran died of bowel cancer on 6 August 1965 at his home, 1 Falkland Grove, Dorking, Surrey, and was buried at Dorking cemetery on 13 August. Thereafter supervision of the central criminal court extension passed to his former partner, who was wholly responsible for planning the building's interior of twelve court rooms. George Whitby died on 22 February 1973 at his home, Tylers End, Tylers Green, Penn, Buckinghamshire. His death came several days before a large IRA car bomb was detonated outside the criminal court extension, which, in contrast to surrounding buildings, survived virtually unmarked. 


@@@@@


doc= 62904


Jones, William (bap. 1726, d. 1795), poet and radical, was baptized on 18 June 1726 at Llangadfan parish church, Montgomeryshire, the youngest of three sons born to William Sion Dafydd (1666-1758), a farmer and stagecoach guard, and his second wife, Catherine (died 1760). He took up his father's tenancy of Dolhywel in 1750, a decision which consigned him to a life of unremitting toil and poverty. Yet, in an age which prized versatility, he was an unusually gifted all-rounder and a remarkably intelligent, sophisticated, and well-read man. His fellow parishioners could only marvel at his gifts as a country healer, musician, poet (his bardic name was Gwilym Cadfan), raconteur, linguist, eisteddfod adjudicator, historian, and amateur astronomer. He offered his services as a collector and transcriber of Welsh manuscripts to leading Welsh and Celtic scholars in London, and Walter Davies, his bardic disciple, believed that in Welsh prosody and syntax Jones 'ranked among the profoundest critics that Wales has ever produced' ('Cambrian Register', 11, 1796, 239). 
Well versed in free-metre and strict-metre Welsh poetry, Jones also translated from Latin into Welsh some of the odes of Horace and parts of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses'. Much of the content of the enlarged edition of Edward Jones's 'Musical and Poetick Relicks of the Welsh Bards' (1794) was the fruit of William Jones's tireless research. Not the least of his achievements, too, was to record and revive the traditional country dances associated with the parish of Llangadfan and his efforts to rid the Welsh of their musical amnesia. 
Although Jones was deeply interested in Welsh literature, his researches on behalf of London Welsh scholars were also prompted by the need to make ends meet. Trapped by his penury in the barren upland wastes of mid-Wales and by the illness of his wife, Ann, he was obliged to seek ways of supplementing his income. As a part-time country healer (he despised the term 'quack') he earned considerable respect in the county, not least because of the deft use he made of herbal lore. The Llangadfan vestry books bear witness to his care for sick people by purging, bloodletting, excising tumours, extracting teeth, and healing malignant fevers and agues. All his patients were informed in considerable detail of his success in conquering scrofula and those who cast doubt on his competence were shown his scars. 
Jones was much in demand as an adjudicator in national and local eisteddfodau, and also participated in some of Iolo Morganwg's gorsedds in London. He was remarkably well informed about current affairs, partly because members of the Gwyneddigion Society visited him regularly but mainly because he pestered members of parliament and foreign ambassadors for information. Letters, books, magazines, squibs, and ballads were sent by the score to Cann Office, a staging post at Llangadfan, and Jones developed a particular interest in astronomy, physics, geography, topography, and navigation. He traced the voyages of Captain Cook, familiarized himself with the terrain of Africa, Arabia, Brazil, and Egypt, and few in Britain were better acquainted with the civilization of the Incas and the culture of the elusive Padoucas (white-skinned Welsh Indians, the alleged descendants of Madoc, son of Owain Gwynedd), who were believed to dwell in the upper reaches of the Missouri. 
Like many cultural nationalists and myth-makers in eighteenth-century Europe, Jones was determined to enhance the self-image of his people by campaigning on behalf of Welsh national institutions. He was among the first to call for a national library and a truly national eisteddfod. He composed a robust Welsh national anthem -- the first of its kind in modern Wales -- based on the refrain 'And join in joyful song on the fair break of dawn'. Stirringly patriotic, the anthem was his riposte to the jingoism of 'Rule Britannia' and 'The Roast Beef of Old England'. 
Jones's political radicalism owed much to the inspiration of the French Revolution. In many ways, he discovered his political voice in 1789, and his correspondence is riddled with barbed references to fleecers, tyrants, and oppressors. A self-styled sans culotte, he prized the works of Voltaire above all others, so much so that he became known as the Rural Voltaire. Jones bore more than a passing resemblance to Voltaire and he also shared his Ranter-like fondness for satire, blasphemy, and vulgar jokes. Jones's penchant for bawdiness is best exemplified in his unpublished poem 'The Enraptur'd Lover to the Tune of Jack ye Latin', and the rector of Llangadfan, who dubbed him 'a rank republican [and] a Leveller' (NL Wales, MS 1806E, fol. 786), believed that he deserved to be peppered with gunshot and powder. During William Pitt's 'reign of terror' government spies intercepted, opened, and destroyed letters to and from Jones, and doubtless many of them were horrified by his scabrous comments about despotic Saxons and Normans. One of Jones's most loyal friends reckoned that he was 'the hottest arsed Welshman he had ever known' (NL Wales, MS 13221E, fol. 256). 
Weary of poverty, persecution, and neglect, William Jones resolved to emigrate to the Land of Liberty. His aim was to purchase cheap and fruitful land in Kentucky and also to embark on an expedition in search of the Lost Welsh Brothers. But illness and old age conspired against him, and the Welsh Voltaire died in November 1795. The final wish of this incorrigible infidel was that he should be laid to rest in unconsecrated ground in the graveyard of Llangadfan parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 62906


Lloyd, Sir Herbert, first baronet (1720-1769), politician and landowner, born on 22 July 1720 at Peterwell, Lampeter, Cardiganshire, was the third of five surviving children of Walter Lloyd (1678?-1747) and his wife, Elizabeth Evans (died 1743), daughter of Daniel Evans of Peterwell, a wealthy landowner. His father, a whig supporter, was appointed the local law officer of the crown after the Hanoverian succession, and served as MP for Cardiganshire from 1734 to 1742. Educated initially at home, Lloyd studied at Jesus College, Oxford (1738-40), and proceeded to the Inner Temple. He was called to the bar in 1742. He married in 1742 Elizabeth Bragge of Essex, who died the following year. In 1745 he married Ann (1702-1778), daughter of William Powell of Nanteos, Cardiganshire, and widow of Richard Stedman of Great Abbey, Strata Florida. They took up residence at Foelallt, Llanddewibrefi. Although an Anglican Lloyd had some early sympathy with the Methodists and was friendly with Howel Harris, one of the founders of Welsh Methodism. On the death of his brother John, MP for Cardiganshire, in 1755, he inherited the Peterwell and Llechwedd Dderi estates. Together with Foelallt, this made him a substantial landowner. 
Herbert Lloyd became notorious for his irascible nature and oppressive behaviour. Appointed a JP at an early age, he soon acquired a reputation for harshness. Lloyd's intemperate behaviour led to his being struck out of the commission of the peace in 1755, and his treatment of Ann, his second wife, caused her to leave him. He is associated with falsely accusing Sion Philip, a freeholder, of stealing his prized black ram and of securing his execution at Cardigan in order to acquire his land. He harboured political ambitions but was persuaded by the Newcastle administration to stand aside, in favour of another, in the contest to succeed his brother as MP in 1755. At that time his rival, Wilmot Vaugham, wrote to Newcastle that 'The views of the present Mr Lloyd of Peterwell are so very extensive, his principles so little fixed, and his whole character so unstable' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 47). However, Lloyd was finally elected to parliament in 1761 as member for the Cardigan Boroughs. He sought to ingratiate himself with the prime minister, the duke of Newcastle, and with his successor, the earl of Bute, and was granted a baronetcy in January 1763. The title served to increase his unpopularity among the Cardiganshire gentry and they began to refer to him as the Vulture Knight. 
Lloyd's parliamentary career was inauspicious, but he was one of those members who favoured the ending of the Seven Years' War. Lloyd approved of the expulsion of John Wilkes from parliament in 1764; but he was listed by the marquess of Rockingham as 'doubtful' in July 1765. On 22 February 1766 he voted against the administration's bill to repeal the 'Stamp Act'. He nevertheless seems to have supported the administration of William Pitt the elder. Having alienated his local political allies due to his erratic behaviour, Lloyd declined to contest the 1768 election. Following the death of the successful member, however, Lloyd again offered himself as a candidate in the by-election held in January 1769, but was defeated. He challenged the result, but unsuccessfully petitioned the committee of privileges and elections to have it overturned. Having spent vast sums of money on his mansion at Peterwell, and with his political career now in ruins, he faced increasing financial problems. Allied to this, his excesses over the years had greatly affected his health. He frequently visited the gaming tables in London in vain attempts to recoup his losses. During one of these visits, shortly before his death, Lloyd bigamously married a Mrs Bacon of Bishop Auckland. There were also regular visits to take the waters at Bath. 
On one of these journeys Sir Herbert was taken ill and died 'en route' for Bath on 20 August 1769. His body was returned to Peterwell and he was interred with due pomp at midnight on 3 September 1769 in the family vault at St Peter's Church, Lampeter. It appears that he died of natural causes and there is no foundation to the tradition that he committed suicide in London. As Lloyd had no children, Peterwell passed to his nephew, John Adams of Whitland. The estate had been heavily mortgaged to the sum of $54,000 and it was sold on 24 September 1781 to Albany Wallis, a London lawyer. 


@@@@@


doc= 62907


Bourdillon, Thomas Duncan (1924-1956), mountaineer and physicist, was born at 24 Norland Square, North Kensington, London, on 16 March 1924, the elder son of Robert Benedict Bourdillon (1889-1971), scientist, and his wife, Harriet Ada Barnes. He was educated at Gresham's School, Holt, and Balliol College, Oxford (1942-4, 1948-50), where his studies were interrupted by military service. During the Second World War he saw service in Greece and Egypt. In 1950, after leaving Oxford, where he obtained a third-class degree in physics, he was attached to the Ministry of Supply at Westcott, Buckinghamshire, where he worked on the development of rocket engines. On 15 March 1951 he married Jennifer Elizabeth Clapham Thomas ('b'. 1929), daughter of Ronald Clapham Thomas, bank official. 
In 1951 Bourdillon accompanied Eric Shipton on the Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition which prospected a route through that peak's formidable southern defences, the Khumbu icefall in Nepal. During the trip he also climbed with W. H. Murray to the Nangpa La, a high pass on the Tibetan border, from where a possible route on nearby Cho Oyu was discerned. This was attempted the following year as a warm-up climb for Everest, again with Shipton as leader. Experimenting with oxygen apparatus on this expedition prompted Bourdillon to investigate the practicalities of a 'closed circuit' system. This he developed in conjunction with his father, who worked at the Electro-Medical Research Unit, Stoke Mandeville. Racing against the clock, they produced eight prototype sets for the 1953 Everest expedition, led by John Hunt. 
The principle of the closed-circuit system is that the climber receives 100 per cent oxygen from the bottle without air entering the face mask, as it does in the standard 'open-circuit' apparatus. Expired carbon dioxide is 'scrubbed' by passing through soda lime so that a proportion of the breathed oxygen is available for rebreathing, thus extending the life of each bottle of oxygen and reducing the number of bottles required by those using the apparatus. Tests on the mountain were encouraging and, with this closed-circuit system, Bourdillon and Charles Evans on 26 May 1953 made their prodigious climb from the south col to the south summit (28,700 feet) of Everest and back, opening the route for Hillary and Tenzing to go to the summit with open-circuit sets three days later, as the first climbers ever to do so. 
Bourdillon -- who was described by friends as generous, cheerful, unruffled, dependable, and 'too shy', and by Hunt in 'The Ascent of Everest' (1953) as 'huge and hefty, built like a second-row rugby forward' -- had climbing in his blood. His father was a founder member of the Oxford University mountaineering club in 1909. Sir Arnold Lunn told the story (in 'A Century of Mountaineering', 1957) that on the premise that 'a scientist must know something about electricity', Bourdillon senior was put in charge of the club's lantern for showing lantern slides; when young Bourdillon joined the club, he too was appointed 'lanternist' to maintain the tradition. An outstanding rock climber and an enthusiast for the new vogue of 'artificial climbing' which so shocked traditionalists, Bourdillon was at the forefront of a post-war renaissance in British alpinism. He took on some of the most difficult alpine routes of the day (north face of Dru, Mer de Glace face of Grepon by Aig du Roc), and he became the first president of the elite Alpine Climbing Group (1954-6), which did so much to raise the profile of British mountaineers on the international stage. 
Bourdillon was killed -- along with another fine British climber, Richard Viney -- in a climbing accident on 29 July 1956 while ascending the east buttress of the Jagihorn in the Bernese Oberland of Switzerland. His widow, their daughter aged nineteen months, and son of ten weeks survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 62908


Marged ferch Ifan (bap. 1696, d. 1793), harpist and wrestler, was probably born in Beddgelert, Caernarvonshire, and baptized in the parish church on 10 May 1696, one of at least eleven children born to Ifan Powell and his wife, Elizabeth Hughes. She became known far beyond Wales after Thomas Pennant published a lively description of her in his 'Tours in Wales' (1778-81), but local oral tradition has also preserved many tales which grew up around her, many of them no less attractive for being impossible to verify. All sources, however, describe her as a large and exceptionally strong woman, a great weightlifter who could wrestle any man to the ground, so that even when she was seventy years old the young men of the district treated her with respect. Her husband, the harpist Richard Morris (died 1786), was much slighter and no match for her, which suggests that it was she who courted him, for few suitors dared approach her. She is said to have given Richard Morris two severe beatings: after the first he married her, on 8 May 1717 in Beddgelert, and after the second he joined the Methodists. 
The couple went to keep an inn called Telyrni between Nantlle and Drws-y-coed, in the parish of Llandwrog. The inn was frequented mainly by the local copper miners, and Marged ferch Ifan played the harp to entertain them. Tradition has it that some of her customers composed extempore two of the surviving 'penillion telyn' (popular stanzas for the harp), celebrating her two harps and two bellows. 
The decline of the copper mine forced the couple to give up the Telyrni inn, of which no trace now remains. Some time before 1764 they moved to Pen-llyn, a house at the north-western end of Padarn Lake in the parish of Llanddeiniolen. Marged became a boat builder and transported copper ore in a boat from the foot of Snowdon across lakes Peris and Padarn to Cwm-y-glo, where it was loaded onto carts to be transported to the coast. According to one anecdote, she took out in her boat one day the local landowner and industrialist Thomas Assheton Smith of Vaenol (1752-1828), who made sexual advances to her. Quick as a flash she picked him up and dropped him in the lake. When he rose to the surface and begged her to pull him out she refused until he paid her half a guinea. 
Marged ferch Ifan, whom Pennant calls 'Queen of the Lake', was out when he called at Pen-llyn in 1786, but he seems to be relying on a local informant when he states that she was a remarkable hunter, keeping a dozen hounds, played traditional Welsh airs on the fiddle as well as the harp, made harps and her own shoes, and shod her own horses. Her strength was legendary, for she is also remembered locally for making the Pont Meibion slate bridge at Nant Peris, she alone lifting one end of the huge slab and several young men the other. 
At least three children, a son and two daughters, were born to Marged ferch Ifan. Although some sources claim that she died in 1801 at the age of 105, in fact she died in January 1793 at Pen-llyn and was buried on 24 January in Llanddeiniolen churchyard. W. R. Ambrose quotes English verses which he claims were inscribed on her gravestone, but their authenticity is highly questionable and the stone does not survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 62909


Griffith, Sidney (c.1720-1752), follower of Methodism, was the daughter of Cadwaladr Wynne and his wife, Jane Griffith (died 1771) of Foelas, Ysbyty Ifan, Denbighshire, but her date of birth is unknown. She was named in honour of her grandmother, a member of the prominent Thelwall family. Her marriage to William Griffith (1721-1751) of Cefnamwlch in Caernarvonshire is believed to have taken place in 1741, for in 1742 she gave birth to her only son, John Griffith, high sheriff of Caernarvonshire in 1765. 
Griffith converted to the Methodist cause under the ministry of the Methodist clergyman Peter Williams in 1746. Howel Harris, one of the leaders of the early Methodist movement in Wales, met her for the first time during a preaching tour of north Wales in October 1748. The strong-minded and attractive young woman made a lasting impression on Harris, who was always gratified when members of the gentry were drawn to the movement. Her first visit to Harris's home at Trefeca in Brecknockshire took place in February 1749 and she soon began to accompany him on his preaching journeys. In July 1749 she fled to Trefeca to seek refuge from her unhappy marriage and her drunken and abusive husband, who was compared by John Wesley to one of the 'ruffians' in 'Macbeth'. 
Harris insisted that 'Madam Griffith' should be regarded as a prophetess and referred to her as his 'Eye' and his 'Light'. In this capacity she attended meetings of the Association, the governing body of the Methodist movement in Wales, despite the fact that the movement tended to disapprove of women adopting a prominent public role. Ultimately, however, the relationship proved to be one of the contributory factors in the quarrel which divided the Welsh Methodist cause into two distinct camps in 1750. Doctrinal differences and increasing tension as a result of Harris's fractious personality were also to play a major part in the division, which led to most of the Methodist exhorters siding with Daniel Rowland against Harris. 
Harris's infatuation has in the past been frequently attributed to his declining mental health, and it has been suggested that exhaustion led him to the brink of a total breakdown by the late 1740s. It has also been claimed that Mrs Whitefield actively sought to poison Anne Harris's mind against Madam Griffith out of malice and jealousy. The precise nature of the relationship remains a topic of debate among Welsh historians, particularly since Harris's diary entries are ambiguous and open to various interpretations. There can be little doubt that he was utterly enchanted by her. His marriage to Anne Williams in 1744 had not been a great success, partly because his wife's ill health did not allow her to accompany him on his preaching tours. Speculation regarding the relationship with Madam Griffith caused Harris's associates to urge him to relinquish his prophetess for the good of the movement. Harris, however, proved to be intractable and succeeded in alienating many of his closest colleagues by his refusal to listen to reason. It is difficult to know what Griffith's own feelings and attitudes were, since so much evidence regarding the relationship comes either from Harris's own writings or from contemporary supposition. She could be obstinate and determined, and occasionally supported Daniel Rowland against Harris on matters of doctrine. She also at times proved to be something of a financial burden, since her husband was loath to contribute to her maintenance before he finally fell and broke his neck in February 1751. 
Griffith died on 31 May 1752 at The Lodge, Hyde Park, and was buried in Audley Chapel, London. Harris was grief-stricken and continued to mourn her passing for the rest of his life. It could be argued, however, that her death removed one major stumbling block in the way of his eventual reconciliation with the remainder of the Methodist movement in 1763. 


@@@@@


doc= 62911


Morgan, Griffith (1700-1737), long-distance runner, was a celebrated athlete of phenomenal speed and stamina. Guto is the Welsh diminutive of Griffith, and Nyth-bran ('crow's nest') was the name of the farm where he lived, in the parish of Llanwynno, in the Glamorgan hills between Porth and Mountain Ash. Nothing is known of his upbringing beyond the fact that his parents moved to Nyth-bran Farm from his birthplace in neighbouring Llwyncelyn when he was little more than a year old. 
Foot-racing and pedestrian contests, like prize-fighting and wrestling matches, were regular features of pre-industrial sporting life; arranged locally by publicans or local shopkeepers in the absence of more professional promoters, they were invariably an outlet for gambling and the expression of parochial pride. Little celebrated in his own day, Guto's remarkable feats were revived for posterity by the Revd William Thomas 
(Glanffrwd; 1843-1890)
, whose history of the parish of Llanwynno appeared in 1888 at a time of emerging Welsh national consciousness. Guto, it appears, was a fleet-footed, multi-terrain specialist who could round up sheep without the help of a dog, chase hares until they were reduced to exhaustion, and outrun horses. His mother once sent him on an errand to Aberdar, more than 3 miles away, and was amazed to find he had completed the 7 mile round trip before the kettle had boiled. Only a cynic would query the capacity of the kettle or the intensity of the flames which heated it. 
Capable of covering 50 yards in four seconds and 10 miles in forty-five minutes, this Welsh Olympian attracted backers whose wagers were taken by the formidable Sian o'r Siop ('Jane of the shop'), a local admirer who became Guto's lover as well as his manager. Having seen off numerous opponents from near and far, in 1737 Guto, despite not having run competitively for four years, accepted the challenge of an Englishman, Prince, to a 12 mile race from Newport to Bedwas church, near Caerphilly, for a large money prize. Sian wagered a thousand sovereigns, and the life savings of every resident in the parish of Llanwynno were said to have been placed on Guto. The race took place on 6 September, and after adopting his usual malodorous pre-match practice of sleeping in warm manure, as much to deter any opponent from getting too close to him as to loosen his limbs -- which according to Glanffrwd were 'like whipcord and as flexible as whalebones' (Glanffrwd, 92) -- Guto felt confident enough during the race to chat with spectators along the route, thereby enabling Prince to open up a large gap. Guto eventually overhauled him, ran alongside for a short while dispensing advice and then, with fine but foolhardy bravado, sprinted up the steep mile-long gradient to the church to win in the astounding time of fifty-three minutes. An ecstatic Sian collected two full aprons of winnings and thumped the back of her triumphant but exhausted champion, who promptly fell dead at her feet. 
Guto was buried in St Gwynno's churchyard, Llanwynno, on 18 September 1737. His original gravestone still lies under the south wall of the churchyard, while another was erected in 1866, bearing two verses in Welsh, one of them by Glanffrwd, whose subsequent history of the parish did most to revive the reputation of this remarkable athlete. 


@@@@@


doc= 62912


Morgan, John (1688-1733/4), Church of England clergyman and Welsh scholar, was born on 7 February 1688 at Llangelynnin, Merioneth, north Wales, younger son of Edward Morgan ('fl'. 1651-1700), curate of Llangelynnin, and his wife, Margreta ('fl'. 'c'.1660-1700). From 1704 to 1708 he studied with his elder brother, Edward (died 1749) -- also to become a cleric and man of letters, at Jesus College, Oxford, where he is thought to have come under the influence of the renowned Welsh antiquary Edward Lhuyd. Having been ordained in 1709, he became curate of Llandegfan, Anglesey (1709-10), and of Llanfyllin, Montgomeryshire (1710-13). In 1713 Morgan left his native Wales to become curate in the village of Matching, Essex, where he served as vicar from 1728 until his death. He was commonly known as John Morgan Matchin, and there is no evidence that he married. 
Morgan's interest in Welsh literature and scholarship, which he shared with a number of other Oxford-educated Welshmen of the time, is reflected in a collection of proverbs and colloquialisms and in a verse collection including some of his early work (NL Wales, Llanstephan MSS 20 and 15). He is thought to be the author of the translations from Tertullian and Cyprian, 'Llythyr Tertulian at 'Scapula' (1716). He is best known, however, for his short prose work, 'Myfyrdodau bucheddol ar y pedwar peth diweddaf' ('Devout musings on the four last things'), which appeared in eight editions between 1714 and 1830. Although partly based on an earlier translation from English, 'Cadwyn euraidd o bedair modrwy' (1706), its clarity of expression and classically influenced economy of style set it apart from other devotional and didactic writing of the period. In three letters addressed to his Oxford contemporary Moses Williams (BL, Add. MS 14934, fols. 175-7), as well as discussing literary and antiquarian matters Morgan voiced his concern for the educational and spiritual well-being of his fellow countrymen, denouncing the folly of the English-only education policy of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 'the consequence [of which] at last will be barbarism, which necessarily introduces ignorance and irreligion'. These letters eventually came into the hands of the Morrisian circle of writers and antiquarians, making John Morgan a link between Edward Lhuyd and the cultural revival of mid-eighteenth-century Wales. He died at Matching on 28 February 1734 (or possibly 1733) and was buried on 2 March in the chancel of the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 62913


Morris, Robert (bap. 1701?, d. 1768), industrialist, was born to Robert Morris of Bishop's Castle and Cleobury Mortimer, Shropshire, whose family was said to be of north Welsh stock, and Mary, the daughter of Richard Tristram of More Hall, Worcestershire. He was probably the Robert, son of Robert and Mary Morris, baptized at the parish church, Clunbury, on 22 June 1701. Little is known of his early years before he moved to south Wales, but he was married on 9 September 1725 at St John's Church in Swansea to Margaret (died 1786), the daughter and heir of David Jenkins of Machynlleth, Montgomeryshire, and his wife, Bridget Parry. Through her mother she was related to some of the leading families of Cardiganshire, and as a descendant of Owain Gwynedd she belonged to one of the so-called fifteen tribes of north Wales, a fact of which the family was suitably proud. 
Robert Morris had been drawn to the Swansea area about 1724 by the copper-smelting works (known as the Landore works) that had been operated at Llangyfelach from 1717 by Dr John Lane of Bristol. Lane became bankrupt in November 1726 and Morris took over the works as receiver until he eventually secured sufficient capital from, among others, Richard Lockwood, Edward Gibbon (a relation of the historian), and Robert Corker, to buy the works in 1727. He himself became a partner in 1728, so forming the company of Lockwood, Morris & Co. which would play a large part in the history of Swansea over the next century and more. Morris was the most active partner, and his success lay in his realization that whereas copper ore could be easily imported from Cornwall, it was the availability of a local, and therefore inexpensive, supply of good coal that was vital for the operation. This awareness soon gave rise to a dispute with Thomas Popkins of Fforest, a local mine owner who failed to keep to his part of the covenant in the original lease to supply coal. Morris was able to gain advantage over Popkins and other competitors by winning the support of Gabriel Powell, the duke of Beaufort's steward in Gower, in the competition for leases. He was soon mining his own coal, and by 1735 he was the biggest exporter out of the port of Swansea. His long and profitable direct involvement in the town of Swansea was evident by 1733, when he was granted a lease near the River Tawe to build a dock for coal ships, and over the following years his efforts at improving facilities at the port included bringing in better horses to haul coal and an attempt to improve postal facilities. In 1748 the works at Llangyfelach ceased to operate and were moved further up the valley to Fforest. 
The tensions between Morris and his rivals did not cease after the early years of the enterprise, however, but led to a series of mineral property disputes through the 1730s, 1740s, and 1750s which saw the Popkins of Fforest and the Prices of Penlle'r-gaer line up against Morris and Powell and the party of the dukes of Beaufort. Like Henry Somerset, third duke, and Charles Noel Somerset, fourth duke, Robert Morris was a high tory, and possibly a nonjuror. In this he conformed with most of the entrepreneurs who had a share in the industrial boom which Swansea experienced in the years 1720-70. His interests in the lead mines of Cardiganshire, an area in which his wife had family ties, also brought him into contact with like-minded families such as the Powells of Nanteos. This probably aided the process by which he became largely accepted into the gentry circles of Glamorgan, becoming a justice of the peace by the 1760s and acting as high sheriff of the county in 1763. The building of the mansion of Clasemont in Llangyfelach, with which the family's name was later linked, and the innovative workers' residences known as Morris Castle have been attributed to Robert Morris, but it seems likely that they were built by his son John Morris soon after his father's death. It was through this son that Robert's surname was given to the industrial suburb of Morriston on the outskirts of Swansea. 
Robert himself probably lived at the house of Tredegar in Llangyfelach, and was the owner of other small estates in the Swansea valley as well as a town house in High Street, Swansea. He and his wife had twelve children who were baptized at St Mary's Church, Swansea, but six of them died in childhood. Of the survivors, four girls, Bridget ('b'. 1729), Margaret ('b'. 1731), Mary ('b'. 1736), and Jane ('b'. 1739) were followed by two boys, Robert Morris (1743-1793), and John (1745-1819). Robert, best-known for his political radicalism, played only a small role in the development of his family's business, although it was he who, in 1774, compiled the manuscript 'A history of the copper concern' that is such a vital source for the early years of the business. It was the younger brother John (knighted in 1806) who took care of the business after their father's death. Robert Morris died between January and April 1768 at his London home in Mortimer Street, Cavendish Square, and was buried at St John's Church, Swansea. After his death, his son John spoke affectionately of his father that 'His amiable manner, his Countenance, his deportment, Language and voice, in fact every word and every action announced the good man, as well as the accomplished Englishman of his day' (Ross, 40). 
Robert Morris is remembered as one of the foremost industrial pioneers in south Wales. He has been characterized both as an unusually successful example of a native Welsh entrepreneur and as a typical example of how the large profits from Welsh mineral resources went into English hands. His importance in the development of Swansea and its hinterland is not open to doubt, however, and the industrial dynasty which he founded played a foremost role in the development of the town at a time when it was arguably the most important in Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 62914


Morris, William (1705-1763), antiquary and botanist, was born on 1 May 1705 at Fferam in the parish of Llanfihangel Tre'r-beirdd, Anglesey, the third of five children of Morris Prichard (1674-1763), cooper, tenant farmer, and small merchant, and Marged Morris (1671-1752). Both parents were of Anglesey gentry stock. In 1707 William moved with his parents and three brothers to Pentre-eiriannell, a farm in the neighbouring parish of Penrhosllugwy, overlooking the Dulas estuary. 
William was taught to read by his father and for a short time attended a school near the parish church. As well as helping his father on the farm it is more than likely that he also assisted him in running a sloop which traded on the coast of north Wales and as far as Liverpool. This activity eventually led him, in 1726, to that port, where, for the following ten years, he was employed by a Welsh merchant, Owen Prichard, a native of Anglesey, who through his marriage with Philipia Wright in 1718 had become stepfather to Fortunatus Wright (1712-1757), the famous privateer. 
In March 1737 Morris was appointed deputy comptroller of the customs and also comptroller of the coal duties at Holyhead, where his elder brother, Lewis Morris, had been customs officer since 1729. William was to hold this post, with its short hours and long periods of inactivity, for the remainder of his life. On 5 February 1745 he married Jane (1719-1750), daughter of Robert Hughes of Holyhead, the owner of a small estate in the parish of Llanfigel, Anglesey, which was subsequently inherited by William's son, Robert. Two other children were born of this marriage: William (died an infant in December 1748) and Jane. Morris's wife died and was buried on 2 May 1750; he did not remarry. 
From early childhood Morris had been immersed in the folk culture of Anglesey, where poetry and music were still transmitted orally. Little is known of his literary pursuits while he was at Liverpool, but from there he began to correspond with his brother Richard Morris, who had settled in London in 1722, and with his brother Lewis in Anglesey, a correspondence which continued for the remainder of their lives. A substantial number of these letters has survived, and show how varied the Morrises' interests were. 
While settled at Holyhead, William Morris's various interests became evident. He derived great pleasure from gardening and not only secured seeds and plants from various contacts in London but also from seamen, who at his request brought them from foreign lands. This led him to a serious study of botany. With the help of specialist books on the subject he began forming a catalogue of plants with their Latin, Welsh, and English names, and his search for specimens took him to Snowdonia and as far as Flintshire. Morris's life as a naturalist was in part inspired by his relationship with the young Thomas Pennant (1726-1798), the famous naturalist, whom he assisted unsparingly. Not surprisingly Morris was the only subscriber from north Wales to Pennant's 'British Zoology' (1766), which began to appear in parts before Morris's death. He formed his own collection of fossils, shells, birds, minerals, and such like, and through Pennant became acquainted with other botanists and naturalists in England, Ireland, and on the continent. This meant that when he discovered a unique fish, 'Leptocephalus', near Holyhead, not only was this recorded by L. T. Gronovius of Leiden in his 'Zoophylacium', but also it was named after Morris 'in memory of our worthy friend' (Pennant, 139). 
Morris was also a staunch and reliable supporter of his brother Richard's literary and scholarly pursuits in London. This brother edited the Welsh versions of the 'Bible' and 'Book of Common Prayer' in 1746 and 1752, and secured the help of William and others to read the proofs. Richard Morris was secretary of the Cymmrodorion Society, established in 1751 and based in London, and his brother William participated fully in its activities, becoming a corresponding member. 
Through the guidance and influence of his elder brother, Lewis, William Morris mastered the whole span of the Welsh bardic tradition. He formed his own collections of poetry and notably acquired a seventeenth-century manuscript which contained the poetry of the Welsh princes (BL, Add. MS 14869). The collection ranged from the works of the fourteenth-century poet Dafydd ap Gwilym to that of his own eighteenth-century contemporaries. Morris's antiquarian interests extended from Celtic saints and Welsh proverbs to Welsh traditional music. 
Although William Morris lacked the academic ability of his brother Lewis, the mainspring of the great Welsh literary revival of the first half of the eighteenth century, William, through his genial support and varied and general interests, was an integral part of that revival; and through his untiring correspondence he was an inspiration to the other members of the Morris literary and scholarly circle. He was nevertheless also fond of people and strove to help the needy. He died on 28 December 1763 at Holyhead and was buried the following day, probably with his infant son and wife in the churchyard at Holyhead. 


@@@@@


doc= 62915


Pugh, Edward (bap. 1763, d. 1813), miniature painter and topographer, was baptized in June 1763 at Ruthin in Denbighshire, the son of David and Dorothy Pugh. His father was a barber and presumably, therefore, of moderate means, and nothing is known of how his son acquired a training in art. By 1793 Pugh was exhibiting miniatures at the Royal Academy where he continued to show both portraits and landscapes until 1808. He lived in London, although he spent a considerable amount of time in Wales, and was in Chester in 1799. He cut a minor figure in the London art world, possessed, as he himself conceded, only of a 'moderate talent' (Pugh, vii), but, nevertheless, provided drawings for 'Modern London' (1804), and was known to individuals of note including the magistrate, amateur painter, and Sir Richard Phillips's caricaturist Henry Wigstead, by whom he is credited with drawing for his 'Remarks on a Tour to North and South Wales' (1800). Pugh's miniature practice drew on both Welsh and English patronage, notably among the literati in Chester and London, where he painted William Owen Pughe ('c'.1802). In its engraved form his miniature of the playwright Thomas Edwards, 'Twm o'r Nant' (1799), became his most celebrated portrait. 
It was Pugh's association with John Boydell, the publisher of prints, which led him in 1804 to commence his most important work, 'Cambria depicta'. Over the next nine years Pugh travelled extensively on foot through north Wales, and both wrote the substantial text and provided the original drawings for seventy-two aquatints. Although the biographical details of Pugh's life are sketchy, a great deal can be said of his character, since 'Cambria depicta' was written in the first person and in a lively and entertaining style. It presents Wales from the perspective of a native Welsh-speaker, rather than of an English traveller, on which grounds the author particularly commended the work to his audience for the insights it offered. Pugh regaled his readers with interesting incidents, gossip, and his idiosyncratic opinions on aesthetics and the general state of the world. Although working broadly within the eighteenth-century tradition of topographical and antiquarian descriptive writing, his was a fresh and democratic voice, expressing ambitions for the improvement of contemporary Welsh culture, as well as relating its history and myths. For instance, he proposed the establishment of a national academy on the Scottish model. Pugh died, apparently unmarried, in his home town of Ruthin where he was buried (at Well Street) on 20 July 1813, and did not see his masterpiece in printed form; it was published by Evan Williams in London three years later. Examples of his work are in the National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth, the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 62916


Roberts, Ellis (c.1712-1789), Welsh-language writer, was born in the vicinity of Bala. By 1753, and possibly as early as 1742, he had settled in Llanddoged, near Llanrwst, in the Vale of Conwy, where he worked as a cooper (whence his sobriquet). He was a prolific writer of interludes, ballads, and letters. 
In his introduction to 'Gras a Natur' ('Grace and nature'), published in 1769, Elis claimed to have served his fellow countrymen for a period of thirty-eight years and to have composed sixty-nine interludes, not such a great feat in view of his statement that 'Gras a Natur' took no more than three days to complete ('Nid oedd y cwbwl... ond gwaith tridie'). However, only nine of his interludes, composed in the period 1753-89, remain either in manuscript or in print. 
Elis's earliest interludes present two stock characters, the miser and the jester, and dramatize the traditional antagonism between the two. The miser is shown being deceived not only by the jester and deprived of his wealth but also by his newly wedded wife, who is about to give birth to the jester's offspring. 'Pleser a gofid' marks a turning point. This and later works are characterized by their moral content and by the gradual demotion of the miser to the role of a mere spectator. Elis comments freely on moral matters, and on religious and social issues, notably the state of the church and the greed of landowners, but his hurried compositions lack the consistency of thought found in the works of Twm o'r Nant, the most prominent Welsh interlude writer. 
The frequency with which his actors sing is another feature of Elis's works. The songs included in the interludes correspond closely to the ballads which were in vogue in eighteenth-century Wales, and on the basis of the material which remains in print -- his ballads appear in no fewer than 165 ballad books -- no author can claim to have been as productive. His subjects encompass accidents and murders in their most gruesome details, current affairs and fashions, and love both romantic and lewd. The moralizing voice heard in the interludes is rarely silent in the ballads. 
It is this voice which is heard in a series of nine letters published between 1771 and 1783. These are long, scarcely punctuated statements which abound with biblical quotations and verbal rhetoric, but which, in spite of their solemn titles -- the fifth was promoted as 'Difrifol fyfyrdod am farwolaeth' ('Serious meditation upon death') -- struck a chord and appealed to the population at large. Individual letters were reprinted -- the sixth appeared on eight occasions -- and the letters were published as a collection in 1794. 
Elis was married four times, and had at least ten children, although little is known about his marriages. His first wife, who came from Bala, died within thirty months of their marriage. He and his second wife, Elin, had a child who was baptized in 1742. Another child, of Elis and his third wife, Elizabeth, was baptized in 1753. In 1765 a child from his fourth marriage, to Grace, was baptized. 
The popularity of the letters, ballads, and interludes made Elis y Cowper a household name throughout north Wales during the course of the eighteenth century. He has been seen, however, by subsequent generations through the eyes of the circle of poets and antiquarians surrounding the Morris brothers, especially the poet Goronwy Owen, who narrowly escaped being thrashed by Elis when the two met on one occasion in Llanrwst. Owen's colourful comments must be considered in the light of this unfortunate encounter, but Elis y Cowper is also made to symbolize the deterioration in poetic standards which had taken place since the sixteenth century, and which the Morrisians vigorously sought to remedy. Elis died on 27 November 1789, aged about seventy-six, and was buried at Llanddoged on 1 December. He was survived by his fourth wife, Grace. 


@@@@@


doc= 62917


Roberts, Thomas (1765/6-1841), author, was baptized at Llwyn'rhudol Uchaf in the parish of Aber-erch, near Pwllheli, Caernarvonshire, on 16 August 1767, the son of William Roberts (died 1777/8), a lawyer, and Jane, his wife. 
Thomas Roberts was well educated, but it is not known where, and the details of his youth are also unclear. He went to London before he was fourteen, and he may have practised as a lawyer. In 1791 Roberts married Mary (died 1829), from a prosperous Warwickshire Quaker family, and through his wife's connections he was able to become a London goldsmith. By the time of the birth of their first child, Hannah, in October 1791, they were members of the Devonshire House meeting of the Society of Friends. They had five daughters and a son, Maurice, and lived successively in or near the City of London, at Aldgate, Clerkenwell, and Poultry. Roberts went to Jersey on business in 1820 and paid a cultural visit to Brittany at the expense of the treasurer of the Welsh School, London. The following year he visited Ghent, on business, where he stayed until the beginning of 1823. Mary Roberts died in March 1829 and was buried on 5 April in Bunhill Fields. 
Wales continued to feature in Roberts's life: he and his family paid frequent visits there; he brought up his children to speak Welsh (his son showed promise as a writer of Welsh); and he corresponded with men of letters in Wales. A collector of folk-verse, he particularly admired 'penillion telyn' (verses for the harp). 
As an active member of London-Welsh society he held, at one time or another, all the major offices of the Gwyneddigion Society. It is probable that he, along with others, was instrumental in setting up a branch of the Gwyneddigion, the Cymreigyddion, in 1794. This was a Welsh-language debating society which touched upon the controversial issues of radical London politics at a time of insecurity and censorship. One of the characteristics of the London Welsh societies was their boisterous 'bonhomie' and Thomas Roberts, although a Quaker, made a lively contribution. An attempt in 1840 to prohibit smoking at meetings (as a degrading habit) was defeated by Thomas Roberts's casting vote: he argued that the object of the Cymreigyddion was the maintenance of the Welsh way of life (which evidently included smoking). 
Roberts wrote in both English and Welsh. His best-known work in Welsh, 'Cwyn yn erbyn gorthrymder' (1798), was a satirical and radical piece which attacked various forms of oppression in Wales, chiefly the tithe of the established church, but also Methodists, doctors, lawyers, and the deference of the peasantry. His radicalism was associated with his dissent. Although Thomas Roberts was not a supporter of the Methodists, he spoke in their defence. He wrote under the pseudonym Arvonius against the libellous anti-Methodism of a fellow London-Welshman, the Anglican Edward Charles. His defence was inspired by a Quaker dislike of the established church and a radical distaste for 'old corruption'. 
Roberts's English works mediated between the cultures of England and Wales. He published an 'English and Welsh Vocabulary' (1827) and a pocket book of Welsh phrases with their English equivalents. 'The Welsh Interpreter' (1831) was designed, according to its subtitle, to help English tourists 'make themselves understood by the peasantry during their rambles through Wales'. He was equally concerned to ensure that the Welsh benefited from works of self-help previously available in English, and therefore published a Welsh version of Benjamin Franklin's 'Poor Richard' in 1839. He also published Welsh versions of English devotional material. Towards the end of his life, Roberts lost much of his wealth (owing, so it was said, to the loss at sea of a shipload of bullion) and lived latterly on a pension from the Goldsmiths' Company. He died on 24 May 1841 at 7 Bond Street, London, the home of his sole surviving daughter, Keturah. He was buried on 30 May with his wife in Bunhill Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 62918


Thomas, John (bap. 1730, d. in or before 1806), schoolmaster and Independent minister, was born at Col, a cottage in Myddfai, Carmarthenshire, and was baptized on 25 April 1730, St Mark's day, at Myddfai parish church. He was the illegitimate son of Thomas Evan and an unnamed mother, but was brought up by a foster mother, who died in 1738, and subsequently by an aunt. His childhood was dominated by insecurity, ill health, and severe spiritual anxiety; his only education was three months at a local school. His interest in religion was aroused by reading devotional books and participating in the family devotions at Gellifelen, Myddfai, where, from the age of eleven, he served as a farm labourer. He then came into contact with the Methodist society at Cefn Telych, Myddfai, where he heard of Griffith Jones (1684-1761), of Llanddowror, who later acceded to his request to become his servant. Since Griffith Jones sought to dissuade him from his ambition to prepare for the ministry, he turned to Howel Harris (1714-1773) after hearing him preach at the house of Jethro Dafydd Evan at Llanddeusant. Harris enabled him to attend his school at Trefeca from November 1745 until the autumn of 1746. In 1750 Thomas preached for the first time at Cantref, near Brecon, and, at the Methodist Association at Carmarthen in 1752, he was accepted as an authorized preacher. For the next ten years he travelled widely, conducting circulating schools and preaching. 
In 1761 Thomas became convinced that the Independent church view of church government best accorded with scripture and consequently became a dissenter. In that year he entered the nonconformist academy at Abergavenny, under the tuition of David Jardine. While there he was supported by grants from the Independent church fund board from April 1762 until January 1766. On 23 April 1767 he was ordained minister of the three Independent churches at Cae-bach, near Llandrindod, Rhaeadr Gwy, and Garn, all in Radnorshire. This brought him under the generous patronage of an admirer of Howel Harris, the wealthy Thomas Jones (died 1782), of Trefonnen and Pencerrig, Radnorshire, whose uncle, Thomas Jones (1675-1745), had built Cae-bach chapel in 1715. On 6 June 1768, in the parish church of Llanfynydd, Carmarthenshire, Thomas married Elizabeth, the daughter of John Jones (died 1778) and his wife Diana (died 1788), of Dyffryn Isa, Llanfynydd. They had three children: Ioan, born in April 1775, Elizabeth, who was born on 26 September 1781 but died of smallpox in November 1782, and Thomas, of whom nothing is known but that he was a wild character who enlisted in the army in 1795 and no more was heard of him. 
During Thomas's visits to Trefeca, Selina, countess of Huntingdon, heard him preach and invited him to take services at the churches of her connexion in Brighton and Sussex, which he did during a two-month visit. He suffered much opposition at Cae-bach after a very flourishing period, and resigned his pastorate in 1778; he continued at his two other churches for a short period. Thereafter he lived an unsettled life and moved house no fewer than eight times between 1775 and 1799 before residing finally at Carmarthen. He supported himself by keeping school and received additional support from the proceeds of his wife's little shop, as well as from occasional gifts from well-wishers and grants from the Societas Evangelica. 
In all, Thomas published some twenty-seven titles. The most important of them is his autobiography. Its title, 'Rhad ras' ('Free grace'), published in 1810, echoes John Bunyan's 'Grace Abounding' upon which it seems to have been modelled, inasmuch as its contents have much to say about his spiritual development. He also published elegies for the countess of Huntingdon and Howel Harris, and collections of hymns in both Welsh and English. He represented the incursion of the methods and spirituality of the evangelical revival into the older dissent, with his untiring itinerant preaching in every county in Wales and the astonishing charismatic manifestations that accompanied his preaching. John Thomas died before March 1806. 


@@@@@


doc= 62919


Wood, Abram (d. 1799), Gypsy patriarch, is a figure about whom information is meagre and mostly traditional. His surname is of English origin and it may be presumed that he migrated into Wales. His forename, like that of his wife, Sarah, is biblical, but his ancestry is completely obscure. However, a clear reference to Wood by name occurs in an interlude by Thomas Edwards (Twm o'r Nant), 'Pleser a gofid' (1787), in which his 'cousin', Auntie Sal from the south, describes him as travelling 'Wales and England'. 
A colourful description of Wood was left by his great-granddaughter Saiforella: 'Abram was very tall, not so very lusty, and middling thin. His complexion was very dark, with rosy cheeks. His face was round as an apple, and he had a double chin and a small mouth -- very small for a man. He always rode on horseback, on a blood-horse, and would not sleep in the open, but in barns. He wore a three-cocked hat with gold lace, a silk coat with swallow tails -- sometimes red, sometimes green, and sometimes black -- and a waistcoat embroidered with green leaves. The buttons on the coat were half-crowns, those on the waistcoat shillings. His breeches were white, tied with silk ribbons, and there were bunches of ribbons at the knees. On his feet he wore pumps with silver buckles and silver spurs, and he wore two gold rings -- only two -- and a gold watch and chain. (Jarman and Jarman, 'Y Sipsiwn Cymreig', 65)' This idealized description of Abram Wood no doubt preserves family memories; yet it accords well with more generalized accounts of Gypsy chieftains arriving on the continent. 
Abram Wood and his wife, Sarah, had three sons, Valentine, William, and Solomon, and a daughter, Damaris. From the three sons descended a numerous progeny known in Welsh as 'Teulu Abram Wood' ('the family of Abram Wood'): a name which rapidly became used for Gypsies in general in Wales, although other families also migrated into the country. Among his descendants were many colourful characters such as Alabaina, Sylvaina, Saiforella, and Ellen Ddu (Black Ellen), all celebrated practitioners of the arts of magic and fortune telling. A number of male descendants also took up the art of harp playing and included such well-known players of the instrument as John Roberts of Newtown (1816-1894) and Jeremiah Wood ('c'.1778-1867), who was family harpist to the Gogerddan family for fifty years. At least twenty-six harpists extending over six generations were descended from Abram Wood and it is probable that they preserved much traditional Welsh music which would otherwise have been lost. Black Ellen was notable among her own people as a teller of traditional folk tales and these were collected as narrated by her great-nephew Mathew Wood. 
Abram Wood's first language was Romani and this was retained by many of his descendants down to the twentieth century, although it is now virtually lost. This speech was a pure and archaic form of Romani which was fully described by John Sampson in his monumental grammar 'The Dialect of the Gypsies of Wales' (1926). This also contains a large collection of sayings, aphorisms, names, and riddles attributed to the Woods. 
Abram Wood's death on 12 November 1799 is recorded in the parish register of Llangelynnin, Merioneth, where he is described as: 'Abram Woods a travelling Egyptian.' His reputed grave in Llangelynnin churchyard has the later date of 1800. 


@@@@@


doc= 62920


Busby, Charles Augustin (1786-1834), architect, was born on 27 June 1786 in Poland Street, London, one month before the wedding of his parents, Dr Thomas Busby (1754-1838), musician and author, and Priscilla Angier ('bap'. 1760, died before 1838), daughter of Charles Angier of Earls Court; Augustus has invariably yet erroneously been given as his middle name. Educated at home with six younger brothers and sisters, he exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1801, entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1803, and won the gold medal four years later. Two volumes of designs by Busby followed in 1808: 'A Series of Designs for Villas and Country Houses' and 'A Collection of Designs for Modern Embellishments'. Bingham called the latter 'one of the prettiest pattern books produced during the Regency' (Bingham, 32), and they brought the young unknown several commissions, but open competition found him his first significant contract: the Commercial Coffee Rooms, Corn Street, Bristol (1809; exh. RA, 1810). On 3 July 1811, as the building neared completion, he married Louisa Mary Williams, with whom he had two children. 
Attracted by the intellectual rigour of the Greek revival, Busby also possessed a lifelong fascination for everything mechanical; he patented a hydraulic system to save water in canals (1813) and worked up designs for cast-iron roofs, and always described himself as an 'architect and engineer'. Following his apprenticeship to Daniel Alexander, Busby received a commission to create a Gothic castle at Gwrych, Denbighshire (exh. RA, 1814), which he hoped would launch a successful country house practice. In 1816-17, however, the castle was taken from him and one of his iron roofs may have collapsed; the allegation comes from a later hostile source, and cannot be substantiated. Within months he was in America, where, based in New York, he experimented with the propulsion of steamboats and studied prison design. Yet he apparently received only one commission in America: the Bolingbroke Theatre, Petersburg, Virginia (1817-18), and was obliged to return to Britain to a lowly clerkship under Francis Goodwin (1784-1835), whose office was then flush with projects for the commissioners for new churches. Part-way through a shabby scheme to secure additional contracts by circumventing commission regulations the venal pair fell out. Without delay, Busby secured his own commissioners' jobs in Leeds and Oldham (1821; exh. RA, 1822), only to see the plans rejected on the advice of Nash and Smirke, because the iron roofs were seen to be weak and insecure. Again Busby quit London, this time at the invitation of Thomas Read Kemp. 
Kemp provided Busby with high-profile work in Brighton and brokered a partnership with a talented local architect, 
Kemp Town (plans exh. RA, 1825) is an exceptional piece of urban planning: a self-sufficient community of 250 socially graded houses with amenities arranged (had all been built) in three squares, a crescent, and fourteen terraces. The enterprise was grandiose and comparable with Nash's Regent's Park. The span of Lewes Crescent is 200 feet wider than the Royal Crescent, Bath. Architecturally, as well as financially, however, Kemp Town was not a success. The architects were allowed no part in the building, while lengthy delays compromised their design. Mediocre facades failed to discipline the provocative width of Lewes Crescent and unify the whole. Kemp Town underwhelms. On a similar scale, Busby repeated this vision in Brunswick Town, Hove (plans exh. RA, 1825). Designed in 1824, it is said to have been Busby's own brainchild and, in contrast to the lack of organization in Kemp Town, Brunswick surged ahead under Busby as architect, builder, and manager. Until at least the devising of the ground-plan, however, Wilds was still a full partner; he withdrew the very day the building agreement was signed in November 1824. Whereas Brunswick Terrace and the upper half of Brunswick Square surely bear the incisive flourish of Busby's talent, the mannered facades lower down the square and the intemperate group numbered 1-6 Brunswick Terrace are too vulgar to be his. 
Busby was active in local politics, and served on the Hove vestry and the Brunswick commission. In 1831 he became high commissioner of Hove and helped prepare the local petition in favour of the 'Reform Bill'; his Brighton votes in 1832 show him a radical whig. He was also a keen astronomer, and was often seen off the beach in the small paddle-steamer he designed and built. Inventive to the end, he intended the Brunswick houses to have running hot and cold water, and gained Faraday's approval for a steam-driven central heating system (patented 1832). During the later 1820s Busby overstretched himself. Arrested for debt in 1829 and sued in 1832, his nemesis came in February 1833, when he was declared bankrupt, owing $12,644. Through the generosity of friends the debts were soon paid, but Busby was a broken man. He died intestate in his house at 1 Stanhope Place, Hove, on 18 September 1834 and was buried seven days later in St Andrew's churchyard, Hove. 
Meanwhile, Amon Henry Wilds continued in practice in Brighton, with substantial activity in Gravesend, Kent, in the 1830s. The Brighton houses he built for himself reveal flamboyant a la mode tastes: the Gothic House, Western Terrace ('c'.1822-5), was followed by a foray into the oriental style with the Western Pavilion ('c'.1828). The unexecuted design of a pyramid for his extension to St Nicholas's churchyard (1840-41) and the cast-iron Victoria fountain (1845) demonstrate his delight in the picturesque. At the same time, his use of coade stone, his patented method of cleaning chimneys without climbing boys (1843), and his scheme for a floating Brighton breakwater ('c'.1843) point to a progressive, utilitarian mind. Wilds's most important works were his sequences of linked villas: Hanover Crescent (1822-7), Montpelier Crescent (1843-7), and Park Crescent (1849-55) in Brighton, and Park Crescent, Worthing (1825-9; exh. RA, 1830). His recreation was archery, and briefly he involved himself in local government, serving in 1845-8 as a Brighton commissioner. He died on 13 July 1857 at his home, Old Shoreham Cottage, Old Shoreham, Sussex. 
Rapidly forgotten, much of the Brighton work of Wilds and Busby was under threat of demolition from the 1930s. The researches of Anthony Dale, and the pioneering conservation work of the Regency Society he co-founded, helped to restore their reputations locally, and an exhibition at the RIBA in 1991 reintroduced Busby to a wider public, though perhaps at the expense of allowing him to overshadow Amon Henry Wilds. 


@@@@@


doc= 62921


Elliot, Archibald (bap. 1761, d. 1823), architect, was baptized on 30 August 1761 at Ancrum, Roxburghshire, the son of Archibald Elliot, a carrier. Ancrum was a parish reputed for its building craftsmen. With his brother 
As architect, Archibald Elliot advertised in 1804 for contractors to rework and aggrandize Loudoun Castle, Ayrshire (now in ruins), for the earl of Moira, which implies an already substantial reputation. It was quickly followed by the Dunfermline Guildhall and Stobo House, Peeblesshire (both 1805), for Chief Baron Montgomery. The brothers were joint architects for Stobo, but James controlled the contract. Large houses such as Stobo were heavily picturesque, symmetrical, and invariably in castellated clothing in the manner of Inveraray or Monzie Castle, Perthshire. Given that his patrons were generally from the top rank of Scottish society, Archibald could liaise directly with them when he was in London for the season, living at 60 High Street and then New Road, Marylebone, and, later, at Osnaburg Street in St Pancras. The Elliots' London presence helped to prevent their clients from being tempted to commission fashionable, London-based English architects. It was William Atkinson to whom Breadalbane went, however, for advice of how to remedy water penetration in Taymouth's tower. James, meanwhile, set up as architect in Carrubber's Close, Edinburgh. 
Breadalbane also appointed James Elliot, together with Allan Johnston (builder of Stirling Atheneum) to design the villa of Auchmore House, Killin (1806-7) and the delightful octagonal Glenorchy church, Dalmally (1809). In 1807 James produced a simple crow-stepped box as the new kirk in Kirkcaldy, and the following year undertook alterations to Dunkeld House. He had suffered from ill health since 1807, and died, aged forty, in October 1810, just after completing a new lodge at Taymouth. 
Thereafter Archibald Elliot opened an Edinburgh base, at Calton Hill. Between 1809 and 1814 he reworked the unusual V-plan of Minto House, Hawick, into a strangely austere classical composition for Lord Elliot (with whom there may have been a connection), undertook works to Dunkeld Cathedral in 1814 (drawings at Blair Castle), and towered Lindertis House, Forfarshire (1815; dem.). The buildings of the remainder of his career veered in style between a continuation of castellated picturesque and grandly neo-classical. In the former were the prison and governor's house, Calton Hill, Edinburgh (1815-17) -- 'a toy castle devoid of expression and utterly meaningless', sniffed Sir Rowand Anderson (R. R. Anderson, 'The Place of Architecture in the Domain of Art', 1889, 23) -- Newbyth, East Lothian (1816), the north front of Lochnell House, Barcaldine -- a stylistic attribution, although General Campbell of Lochnell still owed him $113 at his death -- the county and town buildings, Paisley, built with William Reid (both of 1818-20), and the diminutive Jedburgh model gaol (1820-23). 
Archibald Elliot's reputation, however, rests upon his neo-classical urban designs, beginning with the momentous Regent bridge, Edinburgh (1815), which he won in competition with James Gillespie and Richard Crichton. It involved vast underbuilding, wholly obscured by the delicate columned screens visible today. While in London he entered the Edinburgh University competition of 1816 unsuccessfully and the same year was appointed for the county buildings, Edinburgh (dem.). Two years later he designed Edinburgh's Waterloo Place (and became a shareholder in the Waterloo Hotel). It is the crisp majesty of these neo-classical buildings, the use of the most up-to-date details, and the grandeur of axial conception of Waterloo Place that secured his reputation. In 1819 he designed a pantheon at the bottom of Edinburgh's Mound for the prospectus for the commissioners of the national monument, whose still outstanding fee of $200 was classed as an irrecoverable debt on his death. In 1819 he prepared a scheme building on the damlands of Rubislaw (land just west of old Aberdeen) and for Rutland Street and Rutland Square, Edinburgh. His Broughton Place Church in Edinburgh of 1821 has an extraordinarily heavy horizontality, whereas The Haining in Selkirk was extended 'c'.1818 with a delightful bow and colonnade. 
In 1816 Elliot designed the ambitiously perpendicular St Paul's and St George's Episcopal Church, Edinburgh, with a superimposed lacy decoration in the manner of a Cambridge college chapel. This form was echoed at his Cockpen church tower in East Lothian (1818). Miscellaneous works include the Grecian mausoleum in Callendar Park, Falkirk (1816), unexecuted plans to restore St Giles, Edinburgh (1817), court rooms in Parliament House (1818), an extension to 35 St Andrew's Square, Edinburgh (1819), houses in Leith (1820), and Blair Atholl church (1823). To judge by the substantial debts owed to him by the duke of Atholl and John Pringle, and lesser sums by the earl of Morton, Admiral Mowbray, Sir James Montgomery, the marquess of Lothian, the earls of Eglinton and Minto, and Robert Fraser (never mind the heritors of Blair Atholl and Inveresk), he was working on a number of projects at his death. In December 1822 the directors of Inverness Academy sought a design from Elliot, expecting him to visit in the next few months, but he died at Calton Hill, Edinburgh, on 16 June 1823, aged sixty-one. He was buried in the new Calton cemetery, his wife returned to London, and the practice was carried on by his son Archibald. 


@@@@@


doc= 62922


James Elliot (bap. 1770, d. 1810), architect, baptized on 29 April 1770 in Ancrum, Archibald redesigned some of the largest and most imposing early nineteenth-century romantic houses in Scotland. It is not known where the brothers trained, but possibly in the expatriate community in London. Archibald was involved (possibly initially at craft level, since until the end of his life he ran a carpenter's shop beside his office in Osnaburg Street, St Pancras) in works to Douglas Castle, Lanarkshire, which James Playfair began in 1791. On Playfair's death in 1794, the year Elliot first exhibited at the Royal Academy, he took over charge of works at Douglas. Probably some time before 1799 he married Sarah Shiells, for their son Archibald, also an architect, was born that year. It is thought that the brothers had some link with George Steuart, another expatriate Scot who retired to the Isle of Man, and in particular with the construction of Steuart's Castle Mona at Douglas (1806). Certainly Steuart's clientele -- the dukes of Atholl and earls of Abercorn -- match with the Elliots', and may have facilitated their acceptance by aristocratic society. Any work they undertook in England has not yet been identified. In 1800 James Elliot was introduced to the second marquess of Breadalbane by Alexander Trotter of Dreghorn, for whom he was reworking and aggrandizing Dreghorn, Midlothian (dem.), as: 'a young man who has considerable talents as a draughtsman... as he is at this time quite disengaged he would be most happy to mount his poney and wait upon you at Taymouth... He is a young man of but very mean appearance but of considerable abilities as a draftsman and designer, and he proposes to join in business with a brother whom he has got in London and who has had a regular education there, and much experience with the best masters. Their good character, attention and ability has induced me to mention them (Breadalbane Muniments, NA Scot.)' and he forwarded a plan by James for Taymouth Castle, Perthshire, then being rebuilt by John Paterson. By 1805 James was appointed architect for 'the finishing' of Taymouth by the marquess (a man given to detailed design and contract interference), which appears, in essence, to symbolize the cadet house of the Campbells seeking to outclass the chief's Inveraray Castle (the residence of the dukes of Argyll). Archibald was paid a separate fee for advice whenever consulted, provided highly ornate doors for the marquess' Park Lane house, and prepared and shipped up wainscoting for Taymouth. The characteristic central tower the Elliots erected at Taymouth was used by James to denote nobility. 


@@@@@


doc= 62923


Harrison, Henry (c.1785-c.1865), architect, was born in London, the son of John Harrison, a builder and surveyor. His brother George was also a builder-developer, and Henry seems to have engaged in the business on his own account. Harrison averred that he had been 'brought up as a builder and architect', and his family were indeed at the heart of the London building trade ('Report from the Select Committee on the Office of Works and Public Buildings', 1828). Between 1803 and 1809 Harrison exhibited a number of views at the Royal Academy, including a 'design for a temple' in 1806. His first documented work as an architect seems to have been Richmond Terrace, Whitehall, which his brother George built 1822-5. Harrison in fact adapted this from a design by Thomas Chawner, supplying the working drawings himself. Its severe Greek revival style is of the mainstream for its date, though Harrison's use of yellow stock brick and Bath stone, instead of stucco, imparts a warmer quality to the building. The General Lying-in Hospital on York Road, Lambeth (1828), is in the same idiom, severe and well designed, with a portico in antis of giant Ionic columns. 
In the 1820s Harrison established a wealthy clientele, almost all of them from the landed aristocracy or gentry, building or altering numerous town houses in Mayfair or St James's, most of these in the Italianate style then favoured by the Grosvenor estate. His clients included the second Viscount Hampden at 61 Green Street (1824), the earl of Kinnoull at 51 Grosvenor Street (1826), and the earl of Carysfort at 46 Upper Grosvenor Street (1827). Harrison's prosperity at the time, and his connections with Mayfair, were alike expressed in the construction of his own house, 31 Park Street, Grosvenor Square, built 1825-6, and occupied by Harrison 1828-39. The most eminent of all these jobs was the reconstruction, 'c'.1821, of Bath House, 82 Piccadilly (dem. 1963), for Alexander Baring, first Lord Ashburton. Harrison's work in Mayfair has suffered from very heavy losses; notable survivals are the Greek revival rear elevation of 61 Green Street (1824 and later) and three Italianate houses at 10-11 Upper Grosvenor Street and 62 Park Street (1843-4). 
In the 1820s Harrison managed to establish valuable connections in Cornwall, where he carried out a good deal of work over the period 1825-34. These probably began with work for the second earl of St Germans at Port Eliot. Sir John Soane had remodelled the house 1804-6; Harrison added a new entrance front and adjacent service wing, in the plainest Tudor gothic, as severe and symmetrical as any of his Grecian buildings, in 1825-9. This was followed by work at Heligan, where Harrison made alterations for J. H. Tremayne (1830); at Carclew, near Mylor, where he made additions for Sir Charles Lemon ('c'.1830; burnt), and at Enys, near Mylor, where he built a severely plain granite house for J. S. Enys (1833). The new house at Enys was exceptional; most of Harrison's commissions consisted in refurbishment or alteration, and relatively few involved designing from scratch. Nevertheless, he had already demonstrated at Port Eliot that he could design in the gothic style, and used this again in almshouses (1829-33) at Saffron Walden, Essex, for the local magnate, Lord Braybrooke of Audley End, and in alterations to a house called Pendarves in Cornwall (1832; dem. 1955). 
From around 1823 Harrison was surveyor to the Holland estate in west London, and thus had an important role in the development of this area. He produced the general layout plans, and also took a number of plots as builder-developer on Kensington High Street. The most important element of these was the ambitious St Mary Abbot's Terrace (1825-30; dem. 'c'.1960), a series of pairs of four-storey houses, with a grand pedimented centre, similar to that at the General Lying-in Hospital. Harrison's activities as a builder-developer ended in bankruptcy in 1840. There are fewer known works from after 1840, though one of his finest and most prestigious buildings, the new Guards' Club at 70 Pall Mall, in a fashionable Italianate style, dated from 1848-9; this, too, has been demolished. Harrison does not seem to have recovered fully from the bankruptcy, for in 1856, around the age of seventy, he applied (unsuccessfully) for the post of architect to the Metropolitan Board of Works. In 1864 he was resident in Bedford Square; thereafter his name disappears from the London Post Office directories. He does not seem to have received an obituary in the architectural press. 


@@@@@


doc= 62924


Hurst, William (bap. 1787, d. 1844), architect, was baptized on 2 May 1787 in Doncaster, the son of William Hurst, keeper of The Salutation inn, and his wife, Mary. He was articled to William Lindley ('c'.1739-1818), who had been a long-serving assistant of John Carr of York before establishing his own practice in Doncaster. In 1811 Hurst exhibited two drawings at the Royal Academy. From 'c'.1810 Lindley was in partnership with John Woodhead (died 'c'.1838) and, on the former's death in 1818, the practice became Woodhead and Hurst. On 27 April 1820 Hurst married Sophia Elizabeth Pearson ('bap'. 1796, died 1822), who died when their only child, Mary Sophia, was born. Two years later, on 16 November 1824, he married Charlotte Jane Innes (died 1856). Hurst took a great interest in civic affairs, served on numerous committees, was mayor of Doncaster for the year 1828-9, and became a magistrate for the borough. He acquired several houses and pieces of land in the town and, after his father's death (probably in 1828), became owner of The Salutation inn. 
The Woodhead and Hurst practice was based at South Parade, Doncaster, and around the 1820s designed various improvements for the town, such as a library (1819-21), substantial additions to the racecourse buildings (1823-4), a gasworks (1826-7), betting rooms in High Street (1826), and a new gaol (1829). The latter is known to have been by Hurst (then mayor), as was the imposing Christ Church (1827-9), which shows Hurst's early assurance in the handling of Gothic (and is the only survivor of the buildings listed above). The practice was not confined to the Doncaster area and carried out work elsewhere in Yorkshire and in Derbyshire. The partners could turn their hands to a variety of styles. About 1820 they remodelled Firbeck Hall, West Riding, Yorkshire, with Jacobethan detailing, for Henry Gally Knight and built the church in Firbeck, using a mixture of late Norman and Early English. For Colonel James Wilson, also about 1820, they built the castellated mansion of Sneaton Castle 11/2 miles west of Whitby, North Riding, Yorkshire, complete with a curtain wall separating the grounds from the road. Sneaton church, also for Wilson, is a mixture of Perpendicular and Early English. Churches formed an important element in the work of the practice, with examples in Sheffield (St George's, 1821-5), Pateley Bridge (1825-7), and Stannington (1828) in the West Riding, and New Brampton (1830-31) and Ridgeway (1838-40) in Derbyshire. In 1824 Woodhead and Hurst planned the new town of Goole, Yorkshire, for the Aire and Calder Navigation Company, whose first docks there opened in 1826. The first houses were occupied in 1826, the year the docks and canal were officially opened, and building continued until the early 1840s. 
In 1836 Hurst was elected a fellow of the Institute of British Architects. The following year he proposed an ambitious scheme to redevelop the area of Doncaster market with new buildings and roads but this remained unexecuted. On the death of Woodhead about 1838, Hurst took on a new partner, William Lambie Moffatt (1808-1882), a Scot and a pupil of William Burn. The practice continued to undertake a mixture of secular and ecclesiastical commissions, most of them away from Doncaster. Hurst and Moffatt designed the Greek revival New Independent Chapel in East Parade, Leeds (1839-41), Gothic churches at Grosmont (North Riding, 1840), Woodsetts and Ardsley (both West Riding, 1841), and a Romanesque church at Rock Ferry (Cheshire, 1841-2). In 1842-4 they were responsible for the Clipstone archway in the drive at Welbeck Abbey for the duke of Portland. There were also various public buildings in Leeds and Wakefield, but these were mainly the work of Moffatt. Their grandest work, for the new town of Goole, is the church of St John (1843-8), which Pevsner found 'remarkably large and stately' (Pevsner, 223). Although its Perpendicular detail was passing out of fashion, the generous scale and the fine proportions of the tall crossing tower and spire might have impressed the choosy critics of the day. But long before the church was complete, Hurst died of 'disorder of the heart' at his home at 6 Regent Terrace, South Parade, Doncaster, on 8 December 1844, aged fifty-seven. He was buried five days later in Doncaster. 


@@@@@


doc= 62925


Boyle, William (1853-1923), playwright, was born on 4 April 1853, at Dromiskin, co. Louth; his father may have been Christian Boyle, a farmer. He was educated at St Mary's College, Dundalk, subsequently joining the civil service in London, and acting as an excise officer until 1914. 'A Kish of Brogues' (1899) was a collection of tales and poems based on the country life of his childhood. On 25 April 1905 the Abbey Theatre in Dublin staged his first play, 'The Building Fund', which dealt with rural life in a realistic and unromanticized manner. Many critics of the Abbey policy at the time, which was faulted for being either too poetic or for making a travesty of Irish character (as was said of J. M. Synge's 'The Playboy of the Western World'), welcomed Boyle's familiar style and accuracy. Boyle was, in fact, drawing upon an older set of conventions than that which the Abbey (founded 1904) was seeking to form for itself; his models were those of Victorian melodrama and farce in their Dublin manifestations: stereotypical characters, stock situations, humorous brogue, broad comedy, and sentiment. Yeats thought his work vulgar and yet recognized its commercial appeal, a consideration of some importance for a theatre heavily dependent on the goodwill of its patron, the English heiress, Annie Horniman. Nevertheless Yeats 'nearly had a fit' when Boyle told him he wrote poetry, but relaxed when he was reassured that it was merely comic verse (Hogan and O'Neill, 59). 
Boyle returned to the Abbey with 'The Eloquent Dempsey' (20 January 1906) and repeated his popular success with this study of small-town politics and patriotism. It was followed by 'The Mineral Workers' (20 October 1906), dealing with the conflict between modernization and tradition in the countryside, as a young industrialist seeks to set up a smelting plant in an area exclusively given over to farming, and after much opposition, some of it politically motivated, who triumphs. Once again, Boyle found more favour with the popular reviewers than he did with Yeats and the Abbey directorate. When the controversy blew up over Synge's 'Playboy' (January 1907) Boyle withdrew his three plays from the Abbey repertory in protest against the staging of a play which, in his view, calumniated Irish character. Lady Gregory, who distrusted Boyle as much as Yeats did, commented on his departure: 'that's a rotten branch gone' (Hogan and others, 183). 
Boyle returned, however, with another play of rural realism, 'Family Failing' (28 March 1912), which was less well received. After retiring from his post in London he returned to his native place to build a house on the spot where the family one had been. He became a magistrate, which effectively estranged him from the very people he had hoped to become closer to on his return. Out of sympathy with the Easter rising of 1916, he went back to England where he died at his home, 16 Ardbeg Road, Dulwich, London, on 6 March 1923, survived by his wife, Maud. A nationalist who distrusted Yeats and the Irish literary movement, and a realist who yet could not tolerate the Irish country people being (as he put it) 'misrepresented', his emotional tensions were the source of his dramatic energy and his irascibility. 


@@@@@


doc= 62926


Corkery, Daniel (1878-1964), Irish nationalist and writer, was born at 1 Gardiner's Hill, Cork city on 14 February 1878, the son of William Corkery (died 1883), a carpenter whose family had lived in Cork city for several generations, and Mary Barron (died 1923), the daughter of a Waterford sea captain, who kept a small shop after her husband's death. Corkery suffered from a bone deformity which left one leg shorter than the other. Corkery was educated by the Presentation Brothers at their South Monastery School, won a King's scholarship, and trained as a pupil teacher; he became a full-time teacher in 1905 and underwent a year's training at St Patrick's College, Drumcondra, in 1906-7. 
Corkery developed an interest in the Gaelic League in 1901 under the influence of D. P. Moran's weekly paper 'The Leader'. (He had previously been only vaguely aware of the existence of an Irish language.) Between 1901 and 1910 Corkery wrote regularly for 'The Leader' under the pen-name Lee, with the aim of improving Irish artistic standards and giving Cork a civic culture drawing on the everyday life of the city and the Gaelic traditions of the surrounding countryside. He also taught primary classes in St Francis' national school in the city centre (1905-13) and St Patrick's national school on the North Side (1913-18), both in slum areas. He complained about teaching overcrowded classes of poor children in an examination-oriented system which gave little time for encouraging individual creativity, and tried to encourage team sports, gave drawing lessons, and formed a school choir. His pupils included the future sculptor Seamus Murphy and Michael O'Donovan (Frank O'Connor). 
In 1908 Corkery became the leading figure of the Cork Dramatic Society, an amateur group intended as a Cork counterpart to the Abbey. Between 1909 and 1913 it produced eighteen original plays (including five by Corkery). Despite its eventual demise it marked the beginning of Cork's Little Theatre tradition. At this time Corkery was primarily a cultural nationalist who saw separatism as impracticable; he argued the subject with Terence MacSwiney, whom he had met through the Gaelic League. Although they admired each other's dedication and intellectual ambitions, they also disagreed about the possibility of Irish culture expressing itself through English as well as Irish (MacSwiney thought this impossible) and the plays of J. M. Synge, which Corkery publicly defended. 
Corkery had begun to publish short stories in magazines; in 1916 some were collected as 'A Munster Twilight'. This and the publication of his novel 'The Threshold of Quiet' the following year established his literary reputation. At the same time he was moving towards Sinn Fein; this led to his being refused the headmastership of his school in 1918, and he resigned to become a travelling instructor with the co. Cork technical instruction committee. In 1918 he was offered a Sinn Fein parliamentary candidacy. 
Corkery was deeply affected by the sense of cultural and national revival of the War of Independence period (1919-21), in particular by the death on hunger strike of MacSwiney as lord mayor of Cork which attracted worldwide attention. His response to this period is expressed in his second short-story collection, 'The Hounds of Banba' (1920), and 'The Labour Leader' (1920), a play loosely based on the activities of James Larkin, whom he greatly admired. He also wrote at this time 'Three Plays' (1920; a play about the Easter Rising, which was excluded by military censors and published in 1942) and a book of verses, 'Ui bhreasail' (1921). He hoped to found a school of local writers incorporating some of his younger associates, notably O'Connor and Sean O Faolain. 
Corkery opposed the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1922 as a betrayal of the ideals of the rising and supported the defeated republicans in the ensuing civil war. In 1924 he published his best-known book, 'The Hidden Ireland'. This study of the Gaelic poetry of eighteenth-century Munster has been criticized for romanticizing its subject and ignoring the extent to which the poets it described spoke for a class of strong farmers with aristocratic pretensions rather than the Irish-speaking people as a whole, but its evocation of cultural loss, and its insistence on the impossibility of understanding Ireland without knowledge of Gaelic culture, made it an inspiration to many later Irish artists and intellectuals. 
The appearance of 'The Hidden Ireland' strengthened Corkery's literary reputation (further increased by his third and strongest short-story collection, 'The Stormy Hills' (1929)) and opened a breach with his disciples O'Connor and O Faolain, who disliked his calls for the subordination of individuality to an idealized national tradition. This was exacerbated by Corkery's attacks on Sean O'Casey and Liam O'Flaherty for what he saw as vulgarity and cynical hostility to the idealism of the War of Independence period, and by his publication of 'Synge and Anglo-Irish Literature' (1931), a partial retraction of his earlier praise of Synge, which although often narrow and incoherent, raises important questions about Irish literature in English. Its insistence on the link between Catholicism and Irishness was particularly controversial. (Corkery idealized the culture of medieval Catholic Europe, but his own religious beliefs are the subject of some controversy. Some friends believed he was a secret agnostic; he certainly had a strong anti-clerical streak, usually confined to private conversation.) By 1931 Corkery had decided it was impossible to have a distinctive Irish culture in English, since it would be distorted by the dominance of the English literary market. This led him to devalue most Irish literature in English, including his own (though he published one further short-story collection, 'Earth out of Earth' (1939)). He later published some small works outlining his views on the revival of the Irish language, and a play in Irish, 'An doras dunta'. 
Corkery was appointed professor of English in University College, Cork, in 1931 after a bitter contest with O Faolain, and held the position until 1947. He was awarded a DLitt in 1948, served in the Irish Senate, 1951-4, and sat on the Irish Arts Council, 1952-6. He continued to produce journalism, and was recognized as a significant influence by many Irish artists and a major presence in the intellectual life of Cork (where he continued to encourage local talent). The Irish-language poet Sean O Riordain, who had an ambivalent relationship with him, said that he towered over the intellectual life of Cork like a mountain. He painted extensively in watercolours all his life, and attained a minor reputation for the handling of colour in his late work, most of which is in private ownership. 
Corkery never married; his unmarried sister Mary kept house for him. Towards the end of their lives, as they grew increasingly frail (Corkery became almost blind some time before his death) they spent the winter months with their niece in Passage West, co. Cork, where Corkery died suddenly of a heart attack on 31 December 1964. He was buried in January 1965 at St Joseph's cemetery, Cork city. 
Daniel Corkery's critical views remain controversial. Some critics see him as a cultural commissar embodying the narrowness of de Valera's Ireland, others praise him as a pioneering post-colonial critic. Through his role as developer of others' talents and popularizer of Gaelic culture, as well as his own limited but distinctive literary output, he secured a lasting place in Irish cultural history. 


@@@@@


doc= 62927


Magee, William Kirkpatrick (1868-1961), writer, was born on 16 January 1868 at 41 Eccles Street in north Dublin, the second of three sons and two daughters of the Revd Hamilton Magee (1824-1902) and his wife, Emily Clare, 'nee' Kirkpatrick (died 1870). His father, a native of Belfast, after preaching to the famine-stricken peasants in Connaught, was sent by the synod of the Presbyterian church in 1852 to superintend the 'Irish mission' for the conversion of Catholics in Dublin. His wife was the daughter of William Kirkpatrick, the senior Presbyterian minister in the city, so W. K. Magee was descended from protestant clergymen on both sides of the family. 
At school in Harcourt Street, Magee sat next to W. B. Yeats, cribbed Euclid from him, and was able to compensate the poet by affording him a glance of his own correct translation of Demosthenes. Yeats introduced his schoolfellows to a book that was to lead Magee and his brothers to a half-way house between their father's evangelical protestantism and outright agnosticism: A. P. Sinnett's 'Esoteric Buddhism': 'I read it, and I believed!' Magee recalled (J. Eglinton, 'Irish Literary Portraits', 1935, 43). Thereafter he became a disciple, if a wayward one, of 'AE' (George Russell) in the Dublin Theosophical Society. In 1887 Magee entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he won the vice-chancellor's prizes for verse in 1889 and 1890, and for prose in 1892 and 1893, prizes judged by Professor Edward Dowden (1843-1913). Magee spent some time picking up German in Gottingen, with his theosophist friend and fellow poet Charles Weekes. After some years of unemployment, and employment as a schoolteacher in Drogheda, Magee was helped to a post at the National Library of Ireland by Dowden, one of its trustees. Magee's early ambition to be a poet soon faltered in the face of Yeats's success. Their friend Charles Weekes set up a press to bring out the first books of AE and John Eglinton, an Anglophile's pen-name taken from the name of the street on which Magee's parents lived in Kingstown. Magee's 'Two Essays on the Remnant' (1894) readjusted his father's notions in the light of Wordsworth, Emerson, and Dowden: the 'Chosen People' or remnant, became not Jews or Ulster Presbyterians, but young Magee's 'brethren in unemployment', the last genteel Romantics who would withdraw to the suburban woods rather than accept the professions on offer in the city, with its Darwinian struggle for survival ('Two Essays', 4). 
In autumn 1898 Magee parted company with Yeats and Irish cultural nationalism in a newspaper controversy over the Irish Literary Theatre (republished as 'Ideals in Ireland' in 1901). Ancient Irish myths, Irish folklore, or literature in the Irish language could never for Magee be the proper basis for a great literature, but they could turn out to be a dangerous basis for a political separatist movement, one that would extirpate the conditions that gave life to such as him. In 'Pebbles from a Brook' (1901), he began to project as the ideal 'the Modern Irishman', by which he meant the university-educated, agnostic-protestant, Anglo-Irish citizen of Europe and a sublimated British empire. Nations he hoped would soon pass away, and leave only individuals behind. 
In February 1900 Magee met George Moore, who described him as: 'a thin small man with dark red hair growing stiffly over a small skull... the face somewhat shrivelled and thickly freckled. A gnarled, solitary life, I said, lived out in all the discomforts inherent in a bachelor's lodging, a sort of lonely thorn-tree. (Moore, 'Ave', 124)' (The bachelor lodging was an old coach inn at 5 Cadogan Road where the Tolka flows into Dublin Bay.) At this time, his work at the National Library brought him into contact with the others who would distinguish Irish literature in the period -- Oliver St John Gogarty, John M. Synge, and James Joyce. The publication of 'Ulysses' (especially chapter nine) twenty years later was sharply to recall to the librarian conversations he had had with the young University College graduate about the Shakespeare-Bacon controversy; Magee was then surprised at 'the half-kindly and painstaking exactness' with which Joyce 'mitigates his cruelty' about 'John sturdy Eglinton' 'ugling Eglinton' 'Steadfast John' and ''Eglintonus Chronolologos'' (Joyce, 'Ulysses', 193-5). In early 1904 Magee had rejected for publication a first draft of 'Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man' in 'Dana', a monthly he co-edited with the socialist Fred Ryan from 1904 to 1905. 
The stated aim of 'Dana' was to open up for discussion ethnic and political issues that had been buried under 'an artificial and sentimental unity' by the cultural nationalists. Moore hoped 'Dana' would be simply 'an anti-clerical journal'; 'Fleet Street atheism' was Yeats's dismissal; 'an amusing disguise of the proselytizing spirit', Joyce suspected ('Letters... to Ed. Dujardin', 49; J. Eglinton, 'Irish Literary Portraits', 1935, 135). Magee published a selection of his own contributions to 'Dana' in 'Bards and Saints' (1906), including 'The de-Davisation of Irish literature', an argument that the writer should not aim consciously to express, much less exalt, nationality (J. Eglinton, 'Bards and Saints', 1906, 39-43). He also needled the Gaelic League by saying, truly enough, 'The 'Irish' language is indeed a title of courtesy: the ancient language of the Celt is no longer the language of Irish nationality. And in fact it never was' (ibid., 13). The real problem with Gaelic literature, he judged (suavely begging the question), was that the Catholic Irish had rejected Bishop Bedell's 1685 translation of the 'Bible' into Gaelic, and thus missed out on that fructifying effect the King James version had had on English literature. Instead, the Irish had to put up with eighteenth-century bards, idlers and bullies for the most part, who wrote only self-serving songs of praise to their hosts. 
On his holidays from the National Library, Magee often travelled to Wales and the Lake District, or to Paris, Germany, and Greece (he was fluent in French and German, and well trained in Greek and Latin). In 1913 Magee was considered in place of, or in tandem with W. B. Yeats, for the chair of Edward Dowden at Trinity College; the post went, however, to a more appropriate and ultimately unimportant scholar. Always retentive of his own ideas, Magee became still more costive from 1910 to 1921, although he published 'Anglo-Irish Essays' in 1917, to remind 'Irish Ireland' that the protestant descendant of the English settlers 'is still there', though now as a tolerant, melancholy, sceptical 'good European' (J. Eglinton, 'Anglo-Irish Essays', 1917, 3-4). Irish resistance to conscription during the First World War he found 'extraordinary and disconcerting' but, looking over the wreckage of O'Connell Street after the Easter 1916 rising, he was forced to acknowledge that the 'old Catholic population' now held the title deeds to Irish nationality (Eglinton, 'An Englishman Talks It Out', 3-4). From 1919 to 1920, living a tram journey outside wartorn Dublin at 1 Lakelands Park, Terenure, he continued to make a protestant case for inclusive and European conceptions of citizenship in the 'Irish Statesman' (edited by George Russell). 
In March 1921 Magee began to contribute the 'Dublin letter' to the American 'Dial' (T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound wrote the London and Paris letters). Along with Ernest Boyd's 'Ireland's Literary Renaissance' (1916), the 'Dial' letters of Magee (1921-9) make up the first serious critical assessment of twentieth-century Irish writers. His commentary on the 'Irish Renascence' insisted on the necessity of biographical and ethnic knowledge to an understanding of literature. Indeed, for Magee in contradistinction to the formalism of Eliot, 'the vitality of a literary work is in proportion to the interest it excites in the author' ('Dial', August 1926, 91). To gain time to write, and weary of answering inquiries from library patrons, Magee took advantage of the Anglo-Irish treaty (1921) by which the British offered early pensions to those civil servants not wishing to continue employment under the free state. On 31 January 1921 he 'stepped into freedom 'with a sigh'' (J. Eglinton, 'Confidential, or, Take It or Leave It', 1951, 6). 
Magee's departure from the library may also have had something to do with a great change he had made in his personal life. After her conversion to protestantism, he had married an assistant at the library, Marie Louise O'Leary, on 6 April 1920. The two stayed on into the civil war until 'the ancient archives of Dublin' in the Four Courts were blown up in June 1922 -- an event he compared with the publication of 'Ulysses' as 'conflagrations of pious illusions of provincial and Catholic Ireland' ('Dial', August 1923, 180; October 1923, 435). The couple moved in late 1923 to a house by the sea in Prestatyn, north Wales, where they had a boy, their only child; and south to Bournemouth in 1929, where Magee remained until his death, brooding over the literary evidence of the turbulence that drove him from Ireland. 
In the 1920s, Magee continued an extensive correspondence with George Moore who from 1911 sought advice from Magee on the proofs of all his books. The much admired correctness of Moore's late style owes a good deal to the former Trinity College prizeman. In recompense, Moore found literary projects for Magee: a two-volume edition of Landor, a translation of Homer into the style of Moore's 'Brook Kerith', both unpublished. A few of Moore's proposals, however, did pay off, such as Magee's translation of 'George Moore's Letters to Ed. Dujardin' (1929) and the selection of 'Dial' essays published as 'Irish Literary Portraits' (1935). Magee habitually professed a reluctance to write or, having written, to publish. Moore pictured Magee as the years went by sinking deeper and deeper into his armchair, while he rearranged and dusted his favourite ideas, 'conscious of their familiar presences' but undesirous of writing them out, and out of politeness hiding his contempt for the literary activities of his friends (Moore, 'Vale', 177). 
In 1929 Magee shied away from Moore's pleas to become his literary executor, much less his biographer; he also turned down an offer to ghost-write a biography of Synge with Synge's uncle. Magee did, however, accept the commission from Macmillan for 'A Memoir of AE: George William Russell' (1937), less a documentary biography than a personal estimate of his old friend, whose poetry, politics, and mystical philosophy, Magee confessed, awoke in him more doubt than admiration. Indeed, the value of Magee as a critic is not just in his vividly etched memories of men he knew, or in the insight he offers into the sectarian energies of Irish literature, but in an intelligence heightened by 'ressentiment'. One who confessed himself a failure in the preface to his privately issued booklet of poems (1951) uses world standards to assess the successes of his friends: Yeats did not write out of his 'best self', and was 'more eidolon than man'; the general impression left by Moore's late fiction was 'one of monotony'; Joyce's 'Portrait' was 'pompous and self-conscious' in style -- 'he is a man of one book', 'Ulysses'; and the whole work of the 'so-called Irish Literary Renaissance' is 'non-canonical' (that is, it should not be admitted to the British canon) (J. Eglinton, 'Irish Literary Portraits', 46, 97, 142, 149; J. Eglinton, 'Dial', May 1921, 332). 
Yet Magee could be profound as well as severe in his appreciation, and he never allowed a badly constructed sentence to leave his desk. Even without a coherent body of convictions, or a talent for invention, Magee wrote periodical essays that count as literature. After 1950 his hand became very shaky as a result of an accident in which he was knocked down by a bicycle, fracturing his wrist. Notwithstanding, up to 1956, the ageing exile continued to send off from Bournemouth his occasional 5-guinea articles to the 'Dublin Magazine', all composed in his 'gaunt, gnarled, masculine prose', and many of them sympathetic second thoughts about the work of friends that he had more strictly judged on earlier occasions (G. Moore, 'An Irish essayist', 'The Observer', 4 Nov 1917, 3). The conscience, in the case of Magee, was a highly developed faculty. In 1952 he was awarded an honorary degree by Trinity College. He died of cancer on 9 May 1961 at 36 St Catherine's Road, Southbourne, Bournemouth, a writer of the Irish literary revival who lived to tell its story. 


@@@@@


doc= 62929


Hopper, Eleanor Jane (1871-1906), writer, was born on 2 January 1871, at 8 Radnor Place, St Leonard, Devon, the daughter of Captain Harman Baillie Hopper (died 1871), an Irish officer retired from the 31st Bengal native infantry, and his second wife, Caroline Augusta, 'nee' Francis, who was Welsh. Eight months later, Hopper died. Caroline Hopper went to live with her unmarried sister Sarah in Sussex Villas, Kensington. Nora was educated at Cumberland House, South Kensington, and lived with her mother at 36 Royal Crescent, Notting Hill, until her marriage. 
Nora Hopper began to write poems at fifteen and studied folklore at the British Museum with the encouragement of Dr Richard Garnett and A. P. Graves, spending three years reading Icelandic sagas. She began to publish poems and stories in such periodicals as 'The Sketch', 'Black and White', 'Household Words', 'Longman's', 'Macmillan's', and 'Chambers'' magazines, 'Sylvia's Journal', the 'Yellow Book', the 'National Observer', and 'The Lyceum'. 

'Ballads in Prose' (1894), Hopper's first book, alternated verse and prose in a 'conte-fable' structure ostensibly based on Irish fairy-lore, but in fact 'spun out of the moonshine of my own brain... Irish tradition has given me nothing' she confessed (letter to Richard Garnett, 28 Jan 1895, Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, University of Texas at Austin). That the Irishness of her work had been achieved by one who had never been there was 'a remarkable instance of temperament and interest independent and almost defiant of environment'. Home rule politics were 'meaningless in her ears, and she only becomes a partisan at the sound of ''98,' or at the names of Emmett or Sarsfield' ('The Bookman', Sept 1895). 

'Ballads in Prose' contained naive plagiaries of both Yeats and Katharine Tynan. Annoying as Yeats found the plagiary of his announced title 'The Wind among the Reeds', incorporated into Joseph Walter West's cover design, he reassured Hopper. He was 'haunted' by four 'strange wayward' stories which, in turn, influenced his 'The Secret Rose' (1897), including 'The gifts of Aodh and Una', which inspired his plans for a Celtic mystical order. (Hopper played a minor role in its visionary experiments.) 
Unequal and immature as Hopper's work was, Yeats praised 'Ballads in Prose' in two lists of 'Best Irish Books' in 1895 as 'an absolute creation, an enchanting tender little book full of style and wild melancholy', leading the Irish newspapers to suspect rightly that he was booming her prematurely ('Collected Letters', 440-43, 453n., 470n.). He included her work in 'A Book of Irish Poetry' (1900) and wrote the headnote for her poems in Brooke and Rolleston's 'A Treasury of Irish Poetry in the English Tongue' (1900). 
Hopper's drawback was her lack of precise knowledge of Ireland. After her death Yeats thought that Irish Fairyland had spoiled her work (always excepting 'The King of Ireland's Son', which she had herself spoiled by revision, as he told her in 1898). Yet Thomas MacDonagh considered Hopper (with Lionel Johnson) as one of only few writers who were born and who lived their whole lives out of Ireland, and yet were truly Irish. Nora Hopper's work appeared in a range of publications: 'Folk-Lore', 'The Celt', 'The Evergreen', the 'Cornish Magazine', 'Daily Express' (Dublin), and 'New Ireland Review'. 
Collections of Hopper's poems such as 'Under Quicken Boughs' (1896), 'Songs of the Morning' (1900), and 'Aquamarines' (1902) followed, as did 'The Bell and the Arrow: an English Love Story' (1905). She read at 'original nights' of the Irish Literary Society, London (1898-1901), with 'an exquisitely modulated voice, but her appearance was disappointing... rather common-looking, short and squat' (MacManus, 5). Ford Madox Hueffer (later Ford) recalled her 'quality of having existed for ever, not of having aged. Above all, it was the quality of seeming aloof... not absent-mindedness, but rather abstraction'. During a train journey, she 'was not in the carriage at all. She was, precisely, in another world, and just before we entered London, with a sudden air of 'pulling herself together,' she announced that she had a poem in her head' (Chesson, biographical note, xi-xii). 
On 5 March 1901 at Brentford register office Hopper married (Wilfrid) Hugh Chesson (1870-1953), literary journalist and publisher's reader for T. Fisher Unwin, whom she had known since 1894. Their first child, Ann Caroline Spry, was born on 6 August 1902, followed by a son, Dermot, on 11 July 1904. They lived at Childwall, 337 Sandycombe Road, North Sheen, Surrey, Hugh Chesson's home for the next fifty years. The house belonged to Nora Chesson: she had investments of $60 a year and literary earnings of $40 a year from prolific hack work as reviewer, novelist, anthologist, versifier for children's books illustrated by Louis Wain, and paraphraser and reteller of nursery tales for Raphael Tuck & Sons. She also wrote for the 'Girls' Own Paper'. 'No poet of her time contributed more to the Press', Chesson recalled, but she had become so well known as Nora Hopper that 'the press refused her the privilege of being equally well known' as Nora Chesson (Chesson, biographical note, viii). Nora Chesson wrote the libretto for O'Brien Butler's three-act opera 'Muirgheis' ('The sea-swan'), produced in Dublin in 1903 and later translated into Irish by Torna (Tadhg O Donnchadha), and a Celtic play 'The dark prince' (rejected for the Abbey in 1910). 
On 27 June 1905 Nora Chesson applied to the Royal Literary Fund after her husband's 'complete nervous breakdown'. As her case was appraised, H. C. Beeching invoked comparisons with Christina Rossetti. In July 1905, when the first instalment ($150) of the $250 grant came, she took the family to Crockham Hill, Edenbridge, and thence to the Waverley Hotel, Lyme Regis. On 13 September 1905 she met Irish writers in Dublin for the first time, and by 9 November 1905 the Chessons were at 6 Mark Street, Portrush, co. Antrim, where her husband made 'steady progress'. Back in London, a second daughter, Dagmar, was born on 21 March 1906. On 14 April 1906 Nora Chesson died at her home in North Sheen. The death certificate lists 'old valvular disease of the heart' and 'parturition 24 days', but E. V. Lucas told the Royal Literary Fund that she died of puerperal fever. A friend, Margaret Harwood, arranged for Dermot Chesson to be adopted by her sister and brother-in-law, Alice and Graham Spence. Thereafter, Dermot had virtually no contact with his father or sisters. 
Hugh Chesson's interest on the $2284 15's'. 8died left by Nora Chesson came to $74 per annum, and there were debts. Ford Madox Hueffer proposed to pay Chesson a small sum for preparing an edition of his wife's poems and to return the proceeds to a fund for the daughters, who lacked a breadwinner and a responsible parent. Five fascicles of her poems under the overall title 'Selected Poems' (1906) followed. The first, 'Dirge for Aoine and other Poems', contained a biographical note by Chesson and an 'Introductory' by Hueffer. By 4 July 1906 the appeal had raised $206 9's'. 6died G. K. Chesterton, Justin McCarthy, and Richard Garnett supported a further bid to the Royal Literary Fund. $250 was added, and the fund became the Chesson Trust ($505 3's'. 7died). 
Hugh Chesson 'slowly recovered from a most terrible struggle with inner forces whispering of self destruction... [feeling] not far removed from the precipice into which any mental strain might again precipitate him', as Garnett testified. His spiritualism enabled him to 'look upon his wife's death not so much as loss but as separation and that alleviated by the possibilities of continued intercourse' (Royal Literary Fund archive, London). In his introduction to her novel 'Father Felix's Chronicles' (1907) Chesson claimed that his occult beliefs arose in part from his wife's visionary experiences, which involved time travel and the gift of tongues. More darkly, he hinted that she 'coveted the pain of them whom she loved' (p. 8). On 20 June 1923 Hugh Chesson married a Miss Daisy Green. By then his daughter Ann had committed suicide shortly after her marriage to Gilson MacCormack, and the discovery of his infidelity. Chesson had at least two more children, and died on 16 February 1953, aged eighty-two. Dagmar Chesson was given administration of the residue of Nora Hopper's estate at his death. She never married, but lived a bohemian life in Chepstow Villas, Bayswater, and died in 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 62930


Russell, Matthew (1834-1912), poet and editor, was born in Ballybot, near Newry, co. Down, Ireland, the sixth and youngest child of Arthur Russell (1785-1845), a master in the merchant marine, and his wife, Margaret Hamill, 'nee' Mullan (died in or after 1845). On his marriage to the widowed Margaret Hamill, Arthur Russell purchased a brewery in Newry. The Russells, who traced their descent from an Anglo-Norman ancestor who arrived in Ireland with Strongbow, were comfortable but not rich, and when Arthur Russell fell ill in the late 1830s, he leased the brewery and moved his family to Seafield House, a small farm at Killowen on Carlingford Lough, where the children were educated by a governess. Both parents were enthusiastic supporters of Daniel O'Connell, and both, particularly Mrs Russell, were strict Catholics; the children had to read from Alban Butler's 'The Lives of the Saints' every day. Matthew Russell's uncle Charles William Russell, who became president of St Patrick's College, Maynooth, in 1857, was instrumental in converting Newman to Catholicism, as well as helping Cardinal Wiseman to edit the 'Dublin Review'. Arthur Russell died in May 1845 and the family returned to Newry, although they continued to spend summers at Killowen. Russell's three surviving sisters all became nuns in the order of Mercy, while his brother Charles Arthur Russell (1832-1900), a barrister, rose to be lord chief justice of England in 1894. 
Matthew Russell was educated at Castleknock College and St Patrick's College, Maynooth; he entered the Society of Jesus in 1857 and in 1864 was ordained priest. Until 1873 he did school and church work in Limerick, but in that year he moved to Dublin and founded (and edited until his death) the 'Irish Monthly', subtitled the 'Irish Catholic'. Its first editorial announced that it was 'devoted to the service of the Faith and the Fatherland after which it is named', and that it would be Catholic and national in tone, with the emphasis on Catholic. Although theologically orientated in its early years, Russell began to hope that it might be 'the forerunner of a Catholic literature in Ireland', which he saw as 'the essential want of this country', since over the previous century 'Genius and Intelligence' had been 'hostile to, or estranged from Catholicity', and he gradually opened the magazine to literature and even to non-Catholic writers such as Oscar Wilde and W. B. Yeats. As well as serializing stories by living writers such as Rosa Mulholland and publishing poems by Katharine Tynan, Rose Kavanagh, Dora Sigerson, and Ellen O'Leary, it also printed correspondence, work, and recollections of earlier Irish writers and politicians, including Charles Kickham, Gerald Griffin, and Thomas Davis. 
In addition to editing the 'Irish Monthly', Russell published numerous volumes of religious and secular poems, a series of very popular devotional works, a biography of his three sisters and of the Blessed John Eudes, and an edition of Rose Kavanagh's poetry. He was also in demand as a lecturer and particularly concerned himself with speaking in support of the temperance movement. From 1877 to 1886 he served as a priest at St Francis Xavier's Church in Gardner Street, Dublin, and from 1886 to 1903 taught at University College, St Stephen's Green, before returning to his sacerdotal duties in Gardner Street until his death. W. B. Yeats described Russell in January 1889 as 'a Catholic priest of a most courteous, kindly, and liberal kind' ('Collected Letters'), and these qualities are evident both in his editorial policy and in his attitude towards his contributors and parishioners. Russell performed many quiet acts of charity and was particularly understanding when Katharine Tynan, one of his most assiduous contributors and correspondents, married a protestant in 1893. He died at 20 Mountjoy Square, Dublin, on 12 September 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 62931


Larminie, William (1849-1900), poet and folklorist, was born on 1 August 1849 at Castlebar, co. Mayo, the fourth child and second surviving son of William Larminie (1796-1856) and his wife, Bridget 
(Beda; 1812-1903)
, third daughter of Colonel John Jackson of Ballina, co. Mayo. The Larminies were a family of Huguenot descent, settled in co. Mayo since 1721. On his father's death Larminie's maternal uncle, the Revd William Jackson, later archdeacon of Killala, helped the family to move to Wicklow and provided his nephews with a tutor. Larminie later attended Kingstown School and Trinity College, Dublin, from which he graduated in 1871 with a moderatorship in classics. 
Larminie joined the India Office in 1873 as a junior clerk in the store department, and his mother moved to England, keeping house for him in Anerley, Upper Norwood. However, Larminie, who had been writing poetry since adolescence, decided to retire from the civil service in 1887, and devote himself to folklore collecting and to literature. His mother, described by William Kirkpatrick Magee (John Eglinton) as 'brilliant and picturesque' and by Douglas Hyde as 'a terrible old woman' (Eglinton, 14), was angered by this decision, for which she never forgave him; however, she returned with her son to Bray, co. Wicklow, where they lived in some comfort at 2 Prince of Wales Terrace, despite Larminie's not having qualified for a pension. Larminie, who had learned Irish, had begun to collect oral folk tales in the west of Ireland in 1884 with the help of a friend, James Lecky. Larminie translated and edited a selection, 'West Irish Folk-Tales and Romances', in 1893; he had already allowed Douglas Hyde to use two of his orally collected tales in 'Leabhar sgeulaighteachta' (1889). W. B. Yeats reviewed Larminie's collection very favourably, describing it as having 'the extravagance and tumultuous movement as of waves in a storm' (Yeats, 'Uncollected Prose', 1.328), and one of Larminie's folk tales also provided the source for part of Yeats's poem 'The Secret Rose' (1896). Hyde, who greatly admired Larminie's pioneering work and his respect for the specificity of the oral folk tale, described him as 'the most under-rated man in Ireland' (Eglinton, 13). 
In 1889 Larminie published his first collection of poetry, 'Glanlua and other Poems', a volume which, like Yeats's 'The Wanderings of Oisin and Other Poems' (1889), sought to continue the tradition of Sir Samuel Ferguson's 'Congal' (1872) and to realize Irish mythological subjects in English verse. In 1892 a second volume, 'Fand and other Poems', also containing much verse based on Irish mythological and legendary material, followed. Larminie also attempted to introduce prosodic forms (such as assonance) from Irish poetry into English poetry, without conspicuous success, despite the concern with prosody demonstrated in his essay 'The development of English metre' (1894). 
From the mid-1890s onwards, Larminie's principal concern was with his projected translation of John Scottus Eriugena's 'De divisione naturae'. In 1897 he published an article on Eriugena, 'our Irish Plato', claiming him as the forerunner of German idealist philosophy -- and therefore modern philosophy (W. Larminie, 'Joannes Scotus Erigena', 'Contemporary Review', April 1897, 558). In December 1897 he began to publish his translation of Eriugena in 'The Internationalist', the journal of the Dublin Theosophical Society, of which he was a member. By 1898 he was well enough known to be recommended by Yeats to T. P. Gill as a potential contributor to the Dublin 'Daily Express' in its brief nationalist phase. Yeats, who thought Larminie a 'bad but wildly eccentric poet', had been very impressed by Larminie's two articles on Norse and Irish mythology, published in the 'Contemporary Review' in October and November 1895, which Yeats thought showed Larminie to be 'a profound Celtic folk lorist' and 'more philosophical than Hyde' ('Collected Letters of W. B. Yeats', 2.307, 268). Larminie did write for the 'Express' during the orchestrated cultural nationalist controversy of autumn 1898 and his contribution was reprinted by George Russell in 'Literary Ideals in Ireland' (1899) as 'Legends as materials for literature'. 
William Kirkpatrick Magee (John Eglinton), a fellow theosophist, who was probably Larminie's closest friend, described him as 'a tall handsome man, something of the Parnell type', and reported Beda Larminie's pride in her son's good looks (Eglinton, 12). John Eglinton, who spent most Sundays walking with Larminie in the Wicklow hills, feared that his return to Ireland (or rather to Bray) had been unwise and that the initial excitement and sense of released creativity, on his return to 'the enchanted strand' ('The Finding of Hy Brasil', 'Glanlua', 72), had diminished; however, John Eglinton, who confessed to having never read his friend's verse, was vehemently opposed to the use of Irish mythological materials in modern writing. He recalled Larminie as: 'a somewhat forlorn figure in Bray, where I have heard him characterized briefly as a 'queer fish': he was in fact a fairly normal, thoughtful, utterly unpretentious human being... the 'return of the native' was in his case as complete a failure as in Hardy's novel, and shortly before his last illness he confessed to me that time hung very heavily with him. (Eglinton, 15)' Larminie was coming into closer contact with the leading figures of the Irish literary revival at the close of his life and was a vice-president of the National Literary Society of Ireland from 1896 to 1899. He died of pneumonia following influenza at his home, 2 Prince of Wales Terrace, in Bray, co. Wicklow, on 19 January 1900, and was buried in Enniskerry churchyard, there being no protestant cemetery at Bray. He had retained the respect of contemporaries such as George Russell and Yeats. Russell wrote a eulogistic account of his verse for Brooke and Rolleston's 'A Treasury of Irish Poetry in the English Tongue' (1900) expressing his bewilderment that Larminie's 'many and great gifts as an imaginative poet, should have been so coldly received' (p. 476). Yeats, in 1919, arranged for his wife to inspect the manuscript of Larminie's translation of Eriugena deposited in the National Library of Ireland, a manuscript which John O'Meara called 'a pathetic testimony to his great interest and our indifference' (O'Meara, 90). 


@@@@@


doc= 62932


Murray, Thomas Cornelius (1873-1959), playwright, was born on 17 January 1873 at his parents' bar and grocery store in Pound Lane, Macroom, co. Cork, the seventh of the eleven children of Cornelius Murray and his wife, Honora, 'nee' Kelleher. After being educated at the national school in Macroom, as well as at the Latin School there, in 1891 he was awarded a queen's scholarship to train for two years at St Patrick's Training College, Drumcondra. He then taught in several schools near Cork city, including St Mary's, Carrigtwohill, where he met his future wife, Christina Moylan (died 1944), the daughter of the principal. In 1900 he was appointed principal of the national school at Rathduff, near Blarney, where he earned a local reputation for being exacting and sarcastic. Murray and Christina married on 31 July 1903 at Holy Trinity, Cork, and subsequently had one son and four daughters. The performance and publication of his third play, 'Maurice Harte' (1912), with its theme of a seminarian who loses his faith, caused Murray to fall foul of Father Laurence Murphy, his parish priest and school manager in Rathduff. A period of strained relations ensued; it was with some relief that Murray accepted appointment as the headmaster of the Inchicore Model Schools in Dublin in 1915, where he remained until his retirement in 1932, living first in Kilmainham and, after 1931, in Ballsbridge. 
Murray's literary career, which he sustained alongside his professional duties as a teacher, began with essays on educational issues which he published in Father Tom Finlay's 'New Ireland Review' and with poems and stories for the 'Cork Examiner', the 'Irish Weekly', 'The Leader', and 'Shan Van Vocht'. It was not until 1909 that he attempted a play, 'The Wheel of Fortune', at the request of his friend the novelist, playwright, and critic Daniel Corkery, who had recently founded the Cork Little Theatre with Terence MacSwiney and Tom O'Gorman. Its modest success led him to a further attempt, 'Birthright', which was staged by the Abbey Theatre (27 October 1910), a play that remained a staple of the company's repertoire over the next two decades and won Murray an international reputation when it was taken on tour in 1911 to America, where it was seen and admired by Eugene O'Neill. 'Birthright' established what were to be the consistent strengths of Murray's drama: a tightly constructed narrative which moves with an implacable force towards a tragic outcome that is the product of character not of chance; a serious engagement with the hardships of peasant life (Murray's father had moved to Macroom to avoid a life in impoverished tenant farming); an ability to create a believable verisimilitude by showing how country lives are affected by slow, quiet, daily routines and the larger pattern of demands occasioned by seasonal change; a refusal to sit in judgment on the characters he constructs; and a remarkable skill in interweaving the archetypal (here the story of Cain and Abel) into the seemingly mundane. Most impressive is Murray's way with dialogue, which binds these other qualities into an organic whole: at its best this is remarkable for the careful pacing, as if the characters dimly apprehend some imminent catastrophe that is about to overtake them but are searching for the right words to elicit certain confirmation of their intuitions of disaster or to deflect its impact. There is therefore a restless tension surging and building behind a seemingly placid surface to the conversation and the eventual eruption is the more profound for the preceding suppression. Murray by this means invests a confident, spare realism with a degree of poetry. 

'Maurice Harte', which was staged by the Abbey company in 1910, confirmed a further excellence: Murray's skill in writing what were consummately ensemble plays where the dramatic interest was shared between a range of subtly differentiated characters (here a mother of intransigent determination, a son torn between honouring her ambitions for him and his own integrity, a kindly father confused by the resulting emotional upheaval and fearful of intruding, a younger son on whom falls the demand to find a wealthy wife whose dowry must offset the debts incurred in securing his brother's education, and a parish priest whose own faith is challenged by his inability to offer more than platitudes and meaningless pity). Murray, on whom an early influence was a reading of Racine's 'Athalie', was rare among his contemporaries in writing about the place of Catholicism in his characters' experience and in doing so without resorting to mawkish piety or rhetorical insistence. 
Three one-act plays followed: 'Sovereign Love' (1913) was a redrafting of 'The Wheel of Fortune', sharpening its satirical and farcical attack on arranged marriages; 'The Briery Gap' (1917), a fierce if miniature tragedy, remained unperformed because of its compassionate treatment of the theme of illegitimate pregnancy; and 'Spring' (1918) explores the penny-pinching tensions and petty cruelties involved in caring for the elderly in an indigent household. All were perfectly structured dramas catering for a long-standing Abbey tradition of triple bills of plays by different writers. 'The Serf' (1920) and 'Aftermath' (1922) were considered sound, even if they did not appreciably advance Murray's creativity; but 'Autumn Fire' (1924) was immediately judged a masterpiece for the manner in which within a credible peasant situation Murray deftly investigated a tragic situation that parallels the myth of Theseus, Phaedra, and Hippolytus, though those classical and archetypal roots are never openly admitted. (If Racine's 'Phedre' was an influence, it was wholly subsumed in Murray's invention.) By a significant coincidence O'Neill staged that same year 'Desire under the Elms', which explores precisely the same emotional and mythical territory. Murray's triumph with 'Autumn Fire' marked a watershed in his career: while two plays, the one-act 'The Pipe in the Fields' (1927) and 'Michaelmas Eve' (1932), stay in the genre of peasant drama, they noticeably lack the depth of implication that enriches his earlier work and the latter seems unsure of its direction both in terms of plot and theme (several possible endings are extant). 'The Blind Wolf' (1928) showed Murray attempting to move away from his usual subject matter by dramatizing a Hungarian tale about greed and murder but the result was considered rightly as overly melodramatic and sensational. With 'A Flutter of Wings' (1930) Murray embarked on a series of plays of middle-class life, sometimes rural, sometimes urban: 'A Stag at Bay' (1934), 'A Spot in the Sun' (1938), 'Illumination' (1939), and 'The Green Branch' (1943). None was successful. What a reviewer for the 'Evening Mail' (11 Nov 1930) observed of one of them is true of all the last plays, except for 'The Pipe in the Fields' where realism extends into the visionary and transcendent: Murray 'does not seem to be quite sure of himself, quite sure of what his characters are to say, and the whole point of the play is by no means clear'. Once his characters become educated and articulate, the dialogue seems conventionally theatrical -- stilted, thin, and brittle -- rather than natural, flowing, and idiomatic. 
Murray tends to be classified in histories of the Irish theatre as one of the 'Cork realists', but his early plays survived beyond their initial productions, which the work of Padraic Colum or R. J. Ray, with whom he is regularly grouped, did not; and, unlike theirs, his drama survived to influence a later generation of Abbey dramatists (George Shiels and Brinsley McNamara). One Cork connection proved an enduring benefit: Lennox Robinson, whose 'The Lesson of his Life' shared the bill with 'The Wheel of Fortune' in 1909. Robinson directed his own play and Murray observed him in rehearsal with astonishment and admiration. Subsequently Robinson directed all Murray's plays at the Abbey until 1928, their shared Cork background ensuring that they were properly responsive to the nuances in each other's artistry. 
Honours came late to Murray: 'Birthright' won the bronze medal for drama at the Olympic Festival in Paris (1924); in 1949 the National University awarded him an honorary DLitt. In retirement he began a projected work of autobiographical fiction but only the first volume, 'Spring Horizon' (1937), was finished; interestingly it demonstrated how much a childhood spent within the family store furnished him with the material (plots and dialogue) for his early plays. Murray at this time took on a number of official roles to further the interests of writers: he was a member for some years of the film censorship appeal board, vice-president of the Irish Academy of Letters, treasurer and later president of the Irish Playwrights' Association, and director of the Authors' Guild of Ireland. His major plays were translated into German, Spanish, Welsh, Breton, Irish, Japanese, and Korean and continued to be revived by amateur groups or in radio broadcasts into his final years. After the death of his wife in 1944, Murray became increasingly reclusive; he admitted to a depressive mindset that deepened after the death of his son, Niall, from cancer in 1951 and the departure for Australia a year later of his daughter Pauline, a cloistered nun, to establish a convent for the Poor Clares in Sydney. Murray died at his home, 11 Sandymount Avenue, Ballsbridge, Dublin, aged eighty-six, of viral pneumonia on 7 March 1959 and was buried at the Star of the Sea Church, Sandymount. 


@@@@@


doc= 62933


Ryan, Frederick Michael (1873-1913), playwright and journalist, was born at 8 Brunswick Place, Dublin, on 12 October 1873, the son of John Ryan, a bookkeeper, from whom he inherited his radicalism, and Catherine Davis. On leaving school he became a clerk in the civil service in London, where he frequented Fabian Society lectures and performances of Ibsen's plays. He resigned his position after a year because of ill health and joined the Dublin accountants Craig, Gardner & Co., where the stage-struck Frank Fay was a fellow clerk. 
On 6 March 1896 Ryan was elected a member of the Celtic Society, founded by Arthur Griffith and William Rooney to stimulate debate on Irish affairs, and a forerunner of the Sinn Fein party. Later that year he also joined James Connolly's Irish Socialist Republican Party (ISRP), although he did not remain an active member of either society for long; the factionalism in the ISRP frustrated him, and he found himself growing out of sympathy with Griffith's bourgeois nationalism and racialism. 
Ryan's friendship with Frank and William Fay led him to join their amateur Ormonde Dramatic Society in 1901, and in April 1902 he took a small part in their production of plays by George Russell and W. B. Yeats which led to the establishment of the Irish National Theatre Society. Ryan was elected secretary of the new society on 8 August, a position he held with great efficiency until 1904, when he became treasurer. He also turned his hand to playwriting, and his Ibsenite drama, 'The Laying of the Foundations', on the theme of municipal corruption, was produced on 12 October 1902, revived early in December, and performed on the Irish National Theatre Society's first visit to London on 2 May 1903. 
Being secretary to the theatre did nothing to stem Ryan's constant flow of letters and articles to the Dublin and London press, usually under his pen-name Irial or Finian. His contributions to Griffith's 'United Irishman' criticized the paper's refusal to see the Irish struggle from an international perspective, and in 1904 he vigorously attacked Griffith's antisemitism. Growing weary of the orthodoxy and superficiality of Irish journals, he and John Eglinton launched 'Dana', 'A Magazine of Independent Thought' in 1904, to promote the interchange of progressive ideas. The work of many leading writers of the Irish literary revival appeared in this monthly, including a poem by James Joyce -- although the editors rejected an early version of 'A Portrait of the Artist'. The magazine folded after less than a year, but Ryan had contributed enough articles in this time to make up his only book, 'Criticism and Courage' (1906), and, deprived of his own journal, he continued to publish in 'The Nationist' and the 'New Age'. 
Meanwhile Yeats was transforming the Irish National Theatre Society into a professional company, with power vested in three directors. Although opposed to this suppression of democracy, Ryan helped redraft the constitution, but voted against its adoption at the general meeting and subsequently resigned from the society. He helped other seceders set up a rival Theatre of Ireland in 1906 but, tired of theatrical quarrels, soon withdrew altogether from the Irish dramatic movement. His attempts with like-minded colleagues to establish a 'national democratic committee' in 1906 were abandoned with the sudden death of Michael Davitt, the proposed chairman, and as an alternative Ryan set up the Dublin Philosophic Society, which arranged a series of public lectures on rationalist themes. Early in 1907 he started the 'National Democrat' with Francis Sheehy-Skeffington to carry on the committee's work in another form; this penny monthly ran for seven issues and its demise left Ryan much out of pocket. 
With the failure of this venture Ryan left Dublin for Cairo to take up the assistant editorship of the anti-imperialist 'Egyptian Standard', but returned to Ireland in April 1909 to write against vested commercial and clerical interests in the 'Irish Nation'. In June 1909 he helped William O'Brien reorganize the Socialist Party of Ireland of which he subsequently became secretary. He also served as secretary to the committee of the Young Ireland branch of the United Irish League. When James Connolly returned permanently to Ireland in July 1910, he immediately called on Ryan, who later found him supplementary employment which subsidized his trade union work. Early in 1911 Ryan returned to London to edit Wilfrid Scawen Blunt's monthly review 'Egypt', but on 3 April 1913, while in Sussex to discuss the future of the periodical with Blunt, he was taken ill with appendicitis. He died on 7 April at New Buildings Place, Shipley Road, Billingshurst, after an emergency operation. Although a confirmed agnostic, he was buried in the Crawley monastery churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 62934


Todhunter, John (1839-1916), playwright and poet, was born on 30 December 1839 at 19 Sir John Rogerson's Quay, Dublin, the eldest of the five surviving children of Thomas Harvey Todhunter (1799-1884), timber merchant, and his wife, Hannah Harvey (1806-1857), a cousin, and daughter of Joseph Massey Harvey, also a timber merchant, both members of the Society of Friends. He was educated in Quaker schools in Dublin, and later in Mountmellick, Queen's county, and York. Apprenticed to importing firms from the age of sixteen, he left that employ to study medicine at Trinity College, Dublin, taking his BA in 1867, MB and MCh in 1868, and MD in 1871, and studying in Vienna and Paris. He was assistant physician at Cork Street Fever Hospital in Dublin until 1874, but in 1870 also succeeded his friend and confidant Edward Dowden as professor of English literature at Alexandra College for Women. In 1872 he published an aesthetic treatise, 'A Theory of the Beautiful', to favourable comment in British and German intellectual circles. He contributed to the 'Cornhill Magazine' under Thackeray's editorship. 
Todhunter's marriage to Katharine Gresley Ball (died 1871), daughter of Robert Ball, on 18 May 1870, ended with her death the following year in childbirth. Their son, Arthur, survived only until 1874. After experiencing this dual blow Todhunter resigned from the Society of Friends, ceased to practise medicine, and moved to London to pursue the artistic life. He was described by friends during this period as a large imposing man of sallow complexion and melancholic disposition. Although determined at first to become a painter like his college friend John Butler Yeats, Todhunter found himself gradually in London's Irish literary orbit, helping to found the Irish Literary Society and becoming a member of the Gaelic League, but also joining the Rhymers' Club, the Sette of Odd Volumes, and the Order of the Golden Dawn, along with his friend's son, William Butler Yeats, then an emerging poet. 
On 12 July 1879, Todhunter married Dora Louisa, 'nee' Digby (1853?-1935). They had three children, Edith (1880-1946), John Reginald Arthur (1885-1968), and Margery Dorothea (1887-1968). 
Todhunter's earliest literary success came with the publication of 'The Banshee and other Poems' in 1888, which contains his most anthologized poem, 'Aghadoe', known to generations of Irish schoolchildren. It was, however, in the theatre that he would make his lasting literary contribution, initially with the staging of his verse play, 'Helena in Troas', in Hengler's Circus in 1886. Herbert Beerbohm Tree played a leading role and the newly wed Constance Wilde a minor one. Edward Godwin provided its elaborately authenticated stage design. Todhunter's most popular play, 'A Sicilian Idyll', a verse pastoral, was first performed in 1890 in the theatre in the model suburb and artists' colony at Bedford Park, Chiswick, where he lived. 
In 1893 Todhunter's next theatrical success abandoned verse in an effort to keep pace with changing popular taste. 'The Black Cat', an Ibsenite prose play, was praised as avant-garde by William Archer. In the following year a fellow adept in the Order of the Golden Dawn, Florence Farr Emery, an actress, undertook with Todhunter and Annie Horniman to mount a season at the Avenue Theatre. Todhunter's 'A Comedy of Sighs' (1894) was a play similarly constructed to 'The Black Cat', but with a contrived happy ending which avoided the earlier play's Hedda-esque suicide. Yeats's 'Land of Heart's Desire' served as the curtain-raiser (in the event a disastrous choice, and unable to be heard by the audience). However, it was Todhunter's, not Yeats's, play that was replaced on the bill, by Shaw's 'Arms and the Man', a development that helped to launch that playwright's career. 'A Comedy of Sighs' has an additional place in theatrical history in that the poster that advertised the production was an early commission for Aubrey Beardsley. It defied the convention that theatre posters be mostly typographic information. Beardsley's poster for the Yeats-Todhunter double bill, in vivid teal blue and lime green (considered a ghastly combination of colours at the time), featured a 'wanton' pre-Raphaelite beauty, and drew as much attention as the plays. 
After the failure of 'A Comedy of Sighs' Todhunter, who had enjoyed nearly two decades of literary success, seems to have withdrawn from public life. His considerable means provided a comfortable income. He is likely to have suffered from senility in his later years, and died after a long illness on 25 October 1916 at his home, Orchardcroft, 3 The Orchard, Bedford Park, Chiswick. He was cremated at Golders Green. 
Todhunter experimented with many genres, writing a biography of Patrick Sarsfield and translating Goethe's 'Faust' and Heine's 'Book of Songs'. He provided the libretto for an oratorio, 'The Legend of Stauffenberg', which was composed by J. C. Culwick and performed to acclaim in Dublin in 1890, and another (unpublished and unperformed) for a children's opera 'Pat in Fairyland'. 
John Todhunter's literary achievement is, at its highest level, worthy. Most of his writing does not sustain that degree of attainment, but is a valuable record of the artistic taste of his era. His close connection with the Yeats family and minor role in the Irish literary revival earn him a secure place in literary history, as does the significance of his aesthetic, literary, and social affiliations in 'fin de siecle' London. 


@@@@@


doc= 62935


O Criomhthain, Tomas Dhonaill (bap. 1855, d. 1937), writer, was born on the Great Blasket Island, co. Kerry, Ireland, and baptized there on 29 April 1855, the youngest of the eight children of Donal Mac Criomhthain ('bap'. 1808) and Cait Ni She, who were married on 26 January 1837. The Great Blasket Island (An Blascaod Mor) -- a narrow island about 5 kilometres long and 1 kilometre wide -- is the largest of the seven islands in the Blasket archipelago and lies off the south-west coast of Ireland in co. Kerry. At the east of the island and closest to the mainland lie the remains of the island village where Tomas O Criomhthain was born and lived out his life. The Irish-speaking island community never exceeded 200 inhabitants, and the community depended for its livelihood on the sea. 
Tomas O Criomhthain attended the Roman Catholic national primary school on Great Blasket Island from 1864, when the school was first opened, to some time in 1876, when he may have served as a 'monitor' for a short period. The standard of teaching was generally poor and the entire curriculum was in English, a language which was not generally understood by the island community. Although the islanders were predominantly Roman Catholic, a number of them were adherents to the Church of Ireland and there had been a Church of Ireland missionary school on the island between 1839 and 1863 where the language of instruction was Irish. With the revival of the language movement within Ireland and the Anglo-Irish literary movement, for a time the Blasket Islands became a centre for those wishing to study the Irish language. John Millington Synge came to the Great Blasket in 1905, and his account of island life, 'In West Kerry' (1907), generated further interest. The first prominent scholar visitor was Carl Marstrander of the University of Oslo, who came to the island in 1907 and befriended Tomas O Criomhthain, who in turn became his mentor in Irish and island lore. Marstrander recommended the island to Robin Flower of the British Museum, who was completing a catalogue of the museum's extensive collection of medieval manuscripts in the Irish language. Flower first came to the island in 1910 and remained a constant visitor until his death. He became a close friend of O Criomhthain and worked with him in his collection of island material, much of which was narrative recording of Tomas O Criomhthain's own accounts of island life. Flower's book on the island culture, 'The Western Island' (1944), opened the Great Blasket to a wider audience when the material was given as a series of lectures at the Lowell Institute in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1935. 
Notwithstanding the scholars' attention which O Criomhthain enjoyed, he had set himself to write and began in the first instance from 1908 with accounts of island life for Irish language periodicals. How a fisherman from the Blasket Islands became literate in his own language at a time when reading and writing in the Irish language were not widespread remains intriguing. Certainly the scholar visitors brought Irish language literacy skills to the island, but Tomas O Criomhthain was able to read the visitors' texts with them. O Criomhthain in his own accounts tells of his learning to read and write Irish from schoolchildren on the mainland when he was storm-bound as an adult. The origins of his literacy in Irish are more likely to derive from the legacy of the protestant missionary school on the island. It was not, however, the visiting scholars who played the vital role in persuading Tomas O Criomhthain to write his insider's view of island life. Brian O Ceallaigh from Killarney (also known as Bryan Albert Kelly) came to the island in 1917 and established a supportive and intellectual friendship with O Criomhthain; the two discussed literature and writers in other cultures. O Ceallaigh introduced Tomas O Criomhthain to the works of Maksim Gorky, Pierre Loti, and Boccaccio in translation. O Ceallaigh persuaded O Criomhthain to write his island journal 'Allagar na hInise' and autobiography 'An tOileanach'; these texts were written on sheaves of foolscap provided by O Ceallaigh and were sent to him by post. O Ceallaigh tried to have the texts published but finally deposited them with an Irish language scholar, author, and publisher, Padraig O Siochfhradha, who edited them for publication. O Criomhthain's two books 'Allagar na hInise' (1928) (published in translation by T. Enright as 'Island Cross Talk', 1986) and 'An tOileanach' (1929) (published in translation by R. Flower as 'The Islandman', 1937) mark a unique chapter in the canon of Irish literature. As both were written from within the island culture, O Criomhthain's voyage was into uncharted seas; there were no exemplars for his work in the then emerging and tentative literary movement in modern Irish. 

'Allagar na hInise' ('Island Cross Talk') is essentially a book of sketches written by O Criomhthain between 1918 and 1923. The book is constructed for the most part into sequences, which contain conversations and events which engaged the writer. What emerges is a powerful series of images constructed around his neighbours on the island and his mobilization of their characters and speech habits. Taken together the portraiture is a very vivid series of notes on the community which hang together well as a portfolio of everyday island life. 'An tOileanach' ('The Islandman'), written between 1923 and 1928, is an autobiography ranging from the nineteenth-century childhood memories of Tomas O Criomhthain to the second decade of the twentieth century. The time frame is frequently set from events which had an impact on the island community. What he achieves in his camera sweep is an insider's view made accessible to the outsider: an inscape. The style is taut, but within its compass the writer copes with personal matters such as his first love for a girl from the neighbouring island of Inis Icileain, and of his hard life after marriage to another woman, Maire Ni Chathain ('bap'. 1859), on 5 February 1878. His account of island life is perhaps best summarized by his stated and rather stern aim in writing the book in the ultimate chapter: 'I have written minutely of much that we did, for it was my wish that somewhere there should be a memorial of it all, and I have done my best to set down the character of the people around me so that some record of us might live after us, for the like of us will never be again. (trans. R. Flower)' Tomas O Criomhthain died on 7 March 1937 on the Great Blasket Island, and was buried on the mainland at Dun Chaoin in the churchyard of Baile An Teampaill facing across to the Blasket Islands. His descendants carried on his literary legacy. He was followed as a writer by his son Sean, his grandson Padraig Ua Maoileoin ('b'. 1913), and his great-nephew Muiris O Suilleabhain (1904-1950). 


@@@@@


doc= 62936


Whitbread, James William (1847-1916), theatre manager and playwright, was born in Portsmouth on 20 October 1847. Little is known of his early years or parentage, except that the family moved to Scarborough during Whitbread's infancy. His obituary in 'Era' (21 June 1916) refers to his touring as a young actor 'with the companies of Joseph Eldred' throughout the north of England and to Dublin, and he appears never to have risen above the rank of respected supporting actor. He married his wife, Rachel, on 8 October 1872. According to the obituary in the 'Scarborough Evening News' (12 June 1916) Whitbread became manager for Joseph Elaria, then for Wybert Reeve first at the Royal Edinburgh Theatre and from July 1876 at the Theatre Royal, Scarborough. The first record of his involvement with the Queen's Theatre, Dublin, relates to his producing 'Dick Wittington and his Immortal Thomas (the Cat)', a Christmas pantomime, in 1882. Whitbread, as lessee, took on the management of that theatre in August 1884 and according to an interview published in the 'Irish Times' (1 April 1893) 'by main energy, patience, wisdom and expenditure of money' transformed a lacklustre, impoverished institution into a decent, popular venue. 
From 1886 and the staging of his melodrama 'Shoulder to Shoulder' Whitbread composed regularly for the Queen's, notably 'The Nationalist' (1891), 'The Irishman' (1892), and 'The Spectre of the Past, or, Homeless in the Streets of Dublin' (1893). As the titles suggest, these early works owed a considerable debt of influence to Boucicault, but Whitbread found an original voice with 'Lord Edward Fitzgerald' in 1894. While respecting melodramatic conventions, he foregrounded, as his subject allowed, a distinctly revolutionary politics. A series of patriotic, nationalist dramas followed, beginning with Whitbread's celebrated 'Theobald Wolfe Tone' (1898), designed to coincide with the celebrations commemorating the uprisings of 1798. Other dramas focusing on the heroes and martyrs of that period included: 'The Ulster Hero' (1902) about Henry Joy McCracken; 'The Insurgent Chief' (1902) about Michael Dwyer; and 'The Sham Squire' (1903) about Francis Higgins, who plotted Lord Edward Fitzgerald's destruction. Whitbread's detractors, including W. B. Yeats, often assumed that the playwright merely deployed popular myth about these historical figures but there is evidence that Whitbread did read sources carefully. The typescript of 'Lord Edward Fitzgerald' submitted for licensing by the lord chamberlain (most of Whitbread's plays toured to English provincial theatres) carries a note on the title-page admitting that a crucial influence had been W. J. Fitzpatrick's 'Secret Service under Pitt' (1892). Aspects of the play support the claim. With 'Sarsfield, or, The Siege of Limerick' (1905) Whitbread turned to an earlier period of political unrest surrounding the collapse of the Stuart (Jacobite) cause in 1691, but again the play courted fervent nationalist sympathies in its audiences. The same is true of a number of less overtly political dramas that Whitbread penned: 'Shadowed', 'Rory O'More', 'The Irish Dragoon', 'The French Hussar', 'The Soldier Priest'. 
Joseph Holloway, an inveterate Dublin theatregoer, wrote in his diary that a performance of 'Theobald Wolfe Tone' pleased him for its difference from conventional melodramatic fare, notably 'the entire absence of buffoonery in the comic interludes'. There was no doubting Whitbread's seriousness of purpose in attempting to devise a drama that was 'a cut above the usual sensational play'. The patriotic, revolutionary subject matter gave a freshness and energy to rhetorical displays in the dialogue, more conventionally deployed to expose an evil consciousness or to define romantic ardour. The plays include romantic interest but the greater love in the heroes is for Ireland and independence, to which private feeling must give way. Whitbread's agenda is both educational (to teach audiences about their inherited past, free of colonial English interpretation), and inspirational (to instil in them nationalist commitment). Even the climactic episodes have to be interpreted in the light of this intent and not as sensational. 'Theobald Wolfe Tone', for example, ends with stirring military bands accompanying the embarkation of the French troops at Brest rather than with the collapse of Tone's enterprise with his subsequent arrest in Loch Swilly. The dominant mood is exhilarating, not defeatist. Similarly where a play ends with the revolutionary hero's execution at the hands of the English forces, that death is portrayed through a series of tableaux, where the emphasis is not on the grimly morbid but on the disciplined stoicism which is to be interpreted as martyrdom for the nationalist cause. The irony in all this is that Whitbread was English. What motivated his ideological stance can only be conjectured. The 'Era' obituary supposes that Whitbread 'took up the writing of Irish plays because they were the goods to suit his customers'. But such a mercenary interpretation would most likely lead to shoddy hack work, whereas the plays are carefully finished, expertly paced and structured. Moreover they attracted many fine contemporary Irish performers, such as Tyrone Power and Frank Breen, to work consistently at the Queen's, which run-of-the-mill drama would not have done. As well as being performed successfully for Irish communities throughout Britain, America, and Australia, Whitbread's plays were maintained in the Queen's repertory significantly until 1923 and the creating of the Irish Free State, when their ideological strategies were rendered redundant by political circumstance. Their subsequent neglect is unfortunate, since Whitbread's work afforded a necessary development in the evolution of the Irish historical play, manipulating the devices of melodrama to show the past as shaped by conflicting political ideologies. The plays had an admitted influence on Sean O'Casey. 
An illustrated 'Address of Appreciation' from the company at the Queen's Theatre, Dublin, commemorating James and Rachel Whitbread's silver wedding anniversary carries cameo portraits of the manager, his wife, and two daughters (Florence and Isabel Louise). His image depicts a broad forehead, wavy hair, well-set eyes, and a flourishing moustache, suggesting a man who carried a handsome, youthful presence into middle age. Whitbread left the Queen's Theatre in 1907 when his lease expired, retiring to Scarborough, where he died of cirrhotic Bright's disease and a cerebral haemorrhage at his home at 38 Londesborough Road on 9 June 1916. He was buried three days later at All Saints' Church. He was survived by his wife; his younger daughter died on the day of the funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 62938


O Suilleabhain, Amhlaoibh (1783-1838), poet and diarist, was born in Killarney, Kerry, Ireland, on 1 May 1783, the son of Donncha O Suilleabhain 
(Denis O'Sullivan; 1738-1808)
, a hedge schoolmaster, and his wife, Maire Ni Bhuachalla 
(Mary Buckley; 1748-1827)
, described in 1821 as a 'hugster' (small shopkeeper). He had at least three brothers and two sisters, and the family left Killarney in 1789, moving first to Waterford and then in 1790 to Rogerstown, a crossroads outside Callan, co. Kilkenny, where his father erected a schoolhouse in a single day. They finally settled in Callan where Amhlaoibh spent the rest of his life. 
Amhlaoibh O Suilleabhain owes his place in literature to 'Cin Lae Amhlaoibh ui Shuilleabhain', his Gaelic diary or 'cin lae' (it was edited by Michael McGrath and published in 1936-7 in four volumes). Use of Gaelic for contemporary writing at that time was unusual, although not unknown. O Suilleabhain derived his proficiency in written Gaelic from his father who taught him. The diary covers the years 1827 to 1835, and began in English as 'observations on the weather, herbs, plants, trees etc.', but the language soon changed to Gaelic (although practical, financial, and administrative details are often given in English). 
The original interest in nature was maintained, but the diary expanded into a significant record of the lives of those provincial middle-class Catholics who supported the campaigns of Daniel O'Connell and aspired to replace the ruling elite of the established church as the dominant class in Irish society. A local leader of O'Connell's political campaigns, O Suilleabhain made a speech in Irish at a 'monster meeting' in favour of Catholic emancipation in 1828. He also collected local contributions to the O'Connellite campaigns (the 'Catholic rent'), and in 1828 led the Catholic side in an agitation to wrest the charitable Callan dispensary from protestant control. 
The diary is equally valuable as a record of Gaelic intellectual life. O Suilleabhain's themes include popular pastimes, Irish and international politics, protestant extremism, the campaign against the payment of tithes to the established church, relief schemes for the poor, foreign wars, legal issues, local agrarian rebellions, medical matters, and traditional festivals. The extravagant meals enjoyed by the leading Catholics of Callan at the home of the parish priest are described in detail. 
It is less forthcoming on the details of O Suilleabhain's personal life: a single sentence on 1 July 1829 records the death of his wife, Maire Ni Dhulachanta (Mary Delahunty). She probably came from the Kilkenny city area. The diary, however, makes occasional reference to his surviving children, Donncha ('b'. 'c'.1814), Anastas ('b'. 'c'.1820), Amhlaoibhin, and Seamas, as well as to three children who died. It describes in detail an unsuccessful attempt to negotiate a second marriage (27-9 December 1829), and also includes details of presumed paternity payments to a servant, Maraed Soinsean, to whom a daughter Maire was born on 10 July 1831. 
O Suilleabhain maintained a school in Callan, with some breaks, until 1831 when its closure coincided with the establishment of a state system of education, but more particularly with the growth of his business as a 'linen draper' and shopkeeper. He travelled regularly to wholesalers in Dublin, which allowed him to keep abreast of contemporary intellectual developments, in particular those associated with the Royal Irish Academy. He copied, compiled, and collected manuscripts, wrote stories and poems, and maintained contact with an extensive intellectual network, comprising scholars, artists, antiquarians, medical practitioners, and Catholic clergy. None of his work was printed in his lifetime; instead it forms part of the Gaelic manuscript tradition. O Suilleabhain died in 1838 and was buried at Kilbride, Callan, co. Kilkenny. 


@@@@@


doc= 62939


Brown, Christy (1932-1981), writer and painter, was born on 5 June 1932 at the Rotunda Hospital, Dublin, the son of Patrick Brown (died 1955), a Catholic bricklayer active in the trade union, and his wife, Bridget Fagan (died 1968). There were seventeen children in all, thirteen of whom survived into adulthood; Christy was the tenth. Shortly after his birth it became clear that he was suffering from a severe physical disability, later diagnosed as cerebral palsy. This made both movement and speech difficult for him throughout his life as he strove to control wayward movements of his body, and to overcome the physical and psychological inhibitions on achieving self-expression. The family was told he was a 'mental defective' -- a label mockingly referred to by Brown in the working title of his autobiography, 'Reminiscences of a mental defective' -- but his indefatigable mother devoted much of her considerable energy to proving the authorities wrong. She became in effect his private tutor since there was then no possibility of formal education. The breakthrough occurred when Christy was six and was watching his older brothers and sisters working on their lessons with chalk and slate. Grabbing hold of both with the only part of his body he could actively direct -- his left foot -- and with the coaxing of his mother, he wrote a shaky but identifiable letter 'A'. As he remarks in his poem on Helen Keller, 'that kind of triumph is seldom won', a temporary liberation from the 'deafmute world' in which he seemed condemned to live. Christy's mother went on to teach him all the letters of the alphabet and, armed with that, he soon began to write. The primary medium of communication throughout his growing years was painting, and it offered temporary release from the torment that words themselves brought. He painted throughout his life and had a number of exhibitions; the artistic life offered a more gregarious world than the solitary life of the writer. 
When Christy's mother was seriously ill with her last baby, the Rotunda Hospital sent a social worker, Katrina Delahunt, to the Brown household. She immediately took an interest in Christy and his burgeoning artistic potential. In his autobiography he writes of the romantic yearnings stirred in him by the arrival of this beautiful young woman and of the jealousy he suffered when she showed up one day with an engagement ring. This pattern -- of romantic longing for the women who entered his world, most often in a caring capacity -- repeated itself throughout his life. His waning faith was bolstered by a visit to Lourdes in 1950, and his hopes were raised by the arrival of the paediatrician Dr Robert Collis. Collis wished to develop the study and treatment of cerebral palsy in Ireland and nurtured literary ambitions himself. He judged the nascent autobiography that Christy was writing to be the most promising of his literary productions so far, but was critical of certain stylistic excesses, urging him to use 'a short word rather than a long one'. When the autobiography appeared, certain people held it to be the work of Collis; Christy was aware of the charge and countered it by acknowledging the editorial role which Collis had performed and, while they remained friends, by determining to write subsequent works without his input. Collis sent Christy to his sister Dr Eirene Collis, who had established a clinic for children with cerebral palsy at Queen Mary's Hospital, Carshalton. She, like her brother, thought he was treatable, but insisted he give up working with his left foot, and instead develop his whole body equally. The treatment continued back in Dublin, where separate quarters were constructed for Christy in the garden of his family home, becoming a kind of artist's studio. It emphasized his growing independence. 
In 1954 the London firm of Secker and Warburg, under the editorship of David Ferrer, published Brown's autobiography 'My Left Foot' to immediate success. It comprises a series of short, vivid chapters covering his growing up, first with his family, then with a series of social workers, doctors, and carers. The heart of the book is the watchful, loving care of his mother (to whom the book is dedicated), and the close bond between them. It is also the story of Brown's developing relationship with himself, as he struggles to come to terms with his condition, and the highs and lows he experiences. This heightened sense of Brown's determination to follow his own path is frequently at odds with the more conventional narrative of progress that his later novel depicts. Nowhere is this better illustrated than in Brown's decision to overthrow Eirene Collis's advice and to return to writing with his left foot. 
The question of how to follow the success of an autobiography published in his early twenties dogged Brown for more than a decade. At first he considered writing a sequel, taking the story up through the years of his success. Instead he wrote something more like a novel, more deliberately literary in its treatment and broadening the social canvas beyond his own life story. 'Down All the Days' did not appear until 1970, but when it did, it was praised for its novelistic skills, and made more acceptable the notion of Christy Brown as a writer. It revisits the terrain of the autobiography, but is much franker in its treatment of the young man's sexual urges; these form a central part of the ordeal to which his body subjects him. While his father in 'My Left Foot' remained in the background, the novel is dominated by the hulking figure of the frequently alcoholic bricklayer, alternating between brooding and outbursts of graphically depicted violence, and his baffled relationship with the daughter who defies him. The closing account of the father's death and burial is clearly based on the sudden death of Patrick Brown in 1955. But these realistic scenes are preceded by an impressionistic account of the father's last walk home, which recalls Gypo Nolan in Liam O'Flaherty's 'The Informer'. His mother is here the one relegated to the background. She is replaced by the Rabelaisian figure of a blowsy, drunken, big-breasted widow, whose gossipy scenes with two other old women form a break with literal autobiography. Bridget Brown, who continued to work despite increasing ill health, died in 1968. Christy's care passed to his married sister Ann Jones. 
When 'Down All the Days' was published in 1970 its worldwide success provided Brown with financial security for the rest of his life. He now occupied the niche vacated by Brendan Behan, writing with the same 'sad hilarity' (as his poem on Behan puts it) about working-class Dublin. But the combination of fame and drink induced the same downward spiral. In the remaining eleven years of his life, Brown wrote three more novels, 'A Shadow on Summer' (1974), 'Wild Grow the Lilies' (1976), and 'A Promising Career' (1982), but none achieved the financial success or literary acclaim of his first two books. A more lasting legacy was provided by three volumes of poetry, 'Come Softly to my Wake' (1971), 'Background Music' (1973), and 'Of Snails and Skylarks' (1977), where the poetic form imposes a discipline increasingly lacking in his prose, and where the various lyrical, satirical, and philosophical aspects of his personality achieve expression. 
At Easter 1972 Brown became engaged to Mary Carr ('b'. 1945), a dental hygienist from co. Kerry living in London, daughter of Marie Cecilia Carr. Because she was divorced, they married, on 5 October 1972, in the Dublin register office. In the following year they went to live in Ballyheigue in north Kerry; the poems in 'Of Snails and Skylarks' speak of increasing depression and solitary drinking amid the natural splendour of north Kerry. The couple moved to Parbrook in Somerset in 1980. Christy Brown died at his home there, Longacre, 2 Withial Lane, on 6 September 1981 after choking on some food. His body was returned to Dublin and buried at Glasnevin cemetery along with his parents. He was survived by his wife. 
Brown's funeral was described by his fellow Dubliner Noel Pearson as 'probably the most colorful funeral I was ever at'. Ever since meeting Christy at an art exhibition in the early 1970s, Pearson had been fascinated by him -- 'because of Christy's absolute determination to be normal' -- and tried to make a film of 'Down All the Days'. When the rights to that proved unavailable, Pearson acquired those to 'My Left Foot'. The final screenplay, by the novelist-actor-playwright Shane Connaughton and the theatre director Jim Sheridan, drew on extra material from the novel and brought the life up to his marriage. The film 'My Left Foot' was produced by Pearson and directed by Sheridan in 1989, a first work for both men and a labour of love. Daniel Day-Lewis was cast as Christy and won an Oscar for his role, as did Brenda Fricker for hers as Bridget Brown. The film was a worldwide success, exploring Christy and his life with understanding, sympathy, and a complete lack of condescension. His story remains extraordinary. The autobiographical, fictional, and filmic versions of it have earned him what he always hoped for: enduring literary fame. 


@@@@@


doc= 62940


Starkey, James Sullivan (1879-1958), writer and editor, was born on 17 July 1879 at 80 Rathmines Road, Dublin, the third son of the five children of William Starkey (1836-1918), pharmacist, and his wife, Annie Sullivan (died 1922), daughter of the Revd James Starkey (died 1851) of Ballinasloe. The family was strictly Methodist and politically unionist. Starkey was educated by governesses before going to Wesley College, Dublin, aged twelve. His first real interest in books came from his father, and as a child he was obsessed with the advertising cards for books. During his life he accumulated a vast library of about 20,000 items, many of them rare editions. James Starkey studied medicine at University College, Dublin, but dropped out after a year owing to problems with mathematics. He then entered his father's pharmacy as an apprentice, but his main interest was in 'poetry and life'. 
Through his friend Tom Keohler, Starkey was introduced to George Russell (A. E.), and soon became known in the circles of the Irish literary revival. Starkey's poetry was firstly published in the 'Irish Homestead' in 1902, and in the same year reprinted in the 'Southern Cross' under the pseudonym Ogma. In 1903 he published four poems in Griffith's 'United Irishman', which were reprinted in A. E.'s book 'New Songs' in 1904. By this time he was using the pseudonym Seumas O'Sullivan, which he took from his maternal grandfather who had published books in Irish. O'Sullivan became known as one of the 'Celtic twilight' poets, since his poetry at that time was essentially lyrical and melancholy, dealing with Irish folklore, and moods expressed through the Irish landscape. It was characterized by simplicity of language, and a good sense of rhythm, language, and syntax. His poetry was original, but he was often compared to A. E., who had influenced him; they shared an interest in visions, fairies, and Celtic gods. 
O'Sullivan also had a keen interest in Irish theatre. He was one of the founding members of the Irish National Dramatic Society (also referred to as the Irish National Theatre Society) in 1901, and was involved in its management committee, but also did some acting. He performed the role of the Blind Man in Yeats's 'On Baile Strand' at the opening night of the Abbey Theatre on 27 December 1904, but admitted that he was not a good actor. Edward Martyn, O'Sullivan, and others split from the Irish National Theatre Society in 1906, claiming it had become too commercial, and less nationalist. The dissidents formed the Theatre of Ireland. 
In 1904 O'Sullivan and the actor and poet George Roberts re-established the publishing firm of Whaley & Co. In 1905 his first book 'The Twilight People', the title alluding to the airy immaterial fairies of his incorporeal world, was published by Whaley & Co. in Dublin and A. H. Bullen in London. In the same year O'Sullivan began to edit, with James Connolly, the 'Tower Press Booklets' (printed at 28 Cornmarket, Dublin), which were intended to encourage some established and lesser known poets, such as Thomas Keohler, George Moore, and Susan Mitchell. One of the booklets, 'Verses: Sacred and Profane', contained some of his own works, which emphasized the beauty of decay. 'The Earth Lover and other Verses' (1909) was more vivacious than his previous works. This was followed by 'Impressions: a Selection from the Notebooks of the Late J. H. Orwell' (1910). Some of his verse also appeared in 'Sinn Fein', and his writings became known in America. 
At this time O'Sullivan met Estella Frances Solomons (1882-1968), daughter of Maurice Solomons, a Dublin optician, and Rosa Jane Jacobs of Hull, who were practising Jews, and active in the Dublin Jewish community. O'Sullivan and Solomons moved in the same artistic and literary circles, and both were intensely nationalist. She was a painter who hid rebels in her studio in Great Brunswick Street, Dublin, during the War of Independence. Since her father objected to any of his children marrying outside Judaism, the couple did not marry until 5 August 1926, after Solomons's parents had died. They had no children. It was a happy marriage, and many writers met at their house on Sundays. 

'Requiem and other Poems' (1917) emphasized O'Sullivan's nationalist beliefs, which become even more pronounced in 'The Rosses and other Poems' (1918). A collection of essays, 'Mud and Purple' (1917), dedicated to Oliver Gogarty, showed his delight in character portrayal and his ability to describe Dublin's many moods. In 1913 he supported A. E. in his campaign against the employers during the Dublin strike. 
O'Sullivan was also close friends with the Irish nationalist leader Arthur Griffith and worked with him on the 'Irish Year Book', learning much from him as an editor. Together with Gogarty, they stayed frequently at the Martello tower at Sandycove. In 1918 O'Sullivan produced 'Secret Springs of Dublin Song' with Gogarty and others. Seumas O'Kelly, with whom he had founded the Theatre of Ireland, was another close friend, and the two shared a house together for some time. O'Sullivan was one of the seven founding members of the Irish Academy of Letters, a member of its council for years, and its vice-president. However, he had frequent disagreements with Yeats in the council: their personalities were perhaps too similar for comfort. In 1923 O'Sullivan founded the 'Dublin Magazine' which nobody expected to survive since Ireland was torn apart by the civil war. His optimism was justified, however, because for over thirty years the 'Dublin Magazine' attracted the work of virtually all the established writers, such as Austin Clarke and Liam O'Flaherty, and encouraged younger writers like Samuel Beckett, Patrick Kavanagh, and Mary Lavin. It ceased publication as a monthly in August 1925 because it was difficult to get original material, very demanding for the editor to publish monthly, and there was little advertising revenue. It reappeared in January 1926 as a quarterly. O'Sullivan was a dedicated, courteous, fastidious, and eclectic editor. At the same time he was president of Dublin PEN for several years, and a member of the Old Dublin Society. The 'Dublin Magazine' ceased publication after O'Sullivan died. It was revived in the 1960s, but could not obtain the same readership and standing as before. 
O'Sullivan continued to publish his own work including 'Common Adventures: a Book of Prose and Verse' (1926) and 'The Lamplighter and other Poems' (1929). The latter dealt with the physical and spiritual reconstruction of the Irish after the civil war. O'Sullivan often published his poetry in private and limited editions, such as 'Twenty-Five Lyrics' (1933), 'Personal Talk: a Book of Verses' (1936), and 'Facetae et curiosa' (1937). His celebration of the power of love is evident throughout his poems. O'Sullivan's 'Collected Poems' were published in 1940 but only in 1943 did he produce some new verse in 'This is the House and other Verses'. 'Essays and Recollections' (1944) contained detailed reminiscences about characters and friends of his Dublin childhood and youth; there were more literary recollections in 'The Rose and Bottle' (1946). His final book of poems, 'Translations and transcriptions', appeared in 1950; it contained no new material. 
O'Sullivan received an honorary degree (DLitt) from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1939 and in 1957 he was presented with the Gregory medal by the Irish Academy of Letters. O'Sullivan was a shy, retiring, moderate, and kind person. However, he could also be very witty and satirical, since he possessed a sharp tongue. He and his wife were sticklers for order. He became a vegetarian in 1901. Seumas O'Sullivan died on 24 March 1958 at Mercer's Hospital, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 62941


Clarke, Augustine Joseph (1896-1974), writer and radio broadcaster, was born on 9 May 1896 at 83 Manor Street, Dublin, the eleventh of twelve children (four of whom survived to adulthood) of Augustine Matthew Clarke (died 1918), plumber, son of Denis Clarke, farm labourer, of Blackditches, co. Wicklow, and Ellen, 'nee' Browne (1860-1944), daughter of William Browne, skinner, of Watling Street, Dublin. At retirement Clarke's father had become superintendent of waterworks of Dublin corporation. His mother, who had grown up illiterate in a Dublin tenement, was a cold and forceful character. 
As the youngest surviving child of the family, and often in poor health, Clarke was much cosseted. A strong religious consciousness and puritan reserve, especially in physical matters, pervaded the household. Considerable emphasis was placed on sinfulness and religious duties, and the boy grew up fearing eternal damnation; as an adult he strenuously resisted his inherited religious beliefs. However, visits to the theatre and cinema, violin lessons and holidays in Wicklow, co. Meath, and with relatives in Liverpool, punctuated the rigour. Clarke's early education began at the Convent of the Holy Faith, Dominic Street. A short stint at the national school, Dorset Street, was followed by another in an Irish Christian Brothers' school at St Mary's Place, from which he was withdrawn because of frequent beatings. In 1905 he was enrolled in Belvedere College, Dublin, a Jesuit public school established in 1832 and James Joyce's alma mater; he remained there until 1912, except for a single unhappy term at Mungret College, Limerick, a Jesuit boarding-school. In 1912 he was awarded seventy-first place in the intermediate examination, and won a municipal scholarship to University College, Dublin. 
There Clarke encountered antiquarians and scholars of the Literary Revival, including Osborne Bergin, George Sigerson, and Douglas Hyde. Performances at the Abbey Theatre, among them plays by W. B. Yeats, Lady Augusta Gregory, and Gerhart Hauptmann, and at the Irish Theatre, which staged continental plays, inspired him. Perhaps encouraged by his lecturer George O'Neill, whose assignments included exercises in poetic form, he began to write verse. In 1915 he was awarded a first-class honours degree in English language and literature, and enrolled for a master's degree. He proposed to write a thesis on Elizabethan lute music, under the supervision of Thomas MacDonagh, the poet and revolutionary, but the latter's execution for his part in the 1916 Easter rising obliged Clarke to submit an alternative dissertation on the dramatist John Ford. He was awarded a first-class honours degree and second place in the arts faculty. 
Now Clarke's literary circle included F. R. Higgins, George Russell, Joseph Campbell, and Stephen MacKenna, and in 1917 his first book of verse, an epic poem, 'The Vengeance of Fionn', was published to considerable acclaim. Treating its mythic subject matter in Miltonic blank verse, it is Romantic in mood, with flashes of lyricism. Among its detractors was Campbell, who charged that it was derivative and pretentious. That the book became a topic of vehement debate helped to establish its writer. 
In autumn 1917 Clarke was appointed assistant lecturer in the department of English at University College, Dublin. As civil unrest intensified, his mental health deteriorated and in March 1919 his mother committed him to St Patrick's Hospital, where he was confined for over a year with severe depression and physical breakdown. Before his hospitalization he had met Cornelia Alice Mary Cummins (1889-1943), daughter of Edward Cummins, a bank manager from Drogheda, co. Louth, and his wife, formerly Winifred Blake. A well-educated older woman with a small private income who had lived abroad, Cummins established a career as a journalist who also published short stories and poor-quality verse under the pseudonym Margaret Lyster. She was considered eccentric, even mad; violently antisemitic, she harboured strong Nazi sympathies in later life. She and Clarke married secretly in a register office in Dublin on 31 December 1920, but the union was probably unconsummated and lasted less than a fortnight. About 1928 Clarke instigated unsuccessful divorce proceedings. 
Two books of epic poetry, 'The Fires of Baal' and 'The Sword of the West', were published in 1921. Reviews were disappointing. Excessive verbal decoration, incoherent plot, and poor character portrayal were among the charges levelled against them. 'The Spectator' responded to the first by commenting that Clarke 'neither rises to the sublime nor sinks to the incompetent' (28 May 1921). 
Whether because of his absence due to illness or, as Clarke suggests, his civil marriage, University College, Dublin, dispensed with his services as a lecturer. After visiting Paris, and still prone to bouts of depression which plagued him throughout his life, he established himself in London as a literary journalist. However, he also continued to spend time in Ireland, and his critical writings and verse maintained their focus on the matter of Ireland. Among the journals that printed his workmanlike reviews were the 'Times Literary Supplement', the 'Nation and Athenaeum', the 'New Statesman', and, from 1927, 'T.P.'s Weekly', a popular paper owned by T. P. O'Connor MP, where he regularly undertook editorial duties. In addition, in the 1930s, his reviews appeared in 'The Observer' and the 'London Mercury'. The publishers George Allen and Unwin issued a vigorous collection of poems: 'The Cattledrive in Connaught' (1925). The following year Clarke's first play, 'The Son of Learning', was published in the 'Dublin Magazine', having been rejected by W. B. Yeats at the Abbey Theatre. Terence Gray staged it as part of the Cambridge Theatre Festival in 1927, and Hilton Edwards and Micheal Mac Liamoir had it performed in the Gate Theatre, Dublin, in 1930, the year in which 'The Flame: a Play in one Act' was also published. 'Pilgrimage and other Poems' (1928) signalled Clarke's departure from mythological subject matter in favour of the historically verifiable late medieval monastic period. The first of three romance novels set in medieval Ireland -- 'The Bright Temptation' (1932), 'The Singing-Men at Cashel' (1936), and 'The Sun Dances at Easter' (1952), all proscribed under the 'Censorship of Literature Act' (1929) -- sold well. 
In 1932 W. B. Yeats nominated Clarke a founder member of the Irish Academy of Letters, whose aim was to resist censorship, which Clarke passionately opposed all his life. By 1931 he had met Norah Esmerelda Patricia Walker (1900-1985), daughter of journalist Frederick Walker and his wife, formerly Nannie Harris, daughter of Matt Harris, MP for East Galway (1885-90). Together they raised three boys: Donald (1931-1976), Aidan ('b'. 1933), and Robert Dardis ('b'. 1939). They married on 3 January 1945, after the death of Clarke's first wife. Walker was a kindly, intelligent, self-effacing woman; she had been educated at Loreto College, St Stephens Green, Dublin and at University College, Dublin. She spoke German fluently and held strong republican beliefs. The union was happy and mutually supportive but because of its irregular status until the marriage, it attracted disapproval, not least from the Clarke family. From 1933 to 1937 the family settled in St Albans, Hertfordshire. A proposal in the mid-1930s that Clarke write a biography of W. B. Yeats had to be abandoned when Yeats's co-operation was not forthcoming. From 1933 to 1937 Clarke acted as an adjudicator at the Oxford Festival of Spoken Poetry, and his fortieth birthday saw the issue of his 'Collected Poems'. 
In 1937 Clarke settled in Bridge House, Templeogue, outside Dublin, in which property he held a life interest, and there he remained until his death. Despite Templeogue's pleasant ambience, the tortuous poems of 'Night and Morning' (1938) bespeak a scrupled individuality struggling with the loss of faith. By the time the war began Clarke's weekly 'at homes' had become a feature of Dublin literary life, and he could be seen first in The Pearl bar, and then, when the literati moved their custom, at The Palace bar. In his guise as member of the writers' association PEN, and sometime president of its Dublin centre (1942), he continued to resist censorship. His reviews were a regular feature of the 'Irish Times''s literary page from 1940 until his death, except for a five-year hiatus (1962-7), and he contributed substantially to Seumas O'Sullivan's 'Dublin Magazine'. Given the sheer volume of reviews he was obliged to undertake to eke out a living, the quality inevitably varied. Often his income was negligible, always it was uncertain, but he prided himself in being one of the few contemporary Irishmen of letters earning a livelihood entirely from writing. 
Theatre and radio also beckoned. In 1939 Clarke and Robert Farren, broadcaster and poet, established the Dublin Verse-Speaking Society, and it remained active until the late 1960s. It frequently broadcast dramatic and choral poetry, introduced and directed by Clarke, on Radio Eireann. In addition it performed verse plays and dramatic verse annually in the Peacock Theatre. In 1944 Clarke formed the Lyric Theatre Company, which drew on the talents of the society but also employed professional actors and directors. Until the Abbey Theatre was destroyed in 1951 it successfully staged verse performances, usually twice a year, often including Clarke's own plays in its repertory. Radio Eireann broadcast many of these performances. In the 1940s Clarke published eight plays, most under his own Bridge Press imprint and in limited editions, all performed by the Lyric or his verse-speakers. Clarke's radio programmes, broadcast regularly over more than quarter of a century, sought to popularize and evaluate poetry, and his series of poetry competitions held considerable appeal, attracting entries from some notable aspiring writers. Clarke also served as president of the Irish Academy of Letters from 1952 to 1954. 
After seventeen years devoted to verse theatre, the poems of 'Ancient Lights, Poems and Satires' (1955) found Clarke confronting contemporary social problems and railing against injustice, especially clerical. Institutional inhumanity and rapacity are topics revisited in the years and the many poetry collections that follow. Contraception, the ostracism of single mothers, corporal punishment in schools, the spartan regime of orphanages, the misled piety of spinsters, poverty -- all come under his caustic scrutiny, attracting comparison with Jonathan Swift. Little wonder that he styled himself 'local complainer' in one poem. Liam Miller's Dolmen Press found him new readers and by the 1960s many regarded him as the greatest Irish poet since Yeats. The publication of the long poem 'Mnemosyne Lay in Dust' (1966) was a personal landmark as well as a critical success: its subject matter is Clarke's breakdown of 1919, here confronted publicly for the first time. His 'Collected Plays' appeared in 1963, followed by 'Two Interludes Adapted from Cervantes' (1968) and 'The Impuritans' (1973). 
Among the awards bestowed on Clarke were a commission from the British Arts Council (1961), the Denis Devlin Memorial award for poetry (1964), an honorary DLitt degree from Dublin University (1966), the supreme award of the Irish Academy of Letters, the Gregory medal (1968), and the American Irish Foundation literary award (1972). 
In old age Clarke returned often to the epic form to proclaim secular redemption and release, attainable through eroticism, with some success in 'The Healing of Mis'. Austin Clarke died at his home, Bridge House, of prostate cancer on 19 March 1974, having previously suffered at least two heart attacks. His body was cremated privately in Belfast and a memorial tribute was held in the Abbey Theatre on 7 April 1974. His 'Collected Poems, 1917-1974' and an edition of the 'Irish University Review' (1974) devoted to his work were then in preparation. A second volume of collected plays mooted before his death did not materialize, but 'The Third Kiss: a Comedy in one Act' was published in 1976 and 'Liberty Lane' in 1978. 
Clarke's technical virtuosity and experimentation earned him the respect of fellow poets, but his tendency to load himself with chains and then try to get out of them (as he termed his art) led him into infelicities. For too long the matter of Ireland preoccupied him, as did Gaelic prosody: he was forty-two before 'Night and Morning' was published. However, his especial contribution to literature is a lyricism as intense as his swingeing critique of Irish society. His work includes eighteen books of poetry, eighteen completed verse plays, thousands of literary reviews, three romance novels, three volumes of autobiography, numerous critical works and broadcasts. 
Lugubrious but witty, Clarke's urbane sensibility proved a necessary antidote to the pastoral pieties to which the Ireland of his times subscribed. Possessed of an acute sense of injustice that informed his satire, his governing myth comprised a world that never lived up to its promise. His accomplished but savage indignation is his especially enduring legacy. 


@@@@@


doc= 62942


Raiftearai, Antoine (1779-1835), poet, was born on 30 March 1779 at Cill Liadain (Killedan), near Kiltimagh, co. Mayo, the son of a weaver; his mother's maiden name was Brennan. An attack of smallpox at five or nine years old left him blind for the rest of his life. With a view to eking out some kind of a living the young Raiftearai learned to play the violin, some say tolerably, others poorly. In any event he was taken in tow by a local gentleman, Frank Taaffe, as a sort of family bard, musician, and story-teller, but Taaffe's patronage came to an end either because of Raiftearai's involvement in the loss of a favourite horse or because of his too vocal support for the republican organization the United Irishmen. 
Raiftearai then migrated to south Galway, some 50 miles away, where the pickings were much better for one of his calling among the many well-off farmers of that area. The rest of his life he spent there, much in demand at house dances, weddings, and even wakes. While on such occasions the hat was invariably passed around for his benefit, there was also a deal of plying the blind bard with drink, with the result that he soon had a drink problem. There is no evidence that he ever married. However, it appears he lived with a woman named Siobhan for some years, the liaison producing a daughter and a son before they went their separate ways. 
The nature of Raiftearai's calling as an itinerant bard posited a very public dimension to his songs and poems, for no sooner had he composed a piece than he was in a position to sing or recite it in public. Satires on people who somehow or other incurred the bard's displeasure and an argle-bargle with local fellow poets, the brothers Callanan, were all grist to the mill of a self-publicist whose interest it was to stay in the public eye. 
South Galway was in Raiftearai's time a bilingual society, most people being fluent both in Irish and English. However, the problem with Irish was that it was not taught in the schools and while most people could speak it, there were few who could read it and even fewer who could write it. Raiftearai's output of about forty-eight poems is considerable for a blind man. Lengthy poems such as 'Seanchas na sceiche' ('The bush's history [of Ireland]'), a sort of potted history of Ireland up to the 1690s, could scarcely have been accomplished without the aid of an amanuensis, who no doubt doubled as an editor or adviser. The public recitation of Raiftearai's work by himself and others and its circulation in manuscript copies led inevitably to the emergence of many different variations and additions, with the result that few poets in the Irish language have had their work interfered with to such an extent as Raiftearai. The obverse of this is that some pieces, including the emotive 'Mise Raiftearai' ('I am Raiftearai'), have been attributed to him which were not his. 
Raiftearai's work can be subdivided into poems about people and places, love songs, religious verse, and poems on current affairs and historical subjects. The poems about places characteristically develop into a listing over many stanzas of the flora and fauna of the place, a process which becomes tedious when repeated again and again. The well-known 'Cill Liadain' ('Killedan'), a celebration of Raiftearai's native place, is no exception and would benefit from the dropping of four or five such stanzas. Similarly, poems about an assortment of tradesmen -- shoemaker, weaver, blacksmith, carpenter, and so on -- are little more than a stringing together in verse of the articles produced by such people. Seven or eight love songs, unlike many in that genre, have the merit that the subjects were real people, although Raiftearai's efforts in that direction were not generally welcomed, for his love songs were said to bring bad luck. 
Raiftearai celebrated in verse many local and national events, including the victory in the Galway election of 1833 of the Catholic Sir John Burke, the proselytizing activities of the Hibernian Bible Society, agrarian agitation by a secret society called the Ribbonmen, Daniel O'Connell's great victory in the County Clare election of 1828 which led to Catholic emancipation, and the tithe war of the 1830s. 
In the final analysis, however, Raiftearai's claim to fame rests on perhaps half a dozen pieces. Arguably, first among these must be 'Eanach Dhuin' ('Annaghdown'), a piteous dirge about the drowning of nineteen people in an unseaworthy craft on Lough Corrib, co. Galway, in 1828. Strangely, for a man whose private life was anything but exemplary, two long religious poems must be classed among his best, 'Agallamh Raiftearai agus an bhais' ('Raiftearai's discourse with death') and 'Achaini Raiftearai ar Iosa Criost' ('Raiftearai's petition to Jesus Christ'), a powerful call for repentance, not least by himself, in the face of a cholera epidemic. The latter was published posthumously in 1848 and accompanied by an English translation for the stated purpose of its being intelligible to the reading public. Also of lasting merit are some laments, notably that for Thomas Daly, piper and gentleman. 
Raiftearai died in the direst poverty in a barn near Craughwell, co. Galway, on Christmas day 1835, and was buried in nearby Killeenin graveyard, probably on 27 December. His name was rescued from obscurity towards the end of the century through the initiative of the newly established Gaelic League (for the revival of the Irish language) led by Douglas Hyde (Dubhghlas de hIde) and the Irish literary movement led by Lady Gregory and Yeats. The two movements combined to erect a commemorative slab over Raiftearai's grave in 1900. Gregory wrote a play about Raiftearai and devoted a chapter of her 'Poets and Dreamers' to him, while Hyde edited the first collection of his verse in 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 62943


Colum, Padraic (1881-1972), writer, was born on 8 December 1881, in the parish of Collumbkille, co. Longford, in the midlands of Ireland, the eldest of the eight children of Patrick Collumb and his wife, Susan, 'nee' MacCormack, daughter of a gardener at Powerscourt, in co. Wicklow. His father was the last of an ancient line of peasant farmers, but a graduate of the national school and a teacher in the same institution, and later master of the Longford workhouse. Like his father he was christened Patrick, but after joining the Gaelic League and the Irish Republican Brotherhood in 1901, he began using the Irish Gaelic Padraic, and changed his family name to Colum. 
Colum took pride in maintaining that of his generation of Irish writers he alone was peasant-born and Roman Catholic; he also enjoyed telling people that he was born in a workhouse, but neglected to mention that his father was in charge of the place at the time. Colum's finest play, 'Thomas Muskerry' (1910), is set in a workhouse, and many of the characters that people his poetry and stories are derived from his early acquaintance with the residents of such an institution. He also drew inspiration for story-telling from an uncle, Mickey Burns, a yarn-spinning, travelling wholesale buyer of fowls, with whom the young Colum sometimes rode through co. Cavan. His uncle had an increased influence on Colum when his alcoholic father, having lost his position in Longford, spent time in America trying unsuccessfully to accumulate some money. On his return to Ireland, Patrick Collumb moved the family to Sandy Cove, near Dublin, where he was employed as a railway clerk. In time he became stationmaster and employed Padraic and his brother Fred, later a soldier in the British army, as delivery boys. 
At seventeen, and having had only eight years of formal education, Padraic Colum passed an examination for a clerkship in the Irish Railway clearing house in Kildare Street in Dublin. He was now able to contribute money to the family and help support his younger siblings. Despite working a nine-hour day (six days per week), he wrote poetry and plays, and was soon discovered by Arthur Griffith, publisher and Sinn Fein leader, and later first president of the Irish Free State. 
Griffith became Padraic Colum's patron, publishing his poems and short plays in the 'United Irishman'. One of the latter, 'The Saxon Shillin'', won a prize for a drama written to discourage young Irishmen from enlisting in the British army. As a result, Colum was invited by Frank and W. G. Fay to join the newly formed Irish National Dramatic Company as both playwright and actor; soon the company merged with the Irish Literary Theatre founded by W. B. Yeats, Lady Gregory, George Moore, and Edward Martyn. Under the new name, the Irish National Theatre Company, what became the great Irish National Theatre, the Abbey, was established. 
Colum's first full-length play was 'Broken Soil', later rewritten and published as 'The Fiddler's House' (1907). In it a middle-aged peasant farmer chooses life as an itinerant musician over obligations to his children and the land he works. His choice of art over property and a comfortable life is forcibly contrasted with the priorities of his grasping, mercenary peers. The play's chief strength is its authentic depiction of Irish rural character in the early 1900s. 
Colum's second drama, 'The Land', opened at the newly acquired Abbey Theatre on 9 June 1905, and promptly gave that theatre its first real triumph. 'The Land' also established the 'peasant play' as a staple of the Irish National Theatre. Unfortunately the headstrong young playwright quarrelled with Yeats and the Fays, and despite Lady Gregory's attempt to reconcile the parties, Colum left the company. In 1910 the Abbey performed Colum's last commercially successful play, the tragedy 'Thomas Muskerry', which has been called the 'King Lear' of Irish drama. Although Colum wrote plays for the rest of his life and always considered himself a playwright first, his continuing significance as a writer lay in poetry, folklore, and children's books. 
Colum's first book of poetry, 'Wild Earth' (1907), was well received for its sheer lyric beauty and simplicity, as well as for its strong characterizations of country folk, who lived according to the ancient ways with courage and nobility. 'Wild Earth' is the foundation of Colum's poetic canon. It established his early reputation, and as long as he was emotionally, if not geographically, close to Ireland, his poetry was highly effective and well regarded. Yet from the time of its publication onward, Colum's stark, lucid, sympathetic vision of the Irish people slowly faded. 
In 1912 Colum married Mary Gunning Maguire (1884-1957), a woman born into the Sligo middle class, and a graduate of University College, Dublin. She was also a gifted writer who became a major literary critic in America. They had no children. Unable to earn a satisfactory livelihood as writers in Dublin, the couple 'accidentally' emigrated to the United States in 1914, just before the outbreak of the First World War. Josephine Colum, an aunt in Pittsburgh, had sent them money for a honeymoon trip to the United States as a gift at the time of their marriage, and the war prevented their return. They decided to settle in New York city, perceiving that, as a writing couple, there were more opportunities for them in New York than in Dublin. Later they undertook part-time teaching careers at Columbia University and New York University. In New York, Colum continued to write poetry and plays but earned his primary living as a writer of folklore and books for children. He produced a series of stories at this time for the children's column of the 'New York Sunday Tribune', and his first children's book, 'The King of Ireland's Son', was published to great acclaim in the United States in 1916; it was republished in Britain in 1920. Colum was to support himself financially throughout the rest of his life with his popular children's books, which included accessible adaptations and translations of mythology and the classics. 
In 1916 'Wild Earth and other Poems' was published in New York and it established Colum as an important voice on the American poetry scene. The collection was revised and added to in 1922, 1927, and 1950. Two subsequent collections continued Colum's early lyric portrayal of Irish country life with some success: 'Dramatic Legends and other Poems' (1922) and 'Old Pastures' (1930). 
In 1922 the Colums made a triumphant return visit to Ireland, expecting to see, among other friends, Arthur Griffith (with whose biography Colum later struggled and finally published as 'Ourselves Alone' in 1959), who was now the free state's president. But news of Griffith's unexpected death and the death of Michael Collins reached the Colums on their ship, and they found Ireland in mourning, although the new president, William Cosgrave, received them with great cordiality. Colum had earlier published an Irish travel book entitled 'My Irish Year' (1912), and after this Irish visit he was to produce his finest work in this vein, 'The Road Round Ireland' (1924), which was in turn followed by 'Cross Roads in Ireland' (1930). 
After their stay in Ireland, the Colums went on to visit James Joyce and his wife in Paris, the first of several such visits in the 1920s and 1930s. Colum even typed some of 'Finnegans Wake' for Joyce. Padraic and Mary Colum later collaborated on the highly regarded biographical memoir, 'Our Friend James Joyce' (1958), and after his death in 1941 they generously raised and personally contributed funds to assist Nora Joyce. 
Meanwhile the Hawaiian legislature had invited Colum to codify the folklore of the islands. His in-country investigations and research at the Bishop Museum resulted in 'At the Gateways of the Day' (1924) and 'The Bright Islands' (1925), reissued together as 'Legends of Hawaii' (1937). His work was the key to the foundation of Hawaiian folklore studies. 
In his middle years Colum's reputation as a poet faded and he failed utterly as a playwright. 'Creatures' (1927) indicated that Colum had lost interest, temporarily at least, in writing poems about people, and 'Poems' (1932) is a collection of previously published material. 'The Story of Lowry Maen' (1937), Colum's longest poem, was an attempt at epic narrative, composed of over 1800 lines of blank verse about the break-up of Bronze Age order with the advent of Iron Age invaders. The poem is, however, distinguished neither in narrative nor in language, and is too close to a children's fairy tale to serve as a national epic. 'Flower Pieces' (1938) offered lovely little descriptions of hollyhocks, morning glories, hibiscus, marigolds, and other decorative plants. It testifies to Colum's gentle nature and descriptive powers, and in the next year 'The Vegetable Kingdom' gave the edibles equal poetical time with creatures and flowers. But it must be said that as Colum settled fully into the New York scene and the international literary set his poetry suffered. None of this later work served to advance his reputation, and it appeared that he had written all of his memorable poetry by the age of fifty. His collection 'Ten Poems' (1957) did little to refute this assessment, with the exception of one poem, 'The Book of Kells', depicting the work of a medieval manuscript illuminator, which is one of his finest pieces. It presaged the skill and profundity that Colum would display in his last work. 
Colum's desire for production of his plays tormented him for some fifty years. He became an experimental playwright, abandoning the naturalism and colloquial but eloquent language that had been the hallmark of his early success. 'Theodora' (1912), based on the life of the Byzantine empress, went through several revisions and changes of title (including 'The Bear Keeper's Daughter') but was never produced or published. 'The Grasshopper', a free translation of a Keyserling play, was produced at the Abbey on 24 October 1922, to no great success. Later, the script was burnt in an Abbey fire. He wrote at least four versions of the same play: 'The Desert', 'Timbuktu', 'The Vizier', and 'Mogu the Wanderer'. It had one brief run as 'Mogu the Wanderer', at the Dublin Gate Theatre from 29 December 1931 to 7 January 1932, but proved a complete failure. The audience and even the actors laughed at its pretentiousness. The play is remembered today only because Orson Welles made his stage debut in the production. Colum had hoped for a Broadway production of the impressionistic 'Balloon', set in and around the glamorous world of a first-class cosmopolitan hotel called the Hotel Daedalus (perhaps in homage to Joyce). It was published in 1929 after a two-week run in a summer theatre in Ogunquit, Maine, but it never went to New York. 
Colum also tried his hand at fiction, but his two novels, 'Castle Conquer' (1923), a romance, and 'The Flying Swans' (1957), a moving story of an Irish peasant boyhood in the nineteenth century, were not commercially successful. 
In his old age Colum returned to Irish themes and found renewed celebrity. After his wife died in 1957 and he took her body back to Ireland, Colum divided his time between New York, Woods Hole, Massachusetts, and Ireland. He renewed his bonds to his mother country, producing in a series of 'Irish Elegies' (1958, 1961, 1963) powerful and poignant biographical poems centring on deceased friends who had contributed to the winning of Irish independence, or to the creation of Ireland's international reputation for art and literature. At the time of his death Colum was working on a cycle of Noh plays, influenced by Yeats's experimental dramas, and based on the classical Japanese performance form, Noh, which combines elements of dance, drama, music, and poetry into a highly stylized stage performance. His completed plays in this genre ('Moytura', 'Glendalough', 'Cloughoughter', 'Monasterboice', and 'Kilmore', 1961-6) achieved some success both as written poetry and in small productions performed by dancers. 
Colum's final poetry collection, 'Images of Departure' (1969), is a subtly crafted and moving collection of poems of farewell to much loved people, such as his wife and mother, and nostalgic tributes to favoured spots in Dublin. It also represents a farewell to Ireland, his memories, and his life. A remarkable achievement for an eighty-seven-year-old poet, 'Images of Departure' is one of the finest Irish poetry collections of the last half of the twentieth century. 
Padraic Colum died at the Parkway Pavilion, a nursing home in Enfield, Connecticut, on 11 January 1972, one month after his ninetieth birthday. His body was viewed at the Abbey Funeral Home in Manhattan, and a high mass of the resurrection was conducted at St Patrick's Cathedral. His body was returned to Ireland and interred in St Fintan's cemetery, Sutton, co. Dublin, in the same grave as his beloved wife. 
Padraic Colum has long been recognized as an early contributor towards developing the Irish National Theatre, and as one of the significant Irish poets of the twentieth century. It is as a lyric poet that Colum will be best remembered. The beauty and discipline of his early and very late verse, his surety in characterization, and his unquestioning belief in God are the foundations of his achievement. His real monument is the last full collection: 'The Poet's Circuits: Collected Poems of Ireland' (1960). 
Colum conceptualized the early modern Irish poet as a peasant bard, a preserver of the oral tradition, a story-teller with dramatic skill, a codifier of mores, and a conveyer of cultural values. Unlike Yeats, Colum never philosophized deeply, being content to respond emotively in his poetry to his country, his wife, his friends, and the poor hardworking people of the rural Ireland of his youth. Today Colum's lyrics are read and memorized by thousands of Irish school children yearly, although often they do not learn or remember the author's name. Thus Padraic Colum has become both a national poet and an anonymous bard, exactly as he would have wished. 


@@@@@


doc= 62946


Fitzmaurice, George (1877-1963), playwright, was born on 28 January 1877 at Bedford House, near Listowel in co. Kerry, Ireland, the tenth of twelve children of the Revd George Fitzmaurice (1822-1891) and Winifred O'Connor (1842-1919). The playwright's arrival coincided with the decline of an old and respected Anglo-Irish family. His father, a younger son, was a minister in the Church of Ireland who, having married a Gaelic-speaking Catholic on his estate, seems to have hastened the collapse of the Fitzmaurice dynasty. He abandoned the ministry after nine years and led the life of a country gentleman, gradually selling off the 500 acres he had inherited. George junior, like all his siblings, was educated at home; and like them, he never married. His father died when George was fourteen, and the family moved closer to his mother's people in Duagh, where farming became the mainstay. 
Fitzmaurice was now in a most unusual position. As the product of a mixed marriage he had little social status. He was among the Gaelic-speaking people to a far greater degree than was John Millington Synge (the writer with whom he is most often compared) but alienated in rather similar ways from the peasant Catholic majority. His lack of formal education left him at a distinct disadvantage when it became necessary for him to take up employment, and the best he could do, after a brief sojourn in a bank in Cork before 1900, was as temporary clerk in the civil service (congested districts board) in Dublin. Fitzmaurice remained a clerk all his working life from 1901 until retirement in 1942. 
During all his years in Dublin Fitzmaurice made no friends. He was a small, shy, retiring figure who lived alone. Yet he obviously felt himself early to be a writer, for he had five stories published in Irish weekly journals by 1901. These, posthumously collected with four others under the title 'The Crows of Mephistopheles' (1970), indicate Fitzmaurice's ear for the richness of Kerry speech and his insight into the intrigues surrounding matchmaking. 'The Country Dressmaker' (1907), the first of his plays to be accepted by the Abbey Theatre, was based on one of these early short stories, 'Maeve's Grand Lover'. It concerns matchmaking in the north Kerry area, where all but two of Fitzmaurice's seventeen plays are set. The success of the play was something of a surprise; Yeats had expected it to cause riots in the manner of Synge's 'Playboy of the Western World' because of its satiric portrayal of the peasantry. Its handling of the romantic dreams of the eponymous dressmaker, however, disillusioned by the sight of her fiance after his ten years' wear and tear in America, proved immensely popular, and the play was often revived down to the year 1949. Indeed, nothing Fitzmaurice subsequently wrote achieved comparable success. 
Yet 'The Country Dressmaker' reads now as a fairly conventional three-act Abbey comedy. The real interest of Fitzmaurice's dramatic work lies in the strange folk plays he began to write with 'The Pie Dish' (1908) and 'The Magic Glasses' (1913), one-act allegories of the frustrated artist out of his element in the idyllic Irish landscape. This turn in his writing occurred during a long unemployed period in Duagh, the result of illness and suspension between January 1909 and December 1913 (when he was reinstated). Comic though these pieces are, with larger-than-life, colourful characters gifted with outlandish eloquence, they end with the tragic deaths of the artist figures. Audiences were mystified by 'The Magic Glasses', and the Abbey subsequently rejected 'The Dandy Dolls', a delightful fantasy in which the fairy world mingles mischievously with human fancy and obsession. These plays, together with 'The Moonlighter', a political tragedy, were published in 'Five Plays' (1914, 1917) in Dublin and Boston. Fitzmaurice joined the British army in 1914 and served in France as a private until 1919. The Ireland he returned to would have thought little of his sacrifice while nationalists fought for independence. Resuming his clerkship, Fitzmaurice failed to get promoted to 'graded' status before the change of government administration in 1922. He seems to have achieved this in 1925, becoming a clerical officer in the department of agriculture and fisheries. 
Fitzmaurice's next play, ''Twixt the Giltenans and the Carmodys' (1923), reverting to the realistic, matchmaking theme of his first success, was a grievous disappointment. He now retreated into obscurity and eccentricity where, like one of his own obsessive characters, he preferred to live. Rejected by the Abbey, he wrote fantasies in which realistic characters inhabit a world of folklore and magic. Music-hall entertainment, of which he was fond, may have influenced the form of these fantasies. The wonder plays of Lady Gregory and the fanciful plays of Jack B. Yeats also offer themselves as counterparts, but Fitzmaurice's tone and style are unique. The plays are whimsical but they are also intense, subversive, and to a degree satirical. Most of them were published by his friend Seumas O'Sullivan in 'The Dublin Magazine', and Fitzmaurice discouraged their production on stage. He seems to have written nothing during the 1930s. When the poet Austin Clarke rediscovered Fitzmaurice in the 1940s it was a major task to persuade him to allow the staging of 'The Dandy Dolls' and other pieces by Clarke's Lyric Players. Fitzmaurice shunned others who likewise showed signs of interest, whether in radio or stage production. 
Fitzmaurice was rediscovered yet again after his death, when the American scholar Howard K. Slaughter oversaw the publication in 1967 of all seventeen plays in three volumes, after which the Abbey renewed its interest and staged several of the plays, most recently 'The Enchanted Sea' (1976). A new generation was introduced to Fitzmaurice by the Druid Theatre Company's productions of 'The Ointment Blue' and 'There are Tragedies and Tragedies' in Galway in 1993. 
Yet Fitzmaurice remains an enigma. When he died of natural causes in his room at 3 Harcourt Street, Dublin, on 12 May 1963 he was virtually unknown. He left little behind him to assist biographers: no diary, very few letters, no will. There is but one photograph of him, a pencil drawing, and an oil portrait by Harry Kernoff. Fitzmaurice described himself as neurasthenic, which at times made him 'a border-line case' (Slaughter, 40). There were very few people at his funeral. After a service in St Peter's Church, Aungier Street, on 16 May Fitzmaurice was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery in Dublin. In spite of various attempts to accord him major status he seems doomed to remain an intermittently remembered minor writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 62947


Higgins, Frederick Robert (1896-1941), poet, was born on 24 April 1896 in Foxford, co. Mayo, the eldest of the nine children of Joseph Higgins, a police constable, and his wife, Annie French. His father, a protestant unionist, was from Higginstown, Trim, co. Meath, where Higgins spent childhood holidays with relatives. After completing a national school education Higgins started work in 1912 as a junior clerk with Brooks Thomas, the main builders' providers in Dublin. Influenced by the nationalism of the literary revival, he identified with Sinn Fein, and he became estranged from his father over his refusal to enlist in the British army during the First World War, which led to his departure from the family home in Fairview, Dublin. Higgins left Brooks Thomas and, in 1918, became a secretary with the Clerical Workers' Union, where he found that his 'contact with mechanical industry intensified a passion for primitive nature' ('Evening Herald'). This passion found expression in the poetry he had begun to write. The rhythms of Irish airs and ballads are also clearly evident in his early poems, which were greatly influenced by Douglas Hyde's 'Love Songs of Connaught'. He befriended Austin Clarke in 1915 and George Russell (AE) encouraged the young poet. 
Having founded a paper, the 'Irish Clerk', Higgins left the Clerical Workers' Union in 1920, edited several trade journals such as 'Oil and Colour Paint Review' and the 'Furniture Man's Gazetteer', and established the first women's magazine in Ireland, 'Welfare', which ran for two issues. He also worked as a contributing editor to several literary magazines, including 'The Klaxon' and 'To-Morrow'. 
On 3 August 1921 Higgins married a well-known harpist, Beatrice May, daughter of James Moore, a boat maker of Clontarf, Dublin. The couple set up home in Rathfarnham, co. Dublin; they had no children. Higgins won the 1924 Aonach Tailteann award for poetry for his first collection of poems, 'Salt Air', which had been published in 1923 by the Irish Bookshop. He was a pastoral poet who found inspiration in the rugged Connemara landscape, in 'Island Blood' (1925), for example, and in the lush pastures of co. Meath and the Boyne valley. His work reflected a strong sense of tradition and he drew on Gaelic modes of poetry to write in the 'Celtic' manner pioneered by Austin Clarke and Padraic Colum in such poems as 'The Island Dead of Inchagoill' (in 'The Dark Breed', 1927). A major theme was the passing of the Gaelic way of life. Highly regarded by his peers, Higgins was a fastidious craftsman, working and reworking a poem until he was completely satisfied. 
From 1928 to 1932 Higgins was the Aonach Tailteann adjudicator of poetry, and also served as professor of poetry at the Royal Hibernian Academy of Arts. In 1932 he was a foundation member of the Irish Academy of Letters, which was the brainchild of Yeats and had George Bernard Shaw as its first president. The academy's aim was to combat literary censorship by 'giving authority to the utterance' of Irish writers. Higgins was honorary secretary from 1936 to 1941. He was awarded the Casement medal by the academy for his collection 'Arable Holdings' (1933). His poem 'The Past Generation' (1936), first published in the 'Dublin Magazine', to which Higgins regularly contributed, signalled a shift away from lyricism and showed the influence of Yeats. 
Despite joining in the condemnation of Sean O'Casey's 'The Plough and the Stars' in 1926, attacking both the playwright and his defender W. B. Yeats, by the mid-1930s Higgins and Yeats had become close friends. He contributed to an 'Irish Times' supplement to mark Yeats's seventieth birthday in 1935, while Yeats championed Higgins and included him in the 'Oxford Book of Modern Verse' (1936), and in 1937 selected poems by him for BBC and Irish radio programmes. Higgins was involved in the publication of 'Broadsides', a series of illustrated broadsheets published by the Yeats family-owned Cuala Press, of which in 1937 he became an editorial director. In April 1935 Higgins was appointed to the board of the Abbey Theatre (the national theatre of Ireland founded by Yeats), which prompted the 'Irish Times' to hope that he might 'bring back to the Irish theatre something of its first poetic impulse' ('Irish Times'). In September 1935 Higgins's only play to be performed, 'A Deuce of Jacks' (a one-act, low-life comedy set in early nineteenth-century Dublin), was staged at the Abbey. It was not well received by the critics; the 'Dublin Evening Mail' reviewer wrote that it exhibited 'a supreme contempt for what a play should be'. Higgins enjoyed greater success in 1937 as manager of the Abbey company's tour of the United States, which took in seventy-four cities (he became managing director of the Abbey Theatre in 1938). He brought energy, vision, and a keen business sense to the job, and his policy of staging new plays revived the theatre's artistic fortunes, doing away with the need for revivals. As part of the Abbey Festival in August 1938 Higgins delivered a lecture, 'Yeats and Irish drama', in which he expounded his views on theatre. He called on dramatists to ignore box-office considerations, which he thought had a cheapening influence on a literary theatre. He argued for plays that would generate intellectual excitement, thereby making the theatre a place where the mind would be liberated as it was by the theatres of Greece, England, and France at great moments in their history. He disliked any trace of effeminacy in literature; art had to be masculine and intellectual. 
Higgins was of stout build with a bespectacled, plump face and a shock of dark hair. He was a boisterous character with a taste for alcohol and malicious gossip. He fed Yeats's appetite for dirty stories with tall tales of his own sexual exploits which he later recounted for the amusement of Dublin's literati. His main recreation, according to 'Who's Who', was 'gallivanting in the country'. Higgins was an active member of the Church of Ireland. He was a member of the Boys' Brigade and, in 1932, he helped to publicize the church's celebration marking the 1500th anniversary of St Patrick's arrival in Ireland. He saw the Church of Ireland as the true successor of the early Celtic church and the home for the natural piety of a pastoral people. Higgins's last poetry collection was 'A Gap of Brightness' (1940). He suffered from heart disease and died in Jervis Street Hospital, Dublin, on 8 January 1941. He was buried in Laracor, co. Meath, on 10 January 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 62949


O Tuama, Sean (1708-1775), Irish-language poet, born at Baile an Fhantaigh, near Kilmallock, co. Limerick, was probably educated in a local hedge-school, which specialized in preparing young men for the priesthood. The curriculum would have consisted largely of Latin, with some Greek and Hebrew, together with English, science, and geography. He was also trained in Gaelic in a part of the country where there was vibrant scribal and poetic activity. 
O Tuama became a teacher in Croom, co. Limerick, about 1734, probably at the behest of Father Nioclas O Donaill, a Franciscan, and former president of the Irish College at Leuven. O Tuama's school was well regarded, as he had the sons of some local landlords among his pupils. O Tuama, who was styled 'an Ghrinn' ('the Fun-Loving') because of his self-confessed love of song and carousing in convivial company, also established a tavern in Croom, where he proclaimed that customers of a Gaelic inclination were welcome, whether or not they had the capacity to pay. His wife, Muirinn, frowned upon such largess and tried to prevent it, but it appears that the enterprise was never a financial success. The tavern became a meeting place or 'court' for many poets and literati in the region, who convened to compose and judge verse on prescribed themes. Unanimously acknowledged as chief among them was Sean Clarach Mac Donaill, whose visit to Croom, probably in 1735, was celebrated in verse by Father O Donaill, by O Tuama, and by Aindrias Mac Craith, 'an Mangaire Sugach' ('the Merry Pedlar', a sobriquet bestowed by O Tuama), his close friend and fellow poet, with whom O Tuama's career is inextricably linked. They were born in the same townland and Mac Craith arrived in Croom shortly after O Tuama, perhaps to replace or assist him in the school. The two had a bitter falling-out about 1750. Thus began a poetic dispute in which each satirized the other with scurrilous verse. The reasons for the quarrel are not clear but there has been speculation that Mac Craith's drinking was a major contributing factor. 
Aside from occasional verse, elegy, and the praise of patrons, the major preoccupations in O Tuama's poetry are hatred of the English hegemony, the poor state of the Catholic religion, and, concurrently, a fiercely anti-protestant, Jacobite vein. One set of poems by members of the group satirizes Donnchadh O hEadromain (Hederman), a Dominican monk who converted to protestantism in 1736. The invasion of Britain in 1745 by the Young Pretender (Charles Edward Stuart) was a major event, and O Tuama composed a number of poems about it. Another poem from this period bitterly attacks a certain Piotar (Peter) and four others of Gaelic origin who enlisted on the side of the state against the Pretender. The intriguing cross-dressing figure of Sean or Seon Anna Prior, provided the amusing theme for other verses, the earliest dating perhaps from 1743. The Maigue poets, as they were known, also used the 'barantas' ('warrant') form, a mixture of prose and verse imitating certain legal terminology, an extension of metaphor of their poetic conclave as 'court'. The metaphor may also be read as a muted challenge to the oppressive legal regime of the time. Often the poet's theme was personal, such as the death of an Preabaire (Dasher), the favourite horse of Father Nioclas O Donaill. Even these verses, however, as well as lamenting the loss of the beloved animal, also contain political and religious commentary. O Tuama moved to Mungret Gate near Limerick city in 1769 where he died on 30 August 1775. His remains were returned for burial in Croom churchyard. A headstone erected by his grandson and inscribed with his name and dates marks his grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 62950


Kavanagh, Patrick Joseph (1904-1967), poet and writer, was born on 21 October 1904 at the family home in Mucker, a townland in the parish of Inniskeen, co. Monaghan, Ireland, the elder son and fourth of the ten children of James Kavanagh (1855-1929), a cobbler, and his wife, Bridget (1872-1945), daughter of Patrick and Mary Quinn, farmers. James Kavanagh bought a 9 acre farm in 1910 and Patrick was removed from school at the age of thirteen to embark on the career of cobbler-cum-subsistence farmer. Though the rest of his siblings left home in their teens and early twenties, most entering the nursing or teaching professions, he lived and worked on the family smallholding until he was thirty-five. 
As a schoolboy Kavanagh was rather lackadaisical and displayed no particular aptitude for literature, but he developed a passion for poetry in his teenage years and secretly pursued a literary education, reading and versifying in his spare time. Books, other than school texts, were scarce in this hard-pressed society and he knew nothing about contemporary literature until 1925, when by chance he picked up a copy of the 'Irish Statesman' in a newsagent's. From then until it folded in 1930, this weekly journal of arts and ideas, edited by George Russell (A. E.), was his main educational resource. By 1929 he had learnt to write the kind of vague religio-rural rhymed verse that A. E. favoured and three of his poems were accepted for publication, among them 'Ploughman'. 
In December 1931 Kavanagh visited Dublin for the first time to meet A. E. -- walking there rather than taking the train, to exaggerate his peasant status. A. E., who had a reputation for fostering young talent, lent him books, dispensed literary advice, and introduced him to other writers such as Frank O'Connor. He became a frequent visitor to Dublin and was soon 'au fait' with what was happening on the Irish literary scene. The 'Dublin Magazine' began publishing his verse in 1931, and from that year it also began to appear in English journals such as 'The Spectator' and 'John O'London's'. His first collection, ''Ploughman' and other Poems' (1936), consists for the most part of slight apprentice offerings, the chief exception being the sonnet, 'Inniskeen Road: July Evening', a rueful, yet playful, meditation on the anomaly of being a poet in his native village. 
In 1937 Kavanagh went to London for a time to seek literary employment and was commissioned to write 'The Green Fool' (1938), an autobiography with an anthropological dimension, combining a portrait of the artist with a portrait of his society. The mandate to provide a narrative about small-farm life in Ireland compelled Kavanagh to attend to the subject which was closest to him but which he had so far virtually ignored. 'The Green Fool', which took a fresh and light-hearted approach to life in an Irish village and modulated easily from the comic to the lyrical, received rave reviews in the Irish and English press, but was withdrawn in 1939 following a successful libel suit by Oliver St John Gogarty. Gogarty, a practising doctor as well as an author, took offence because on page 300 Kavanagh had commented that on his first visit to the city he had called at his house and was unsure whether the white-robed maid who answered the door was his wife or mistress. 
Kavanagh moved to Dublin in 1939 to become a full-time writer and, apart from some lengthy stays in London and Inniskeen, he lived there for the rest of his life. During his first Dublin years he benefited from the cult of peasantry which had been a feature of the Irish literary revival and was welcomed and patronized by the city's literati as a harmless naif. In dress and appearance he still looked like a farmer. Not particularly tall at 5 feet 101/2 inches, he none the less conveyed an impression of ungainly size because of his broad frame, large hands and feet, and ploughman's gait. Under the influence of Sean O'Faolain, editor of a new monthly journal, 'The Bell' (October 1940-1946), and Frank O'Connor, its first poetry editor, he soon began to perceive himself as a post-literary revival and post-independence writer, one of a new generation of disillusioned realists intent on portraying contemporary Irish life, warts and all. He projected himself as the 'voice of the people', the authentic and articulate expresser of a rural Catholic Ireland that he saw as grossly misrepresented by literary revival writers such as W. B. Yeats, Lady Gregory, and, especially, J. M. Synge. Possessed by a missionary zeal to counter inherited literary images of the peasant, he quickly progressed from brief, affectionately realist lyrics such as 'Spraying the Potatoes', 'A Christmas Childhood', and 'Art McCooey' to 'The Great Hunger' (1942), a rhetorically powerful poem of 758 lines offering an authoritative and shocking indictment of small-farm Ireland. 
Its central protagonist, Patrick Maguire, a typical Irish subsistence farmer, is an elderly bachelor who has sacrificed sexuality to agricultural productivity, living 'that his little fields may stay fertile'. The poem criticizes the contemporary Irish small-farm ethos in which a puritanical Catholicism and a preoccupation with economic security combine to render men's and women's lives joyless and unfulfilled. Technically as well as thematically daring, it is written in a mix of free-verse paragraphs and rhymed stanzas, and exploits cinematic strategies of montage. Though some Dublin critics were uncomfortable with 'The Great Hunger''s innovative techniques and disruption of literary pieties about the peasantry, Kavanagh was now widely recognized as a force to be reckoned with in Irish letters. 
In another long and only posthumously published poem, 'Lough Derg' (1978), he experimented with broadening his cultural analysis to present an anatomy of Catholic Ireland, urban and rural, north and south. He then abandoned socio-realist verse. His post-war collection of poems, 'A Soul for Sale' (1947), was respectfully received and 'The Great Hunger', which many English and American critics were reading for the first time in that volume because it had previously appeared in a limited edition, was singled out as a major twentieth-century poem. 
Since he could not survive on the pittance he earned from his poetry, Kavanagh had been assiduously seeking a well-paid job or sinecure since his first days in Dublin. Lack of academic qualifications and political connections rendered him ineligible for most positions, and the only regular employment he was offered in the 1940s was as a twice-weekly columnist with a daily newspaper, the 'Irish Press' (September 1942-February 1944), and as a staff journalist (August 1945-April 1947) and film critic (February 1946-July 1949) with a Catholic weekly paper, 'The Standard'. Embittered by middle-class Dublin's refusal to proffer him patronage or at times even the means of earning a livelihood while writers whose work he despised were salaried and secure, he produced a series of satires excoriating Dublin as a cultural mediocracy and casting himself in the role of outcast genius. The best of these was 'The Paddiad' (1949), based on the 'Dunciad'. Satire, as he gradually came to recognize, was 'unfruitful prayer' ('Auditors In'), corroding him spiritually as well as frittering his talent. The supreme literary virtue which he endeavoured, often vainly, to cultivate from the late 1940s was what he termed comedy, a humorous, affectionate, yet disengaged art. 

'Tarry Flynn', the autobiographical novel about the life of a farmer-poet he had been attempting to write since 1940, eventually appeared in full in 1948; it was a realistic but mellow and often very funny portrayal of his Inniskeen milieu. This novel had its advocates from the beginning but its shelf life was short because the London publisher, the Pilot Press, went into liquidation. Its present status as a classic of Irish fiction dates from its reissue as a paperback in 1962 and its many subsequent reprintings. 
One of the cultural legacies of the Irish struggle for independence was an emphasis on ethnicity and nationalism in literature, a trend so antipathetic to Kavanagh that he once declared, 'Irishness is a form of anti-art' ('X', August 1961). His opposition to an ethnic aesthetic, evident from 1947, took two contrary forms. First, he countered the 'myth of Ireland as a spiritual entity' ('Studies', spring 1959) -- which he attributed to the literary revival writers, especially Yeats -- with a 'parish myth' presenting the country as a mosaic of distinctive parishes rather than as a monolith. 'Tarry Flynn' is the finest instance of what Kavanagh called 'parochialism' ('Kavanagh's Weekly', 24 May 1952), an art that has the courage to focus on the local and familiar. In his sonnet 'Epic', Homer makes the Iliad out of a 'local row'. Second, and more persistently from 1950 onwards, he demanded that writing should reveal the personality rather than the nationality of the writer. A new Irish monthly journal of arts and letters, 'Envoy' (December 1949-July 1951), to which he contributed a monthly diary, gave him a platform to communicate his subversive views on contemporary Irish life and letters. He indulged this vein even further in 'Kavanagh's Weekly', a short-lived journal which he edited and co-wrote with his brother Peter (12 April 1952-5 July 1952). 'Kavanagh's Weekly', which was critical of the government, of almost every state institution, and of many prominent figures in Irish public and artistic life, won him numerous enemies and its collapse left him destitute and unemployable. 
Kavanagh's own life as a Dublin writer and character was becoming his poetic theme from 1950 onwards. A distinctive figure about town because of his unkempt, countrified appearance, abrasive turn of phrase, and booming voice, he took to boozing and gambling on horses in middle age. Among his intimates he was an entertaining and humorous companion. His cultivation of a crusty and abusive public manner was largely a way of fending off intrusiveness, but he had also been soured by financial insecurity. Though widely recognized as Ireland's leading poet he was pathetically poor and dependent for survival on loans and handouts from well-off supporters and on the nurture and sympathy of numerous women friends, 'Rescue work with kiss or kitchens' ('Prelude'). In a frank, laid-back, casual vernacular verse that drew on metaphors from racecourse, betting shop, street, and pub and blended journalistic cliche and literary allusion, he analysed his daily experiences and his psyche: his insolvency, alcoholism, temperamental cussedness, failures as a lover, and abiding belief in the importance of poetry. Among the best of these lyrics centring on the persona of an endearing, fallible figure, usually intent on self-reform, are 'Auditors In', 'Prelude', and 'If ever you go to Dublin town'. 
In the hope of making some easy money Kavanagh took a libel action against 'The Leader', an Irish journal which had printed an unsigned 'profile' of him in October 1952. The profile depicted him hunkered on a bar stool surrounded by young disciples whom he verbally abused, but it went on to praise his poetry, especially 'The Great Hunger'. The case, heard in February 1954, was a 'cause celebre' and earned Kavanagh considerable notoriety but no money. He lost, later won the right to appeal, and eventually settled out of court, only to discover that the defendants had virtually no assets. 
The stress of this court case also took a severe toll on his health. A heavy cigarette smoker all his life, he was found to be suffering from lung cancer in March 1955. He was operated on, had a lung removed, and made a good recovery, though he never regained his former robustness. That period of his convalescence spent lying day after day on the bank of Dublin's Grand Canal in the warm July of 1955 entered his self-mythologizing as a time when he was born or reborn as a celebratory, lyrical poet whose role was to: '
be reposed and praise, praise, praise 

The way it happened and the way it is. 
('Question to Life')' In the late 1950s he published a series of sonnets expressing this rapturous mood and written in an improvisatory, colloquial style, among them 'The Hospital', 'Canal Bank Walk', 'Lines Written on a Seat on the Grand Canal, Dublin', 'October', 'Come Dance with Kitty Stobling', and 'The One'. These were collected in 'Come Dance with Kitty Stobling' (1960), which was widely and enthusiastically reviewed and was a British Poetry Society choice for summer 1960. 
Equally at home among the literary and artistic sets in Soho and Dublin, Kavanagh was held in high esteem and affection by the upcoming generation of Irish poets in the 1960s. His years of penury and near-destitution were at an end: a regular income came from an extra-mural lectureship at University College, Dublin, from May 1955, a weekly column of reminiscences about his farming days in the 'Irish Farmers Journal' (June 1958-March 1963), and a chat column in the 'RTE Guide' (April 1963-June 1967). His 'Collected Poems' was published to much critical acclaim in 1964, his 'Collected Prose' followed in 1967, and 'Tarry Flynn', adapted for Dublin's Abbey Theatre by P. J. O'Connor in 1966, was a box-office hit. 
On 19 April 1967 Kavanagh married a long-time friend, Katherine Barry Maloney (1928-1989), and they settled in Dublin. A niece of the martyr patriot Kevin Barry, Katherine came from a prominent republican family in Dublin but had been working in London as a bookkeeper since the late 1950s. Kavanagh lived with her during his frequent stays in London from about 1960 onwards. They had many friends in common in literary and artistic circles, shared an interest in all forms of sport, were drinking companions, and, in addition, Katherine was devoted to his welfare. 
In the final years of his life Kavanagh was plagued by poor health, largely consequent on the alcoholism to which he had been succumbing since the early 1950s, and he was frequently hospitalized. He died of pneumonia in the Merrion Nursing Home, Dublin, on 30 November 1967 and on 2 December was buried, as he had requested, in his native Inniskeen. 
Too little known outside Ireland because of disputes over copyright and consequent limitations on the distribution of his poetry, Patrick Kavanagh is acknowledged by most Irish poets who began writing in the 1960s and thereafter as a pivotal figure in twentieth-century Irish literature and as a seminal influence on Irish verse. By precept and example he steered Irish poetry away from its post-colonial obsession with ethnicity in theme and language and its preference for the historical and national rather than the contemporary and personal. He advocated that poetry should be confessional yet carefree; draw its images from the trivia of everyday life and its language from the argot of street and pub; cultivate a casual, relaxed vernacular style, avoiding the bardic or technically intricate; above all, that it should convey personality, capture a mood or an attitude -- wonder, love, delight, pain. His message to Irish poets was to de-nationalize and 'try to be more human'. 


@@@@@


doc= 62952


Lynam, William Francis (1832/3-1894), writer, was born in Galway, co. Galway, Ireland. Very little is known about his early life, except that he had a brother, James, but by 1863 he was living at Churchtown House, Dundrum, co. Dublin. He was commissioned in the 5th Royal Lancashire militia in 1867 and retired in 1881 with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1887 he moved to Clontarf, co. Dublin. He was editor of 'The Shamrock', a weekly paper originally owned by Richard Pigott and later by William O'Brien. He also contributed to the 'Irish Emerald' and the 'Weekly Freeman'. He was best known, however, as the author of the 'Mick McQuaid' stories, which appeared in 'The Shamrock'. They comprised conversations between the optimistic McQuaid and the pessimistic Perry Garrity. The stories lightheartedly criticized the methods and manners of the growing class of rural dealers, land agents, and lawyers, and their control and use of local institutions. The first story, 'Mick McQuaid's Conversion', began to appear on 19 January 1867. Other stories included 'Mick McQuaid, Under Agent' (1869-70), 'Mick McQuaid, MP' (1872-3), 'Mick McQuaid's Spa' (1876-8), and 'Mick McQuaid Alderman' (1879-80). Many Mick McQuaid stories were reproduced as penny numbers and the first three series were issued as a quarto volume of nearly 600 pages, 'The Adventures of Mick McQuaid', in 1875. 'Darby the Dodger', a stage comedy in which a rural trader is given his come-uppance by his long-suffering neighbours, followed in 1877. William O'Brien, in particular, attempted to do away with McQuaid but this damaged sales and he was restored to the paper. Other Lynam characters in 'Shamrock' serials included Dan O'Donovan, Corney Cluskey, and Sir Timothy Mulligan but none achieved anywhere near the popularity of Mick. Lynam's writings were so well known that Carrolls used the name of Mick McQuaid for one of its brands of pipe tobacco. Mick had himself smoked Carrolls' tobacco during his philosophical debates with Garrity. For one of Carrolls' designs in the 1920s, it is said that the artist drew on the facial features of David Lloyd George, H. H. Asquith, and Horatio Bottomley for a caricature of Mick. 
William Francis Lynam died of liver failure on 17 August 1894 at his home, 2 Warrenpoint, Clontarf, co. Dublin, aged sixty-one. He was a Roman Catholic and is said to have been 'a man of much piety' and to have 'lived a very retired life' (Brown, 178). He never married. Unusually for the ephemeral world of serial fiction, Mick McQuaid stories were frequently republished and, indeed, were still being reprinted twenty-five years after their author's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 62954


O'Donovan, Gerald (1871-1942), Roman Catholic priest and writer, was born on 15 July 1871 in Newry Street, Kilkeel, co. Down, Ireland, the youngest of six children of Jeremiah Donovan, pier builder in the board of works, and Margaret Regan. O'Donovan attended national schools in Cork, Galway, and Sligo, and secondary school at Ardnaree College (then the seminary for Killala diocese). After training in St Patrick's College, Maynooth (1889-95), Father O'Donovan became administrator of the Loughrea parish, co. Galway (1896-1904), where he was the model of an engaged priest. He founded a branch of the Total Abstinence Society in a disused military barracks and set about the reinvigoration of town life. His enthusiasm for the Gaelic League, Irish Cooperative Association, and National Literary Society made him a national figure, the plain-speaking patriot priest. Both in articles and lectures, O'Donovan laid blame for the condition of Ireland -- poor, English-speaking, and spiritless -- partly on the clergy themselves. 
Given his head in the decoration of St Brendan's Cathedral in Loughrea, O'Donovan chose in 1901 to employ Irish artists such as Sarah Purser, John Hughes, and the Yeats sisters, some of whom were not themselves Catholic. St Brendan's, heavily financed by O'Donovan's close friend the landlord and playwright Edward Martyn, is a museum of 'fin de siecle nouveau'-Celtic decoration and the most notable cathedral of its period in Ireland. 
In 1903 a new bishop was installed in Loughrea, Thomas O'Dea, a Maynooth priest who had once disciplined O'Donovan for reading books deemed unbecoming for a seminarian to read. Bishop O'Dea tightened the reins once again; rather than submit, O'Donovan left Loughrea in October 1904. Of the hundreds of townspeople who gathered along the road to the railway station, some knelt to be blessed by the troubled, departing priest, who would never bless another. 
Armed with letters of introduction from Ascendancy literary friends, Lady Gregory, W. B. Yeats, and George Moore (who drew on O'Donovan's dilemma for his novel 'The Lake', 1905), O'Donovan tried to continue his life as a writer-priest in London, but as a priest he had difficulty finding employment. In May 1908, bankrupt and 'out of sorts', by his own choice he unfrocked himself. His reformist impulses found a footing at Toynbee Hall in London's East End, where be became sub-warden in March 1910. Months later, while on summer holiday in Donegal, O'Donovan, 5 feet 9 inches tall, a balding, broad-shouldered man of thirty-nine (whose blue eyes under a heavy dark brow looked, H. G. Wells said, like two gun barrels from behind a hedge), met the tall Florence Emily Beryl Verschoyle (1886-1968), the twenty-four-year-old daughter of an Irish protestant colonel. They were married in the Whitechapel register office on 15 October 1910. The couple moved out of Toynbee Hall in June 1911, before the birth of their first child, Brigid, in December. Two more children followed, Dermod ('b'. 1913) and Mary ('b'. 1918). 
In O'Donovan's first and most famous novel, the semi-autobiographical 'Father Ralph' (1913), the hero, Ralph O'Brien, is the single child of a Catholic Ascendancy family in Dublin with a big house in the country; his mother dedicates him to God and the priesthood while he is yet in the womb. Ralph's life is a sequence of excruciating disillusionments with the church but not with religion. The worst comes when Ralph is sent to serve under Father Tom Molloy, a cunning and lustful bully in league with the local gombeen man, a combination of shopkeeper, publican, usurer, middleman, and politician. They conspire to destroy every effort for the improvement of town life, including Father Ralph's Temperance Society. Working with the bishop (who has already extracted the title to the O'Brien estate from Ralph's widowed mother), Father Molloy drives Father Ralph out of town and the priesthood. Ralph takes off the clerical collar, and, puzzled, must learn once again how to tie a cravat. 
The novel is remarkable for its varied gallery of priests, depicted alone and with one another. To judge from the indignation expressed in 'The Tablet' ('a grotesque libel!'), and the delight in papers such as the 'Northern Whig' ('so accurate and so convincing'), O'Donovan succeeded in settling scores with the hierarchy at the cost of giving hostages to unionists. 
After the publication of his first novel O'Donovan used the forename Gerald instead of Jeremiah. His subsequent novels tend to repeat elements of 'Father Ralph' -- the maleficent Father Molloy, for instance, turns up regularly under new names. The subject of 'Waiting' (1914) is the difficulties undergone by an idealistic young schoolteacher who wishes to marry a protestant girl after the 1907 'Ne temere' decree which severely restricted mixed marriages. 
By 1914 Gerald O'Donovan was a patriotic Englishman with a perfect accent (only the 'o' in words like 'cook' gave him trouble). Commissioned as first lieutenant in 1915, he became head of the Italian section of the Ministry of Information in 1918. There his secretary was the novelist Rose Macaulay ['see 'Macaulay, Dame (Emilie) Rose (1881-1958)]; the two soon fell in love. 
After the war, O'Donovan published 'How They Did It' (1920), an expose of wartime corruption; 'Conquest' (1920), made up of dinner table conversations, and illustrating the conversion of its hero to Sinn Fein; 'Vocations' (1921), about Irish postulants without true vocations; and, finally, 'The Holy Tree' (1922), a poetical story of a love triangle in Irish peasant idiom, dedicated to Rose Macaulay. O'Donovan's secret, intimate relationship with Macaulay continued without breaking up his marriage. In 1939 the two were motoring in the Lake District towards Hadrian's Wall, when Macaulay drove into another vehicle. O'Donovan suffered a head injury, then a stroke. It was cancer that ended his life three years later on 26 July 1942 at his home, Church Lane Cottage, in Albury, Surrey; he was attended by his wife and two surviving children, Brigid and Dermod. He was buried three days later at Albury after an Anglican service. 


@@@@@


doc= 62955


O Suilleabhain, Muiris (1904-1950), writer, was born on 19 February 1904 on the Great Blasket Island (An Blascaod Mor), co. Kerry, Ireland, the youngest child of Sean 'Lis' O Suilleabhain ('bap'. 1868) and his wife, Cait Ni Ghuithin ('bap'. 1873, died 1905). O Suilleabhain was the great-grandson of one of the island's 'fili' (traditional versifiers), Micheal O Suilleabhain ('fl'. 1810-1890), and the author Tomas O Criomhthain (1855-1937) was a great-uncle of O Suilleabhain on his mother's side. After the death of his mother O Suilleabhain spent six years in an orphanage in Dingle town on the mainland before returning in 1911 to the Blaskets where he attended the island school until 1918. It was his grandfather Eoghan O Suilleabhain who was to be the dominant person in young Muiris's life. Eoghan (Daideo) was a noted 'seanchai' (traditional lorist). 
The Great Blasket Island is situated off the Kerry coast. It contained, at the time of O Suilleabhain's birth, an Irish-speaking community of 145 people (6 others lived on the adjacent island of Inis Icileain from whence Muiris O Suilleabhain's grandmother came). The island community and its lifestyle were essentially medieval in character, with a strong oral tradition of storytelling and 'seanchas' (traditional lore) deeply rooted in the Gaelic tradition. The island became a focus for visiting scholars interested in Irish language and culture, and George Derwent Thomson (1903-1987) was one of those who visited, on the advice of Robin Flower (1881-1946), keeper of manuscripts at the British Museum. Thomson was a Greek scholar, later to become professor of Greek at Birmingham (1937-70). On his arrival at the island in 1923 he established a close friendship with Muiris O Suilleabhain and his family. He was later to dedicate his edition of the 'Oresteia' (1938) to Muiris O Suilleabhain. 
Thomson persuaded O Suilleabhain not to emigrate to America but rather to join the Garda Siochana (the Irish civil police) in 1927. After training O Suilleabhain took up police duty in an Irish-speaking district at Indreabhan in west Galway and it was here that he first began to write. Thomson urged O Suilleabhain to write of his childhood on the island, and O Suilleabhain wrote a manuscript in sections, which were sent to Thomson who was then teaching at University College, Galway. Thomson edited the text as it arrived, and, with the assistance of Moya Llewelyn Davies, he also translated it into English. The translation was published as 'Twenty Years a-Growing' in May 1933, one month after the Irish original 'Fiche Blian ag Fas' had appeared. 'Twenty Years a-Growing' covers the period of Muiris O Suilleabhain's early childhood on the Great Blasket Island, including an account of his schooling in the Dingle Orphanage, until his arrival in west Galway as a policeman. Its style is youthful and joyously exuberant, and gives a young man's point of view on the Blasket community at its strength. Its portrait may be tinged slightly with nostalgia, particularly in its moving recollections of O Suilleabhain's family and island friends and of his grandfather Eoghan, but its style and that of the English translation make island life accessible. From its success in translation (in French and German as well as in English), it clearly appealed to a readership interested in the romance of island life. E. M. Forster knew O Suilleabhain, and in his introduction to the 1933 English text he wrote: '... and though he is pleased that his book should be translated, his main care is for the Irish original, because it will be read on the Blasket. They will appreciate it more than we can, for whom the wit and poetry must be veiled. On the other hand, we are their superiors in astonishment. They cannot possibly be as much surprised as we are, for here is the egg of a sea-bird -- lovely, perfect, and laid this very morning.' Muiris O Suilleabhain resigned from the Garda Siochana on 5 July 1934 to become a full-time writer, and married Cait Ni Chathain of Doire Fhearta, An Cheathru Rua in west Galway, on 10 July of that year. They had two children: Eoghan ('b'. 1935) and Mairin ('b'. 1944). Muiris wrote the second of what he had planned as an autobiographical trilogy -- 'Fiche Blian Faoi Bhlath' ('Twenty Years a-Flowering') -- between 1935 and 1940. Irish-language publishers showed no enthusiasm for it, however, and the text has remained unpublished. Freelance writing and journalism and broadcasting in Irish did not provide a living for the O Suilleabhain family and Muiris O Suilleabhain returned to the police in 1950. He died while swimming off Salthill on 25 June 1950 and was buried two days later at Barr an Doire, An Cheathru Rua, co. Galway. 


@@@@@


doc= 62957


Parker, (James) Stewart (1941-1988), playwright and writer, was born on 20 October 1941 at 86 Larkfield Road, Sydenham, Belfast, the son of George Herbert Parker (1912-1996), tailor's cutter, and Isobella, 'nee' Lynas (1913-1987), who had been a bookbinder before her marriage. His parents were both Northern Ireland protestants. Stewart Parker was educated at Strand primary school, Ashfield Boys' School -- where he was taught by a charismatic schoolmaster, John Malone -- and Sullivan Upper School. From 1959 until 1964 he studied English literature at Queen's University, Belfast, first with Professor Peter Butter and then with Philip Hobsbaum. He graduated BA with upper second-class honours in English literature in 1963, and MA in 1966 with a dissertation on non-realistic elements in the plays of W. B. Yeats, T. S. Eliot, and E. E. Cummings; his external examiner was Professor Peter Ure. 
Parker's studies at Queen's University were impeded by the onset of cancer, apparently initiated by a kick on the kneecap while playing football. He spent most of a year in hospital, during which he suffered the amputation of his left leg. Previous to this, he had been keen on amateur theatricals. With his sturdy build, cherubic countenance, and rich baritone voice, he might well have made his way as a performer. The voice, at least, never left him; he was always a notable reader of his own -- and other people's -- work. 
Parker early on gained a local reputation as a poet and was a key figure in the Belfast group, a creative writing workshop whose prominent members in the early 1960s included Seamus Heaney and James Simmons and, later, Michael Longley. Parker's contributions to the works that were discussed week by week included several chapters of a novel, 'The Tribulations of S. T. Toile'. This, published only in part during Parker's lifetime, is to be brought out by Blackstaff Press, Belfast. The novel is a work of black humour, involving a school where everybody is malformed, neurotic, spiteful, or otherwise deranged. Poems on similar themes, notably 'Crutch' (an excerpt from 'S. T. Toile') and 'Coming Out' (from hospital), appeared in 'Young Commonwealth Poets '65', edited by P. L. Brent. 'Paddy Dies' and 'Health' appeared in 'British Poetry since 1945' (1970), edited by Edward Lucie-Smith. A long poem, 'The Casualty's Meditation', was published in 1970 as a pamphlet in a much sought-after series, 'Belfast: Festival Publications'. There are probably sufficient pieces of Parker's verse to make up a creditable collection. 
Parker's main interest, however, was to lie in drama. On 26 August 1964 he had married a student teacher, Kathleen (Kate) Ireland, and in that year went with her to Clinton, New York. Here he became an instructor in English and creative writing at Hamilton College. Always a collector of strange names, Parker was delighted to find that among his colleagues were Gerald Commissar, Homer Snavely, and Channing Richardson Bullfinch III. After several unsuccessful attempts to gain academic posts back in the United Kingdom, Parker moved in 1967 to Cornell University. He seems, however, to have found that teaching impeded his creative effort, so in 1969 he returned to Belfast, determined to earn his living as a writer. He arrived in Northern Ireland the same week as the British army. This circumstance, together with his exile abroad, seems to have sharpened his sense of things Irish, and he involved himself in studying Irish language and culture. His early concern with his maimed body gradually broadened into dramatizing the pains of Ireland itself. 
Parker began a regular pop music review column in the 'Irish Times' and contributed articles on literary and theatrical subjects to that and to several other newspapers and journals. His main source of income at this juncture seems to have been BBC radio. 'The Iceberg', a play about the 'Titanic', was broadcast on 7 January 1975, and one about a Belfast showband musician, 'I'm a Dreamer, Montreal', on 20 July 1977. A televised version of the latter was transmitted by Thames on 6 March 1979 and was awarded that year's Christopher Ewart-Biggs memorial prize. Other plays pioneered on radio included the wonderfully titled 'The Kamikaze Ground Staff Reunion Dinner' (1979), which won the Giles Cooper award for 1980, and 'The Traveller' (1985), about the existential crisis of a travel writer. The first of these was transmitted as a television play by the BBC in 1981. 
Parker had already had a play about a Belfast song-writing team, 'Catchpenny Twist', first staged at the Peacock Theatre, Dublin, in 1977, adapted in the same year for BBC television in the 'Play for Today' series. This was based on the true story of a couple of Queen's University students who wrote a Eurovision song contest entry for their idol, the then famous singer Sandie Shaw. It included a song, 'Ziggy-Zaggy', performed not by the protagonist but by the comedian Peter Kelly, that might well have won the contest in reality as an entry in its own right. It is the case of a parody persuasive enough to be capable of literal acceptance. 
However, Parker's main ambition was for success on the stage. He served for a time as resident playwright at the King's Head Theatre, Islington. Here an Irish-Caribbean musical entitled 'Kingdom Come', written in collaboration with the composer Shaun Davey, was first performed on 17 January 1978. A stage play about a Belfast bicycle salesman had already been produced at the Dublin theatre festival in October 1975, where it was an unexpected and runaway success. This had been revived at the King's Head in 1976, and when it won Parker the 'Evening Standard' most promising playwright award, it was transferred to the Vaudeville Theatre in London's West End in February 1977. 'Spokesong' also opened at the Long Wharf Theatre in New Haven, Connecticut, on 9 February 1978. This production was brought to the Circle in the Square Theatre on Broadway on 15 March 1979. It represented Parker's breakthrough as a writer. 
In 1982 Parker, who had separated from his wife, moved to London, where he was to spend what were to be his few remaining years with a fellow playwright, Lesley Bruce, 'nee' Barnett ('b'. 1944). By now, his impact was mainly through television. 'Iris in the Traffic, Ruby in the Rain' (1981) shows two women whose paths intersect during a drizzly day in Belfast. Each pursues her own path and they meet only at the end when Ruby, a Catholic psychologist, discovers that the distressed old lady she has picked up in her car is mother of the protestant clerk, Iris. 
The influence of Joyce's 'Ulysses', with its two wandering protagonists, is manifest here. It is no coincidence that this television play was followed in 1982 by another: 'Joyce in June', commissioned for the Joyce centenary. In addition, 'Blue Money', about a taxi driver who absconds with a briefcase full of cash belonging to a customer, was screened in 1984, and 'Radio Pictures' in 1985. This latter, written for and produced on television, shows a radio play, 'Mr Deadman and Miss Goodbody', being rehearsed. During rehearsals the actors and production staff interact and react, their conflicts acting as a commentary on the radio play and vice versa. The whole constitutes an ingenious discourse on the nature of imagination. Here, as elsewhere, Parker owed a good deal to his producer and actors -- in this case, Nicholas Renton, Frances Tomelty, and Dinsdale Landen, among others. However, it is equally true that Parker had given them a wealth of material with which to work. 
Stewart Parker had become a famous name in television and was entrusted with the script of a series. 'Lost Belongings', directed by Nicholas Bicat, was screened in six hour-long episodes starting in April 1987. This had been twenty years in gestation: an early draft had been entered in the Irish Life Drama competition for 1967. It is a recension of the Deirdre myth, in which a child fostered by the king of Ulster as a prospective bride runs off instead with a young minstrel. The whole story has been updated to contemporary Belfast; however, the outcome is basically the same. Deirdre eventually returns to Ulster but, as had been foretold in the legend, brings disaster upon the place, and dies ignominiously. 
The summit of Parker's achievement may be three stage plays produced, respectively, in Belfast (1984), Birmingham (1986), and Derry (1987), and published under the collective title 'Three Plays for Ireland' (1989). The first of these, 'Northern Star', is an account of the late eighteenth-century protestant reformer Henry Joy McCracken. This politician had been instrumental in founding the United Irishmen, a movement involving protestants and Catholics alike, whose common goal was to free Ireland from British rule. The consequent uprising culminated in the unsuccessful siege of Antrim in 1798, after which McCracken was tried and executed. Parker seems to have identified with McCracken's politics. The play has a framework of dialogue between McCracken and his mistress, which is interspersed by seven scenes in the form of flashbacks, each taking over the style of a major Irish playwright: George Farquhar, Dion Boucicault, Oscar Wilde, G. B. Shaw, J. M. Synge, Sean O'Casey, and Brendan Behan. Parker may well have seen these as his mentors. 
The second play in this presumed trilogy, 'Heavenly Bodies', deals with the life of one of these same playwrights, the nineteenth-century Irish-American Dion Boucicault. The cast consists of two main performers, one of them playing Boucicault and the other an interlocutor, with a group of students acting out multifarious minor roles. The play is really a series of sketches presenting Boucicault as an indomitable Irishman, a kind of Faust-figure. As with all Parker's plays, music is very important -- not as mere decoration, but as an integral part of the action. 
One of the characters in the third play, 'Pentecost', plays the trombone; another toys with the banjo; there are distant Lambeg drums; and a strategically placed hymn. The action evokes the squalid events of 1974, when a protracted strike organized by protestant extremists brought Belfast to a standstill. Trapped in a semi-derelict house are two Catholics, two protestants, and a ghost -- also a protestant -- whose age exactly spans the troubled century. The interpolations of Lily, the ghost who in life gave away an illegitimate child fathered by an Englishman, enable Parker to rise to heights of rhetoric. Here she is raging at the Catholic mother whose child has died: 'I haven't noticed you bringing up any youngsters. What right does a hussy like you have to question God's will? Why would he bless the fruit of your womb more than of mine, look at this place, you have it like a pigsty... are there not enough runty litters running the streets, whelped by your kind, reared with a half-brick in their fists, and the backsides hanging out of their trousers?' The play is replete with images of sterility but also with implications of human forgiveness. Pentecost is a season when even ordinary people prophesy. The derelict house -- which, after all, has belonged to the ghost -- represents an Ireland in which these competing tribes have to co-exist. A central figure Marian, the bereaved mother, says 'I want this house to live. We have committed sacrilege enough on life, in this place, in these times.' 
After writing this last play -- his own masterpiece and a major work of Irish drama -- Stewart Parker again contracted cancer, this time in the stomach. He died, at the height of his powers, on 2 November 1988 in the Westminster Hospital, aged forty-seven. In accordance with his wishes, his body was cremated, and his ashes scattered into the Irish Sea. At his funeral, Parker's colleagues in the making of a new Irish literature -- among them Seamus Heaney, Michael and Edna Longley, Derek Mahon -- paid their respects to the passing of this latest in a line of Irish playwrights, playwrights whom he had loved and from whom he had sought to learn. A two-volume edition of his complete plays was published in 1999. 


@@@@@


doc= 62958


Rodgers, William Robert (1909-1969), poet and broadcaster, was born on 1 August 1909 at 76 Belmont Avenue, east Belfast, the son of Robert Skelly Rodgers (1856-1953), an insurance agent, and his wife, Jane Ferris McCarey (1871-1952). Known as Bertie, Rodgers had a twin sister, Reah, and younger sister, Jean. His parents were strict Presbyterians. In 'Essex Roundabout' (1963) Rodgers recalls and relishes his childhood Belfast: 'City of ships and shawlies, doles and doilies, mills and tills, piety and porter' (p. 44). He attended Ballymacarrett public elementary school (1915-23), but his parents were uninterested in providing him with a more extensive education unless he agreed to be a clergyman. He did so, and a crammer prepared him for matriculation at Queen's University, Belfast, where he took a second-class honours degree in English (1927-31). He trained for the Presbyterian ministry at Assembly's Theological College, Belfast. In 1935 he was ordained and appointed minister of Cloveneden church, Loughgall, co. Armagh. On 30 March 1935 he married Mary (Marie) Harden Waddell (1909-1953), niece of the author Helen Waddell. Marie, a doctor with unfulfilled literary ambitions, set up a surgery in Loughgall. The couple had a stillborn son and two daughters, Harden ('b'. 1938) and Nini ('b'. 1940). The couple's marriage was full of unresolvable conflict. Rodgers's anguished poems 'Paired Lives' and 'The Lovers' refer to 'resentment'. Marie's brilliance masked instability and suicidal urges, and in 1943 she was diagnosed schizophrenic. 
Rodgers began writing poetry in 1938. His dust jacket note on 'Awake! and other Poems' (1941), whose original print run was destroyed in the blitz, mentions another retarding factor: 'I was schooled in a backwater of literature out of sight of the running stream of contemporary verse.' Yet it was a well-read Belfast contemporary, the poet John Hewitt, who introduced him to the work of W. H. Auden, Dylan Thomas, and others. Louis MacNeice became an intimate friend, and Rodgers soon made literary friends in southern Ireland. 'Awake!', a much praised debut, identifies language with liberation and intense sensation. 'Words' celebrates 'the arriving winds of words', and poetry may have 'arrived' as a psychic release from the intertwined tensions of Rodgers's marriage and ministry. 
Rodgers resisted the puritanical strain in Presbyterian culture. His 'Epilogue' to 'The Character of Ireland', co-edited with MacNeice and famous for being unfinished, says: '
I... Was heir to all that Adamnation 

And hand-me-down of doom 
(W. R. Rodgers, 'Collected Poems', 1971, 148)' Yet, as he knew, Calvinism induces eloquence as well as repression (hence his affinity with Dylan Thomas's pyrotechnics). 'Epilogue' both evokes and echoes the: '
old sea-roar and surge 

Of rhetoric and Holy Writ. 

' Rodgers's sermons were legendary, and his remarkable rapport with his congregation was only once disturbed -- by his article 'Black north'. Here he said bluntly: 'the unionist government has not sought for better relations between Protestant and Catholic, but has... used ill relations in order to keep power' ('New Statesman', 20 Nov 1943). Rodgers never wrote so politically again, and his thinking about Northern Irish culture could lean to stereotype or euphemism. This applies to his British Council pamphlet 'The Ulstermen and their Country' (1947) which calls protestant and Catholic 'complementary': 'One is thoughtful and individual, the other is emotional and communal... It is this diversity and interplay of opposites that makes Ulster life such a rich and fascinating spectacle' (pp. 15-18). Rodgers's work, however, was genuinely enriched by Ulster voices, stories, images, customs, and folklore, as in his best-known radio features 'Armagh: the City Set on a Hill' (1945) and 'The Return Room' (1955). He sympathized with the literary 'regionalism' which Hewitt advocated, and was close to the Belfast writer-broadcasters Sam Hanna Bell and John Boyd. Rodgers's vision for Ulster and Ireland was generously inclusive. 
In 1946 Rodgers resigned his ministry to join the BBC in London, having been recruited by Louis MacNeice for the features department. The department's head, Laurence Gilliam, believed that creative radio depended on creative writers. Meanwhile Marie went to Edinburgh to practise psychoanalysis, and worked thereafter in Scotland. The children stayed behind with three 'aunts' (cousins of Marie's father). The couple were divorced in January 1953. In July that year Marie collapsed by the sea at Newcastle, co. Down, where her daughters were holidaying, and died on the 16th of cardiac and respiratory failure. According to his second wife Rodgers interpreted her death as 'a coming together of tragic events' (unpublished letter). 
On 28 September 1953 Rodgers married Marianne Gilliam, 'nee' Helweg (1914-1976), a Danish researcher and translator for BBC radio, and the former wife of Laurence Gilliam. After Rodgers's affair with Marianne had been made public, Louis MacNeice, distressed by the breach between Rodgers and Gilliam, his two friends and colleagues, advised Rodgers to leave the BBC's permanent staff. From 1954 Rodgers and Marianne lived in East Anglia; their daughter Lucy was born in 1956. Rodgers continued working for radio, and, despite financial insecurity, he pursued his most innovative radio project, published as 'Irish Literary Portraits' (1972). These programmes (1949-66) pioneered oral literary history and a form of sound montage renowned as 'the Rodgers technique'. Rodgers introduced his composite portraits of W. B. Yeats and others as 'really studies in relationship', so 'a 'lie' therefore could be as informative as the 'truth', and the myth as substantial as the reality' (Rodgers, 'Irish Literary Portraits', xiii). 
Rodgers was a great talker who got great talk out of others. His soft voice had immense charm, as had his large brown eyes, sensuous features, dapper dress, and old-fashioned courtesy. But talk, especially pub talk, and procrastination may have blocked his poetry. After 'Europa and the Bull and other Poems' (1952) he wrote few poems. His 'Collected Poems' (1971) appeared posthumously. Yet the sources of Rodgers's silence were complex. He was writer-in-residence at Pitzer College, Claremont, California, from 1966 to 1968. His biographer Darcy O'Brien portrayed his years there negatively, but this view has been questioned. It was a financial lifebelt for Rodgers, and Hewitt criticized O'Brien for 'forcing his story... to fit the Dylan Thomas, Brendan Behan archetype, the exile-poet drowning in drink' (unpublished letter). 
In autumn 1967, when visiting England, Rodgers had two operations for bowel cancer. The illness recurred in November 1968 after he had begun a lectureship at California State Polytechnic College. He died on 1 February 1969 in Los Angeles County General Hospital. His ashes were buried at Cloveneden Presbyterian church, Loughgall, on 7 March. 
Owing to his poetic silence, in his later years W. R. Rodgers's reputation declined, but his achievement was brought into focus by a younger generation of poets from Northern Ireland. Along with MacNeice, Hewitt, and Patrick Kavanagh, he influenced Derek Mahon, Seamus Heaney (who read at his funeral), and Michael Longley, who edited 'Selected Poems' (1993). Longley makes comparisons with John Donne, and calls Rodgers 'a latterday metaphysical who apprehends the divine through the senses, The Word through words' (p. 21). Rodgers's style is sometimes too alliteratively word-drunk. But his most vital rhythms have a special power to suggest earthly desire and heavenly fulfilment. His love poem 'The Net' begins: '
Quick, woman in your net 

Catch the silver I fling! 

' His religious poem 'The Journey of the Magi' ends: 'The journey's done. Lord, Lord, how sweet!' (W. R. Rodgers, 'Collected Poems', 1971, 84, 119). 


@@@@@


doc= 62960


Shiels, George (1881-1949), playwright, was born on 24 June 1881, one of seven sons in a family of eight, to Robert Sheills ('fl'. 1880-1920), and Elizabeth, 'nee' Sweeny (died 1925), in Ballybrake, near Ballymoney, co. Antrim. Shortly after his birth the family moved into the small town of Ballymoney, where his father was a railway worker. George received the basic primary education then available to about the age of twelve. It is not known how he was occupied between about 1893 and 1900, when he emigrated to the United States. There he worked at a variety of casual jobs, mining and farming, in the west, and may have married in Oregon (the matter remains obscure). Having made his way to western Canada, Shiels suffered a serious accident in 1904 while working on the Canadian Pacific railroad. He spent the rest of his life in a wheelchair. He returned to Ballymoney about 1908 and set up a small travel and shipping business in Main Street. 
While in hospital in Canada, Shiels began to read serious literature, and he later said that 'Pride and Prejudice' fired his imagination. Thereafter he read widely, and like so many Irish writers of the time was largely self-taught. Once home Shiels took a correspondence course with the Pelman School of the Mind, London, and gradually began to write. His first efforts seem to have been westerns, partly based on his experiences in Oregon and Manitoba. In 1916 two stories appeared in the 'Irish Weekly'. He then turned to drama and, under the name George Morshiel, wrote three plays between 1918 and 1920 for the Ulster Literary Theatre (founded on the model of the Abbey Theatre). These plays, 'Away from the Moss', 'Felix Reid and Bob', and 'The Tame Drudge', remain unpublished. Shiels's first play under his own name, the one-act 'Bedmates', staged at the Abbey on 6 January 1921, was published in 1922 and launched the career of one of Ireland's most popular playwrights of the first half of the twentieth century. 
Shiels went on to write twenty-one plays for the Abbey, roughly the same number as Lennox Robinson, with whom he may be compared. Shiels was not as sophisticated as Robinson but early learned the skills of the Abbey comedy so ably demonstrated in Robinson's prototypal 'The Whiteheaded Boy' (1916). Shiels's 'Paul Twyning' (1922) and 'Professor Tim' (1925) are similarly genial, gently satirical, and well-crafted comedies of rural Irish life. What lent strength to Shiels's comedies was the fine company of players then working at the Abbey. Thus 'Bedmates', though but a trifle, had in the cast Barry Fitzgerald, Michael J. Dolan, and Maureen Delaney, while F. J. McCormick played the lead in the first 'Professor Tim', accompanied by Sara Allgood as Mrs Scally and Eileen Crowe as her daughter Peggy. The enormous popularity of these and other Shiels plays, revived again and again for decades, is bound up with the strengths of such performers. To a large extent the plays were vehicles for the Abbey style of acting. 
Yet Shiels could also be a serious playwright, and 'The New Gossoon' (1930) is usually singled out as evidence of this. Even 'Bedmates', short though it is, offers evidence that Shiels always had ambitions above the writing of farce. That play's basis of a dispute in a guest-house over who should rent a bed, is at the same time a political allegory: a northern protestant and a southern Catholic are set at odds by a conniving Englishman. The issue becomes how the Orangeman and the nationalist can co-habit, without sawing the bed in half! 'The New Gossoon' explores the new, post-treaty Ireland, by using the character of Luke Carey on a noisy motorbike to shatter the peace and moral ideas of the older generation. Similarly 'The Passing Day' (1936) provides, in a form which goes beyond realism, a fairly hard-hitting critique of the materialism of small-town Ireland. And 'The Rugged Path' (1940), as a kind of anti-pastoral play, explores violence in the Irish countryside and the politically contentious issue of informing against wrongdoers. Not surprisingly, Shiels struck a nerve with this play. 'The Rugged Path' ran for three months at the Abbey, where a rapid change of programme was the norm. Shiels wrote a sequel, 'The Summit' (1941), where social conscience leads to solidarity against the vicious family threatening decent people. Shiels was aware that at this time the question of standing up to the violence of the IRA, then waging a campaign in England, was topical. 'The reaction in Ireland to the Coventry martyrs has amazed me. To advocate the exercise of a public conscience after that would probably be regarded as 'playing England's game'' (Kennedy, 53). These two plays challenged traditional attitudes towards the nationalist question. A few years later he was less successful in tackling the issue of the great famine of 1845-7. 'Tenants-at-will' (1945), written to commemorate the centenary, proved too serious for the Abbey audience and its failure was a bitter blow to Shiels. 
In 1932 Shiels moved to New Lodge, Carnlough, in the Glens of co. Antrim and, abandoning his little business in Ballymoney, lived entirely by his writing, in the company of his brother Eddie and sister Mary. He rarely saw one of his plays on stage. Yet he was not reclusive, and loved to hear news and stories of the people of co. Antrim who provided the raw material of his comedies of manners and intrigue. A modest man, he refused an honorary degree from Queen's University, Belfast, and membership of the Irish Academy of Letters. Shiels was a member of PEN (Dublin centre). He died in New Lodge, Carnlough, on 19 September 1949 after a long illness and was buried in Ballymoney on 21 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 62965


Lane, Richard (1795-1880), architect, was born in London on 3 April 1795, the son of Richard Lane and his wife, Margaret ('nee' Cowen). Little is known of his parents or early life, apart from what is mentioned in an anonymous article published in the 'Manchester Evening News' of 26 March 1898, where it is stated that he was taught by the mezzotint engraver Samuel William Reynolds (1775-1835), who was married to his mother's sister, before studying the rudiments of his profession in London. He is listed in 1817 as a pupil at l'Ecole des Beaux-Arts of Achille Leclere (1785-1853), who drew upon the architecture of ancient Greece as one of his principal sources. According to the 'Manchester Evening News' article Lane returned to London in 1818 and moved to Manchester in the same year. He is first listed in a Manchester directory in 1821. The demand for buildings which would reflect the wealth and social aspirations of Manchester's new mercantile elite offered openings to a man of talent and ambition, and there was not much local competition: of the nine architects listed in a directory of 1825, most were probably no more than builders. The opportunities, however, attracted strong competition from outsiders, among them Charles Barry (1795-1860) and Francis Goodwin (1784-1835). Lane found himself competing, sometimes successfully, with both during the 1820s. 
During the 1820s and 1830s Lane became Manchester's principal exponent of the Greek revival style, which had been popularized in the city by Thomas Harrison (1744-1839) and by Francis Goodwin's town hall of 1819-21 (dem.). Early successes with a Methodist chapel, Tiviot Dale, in Stockport, Cheshire (1824-6; dem.), and club premises in Bolton, Lancashire (1824-6), were followed by Salford market hall, Lancashire (1825-7). For this Lane used an imposing pedimented portico with attached Greek Doric columns, a design he was to adapt and develop for buildings such as the Friends' meeting-house (1828-31) and the nearby Gentlemen's Concert Hall (1830-31; dem.), with its splendid portico of Corinthian columns overlooking Manchester's St Peter's Square. Like most men of his generation he also designed in the Gothic revival style, and St Mary's Church, Oldham, Lancashire (1827-30), with its fanciful neo-Perpendicular detailing, plaster rib-vaulted ceiling, and attenuated cast-iron columns, is the best of three early churches which all conform with the standard auditory type of the period. 
Lane must have felt that his career was securely established when, on 20 August 1827, he married Emma Fagg ('b'. 1806) of Bedfont, Middlesex, with whom he had a daughter, Emma, and a son, Samuel. In his professional life he continued to prosper, and the decade following his marriage saw him experimenting with a picturesque neo-Tudor style for educational institutions, most notably the West Riding proprietary school in Wakefield (1833-4), as well as continuing to develop the Greek idiom for buildings such as the Chorlton-on-Medlock town hall, Lancashire (1830-32), and Stockport Infirmary (1832-4). That archaeological accuracy was an objective of his interpretation of the Greek style is demonstrated by his reliance on the measured drawings in J. Stuart and N. Revett, 'The Antiquities of Athens' (3 vols., 1762-94) and by the Manchester corn exchange (1836; dem.), which was top-lit and had no windows to break the severity of its temple front. 
Lane was at the peak of his career when the first Manchester Architectural Society was formed in 1837, and his pre-eminence among his colleagues made him the obvious choice for president. At this time he was involved in the most ambitious project of his career. On the outskirts of Manchester, Victoria Park, with its sinuous thoroughfares and crescents and villas set in their own grounds, is an early example of a planned residential suburban development. Lane designed the layout and the handful of villas which were erected in the first few years following the opening of the park in 1837; the latter are among the few known examples of his domestic architecture. After a promising start the company failed in 1842 and Lane quickly left the house he had designed for himself there and moved to Sale in Cheshire. It must have been a bitter blow and it came at a time when his career was at a watershed. Greek revival architecture had become unfashionable, and the Regency Gothic of his churches and schools represented a style which was being reviled by Gothicists influenced by the writings of A. W. N. Pugin and the proselytizing activities of the Cambridge Camden Society (later the Ecclesiological Society). 
Fewer major commissions came during the 1840s, but those that did demonstrate that Lane was able to adapt. St Thomas's Church, Henbury, Cheshire (1844-5), is the model of ecclesiological rectitude, so different from the early churches that it could have been designed by another man. The Manchester Royal Lunatic Asylum (1848-50) in Cheadle, Cheshire, was commended for its enlightened design by J. Conolley in his pioneering book on mental illness, 'Treatment of the Insane without Mechanical Restraint' (1856). St John's Church, Isle of Man (1849-51), seat of the traditional Manx court, the Tynwald, was his last major work. 
Lane retired in 1859, and eventually settled near Ascot, where he died at his home, Fir Bank, Sunninghill, on 25 May 1880; he was survived by his wife. His career spanned a period when enormous changes were taking place in English architecture, and criticism of Regency architectural styles in general, and of his buildings in particular, appeared in the architectural press during the 1840s. In the latter half of the nineteenth century his work was overshadowed as huge commercial and civic buildings all but obliterated pre-Victorian Manchester. However, of twenty-six known major commissions fifteen survive as a testament to an architect who made an important contribution to the spread of the Greek revival style in the provinces, a scholarly and versatile man who helped to shape early nineteenth-century Manchester and was the city's first truly professional architect. 


@@@@@


doc= 62966


O'Donnell, Frank Hugh (1846-1916), writer and controversialist, was born in an army barracks in Devonport, Devon, on 9 October 1846, the elder son of Sergeant Bernard MacDonald and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Kain, daughter of William Kain or O'Cahan of Ballybane, co. Galway. His younger brother was Charles James MacDonald, later O'Donnell (1849-1934). He was educated at the Erasmus School, Galway, St Ignatius College, Galway, and Queen's College, Galway, graduating MA in 1868 with gold medals in English literature, history, and political economy. MacDonald probably assumed the name by which he was known as an expression of his belief that he was a direct descendant of Roderick O'Donnell, last earl of Tyrconnell. Frank Hugh O'Donnell had a brief career as a journalist on the 'Morning Post' (he shared a bed with T. P. O'Connor in his early days in London), and was elected MP (nationalist) for Galway in 1874, but unseated on petition, becoming MP for Dungarvan, co. Waterford, in 1877, holding the seat until 1885, when his constituency disappeared during redistribution. A controversial figure in parliament, he was 'silenced' in June 1880 by Gladstone and was known as Crank Hugh O'Donnell. O'Donnell, who had hoped to lead the Irish party and who claimed to have invented the policy of obstruction, opposed the Land League and abandoned orthodox politics in 1885. 'O'Donnell v. Walter' -- his unsuccessful action against 'The Times' in 1888, when he had sought $50,000 in damages for libel -- resulted in the parliamentary special commission into Parnellism and crime in 1888-9 and the exposure of the Pigott forgeries. O'Donnell was hostile to Parnell and remained aggressively anti-Parnellite. O'Donnell's 'A History of the Irish Parliamentary Party' (2 vols., 1910) is biased and untrustworthy, grossly inflating his own role; however it contains vivid characterization of -- 'inter alia' -- Michael Davitt and John O'Leary. 
O'Donnell was initiated into the Irish Republican Brotherhood by Dr Mark Ryan, the London Fenian leader, and subsequently moved to the Irish National Alliance. O'Donnell's Fenian career was as chequered as his parliamentary career had been. In 1897 he embarrassed his colleagues by pseudonymously running a series of articles in 'United Ireland' purporting to be from a revolutionary organization called 'Fuath na Gall' (hatred of the stranger). In 1898 he issued, under an Irish National Alliance signature, a pamphlet attacking Michael Davitt as a renegade and British agent. Maud Gonne and W. B. Yeats had this pamphlet repudiated. O'Donnell's retaliation came with the first performance of Yeats's 'The Countess Cathleen' in May 1899. O'Donnell issued another pamphlet, 'Souls for Gold!', viciously attacking the play as anti-Catholic and anti-Irish, guaranteeing a controversial reception. In 'The Stage-Irishman of the neo-Celtic Drama' (1904) O'Donnell returned to the attack, describing Yeats's plays as the 'wedding of Madame Blavatsky and Finn MacCumhail' (p. 9). 
O'Donnell's source of income remains unclear, although he was a prolific freelance journalist. He probably worked as an agent for a number of powers -- Maud Gonne thought him a spy for Britain and W. B. Yeats thought him an Austrian agent -- and he lived for various periods in France, Austria, and Germany. During 1900 when O'Donnell, like other Irish nationalists, was pro-Boer, he promised to mobilize British working-class opposition to the war, via the National Democratic League, if a large enough sum of money were paid to him by the Transvaal government. He also claimed to have prevented 50,000 Irishmen from enlisting in the English army. O'Donnell succeeded in obtaining the considerable sum of $4500 from the Transvaal government for pro-Boer activities -- there is no evidence that the whole sum was passed on to Irish organizations. Despite his eccentricity and dishonesty, O'Donnell was not expelled from the Irish National Alliance, even when, in April 1900, he circulated letters naming Irishmen whom Maud Gonne had enlisted for the Boer cause. He finally alienated himself from nationalists by publishing 'At the Sign of the Harp and the Guillotine', a pamphlet which attacked Wolfe Tone and the other 1798 leaders for destroying the Irish parliament. The 'United Irishman' disowned him in June 1900 and later referred to him as 'Chevalier of the Order of Ananias and Sappira... High Shepherd of the Golden Fleecers and Grand Master of the Knights of the Black Mail' (21 Sept 1901, 3). Mark Ryan's judgement was that O'Donnell had 'no fixed political convictions' (Ryan, 62-3). 
O'Donnell became vehemently anti-clerical, while still professing himself a good Catholic. He wrote books and pamphlets attacking the political power of the Irish Catholic clergy, including 'The Ruin of Education in Ireland' (1902) and 'Paraguay on Shannon: the Price of a Political Priesthood' (1908). He became an advocate for secular mixed education -- reversing the stance of his 'Mixed Education in Ireland: Confessions of a Queen's Collegian' (1870) -- but his coarse rhetoric was probably counter-productive. 
To T. P. O'Connor, the young O'Donnell had seemed like 'a figure from Balzac: one of the self-confident adventurers, like Lucien de Rubempre' and he regretted 'the miserable downfall in which his career ended' (O'Connor, 1.68, 70). W. B. Yeats was to characterize O'Donnell as a 'mad rogue' and as 'half genius, half sewer-rat', recalling this distinguished-looking man transforming himself into a 'half-drunken Country Councillor shaking his fist in an opponent's face' ('Collected Letters', 2, 80, 712, 710). 
Most of O'Donnell's life was spent out of Ireland and he settled in London, dying there unmarried on 2 November 1916. He was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. Despite his facility as a writer and speaker and a life dedicated to political activity, O'Donnell remains a marginal figure in Irish history. 


@@@@@


doc= 62967


Joyce, Patrick Weston (1827-1914), educationist and antiquarian, was born at Ballyorgan on the northern side of the Ballyhoura Hills in the barony of Coshlea in the south-east of co. Limerick, Ireland. He was one of eight male children of Garrett Joyce ('b'. 1794), shoemaker, and his wife, Elizabeth O'Dwyer ('b'. 1794), the granddaughter of a Major Weston of Ballinacurra-Weston near Limerick city. His brother Robert, three years Patrick's junior, was also given a metronymic; in his case that of Dwyer. Trained as a teacher, Robert Dwyer Joyce (who died in 1883 aged fifty-three) qualified and practised in medicine and is remembered as a writer of nationalist ballads. 
Descended paternally from co. Galway Joyce stock who were settled in Limerick since the mid-eighteenth century, Patrick Weston Joyce had, as grandfather, a Joyce known as Roibeard an Gaeilgeoir (Robert the Irish Language Speaker) who died in 1828, and, as father, a Joyce known as Garrett the Scholar -- with a reputation for poetry and religious debate. The family, having moved, in 1830, from Ballyorgan to the village of Glenosheen, a mile further west at the base of Seefin Mountain, Patrick Weston grew up in a partly Irish-speaking pre-famine rural community whose culturally rich mix of Gaelic ancestral tradition, palatine settlement custom, and Anglo-Irish gentry he was to recall fondly throughout a long life lived, from his twenties on, away from co. Limerick. 
Having attended a hedge school at Fanningstown and rural private academies at Kilfinnan, Galbally, and Kilmallock, Joyce was unusual in attempting both the classics and science curricula at the Market House School in Mitchelstown, south across the co. Cork border. In 1845, aged eighteen, he was himself employed as a teacher by the commissioners of national education in Ireland and subsequently became principal of the model school at Clonmel, co. Tipperary. In 1856, having married Caroline Waters of Baltinglass, co. Wicklow, he was appointed to a team of educationists charged with the reorganization of national school education. Moving to Dublin, he combined his employment with further study at Trinity College, graduating BA there in 1861 and proceeding MA three years later. 
Joyce's abilities as a career educational administrator and an amateur antiquarian researcher gained him the honorary degree of LLD from Trinity College in 1870 and the principalship in 1874 of the National Education Commissioners' training college at Marlborough Street, Dublin. He remained in this post until his retirement from the public service in 1893. His reputation then as an eminent educationist was, in time, to be replaced by his reputation as a historian and topographer. 
Joyce published in the region of thirty books on educational, literary, historical, topographical, and antiquarian subjects, the majority dating from after his retirement from the Marlborough Street College. During the remaining twenty years of his life he produced work that contributed substantially to several fields of Irish scholarship. It was justly said of him that 'all his qualities and gifts were spent prodigally in making the Ireland of the past known to the living generation' ('Irish Independent', 8 Jan 1914). Elected to membership of the Royal Irish Academy in 1863, he served on the academy's council from 1884 to 1895. He was a member of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland from 1865, and was elected a fellow and served as president of the society from 1906 to 1908. He was a founder member of the Society for the Preservation of the Irish Language at its first formal meeting in December 1876 but resigned in March 1880 during a period of public controversy in the affairs of the society. He remained, however, well disposed to the society and its aims. Two of his publications of 1879, 'Old Celtic Romances' and 'A Grammar of the Irish Language' were well received by its members and the society later published his 'The Book of Irish Music and Song' (1888). 
A meeting with George Petrie, antiquarian and music collector, in 1853, had motivated Joyce to collect Irish music and song. He published four such collections in all, the last of which, 'Old Irish Music and Songs' (1909) contained hundreds of hitherto unpublished tunes. He claimed to have always kept a piece of music paper in his pocket to jot down airs that he remembered from his youth or encountered in the course of his travels. While the accuracy and authenticity of his transcriptions have been questioned and faulted by later musical scholarship, he is credited with having been among the earliest field collectors of Irish musical tradition. 
Apart from his publications on teaching methods and on school management, which were standard textbooks in their day, Joyce achieved a wide readership with works of popular history. 'A Child's History of Ireland' (1898) was approved for use in national schools and was adopted also, as a Catholic school text, in New York and in Australia. 'A Social History of Ancient Ireland' (1903) gave a pioneering account of daily social and domestic life and of popular custom and ritual. Another pioneering work was 'English as we Speak it in Ireland' (1910), for which Joyce drew on contemporary Hiberno-English usage as well as on Irish, on older English, and on the dialects of Scotland. 'The Wonders of Ireland' (1911) includes an essay on 'Spencer's ['sic'] Irish Rivers', a topic of likely interest to Joyce since Edmund Spenser's Irish home at Kilcolman Castle was just south of the Ballyhoura Hills close to the Glenosheen of Joyce's youth -- and lifelong euphoric recall. 
Joyce's most enduring work was 'The Origin and History of Irish Names of Places' (1869-1913), whose three volumes, despite modern specialist scholarship, are still the starting point for research into the topography of Ireland as a whole. As an amateur scholar of place names -- even with a native speaker's control of the Irish language -- he was unequipped for the task of following the detailed transformation of place-name forms in Gaelic and Anglo-French and English. He nevertheless achieved a remarkable degree of accuracy in his interpretations. 
Patrick Weston Joyce, in his Irish researches and publications, consciously addressed a wider public than did the scholarly antiquarians who were surely his models: Edward Bunting and the trio of George Petrie, John O'Donovan, and Eugene O'Curry, who were associated with the work of the Irish ordnance commission and who strove to record the local history and folklore, the ethnography and the topography of the Irish countryside. In all these fields Joyce was self-taught. His selfless labours outside, and subsequent to, his professional career as an educationist mark him out as a major Irish representative of the tradition of polymath Victorian amateur scholarship of the highest integrity. In his case it was a scholarship carried on by one who felt a patriotic duty to the languages and cultural heritage of his native place and of Irish people. 
Joyce died at his home, Barnalee, Leinster Road West, Rathmines, Dublin, on 7 January 1914, aged eighty-seven years, having been sick for some five weeks. He was buried in a private funeral ceremony at Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. With his wife, Caroline, who predeceased him, he had three sons and two daughters, all of whom survived him. His eldest son, Weston St John Joyce, wrote 'Dublin and its Neighbourhood' (1912). Patrick Weston Joyce and his brother Robert are commemorated together in the Joyce Brothers' School, held annually in September at Kilfinnan. 


@@@@@


doc= 62969


Plunkett, Joseph Mary (1887-1916), Irish nationalist and poet, was born in November 1887 at 42 Upper Mount Street, Dublin, the son of George Noble Plunkett (1851-1948), academic, politician, and papal count, and his wife, Josephine, 'nee' Cranny (1858-1944). He received a Jesuit education at the Catholic University School, and later at Belvedere College. At eighteen, he began the two-year philosophy course at Stonyhurst College, where he became particularly interested by the mystics, especially St John of the Cross, John Tauler, St Teresa, and St Catherine of Siena. At Stonyhurst Plunkett wrote his first poetry, influenced both by his readings in mysticism and a sense of deepening nationalist conviction. In 1910 he began to study Gaelic in preparation for the matriculation examinations at University College, Dublin. His tutor, the poet Thomas MacDonagh, taught at St Enda's School in Rathfarnham, which he had helped Padraic Pearse to found. The two became close friends, and when MacDonagh set up a literary journal, the 'Irish Review', with James Stephens and Padraic Colum in 1911, he published some of Plunkett's first poems. 
Plunkett had contracted tuberculosis, and he spent winter 1910 and the early months of 1911 trying to improve his health in the Mediterranean and Algeria, where he studied Arabic and Sanskrit. MacDonagh corresponded with him, exchanging poems and keeping his friend in touch with political developments. Both poets resisted the pagan, occult tone Yeats and George Russell were giving to modern Irish literature, and instead strove to write a devoutly Catholic Irish poetry. Later that year MacDonagh edited and supervised the publication of Plunkett's first collection of poems, 'The Circle and the Sword'. Profoundly critical of his own work, Plunkett would have rejected many poems in the collection, but the publisher, George Roberts, demanded bulk. However, the 'Times Literary Supplement' praised the poems for showing 'a certain mystical force and that type of imagination which belongs to the Irish school' ('TLS', 21 Dec 1911, 536). 
When Plunkett returned from Algiers in 1912 he helped MacDonagh and Edward Martyn to found the Irish Theatre in Hardwicke Street, producing plays by Martyn, Ibsen, and Chekhov in pointed contrast to the 'peasant plays' at Yeats's Abbey (Plunkett, quoted in Plunkett Dillon, foreword, vii). He became increasingly involved in cultural nationalist circles, in June 1913 paying the debts and taking over the editorship of the 'Irish Review' from Padraic Colum. Under Plunkett's direction the literary magazine became increasingly politicized, supporting Arthur Griffith's Sinn Fein, and James Connolly over the 1913 lock-out strike. Later that year Plunkett attended the founding meeting of the Irish Volunteers at the Rotunda. Elected to the provisional committee, he explained that his ill health would make him a poor soldier, but offered to place the 'Irish Review' at the volunteers' disposal. 
In November 1914 Plunkett ran a particularly incendiary issue, opening with a 'manifesto of the Irish Volunteers', and 'Twenty plain facts for Irishmen'. Copies were seized under the 'Defence of the Realm Act', effectively bankrupting the paper. Turning from propaganda to direct action, Plunkett travelled to Germany shortly before Easter 1915 as the volunteers' representative to help Roger Casement negotiate German assistance for the rising. His journal of his travels gleefully details his self-dramatizing counter-espionage strategies, including conveying news of the German promise to supply arms and ammunition to his sister Geraldine through a prearranged coded Latin inscription on a copy of Italian folk-tales. Back in Dublin for Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa's funeral in August 1915, he was appointed to the military council of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. In September he left for New York to inform Clan na Gael of rebellion plans, there impressing Padraic Colum with his air of decision and command. On his return he was elected director of military operations. 
During 1915 Plunkett fell in love with the artist and his fellow nationalist Grace Evelyn Mary Vandeleur Gifford (1888-1955), sister-in-law to MacDonagh, and the couple became engaged in December that year, Gifford having converted to Catholicism. The marriage planned for Easter Sunday was forestalled by the rising, which began the following day. Plunkett was convalescent from a major throat operation earlier that month, yet spent the rising in the General Post Office (GPO) where by all accounts he acted with a bravery incommensurate with his poor health. He was a signatory to the proclamation of the provisional government of the Irish republic. A sheaf of his poems was lost, presumed destroyed as the GPO burned down. 
Plunkett was taken to Kilmainham gaol, where he was court-martialled and sentenced to death, despite his advanced tuberculosis. In a final gesture which did much to ignite public sympathy for the rising, he married Grace Gifford on 3 May 1916 by candlelight in Kilmainham chapel, attended by two armed soldiers. At two o'clock the following morning Grace was allowed to see her husband for ten minutes in his cell 'packed with officers and a sergeant with a watch in his hand' (quoted in McCoole, 33). Plunkett was executed by firing squad later that day. 
Plunkett's reputation as a poet was posthumous. Later in 1916 his sister Geraldine Dillon prefaced and edited 'Poems of Joseph Mary Plunkett', with a frontispiece drawing from memory by Grace Gifford, which ran to three editions within the year. The 'Times Literary Supplement' confessed itself bemused by the poet's messianic nationalism, noting that 'our attention is half-distracted from the verses themselves by that blind rebellion in which he lost his life' ('TLS', 7 Dec 1916, 583). The later poems in particular invited such distraction, one beginning 'There is no deed I would not dare'. Another, dedicated to Kathleen ni Houlihan, 'The little black rose shall be red at last', imagined sexual union with the feminized spirit of Ireland, ending '
Praise God if this my blood fulfils the doom 

When you, dark rose, shall redden into bloom. 

' Many were recognizably love poems to Grace Gifford. The well-known 'I see his blood upon the rose', uniting a quasi-mystical religious faith with patriotism, became much anthologized, and a standard text in Irish schools. His early death at twenty-eight prompted critics to class him as promising rather than accomplished. 


@@@@@


doc= 62970


Cubitt, Lewis (1799-1883), architect, was born in September 1799, the fourth and youngest son of Jonathan Cubitt (1760-1807), a Norfolk carpenter, and Agnes Scarlett. In July 1814 his eldest brother, Thomas Cubitt (1788-1855), the most respected and successful of the nineteenth-century London builder-developers, became a member of the Carpenters' Company by redemption (that is, payment of a sum of money). In February of the following year Lewis was bound to him as an apprentice and thus seven years later he also became a member of the company, this time in the traditional manner. By 1822 his eldest brother had already placed him in charge of smaller jobs, such as the construction of two houses in Berkeley Square. He also received some training in the architectural office of Henry Edward Kendall (1776-1875), a former pupil of Thomas Leverton and John Nash, whose designs for town houses were well regarded. Lewis later married Kendall's daughter Sophia on 23 January 1830 at St Nicholas, Brighton, Sussex. By 1824 Lewis and two of his brothers were in partnership as 'Messrs. T. W. and L. Cubitt', though this union was dissolved in 1827, Lewis first working with Thomas and then with the middle brother, William Cubitt (1791-1863), whose firm Lewis joined in 1831. Later in the 1830s Lewis established his own architectural practice at 77 Great Russell Street, London. Most of the extensive residential developments built in Bloomsbury and Belgravia by the Cubitts in the 1820s were probably to designs by Lewis. In comparison with his brothers his own speculative developments were minor, for instance the series of Italianate houses on the south side of Lowndes Square which he designed and built in 1837-9. 
During the 1840s Cubitt established a substantial and well-deserved reputation as a railway architect, designing the Bricklayers Arms station, Bermondsey (1842-4; dem.), and a building in Colchester originally intended to be the Victoria Hotel, but which was completed as a lunatic asylum (the Royal Counties Institution, 1843). 
Cubitt's involvement with the railways culminated at the end of the decade in his best-known work, the terminus at Battle Bridge for the Great Northern Railway known as King's Cross Station. The Great Northern route, the second, eastern, line to the north, had opened with a temporary station to the north of Regent's Canal in 1850 in time to bring hordes of visitors to the Great Exhibition. The permanent station, on the site of the old smallpox hospital where the New (now Euston) Road intersected the Caledonian Road, was completed in 1852 with remarkable speed and economy (it cost less than the budgeted $123,500). Its utilitarian character was in marked contrast to the nearby Euston Station with its Greek revival propylaeum (1837) by Philip Hardwick. At King's Cross the station consisted of two parallel sheds, each 800 feet long and 105 feet wide, with glazed roofs supported by a system of innovative laminated timber arches rising to a height of 71 feet. These timbers were replaced with curved steel girders between 1869 and 1887 without substantially altering the appearance of the interior. The sheds covered two sets of platforms, one set for departure and the other for arrival. This simple arrangement was lucidly expressed in the organization of the facade, which was constructed of London stock brick. It featured two massive glazed arches set in deep stepped reveals which were separated by an Italianate clock tower 120 feet high and buttressed at either end by severe brick pylons. In the contemporary press it was noted approvingly that 'great plainness prevails: the architect depends wholly for effect on the largeness of some of the features, the fitness of the structure for its purpose, and a characteristic expression of that purpose' ('The Builder', 9/459, 1851, 731). It was precisely these qualities which caused the building to be held in high regard during that part of the twentieth century when Victorian architecture in general was held in disdain for its frivolity of ornament. Cubitt was also responsible for a number of the structures covering the 45 acres of goods yards which stretched to the north of the terminus, including a substantial granary. His Great Northern Station Hotel, to the west of the train sheds, was a curving Italianate block which in its gentility bore little relation to the sublime grandeur of the main station. 
Cubitt seems not to have engaged in professional work after 1852, perhaps confirming the family tradition that he was 'the laziest and least satisfactory of the three' brothers (Colvin, 'Archs'., 282). He received a bequest of $10,000 following the death of his brother Thomas in 1855. He died at his home, 5 Lewes Crescent, Brighton, Sussex, on 9 June 1883, leaving three daughters, Ada, Agnes, and Ellen. His son Lewis predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 62971


Franklin, William (1730/31-1813), colonial governor, was born after November 1730 in Philadelphia, the eldest child of Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790), inventor and statesman, and either his common-law wife, Deborah Read Rogers (1705?-1774), the daughter of John Read and his wife, Sarah, or a mistress. He grew up above his father's printing shop on lower Market Street with his siblings Francis and Sarah. 
Franklin was educated locally at Annand's classical academy, Philadelphia, from 1738 to 1743, then, thwarted in his wish to go to sea, in 1746 enlisted for a military campaign in Canada. Later he joined an Indian treaty expedition in the Ohio territory. He no longer lived in the Franklin household, and Deborah publicly and 'in the foulest terms' was heard to call him 'the greatest Villain upon Earth' ('Diary of Daniel Fisher', 276) -- unlikely maternal sentiments. He studied law, and in the early 1750s, when Benjamin Franklin was elected to the Pennsylvania assembly, he turned over to his son its clerkship and, later, other colonial offices. Franklin became grand secretary of Philadelphia's masonic lodge. In 1752 he joined his father in the famous kite experiment with electricity, and in 1754 accompanied him to the Albany conference on colonial defence and the following year to confer with General Braddock, whom Franklin assisted in procuring military provisions. 
Firm opponents of Pennsylvania's proprietors, Franklin and his father departed for London in 1757 on the elder's mission to counter them. The Franklins lodged at 7 Craven Street, Strand. After studying at the Middle Temple, Franklin was called to the bar on 10 November 1758 and then travelled with his father through Britain and Europe. When his father received an honorary doctorate from Oxford on 30 April 1762, Franklin was awarded an honorary MA, being described as 'learned in municipal law' ('Papers', 10.76). Tall and handsome, he plunged into social life, one result being the birth of a son, William Temple Franklin, probably in 1760, to an unknown mother. When his father left for Philadelphia in 1762, he remained in London and received the royal governorship of New Jersey, probably through the agency of the earl of Bute. He took the oaths on 9 September 1762, five days after marrying Elizabeth Downes ('bap'. 1728, died 1777). 
The governor and his wife arrived in America in February 1763 and settled in Burlington, New Jersey. Caught between the demands of London and those of his colony, Franklin erroneously believed that the 1765 'Stamp Act' could 'be quietly carried into Execution throughout' New Jersey (TNA: PRO, CO 5/987), while, later, he was castigated by London for not thwarting local action against the 'Townshend Acts'. Vigorously using his position to forward private enrichment schemes, in 1766 he led the way in forming the Illinois Company, which vainly sought a massive grant of land from the crown. He built a grand house facing the Delaware River and farmed 600 acres outside Burlington. He practised his Anglican faith as religiously as befitted his position and in 1772 was elected a member of the London-based Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. 
For several years Franklin provided his father, now back in England, with colonial intelligence. As he continued to oppose Pennsylvania's proprietors, Franklin was challenged to a duel -- which never took place. In 1768 he attended the Fort Stanwix conference, where the representatives of the Six Nations named him Sagorighweyoghsta: 'dispenser or arbiter of justice'. From 1772 onwards his relations with the New Jersey assembly deteriorated, and he began lobbying for the governorship of Barbados. However, with Lord Dartmouth's appointment as head of the Board of Trade, London became far less critical of him: he had, said Dartmouth, 'kept his Province in good Order, during Times of Difficulty' ('Papers', 19.360). He owed much of his advancement to the influence of his father, who in 1771 had addressed his 'Autobiography' to Franklin. Yet by 1774 Franklin was steering a course that placed an unbridgeable gulf between them. His fervent support of parliament's policy towards Massachusetts in the wake of the Boston Tea Party caused his father to call him 'a thorough Courtier' who saw 'every thing with Government Eyes' ('Papers', 21.287). 
When the Continental Congress met in Philadelphia in September 1774, Franklin began sending highly secret intelligence to Lord Dartmouth. Remaining steadfastly at his post while other governors fled, he became the 'bete noire' of American radical leaders. He was a 'madman', who might well be tarred and feathered (Reed MSS, 4.1). When in January 1776 he prepared a further confidential report, it was intercepted and his house was broken into. By June he was arrested as an 'enemy to the liberties of this country' ('Minutes of the Provincial Congress', 456). 'New Jersey have dethroned Franklyn', reported one gleeful member of the Continental Congress (Smith, 4.210). To his tormentors he firmly restated his loyalty to the king: ''Pro Rege et Patria' was the Motto I assumed when I first commenced my Political Life, and I am resolved to retain it till Death' (Revolutionary Era MSS). He was held captive in Connecticut for over two years, on one occasion beaten, on another nearly hit by musket shot. When his wife, now in British-controlled New York city, became seriously ill, he was refused permission to visit her, and she died 'broken hearted' in July 1777 ('Papers', 25.553). 
Late in 1778 Franklin was freed. In New York, where he was awarded an annuity from the British Treasury, he was the acknowledged leader of the American loyalists, for whom he struggled to secure aid. He also built up an unofficial yet active spy network. Deeply embittered and seeking revenge, he was appointed in 1780 president of the Board of Associated Loyalists, which organized bands to plunder rebel areas. This created havoc in official British relations with the rebels and was disbanded, and a discredited Franklin departed for London in August 1782. 
In England, Franklin sought to ensure that the peace settlement provided recompense for loyalist losses in America. His father, however, was a chief negotiator of the treaty, and his hatred of loyalists in general, and the leading role played by his son in particular, was unyielding. Parliament in 1788 granted Franklin but a fraction of his claims. Mortified, he made unavailing attempts to recoup moneys he had earlier sunk into western land schemes and faded from the political scene. 
On 14 August 1788 Franklin married his Irish-born London landlady, Mary D'Evelyn ('c'.1753-1811). Two years after she died, on 3 September 1811, Franklin, suffering from angina pectoris and influenza, died, aged eighty-two, at his home, 28A Norton Street, Marylebone, on 16 November 1813. He was buried in the churchyard of St Pancras Old Church on 25 November. Effectively disinherited by his father, with whom he had never been reconciled, his bequests totalled about $600. 


@@@@@


doc= 62976


Smyth, Sir Robert, fifth baronet (1744-1802), patron of the arts and radical, was born on 10 January 1744 at Berechurch Hall, Essex, the son of the Revd Robert Smyth, vicar of Woolavington, Sussex, and his wife, Dorothy Lloyd. He was educated at Westminster School and was admitted as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 27 January 1762, from where he graduated BA in 1766. He had earlier enrolled at Lincoln's Inn (1761). On 8 December 1765 he succeeded his cousin, Sir Trafford Smyth, as fifth baronet. In 1774 he was elected MP for Cardigan Boroughs, where he remained until December of the following year when he was unseated by petition. Five years later he re-entered parliament as MP for Colchester, close to his estate at Berechurch, for which he sat as an opponent of the North ministry, an enthusiastic member of the association movement, and a supporter of Fox during the Regency crisis. 
On 17 September 1776 Smyth had married Charlotte Sophia Delaval Blake (died 1823); the couple had three children, George Henry, Louisa, and Charlotte. Born in Hamburg, Lady Smyth was naturalized by an act of parliament on 12 March 1781, thereby also confirming her marriage jointure. In 1777 the couple undertook an artistic tour of Italy. They arrived in Milan in early November, visited Naples in March 1778, and reached Rome in early April, where they became acquainted with the painters Henry Fuseli and Piranesi, who dedicated a plate to Smyth in his 'Vasi, candelabri, cippi' (1778). The ten Italian paintings that descended to Smyth's great-grandson, Thomas George Graham White (sold at Christies on 23 March 1878, lots 1-40), including works by Carracci, Correggio, and Salvator Rosa, seem to have been acquired during this trip. Back in England, Smyth became Fuseli's principal patron, for whom Fuseli produced seven of his finest paintings during the 1780s (dispersed 1878, lots 16-22), most notably 'Satan Starting from the Ear of Eve at the Touch of Ithuriel's Spear', 'Lady Macbeth', and the 'Death of Dido'. 
Smyth was an ardent supporter of the French Revolution and, 'lik[ing] neither the government nor the climate of England' (Thomas Paine, quoted in Williamson, 247), he settled in Paris in 1791. This may also be when he established his bank in the rue Cerutti now rue Lafitte (not, as asserted by Alger, at the peace of Amiens). During his decade in Paris, Smyth became a 'very intimate friend' of Thomas Paine (Paine, 425). At the famous British dinner at White's Hotel on 18 November 1792, Smyth and Lord Edward Fitzgerald proposed to toast 'The speedy abolition of all hereditary titles and feudal distinctions' -- misrepresented in the London press as an actual renunciation of their titles -- and signed the subsequent 'address' to the convention. That autumn he helped Lord Wycombe spirit the author Madame de Flahault out of Paris. 
In October 1793 Smyth assisted in the drawing up of a petition against the measures enacted against British residents of Paris. Despite his revolutionary sympathies, he was arrested on 18 November 1793; although released on this occasion, he eventually spent almost a year in confinement. During his own incarceration (from December 1793 to November 1794), Thomas Paine was sustained by the correspondence which Lady Smyth initiated with him (from 'the Castle in the Air' [Paine] to 'My Little Corner of the World' [Charlotte Smyth], (Yorke, 2.366)). This 'extremely beautiful correspondence' became 'half the world' to him, continuing, according to Yorke, 'without intermission' until 1802 (ibid., 2.346). Paine's biographers have never reached a definitive conclusion about the exact nature of this intimacy. 
In summer 1796 Paine stayed with the Smyths at Versailles when he helped Sir Robert secure a passport to enable him to travel to Hamburg to access funds from England. After Paine's return to America he recommended to Thomas Jefferson that he hire Smyth to help the Americans with their trade affairs. But such assistance was not all one-sided. Smyth consistently gave Paine moral and financial support, and was one of Paine's most frequent visitors when he was living with the Bonnevilles (1797-1802). He was also a silent collaborator in Paine's 'Decline and Fall of the English System of Finance' (1796), and forced the builders of the iron bridge over the River Wear at Sunderland (completed 1796) to acknowledge that they had relied on Paine's designs and his materials in its construction. Sir Robert Smyth died suddenly at Paris on 12 April 1802 'of gout in his stomach', and was buried at Berechurch Hall, Essex. His wife died at Versailles in 1823. The baronetcy was inherited by Smyth's son, George Henry, and became extinct at his death in 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 62979


Holford, Sir George Lindsay (1860-1926), landowner, was born on 2 June 1860 at Dorchester House, Park Lane, London, the fourth child and only son of Robert Stayner Holford (1808-1892), MP and art and plant collector, of Westonbirt, Tetbury, Gloucestershire, and Dorchester House, London, and Mary Anne Lindsay (died 1901), daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir James Lindsay. George Holford's maternal uncles were Sir Coutts Lindsay, bt (1824-1913), owner of the Grosvenor Gallery, London, Robert James Loyd-Lindsay, Baron Wantage, and (by marriage) Alexander Lindsay, twenty-fifth earl of Crawford. His father was reputedly the richest commoner in England. 
After Eton College Holford was commissioned into the Life Guards. Despite a generous allowance from his father he ran up considerable debts and in 1883 had to be helped out by his future brother-in-law, the merchant banker Robert Henry Benson. His other sisters married Albert Grey, fourth Earl Grey, and Albert Parker, third earl of Morley. In 1888 he became equerry to the duke of Clarence, whom he accompanied on an official visit to India in 1889-90; for this he was appointed CIE. He was successively equerry to the prince of Wales, later Edward VII, an extra equerry to George V, and equerry-in-waiting to Queen Alexandra. He became colonel of the Life Guards' 1st battalion in 1908 and commanded its reserve battalion during the First World War. He was knighted in 1910. 
Robert Holford died in 1892 and George Holford then came into an inheritance that included the fabled Holford picture collection, Westonbirt, Dorchester House, and over 16,000 acres. The collection remained vast, even though he sold the etchings and engravings, including a celebrated group of Rembrandt etchings, on 11-14 July 1893 at Christie, Manson, and Woods for $28,119. Further disposals included a painting by Meindert Hobbema to J. P. Morgan, privately; a portrait by Velazquez of the duke of Olivares, which passed through Duveen Bros. to the great American collector Arabella Yarrington, Mrs Collis P. Huntington; and a first folio Shakespeare to the New York dealer Dr Rosenbach. Holford's main interest, however, was in developing his father's arboretum at Westonbirt and in cultivating orchids. To this end he employed H. G. Alexander as his specialist grower. One result was 'Cymbidium alexanderi' 'Westonbirt', which by 1993 had produced 381 first-generation hybrids, each of which had been used many times for second- and third-generation hybrids. 
Holford's great-niece once asked his sister what Uncle George did and was told that he 'was at court and attended the king and he is the best backgammon player in London' (private information). It was discovered after his death that the drawers of his writing table at Dorchester House were crammed with IOUs. He had never tried to cash them as he had no need; nor, it was widely reported in his family, had he ever opened a business letter. He was amiable, generous, and even humble: it is as such a character that he made a fictional appearance in Dennis Wheatley's thriller 'The Second Seal'. 
On 17 December 1912 Holford married Susannah West Menzies, 'nee' Wilson (died 1943), with whom he was reputed to have been in love for twenty years. He first met her at Tranby Croft, her father's home, during the weekend when Sir William Gordon Cummings was accused of cheating at cards in the presence of the future Edward VII. She was the widow of Jack Graham Menzies (died 1911). Holford died, childless, on 11 September 1926 at Westonbirt. He left his orchids to Alexander. The rest of his wealth passed to his nephews and nieces, including his executor, Sir Reginald Benson, and the estates were sold. Dorchester House was razed and the Dorchester Hotel built on the site while Westonbirt became a girls' school; the arboretum passed ultimately to the Forestry Commission. 
The Greek vase, furniture, tapestries, Chinese porcelain, and objects of art at Westonbirt were sold there over five days in October 1927. The fabled picture collection was sold in two major sales; Christie, Manson, and Wood conducted all three auctions. The first picture sale, of Italian masters, took place on 15 July 1927 and realized nearly $156,000. The Dutch and Flemish pictures, together with a small number from the English school, were sold on 17-18 May 1928, and included Albert Cuyp's 'Dordrecht at the Maas' (sold for 20,000 guineas), Rembrandt's 'Portrait of a Man Holding the Torah' and 'Portrait of the Young Man with a Cleft Chin' (48,000 and 44,000 guineas respectively), 'The Elevation of the Cross' (5200 guineas) by Rubens, and Richard Wilson's 'The River Dee' (4100 guineas). The first day's sale of seventy-eight paintings realized $364,094, a world record for a single day's sale of pictures by auction; a total of $416,197 was raised over the two days. 


@@@@@


doc= 62981


Malcolm, John, of Poltalloch (1805-1893), art collector and landowner, was the second surviving son of Neill Malcolm (died 1837), twelfth laird of Poltalloch, who owned extensive landed estates in Argyll and sugar plantations in Jamaica, and his wife, Mary Anne (died 1830), daughter and sole heiress of Dr David Orme, the noted physician of London and of the Lamorbey estate, near Sidcup, Kent. He was brought up in the family's London home in Hanover Square and at Lamorbey. Educated at Harrow School (1819/20 to 1823), he matriculated on 6 February 1824 at Christ Church, Oxford, and graduated BA in 1827 and MA in 1830. He studied at Lincoln's Inn in 1829 but was not called to the bar. In 1832 he married Isabella Harriett (died 1858), daughter of the Hon. John Wingfield Stratford, with whom he had three sons, John ('b'. 1833), Edward, and William ('b'. 1840), and a daughter, Isabella. During their early married life they lived at the village of Hunton, near Lamorbey, where Malcolm served as a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for Kent; later he served likewise for Argyll. 
In 1857 Malcolm succeeded as fourteenth laird of Poltalloch on the death of his elder brother, Neill. He inherited the Poltalloch seat -- a vast, uncomfortable mansion near Lochgilphead, Argyll -- and also the family's grand London town house at 7 Great Stanhope Street off Park Lane. In the following year Malcolm's wife died. In addition to his inherited estates in Scotland and the profitable sugar and rum plantations in the West Indies, Malcolm ran, as an absentee landlord, a highly successful cattle station named Poltalloch which he had established with his brother Neill in the young colony of South Australia in 1839 and to which he imported the finest breeds of cattle from Scotland. In June 1873 Malcolm sold this and another cattle station, with 4000 head of livestock, for the prodigious sum of $175,000. 
It was Malcolm's enormous wealth that enabled him to become one of the leading collectors of his day. In 1860 he purchased 'en bloc' the remarkable collection of Renaissance drawings formed by the great connoisseur J. C. Robinson, then superintendent of the art collections of the South Kensington Museum, later the Victoria and Albert Museum. The great strengths of this core collection of some 554 sheets were the works of Italian Renaissance masters, including thirteen drawings attributed to Leonardo da Vinci, twenty-three to Michelangelo, and thirteen to Raphael, many of which had been acquired by Robinson from the London dealers Messrs Woodburn, who had bought the famous collection of Sir Thomas Lawrence. On Robinson's advice Malcolm continued to add to his collection; the large Michelangelo cartoon 'Epifania' (BM) was purchased at the Woodburn sale of June 1860 for the ridiculously low sum of $11 0's'. 6died, with Robinson acting as his buyer. In March 1866 on Robinson's advice he purchased 135 lots, mostly of seventeenth-century Dutch drawings, at the Leembruggen sale in Amsterdam, and later that year Malcolm bought eighty-three lots, including twenty-four Claude drawings, at the posthumous sale of the Oxford divine Dr Wellesley. By 1866 Malcolm's collection had grown to some 708 old-master drawings. In 1869 Robinson published his 'Descriptive catalogue of the drawings by the old masters, forming the collection of John Malcolm of Poltalloch, esq.', in which he outlined the principles guiding the formation of Malcolm's collection, which by then numbered 870 drawings: to collect genuine specimens of the highest aesthetic quality, by the greatest masters, and with a distinguished provenance. These criteria defined Malcolm as belonging to a new breed of connoisseur whose highly disciplined and selective approach differed from the often indiscriminate accumulations of earlier collectors of drawings. 
Malcolm's connoisseurship as a collector was largely formed by his involvement initially with the Fine Arts Club, on his election in 1862, and more importantly its successor, the Burlington Fine Arts Club (BFAC), of which he was a founding member in 1866. His close and lifelong friendship with the collector William Mitchell, dating from the early 1860s, was also significant. Sidney Colvin, keeper of the British Museum's print room, later recalled that Malcolm's 'passion as a collector [was] to a large extent stimulated as well as directed by an inseparable 'fidus Achates' in the person of a bachelor friend... William Mitchell' (Colvin, 'Memories', 207). The pair were involved with the inner running of the BFAC, lent regularly to its shows, worked together in building up their complementary collections, and were a familiar sight at the salerooms in London and on the continent. By 1870 Malcolm's position as Britain's most important collector of old-master drawings was confirmed by his loan of twenty-three Raphaels and seventeen Michelangelos to an ambitious exhibition of drawings by these two artists at the BFAC, with the Royal Collection as the second largest lender. Malcolm also formed an important collection of old-master prints as well as a very fine group of Venetian Renaissance glass, Limoges enamels, a famous St Porchaire faience 'biberon', and other distinguished 'objets d'art'. 
On 30 May 1893 Malcolm died at Poltalloch House, and he was buried under the terms of his will (2 May 1888) in the family vault of the Episcopalian chapel at Poltalloch next to his 'dear wife'. The obituary in the 'Oban Times' (3 June 1893, 5) described Malcolm as 'a model landlord' noted for 'the consideration shown towards his numerous tenants'. His eldest son, John Wingfield Malcolm, succeeded to the title and his estates; Malcolm bequeathed to him the sum of $100,000 and his collection of old-master drawings and prints. 
A few days before he died Malcolm presented the famous 'Sforza Book of Hours' to the British Museum's department of manuscripts (now in the British Library); this is one of the world's finest Italian Renaissance illuminated manuscripts, which J. C. Robinson had purchased in Spain in 1871 and then sold to Malcolm after his initial offer to the British Museum had failed. Less than a month after Malcolm's death his heir donated the Michelangelo cartoon to the British Museum and placed Malcolm's collection of almost 1000 drawings and more than 400 prints on deposit in the print room. Determined that the Malcolm collection should not suffer the same fate as the Thomas Lawrence collection, which had been dispersed following the Treasury's refusal to acquire it for the nation, the keeper Colvin revealed the richness of Malcolm's collection in a loan exhibition at the British Museum in March 1894. With the support of Mitchell, who in January 1895 had presented his unrivalled collection of German woodcuts to the print room, Colvin negotiated to purchase from the heir the Malcolm collection for the nation for the sum of $25,000. In his report to the trustees Colvin argued that the Malcolm collection of drawings 'has long been celebrated... as the richest that has ever been brought together in England since the dispersal of the Lawrence collections'. Following the trustees' successful application to the Treasury, this single acquisition in September 1895 raised the museum's holding of old-master drawings to a level comparable with the celebrated collections of the Louvre, Paris, and the Albertina, Vienna. 


@@@@@


doc= 62982


Williams, Marjorie Agnes Watson- (1892-1984), artist, was born at 14 Westbourne Place, Clifton, Bristol, on 14 May 1892, the second of the five children of Patrick Watson-Williams MD (1861-1938), an ear, nose, and throat specialist and a keen amateur artist, and Margaret Long Fox (1865-1952), who came from a Quaker family and was a niece of the philosopher F. H. Bradley. Marjorie was educated at Clifton High School for Girls, Bristol (1905-9), and at art school in Bristol (1909-12). From 1912 to 1914 she studied at the London School of Art under George Belcher, a draughtsman for 'Punch', and also attended evening classes in lithography at Chelsea Polytechnic in London. Her illustrations in 1916 for 'A Diary of the Great Warr', published under the pseudonym 'Saml Pepys, junr', led to a commission to write and illustrate five articles on London life for the journal 'Drawing and Design'. At this time her black and white drawings were figurative and often humorous. 
Watson-Williams's mature work as a painter dates almost entirely from her first visit to Paris in 1920, an experience of crucial importance and inspiration to her. Her paintings developed rapidly from a late form of impressionism into a more boldly simplified style. Many of these early works, both paintings and prints, were based on scenes in restaurants, theatres, and circuses. Her first one-woman exhibition in London was at the Dorien Leigh Galleries in 1921, and in 1922 she joined the London Group. 
In 1926 Watson-Williams decided to settle in Paris and she adopted the name Paule Vezelay. There she met many of the leading artists, including Henri Matisse, Joan Miro, Wassily Kandinsky, and Juan Gris, and exhibited regularly at the Salon des Surindependants. In 1928 she met the surrealist Andre Masson (1896-1987) and their passionate relationship lasted until 1932. During this period she painted a few semi-surrealist pictures but also produced her first abstract works in which the subject matter dissolved away. In 1934 she was invited to join the Abstraction-Creation group and she began a lifelong friendship with Jean Arp and Sophie Taeuber-Arp. Her paintings evolved from recognizable shapes which floated and danced in space, and became entirely abstract, with flat planes of colour and clear-cut forms. Typical of this period are 'Strange Landscape' (1933) and 'Worlds in Space' (1935). She also made a few small sculptures in plaster. However, her most personal and original contribution to the abstract movement was her series of constructions known as lines in space, consisting of shallow wooden boxes strung with threads and later with coloured wires: works which are delicate and playful, the shadows cast by the lines adding to the effect. The exhibition of these at the Galerie Jeanne-Bucher in Paris in 1937 helped to reinforce Paule Vezelay's growing reputation; and in 1938 and 1939 her work was included in several major surveys of abstract art in Milan, Amsterdam, and Paris. The outbreak of war in September 1939 came, therefore, at a crucial moment in her career. 
Vezelay returned to England and spent much of the war in Bristol, seldom able to paint. Her works included a few unofficial war drawings, particularly of barrage balloons -- objects which resembled the abstract shapes which so fascinated her. Unable to gain a foothold in post-war Paris, she moved to 60 Redcliffe Square, London, where from 1952 to 1957 she devoted time and effort to founding a British branch of the Groupe Espace. In 1957 she made her final home at 12 Beverley Close, Barnes, London. Here she produced textile designs for Heal Fabrics Limited (1955-67) and was elected a fellow of the Society of Industrial Artists in 1958. Apart from exhibitions in London at the Leicester Galleries (1954) and the Grosvenor Gallery (1968), Vezelay felt extremely isolated at this time. In the 1970s and 1980s she made delicate pastels and collages, and finally works which had no forms but simply colour, space, and light. Her work was exhibited in a few galleries in New York and London, notably by Annely Juda Fine Arts. Finally, at the age of ninety-one, she was accorded a retrospective exhibition at the Tate Gallery in 1983. This followed a BBC2 television programme, 'Women of our Century', in which she represented the artist in that distinguished group. Both these events helped to alleviate her lack of recognition in Britain and the loneliness of her last four decades. 
Marcel Brion credits Paule Vezelay with 'a completely original and independent conception for the expression of form in space' (Brion, 302-4), and the critic Josef Paul Hodin, in an unpublished essay of 1975, calls her 'a master of classical abstraction'. In the catalogue of the 1983 Tate Gallery retrospective exhibition Ronald Alley states that she was one of the first British artists to commit themselves totally and irrevocably to the abstract movement (Alley, 13). Her works are represented in the major collections in Britain. Her self-portrait 'Harmony' (1927-9) and her painting of 'Goossens Rehearsing Richard Tauber' (1925) are in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Her published articles include 'Juan Gris' ('Artwork', 4/16, 1928, 258-61) and 'Jean Arp' ('World Review', Sept 1949, 61-4), and she left an unpublished manuscript entitled 'Drawing and composition' (Tate collection, archives, Paule Vezelay MSS). 
Paule Vezelay dressed stylishly. Although reserved, she could appear intimidating, feeling at a disadvantage in a man's world and especially in the sphere of commerce. She was, however, a generous friend and an excellent correspondent. She enjoyed entertaining and designed her own garden, and her extensive library included many philosophical works. She lived alone and still worked indomitably up until her death at the age of ninety-one, after a short illness, at Barnes Hospital, Mortlake, London, on 20 March 1984. She was cremated at Mortlake crematorium on 29 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 62983


Coster, Howard Sydney Musgrave (1885-1959), photographer, was born on 27 April 1885 at his family home, 29 Lavers Road, Stoke Newington, London. He was the third of five sons of William Isaiah Coster, commercial clerk (listed in Howard Coster's 'Times' obituary and 'Who's Who' as John William Coster), and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Porter. William Coster died when his sons were still boys, and the family subsequently moved to Ventnor on the Isle of Wight. There Mary's sister Annie helped to bring up the five boys, and her brother Samuel ran a photographic business at 31 High Street, Ventnor -- a traditional Victorian portrait studio, with glass walls and a glass ceiling. After attending the local school in Ventnor, Howard Coster began a five-year apprenticeship as a general assistant at his uncle's studio, where he earned 2's'. 6died a week. His duties included the laborious task of preparing wet collodion negatives and supervising 200 daylight-printing frames. 
In 1906 Samuel's business was taken over by James Allen, and Coster, now aged twenty-one, abandoned photography in favour of farming in South Africa. His brother Percy had emigrated to the Orange Free State four years earlier. However, after two years of farming, Howard Coster returned to Britain, taking up a position at a portrait studio in Coventry, where he remained for three years, before travelling to South Africa again. 
During this second period abroad Coster worked as a travelling photographer. Cycling through the small towns with a tent as a darkroom, he made portraits of cattlemen, and gained free accommodation at hotels in exchange for portrait sittings. Shortly before the outbreak of the First World War he opened a studio with Mr Somerville in Maitland Street, in the centre of Bloemfontein, but in 1918 he returned to England, to enrol in the Royal Flying Corps. He became attached to the aerial photography section, and reached the rank of lieutenant. A small album from this year survives, containing fascinating aerial photographs and images of wrecked planes, juxtaposed with personal snapshots of Coster's comrades and idyllic English rural scenes. 
After the war Coster returned to South Africa. This time settling there for seven years, working initially in a studio in Bloemfontein and subsequently with Lionel Levson in Johannesburg. In 1925 he married Joan Burr (1903-1974), and the couple returned to London to open their own studio at 8 and 9 Essex Street, off the Strand. Unusually, the Coster studio was dedicated solely to the photography of men, and just a few months after opening, in May 1926, the credit line 'Coster -- photographer of men' began appearing in the press. In this he followed the example of the American photographer Pirie McDonald, who worked as a 'photographer of men' in New York from the 1900s. Moreover, Coster was anxious to distance himself from the many society photographers in London, who specialized in beautifying their female clientele. 
The business was a success from the outset and by the end of the year Coster had undertaken several commissions for portraits of successful writers, including John Galsworthy, J. B. Priestley, and one of his most iconic images, A. A. Milne with his son Christopher Robin Milne and Pooh Bear, at Cotchford Farm, their home in Sussex. In 1926 Coster superseded E. O. Hoppe as portrait photographer for 'The Bookman', a literary magazine, producing small half-tones of contemporary writers. In the Christmas issues of 1929 and 1930 several pages were devoted to large sepia photogravure reproductions of Coster's portraits of Siegfried Sassoon, Algernon Blackwood, R. H. Mottram, M. R. James, Alfred Noyes, E. Phillips Oppenheim, and Philip Guedalla. Despite the closure of 'The Bookman' at the end of 1934, Coster remained the pre-eminent photographer of British literary figures, and his portraits of authors frequently appeared on the inside covers of the sixpenny paperback books first printed by Penguin in 1935. 
However, Coster's output was not limited to literary portraits. From 1928 to 1931 the self-styled 'photographer of men' produced portraits of eminent women and fashion photographs for British 'Vogue', under the by-line 'Howard and Joan Coster'. Through 'Vogue' he met his fellow contributor Baron George Hoyningen-Huene who often made use of Coster's well-equipped London studio. Coster also created advertising images for, among others, Brylcreem, Manikin Cigars, and Slumberland Beds. 
At this time Coster also worked regularly for 'The Bystander' magazine, and from 1929 until 1940 (when the magazine merged with 'The Tatler') he produced various weekly series, such as 'Prominent men of the day photographed at home', 'Our public men', 'Powers of the pulpit', and a series of museum directors entitled 'National custodians'. After 1935 he produced his most important work for 'The Bystander', which included film and theatre stars, directors and producers, theatre designers and composers. 
By 1930 Howard and Joan Coster were living in St John's Wood, London, and they employed several staff in the Essex Street studio. Joan supervised the printing, but rarely operated the camera. A secretary, two printers, an apprentice named Arthur Strong, and a former boxer, Joe, responsible for moving lights and heavy equipment, made up the team. Between 12 and 3 o'clock there was no sitting in the studio, and Coster held an open house, generously providing lunch for the staff and visitors. The portraits from this period were made on three different sizes of film negative: 10 inches by 8 inches, whole plate (81/2 in. x 61/2 in.) or half-plate (61/2 in. x 41/2 in.). They were printed on matt or textured paper and often sepia- or cream-toned. The lighting techniques were simple yet striking, frequently relying on just one blue floodlight and a reflector. 
The soldier and writer T. E. Lawrence recalled the experience of being photographed in Coster's studio, on 31 October 1931, in a letter to Charlotte Shaw: 'On Friday I was on the embankment by the Temple... a little bare-headed man rushed up and said, 'Colonel Lawrence?' Used to be, I replied. 'I want to photograph you.' But who are you, I asked. 'My name is Howard Coster.' A professional, I asked. 'Yes, but this is for myself. I don't want to sell it or show it. You and Gandhi are the two people I want to take.' So I went along, for the joke of it, and he put me on a little chair, made me take my tunic off, and photographed me about a dozen times. A little shop in Essex Street. Rather a nice little stammering man, I thought. Works for 'Vogue'! Had chased me for 5 minutes, afraid to speak.' Howard Coster's portrait of Lawrence of Arabia became an iconic image, appearing in the 'Photography Year Book, 1936-1937' and the 'Illustrated London News', after Lawrence's death. It was also exhibited in Photography of 100 Years at the Science Museum in 1939, and in the premises of Kodak Ltd, West Street, Durban, South Africa, alongside Coster's portraits of Aldous Huxley, John Gielgud, Laurence Olivier, and Eric Gill. Coster's friendship with the sculptor and typographer Gill produced the largest collection of negatives of a single subject by Coster, and included many studies of him at work. In return Gill produced a delineative portrait of Coster (1931, NPG). 
Coster's reputation as a leading portrait photographer was reinforced when in 1932 he was selected as one of the British representatives at the prestigious Wertheim Gallery exhibition in London. Other exhibitors included John Havinden (1908-1987) and Barbara Ker-Seymer (1905-1993) from Britain, the Hungarian-born Laszlo Moholy-Nagy (1895-1946), and Edward Steichen (1879-1973) from America. Although both were original in their approaches to portraiture, parallels may be drawn between Coster and Steichen, who were similarly inspired by the lighting effects of the expressionist German films of the 1920s. 
Other influences from Europe included the work of Man Ray, in particular his use of solarization and under-exposure. One example of Coster's own experimentation with these new techniques is his solarized portrait of Frank Buchman (1878-1961), which appeared in 'The Bystander' on 15 June 1938. As a prominent member of the Professional Photographers' Association, Coster frequently gave public lectures, championing innovative non-British photography and encouraging experimental approaches to advertising and commercial photography, including the use of X-ray photographs. 
In 1937 Coster was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, and from then on the letters FRSA followed his credit line. In the same year an exhibition of 249 of his portrait photographs was held at the department store Selfridges, entitled 'Camera portraits by Howard Coster'. 
As the Second World War loomed, Coster continued to work for 'The Bystander', but turned his camera away from the arts, towards political figures and foreign ambassadors in London. This period witnessed a change in style too; from 1938 onwards he used the smaller 35 mm Contax camera for location work, and his name appears in the 1940 Contax advertising campaign. It has been commented that these portraits lack the clarity and technical skill of his earlier full- and half-plate images. 
After the outbreak of war Coster was commissioned to take a large number of official portraits of army, air force, and political leaders, many of which appeared in the 'Illustrated London News', 'The Tatler', and 'The Sketch'. His photograph of Air Vice-Marshal Owen Tudor Boyd ('The Sketch', 18 September 1940) was exhibited at the RAF War Photographs Exhibition at the Building Centre. In November of the same year Coster's portraits of Augustus John and Jacob Epstein featured in the exhibition of the Institute of British Photographers, at 49 Gordon Square, London. 
In 1943, as his success endured, Coster moved to a new studio at 3 Victoria Street, Westminster. His work continued to appear in many publications, including 'Homes and Gardens', 'Good Housekeeping', 'The Countryman', and 'African World'. A year later he was awarded the freedom of the City of London, in acknowledgement of his lifelong commitment to his art and his important contribution to British photography. In 1946 Coster closed the studio and retired with his wife to the country. His collection of 8000 negatives was acquired for the nation by the British Council photographic library, and it subsequently passed to the Central Office of Information, which gave it to National Portrait Gallery in 1974. 
In 1953 Howard Coster returned to business in the West End and to a new studio at 9 Sackville Street, London W1. Portraits from this later period include John Betjeman, Cecil Day-Lewis, Compton MacKenzie, and John Gielgud, many of which were published in the 'Tatler and Bystander' and 'The Recorder'. He enjoyed his later years with Joan in their terraced house at 32 Friars Street, Sudbury, Suffolk, and continued to work almost until his death on 17 November 1959 at St Audry's Hospital, Melton, Suffolk. 
Talkative, with a slight stutter, Coster's lifelong success was a result not only of his technical skill but also of his interest in human nature, and his careful study of the character of every sitter. His apprentice in the early 1930s, Arthur Strong (1908-2004), who also has work in the National Portrait Gallery collection, described Coster as 'a patriot; he also believed in God, though he held to no orthodox religion' (Pepper, xiii). In appearance Coster was of medium build with bright blue eyes and a prominent nose. 
The significant contribution Coster made to British photography was appraised in the 1985 exhibition 'Howard Coster: camera portraits of the twenties and thirties' at the National Portrait Gallery, London, curated by Terence Pepper. In addition to Coster's collection of 8000 negatives the National Portrait Gallery houses six personal photograph albums and twelve portrait albums from the 1920s and 1930s, which can be glimpsed in the background of his celebrated portrait of W. H. Auden, Christopher Isherwood, and Stephen Spender (1938). Contained in the personal albums are many contact prints and experimental shots, including solarized images of flowers and objects. The diverse range of subjects, such as an East End children's hospital, the Isle of Wight's beaches, and penguins at London Zoo, reveal that Coster's interests and skills extended far beyond portraiture. 


@@@@@


doc= 62985


Farleigh, Frederick William Charles (1900-1965), wood-engraver and painter, was born on 16 June 1900 at 104 Carlton Street, St Pancras, London. He was the son of Frederick William Farleigh, billiard marker, and his wife, Mary Ann Bleach. He was brought up in London and attended St Mary Abbots School in Kensington. The fields around Kensington and the streets of the City formed the background to his early years and he expressed a genuine and undying affection for London throughout his life. 
Farleigh became an articled apprentice at the Artists Illustrators Agency in Balham, London, in 1914 and began to take evening classes in drawing at the Bolt Court School. In June 1918 he was called up for service in the army and served until the armistice in November. In 1919 he completed his apprenticeship and obtained a government grant which enabled him to study full time for three years at the London County Council Central School of Arts and Crafts, where he was taught by Bernard Meninsky and introduced to wood-engraving by the influential head of book production, Noel Rooke. After a period as an assistant art teacher at Rugby School (1922-5) Farleigh returned to take a part-time post teaching antique and still-life drawing at the Central School of Arts and Crafts. He married Elsie Ida Evelyn Wooden (1900-1981) at the register office, Kensington, on 13 November 1925. She had also been a student at the Central School of Arts and Crafts. Their only child, Mary, was born in 1927. 
As well as producing murals, paintings, and drawings, Farleigh received commissions for designs from the Postal Congress Union (1929), London Transport (between 1933 and 1963), and Poole Potteries (1934) among many others. He also began to produce wood-engravings about 1921 and in 1925 was elected a member of the Society of Wood Engravers. In that same year he received his first commission for wood-engraved designs when the Golden Cockerel Press chose him to illustrate an edition of the 'Essays of Swift'. For the next thirty-three years he was commissioned by most of the influential private presses and commercial book publishers of the period and illustrated twenty-eight books with wood-engravings. He achieved wide acclaim and recognition for his illustrations to 'The Adventures of the Black Girl in her Search for God', written by George Bernard Shaw and published by Constable in 1932. Shaw commissioned Farleigh after requesting a trial drawing and was closely involved in the designs. Farleigh duly acknowledged Shaw's input in his partly autobiographical work 'Graven Image' (1940) where he gave a detailed account of the progress of the book. Shaw's witty, satirical text, and Farleigh's quasi-erotic depictions of the African girl, 'a fine creature, whose satin skin and shining muscles made the missionary folk seem like ashen ghosts' (Shaw, 'The Black Girl', 1932, 8), guaranteed its success. The first edition of 25,000 copies, priced inexpensively at 2's'. 6died, was sold immediately. This was the first mass-produced book of the period to contain wood-engravings and it was effective in popularizing the medium for commercial book illustration as well as for the private presses. 
Farleigh's independent prints form a lasting personal contribution to the art of wood-engraving. They demonstrate technical virtuosity and intellectual content and place him alongside other important artists of the period who developed the medium as an art form. He produced several large images, many of mythological content such as 'Lilith' (1937), which demonstrated that wood-engraving was not just limited to the small scale. He was appointed head of book production at the Central School on the retirement of Noel Rooke in 1947 and, as a teacher, played an influential role in encouraging and inspiring a new generation of wood-engravers. In the introduction to the monograph on John Farleigh, written by his former student Monica Poole, his teaching is described as full of vitality and enthusiasm and the man himself as forthright, with a great sense of humour but a deeply serious mind (Poole, 5-17). 
Farleigh exhibited frequently at the Royal Academy summer exhibitions from 1937 until 1964, and had several solo exhibitions at the Leicester Galleries and Lefevre Gallery between 1938 and 1946. In 1948 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers. Farleigh wrote a further five books on crafts and craftsmen between 1945 and 1959 which were also a vehicle for his theories on the teaching of art and design and were illustrated with his own and his students' work. In his 'It Never Dies' (1946), Farleigh included some moving passages from his wartime diaries, written when he carried out duties as an air-raid warden. In 1940 he had been appointed chairman of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society and his ambition was to open a permanent exhibition centre in London for designer craftsmen. In 1946 the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society banded together with four other arts and crafts organizations to form the Crafts Centre of Great Britain. The Craft Centre's gallery opened at Hay Hill, Mayfair, in 1947. Farleigh was appointed CBE in 1949 for his work in founding this organization and in 1950 he took over the chairmanship, resigning only in 1964. During this period he promoted and campaigned for the crafts in Britain with his articles, lectures, and broadcasts. The death of Farleigh's daughter in 1954, at the age of twenty-seven, had a devastating effect on his life. His wife's health suffered and he became seriously ill in 1960. He died on 30 March 1965 of pneumonia and leukaemia at Hampstead General Hospital, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 5 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 62987


Gaskin, Georgie Evelyn Cave (1866-1934), designer, was born on 8 December 1866 at Cliff Cottage, Belle Vue, Shrewsbury, the elder daughter of William Hanmer France, contractor's agent, and his wife, Frances Emily Cave-Brown-Cave. Arthur Joseph Gaskin (1862-1928), artist, designer, and teacher, was born on 16 March 1862 at 169 Great Lister Street, Birmingham, the second son of Henry Gaskin, journeyman decorator, and his wife, Harriet Brassington. 
Little is known about Georgie France until 1888, when as a student at Birmingham Municipal School of Art she began to win prizes with designs for needlework, wallpaper, and metalwork. Her work reflected a new emphasis on decorative art in the teaching of the school, an emphasis by which the city council hoped to raise standards of design in local industries. It also reflected the enthusiasm of young Birmingham artists for the medievalizing themes and craft revival of the arts and crafts movement. Arthur Gaskin, who had studied at the school and taught there from 1885, was one of these artists. The careers of Georgie and Arthur Gaskin depended on this fruitful coincidence between the city's forward-looking civic ideals and the backward-looking romanticism of the arts and crafts movement. 
Arthur Gaskin began to work as a decorative artist about 1890, when he took up black and white illustration, inspired by woodcuts of 'c'.1500. He developed a linear, decorative style that is seen at its best in 'The Shepheardes Calender', printed at William Morris's Kelmscott Press in 1896. His work encouraged a flowering of book illustration at the school, and Georgie France's illustrations in the early 1890s followed his style. But with 'Divine and Moral Songs for Children' (1896) she changed to a more distinctive style that suited the Kate Greenaway world of her imagination, with doll-like children in smocks and bonnets, drawn in fine outline and often in colour. 
Arthur Gaskin and Georgie France were married on 21 March 1894. In 'Divine and Moral Songs' Georgie wrote that the pictures were dedicated to her husband 'by his pupil and wife'. But she was not his pupil in the marriage. He was a shy man who loved teaching -- tradesmen did not always escape the Gaskin household without a drawing lesson. She was grander socially, more intellectual, and more in control of the family, and she dressed their two daughters, Joscelyne ('b'. 1903) and Margaret ('b'. 1907), in the style of her illustrations, sometimes to their embarrassment. The Gaskins were a thoroughly artistic couple and their marriage embraced a working relationship. 
Arthur and Georgie worked together and apart. For a few years about 1900 Arthur painted in tempera but found the paintings difficult to sell. About 1898 he started designing enamelwork; Georgie took some to London in January 1899. In summer 1899 Georgie and he started producing jewellery. Georgie did all the designing, Arthur contributed enamelwork, and they both made the pieces with assistants. About 1900 Arthur started designing metalwork, and in 1903 he was appointed headmaster of the Vittoria Street School for Jewellers and Silversmiths, a branch of the school of art in the jewellery quarter, where the mass of Birmingham's (and thus Britain's) decorative metalwork was made. His task was to improve taste in the skilled but commercialized quarter and, as emblems of this task, he designed several pieces of presentation silver which were then executed by colleagues skilled in damascening, niello, and other techniques. Meanwhile in the south-eastern suburbs of Birmingham Georgie was at work on the jewellery on which their reputation mainly rests. At first it consisted of silver wirework set with coloured stones and enamel, graceful and technically unambitious. Gradually the scrolls of wire were encrusted with colour and detail, flowers in enamel, tiny birds cast in silver, and, by the time of the First World War, her work was often richly set with gems, resembling seventeenth- and eighteenth-century work. (The largest collection of the Gaskins' work in all media is in Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery.) 
In 1924 Arthur resigned from Vittoria Street and he and Georgie retired to Chipping Campden, in the Cotswolds. Arthur returned to wood-engraving and painting in tempera; Georgie designed jewellery until a few months before her death. Arthur Gaskin died on 4 June 1928 in Chipping Campden. Shortly afterwards Georgie moved to West Malling, in Kent, where she died at her home, the White Cottage, on 29 October 1934. They are both buried in Chipping Campden. 


@@@@@


doc= 62991


Joel, Betty (1894-1985), furniture and interior designer, was born on 7 June 1894 in Hong Kong, the daughter of Sir James Haldane Stewart Lockhart KCMG, LLD (1858-1937), colonial secretary and dedicated collector of Chinese art, and his wife, Edith Louise Rider, 'nee' Hancock (1870-1950), daughter of a bullion broker. She attended Miss Weisse's school, Northlands, Englefield Green, Surrey, between the ages of nine and sixteen and her education was completed with a governess. In 1918 Mary Stewart Lockhart married David Joel (1890-1973), a naval lieutenant (later commander) in Ceylon and they returned to England. She stated (Patmore, 276) that she began designing furniture for her own modern house, then began accepting commissions from friends. She and her husband set up a small furniture making business, Betty Joel Ltd, at Hayling Island, Hampshire, in 1921. She had been calling herself Betty since 1907 and this name was adopted for the firm as it was thought to convey a modern feeling and to appeal to female customers. 
Neither Betty nor David Joel had received any training in design and, early on, she assumed responsibility for design while he administered the business. Betty Joel had a confident and assertive personality but was happy to take advice from the craftsmen they employed. Their employees often had a background in boatbuilding and fitting, reflected in the simplified arts and crafts style of the early furniture. This range was named Token furniture, after the two woods, teak and oak, which were predominantly used in its manufacture. It was retailed through a showroom at 177 Sloane Street in London, which, as the business developed, was moved to 25 Knightsbridge, also the Joels' home. This property included an art gallery where they exhibited both abstract paintings and modern carpets, some of which were designed by Betty Joel and manufactured in China. The factory was moved to larger premises in Portsmouth in 1929. The solidity and simplicity of the early furniture was replaced by greater sophistication as Betty Joel drew inspiration from a range of sources, including Chinese furniture, European modernism, and French art deco. The hallmarks of Joel furniture through the 1930s were extensive use of exotic woods and curvilinear shapes. 
Individual clients of Betty Joel Ltd included Sir Winston Churchill, Lord Mountbatten, and the duchess of York, but the firm also produced a more moderately priced furniture range and worked for corporate bodies such as the Savoy and Claridges hotels, Fortnum and Mason, and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Gaumont cinemas. She ventured into product design in the 1930s, designing an Esse stove for Smith and Wellstood Ltd of Bonnybridge and radio cabinets for K-B (Kolster-Brandes) Radio Company. Such a range indicates Betty Joel's popular success, but her work was often criticized by the modernists of the architectural press for indulging her taste for exotic materials and not being sufficiently concerned with function. Her prizewinning circular bed, designed for the British Art in Industry exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1935, was described by Herbert Read as having been 'twisted and contorted into a shape which I can only compare to a dislocated hip-bath' (Read, 48). Joel's spirited defence of her designs formed part of her extensive writings in the design press. Her support of modern architecture was demonstrated by commissioning H. S. Goodhart-Rendel to design a new factory at Kingston upon Thames in 1935. 
Between 1937 and 1939 the Joels' marriage failed and the factory was briefly transferred to David Joel. It closed down during the Second World War. Betty Joel retired to Scotland and resumed her maiden name. Her retirement in her mid-forties and later reluctance to talk about her career have resulted in the neglect of her achievements by design historians, if not collectors. In her former husband's books on modern furniture design the only image of her is of a portrait head. Betty Joel's final years were spent at Fotheringay, a bungalow in Berkshire which she designed. She died in a nursing home, Millway House, near Andover, Hampshire, on 21 January 1985. Some examples of her furniture and carpets are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 62992


Mairet, Philippe Auguste (1886-1975), draughtsman and critic, was born at 12 Blythwood Road, Islington, London, on 27 April 1886, the second youngest of five sons and two daughters of Charles Sylvain Mairet (1840/41-1907), a watchmaker of Swiss nationality, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Goldsmith, originally from Thames Ditton, in Surrey. Mairet attended the local board school, and then the Stationers' Company's School in Hornsey. He entered Hornsey School of Art in January 1901, where he trained for four years. His first job was as a draughtsman and designer for the celebrated architect and social reformer C. R. Ashbee as part of the Guild of Handicraft in the Cotswold town of Chipping Campden. Both socially and intellectually his time in this community was the equivalent of the university years from which he felt his lower middle-class background had excluded him. 
The guild introduced Mairet to the ideas of the arts and crafts movement. It was also here that he met Ethel Mary Coomaraswamy (1872-1952) ['see 'Mairet, Ethel Mary], wife of the art historian A. K. Coomaraswamy, for whom Mairet worked as a secretary in 1910. After the breakdown of her first marriage Ethel and Philippe fell in love and married on 28 May 1913. They spent their early married years in a thatched cottage in Shottery, near Stratford upon Avon, where Ethel had a weaving business (she was later to become one of the central figures in the revival of hand-weaving in Britain). In the same period Philippe worked for Burlison and Grylls, a firm of stained glass window makers on Great Ormond Street, where he helped design one of the windows for Sir Gilbert Scott's Anglican cathedral in Liverpool. 
In the winter of 1914 Mairet met Dimitrije Mitrinovic (1887-1953), a Serbian philosopher and mystic who was working for the Serbian legation in London. By his own admission Mairet invested Mitrinovic with the 'aura of the sage or prophet' ('Autobiographical and Other Papers', 86). Mairet also worked briefly as assistant to the social evolutionist Patrick Geddes while Geddes was doing a vacation course of lectures with Gilbert Slater at King's College, London. Mairet joined the Red Cross in 1915, but at the end of 1917 was persuaded to resign and become Mitrinovic's full-time collaborator and disciple to spread the gospel of 'pan-humanism'. Partly to escape detection by the military authorities for avoiding conscription, Mairet moved to the utopian agrarian community at Ditchling in Sussex, where he met Douglas Pepler and Eric Gill and published 'An Essay on Crafts and Obedience' (1918). He was eventually discovered by the authorities, arrested, enrolled in the Royal Sussex regiment, court-martialled, and imprisoned in Wormwood Scrubs, partly in solitary confinement. He was released at Whitsuntide 1919. 
Between 1922 and 1926 Mairet was an actor at the Old Vic, where he used the stage name Henry Cohen. He played numerous parts including the Bishop of Ely in 'Henry V' and Sir Charles Surface in 'The School for Scandal'. He also continued his work for Mitrinovic in this period and met the Viennese psychologist Alfred Adler in 1926. Mairet wrote 'ABC of Adler's Psychology' (1928) and helped found the British branch of the International Society for Individual Psychology in order to publicize Adler's ideas. Mairet was involved with Mitrinovic's New Europe group, which operated from the same building at 55 Gower Street, London. As part of the group's activities Mairet claimed to have written the first manifesto calling for the political union of Europe ('Autobiographical and Other Papers', 138), which Passerini (p. 127) has identified as 'Integration of Europe: the Way to Reconstitute the States of Europe as an Organic Society in a New World Order' (1931). 
Throughout the inter-war years Mairet gained an increasing reputation as a cultural critic and commentator. He was a founding member of the Chandos group, which had originated in a meeting called by Mitrinovic on 12 May 1926 and took its name from the restaurant at the lower end of St Martin's Lane. This group became known as a forum for Christian cultural criticism, attended by T. S. Eliot and others. Mairet commented on the drafts of Eliot's 'Notes Towards the Definition of Culture' (1948), which Eliot later dedicated to Mairet 'in gratitude and admiration'. Mairet later remarked to C. H. Sisson that he would be remembered for the books dedicated to him rather than for those he had written himself ('Autobiographical and Other Papers', xvi). 
In early 1932 Mairet eventually freed himself from Mitrinovic's influence, in what he described as the 'complete destruction of my previous way of life' ('Autobiographical and Other Papers', 174). His marriage to Ethel broke down at the same time, partly due to his affair with Gwendoline Norsworthy, who was involved with the New Handworker's Gallery which Mairet had opened in Percy Square, London, in 1927. Mairet described this affair as a 'second marriage', but it was one, in his words, that took place 'without benefit of law or clergy' (ibid., xix). 
Philip (he Anglicized his name in the 1930s) Mairet's writing, publishing, and editing activities came increasingly to the fore. He had been a contributor to Alfred Orage's influential cultural review, the 'New Age', from 1919. Later, when Orage acquired the 'New English Weekly' in 1932, Mairet became his assistant. On Orage's death in 1934 Mairet took over the editorship of the journal, a position he held until 1949. The 'New English Weekly' became an organ for the ideas of the Chandos group and a supporter of C. H. Douglas's theory of social credit. Mairet's review was also important in giving publicity to the nascent ideas of the organic food movement, an interest which he continued after the Second World War as a member of the Soil Association. 
On 31 October 1943 Mairet was received into the Anglican communion by the bishop of Willesden at St Silas's, Kentish Town, where Mairet was later to become a churchwarden. He claimed that the drift towards the Church of England had dominated his thoughts for the previous twenty years ('Autobiographical and Other Papers', xxi). He edited the Anglican journal 'Frontier' with Alec Vidler; contributed to Maurice Reckitt's journal 'Christendom'; and described his allegiances later in life as 'Anglican and Royalist'. Nevertheless, in his later years Mairet's activities and interests remained extraordinarily varied: he continued his work of publicizing Adlerian psychology and produced English translations of Emmanuel Mounier ('Personalism', 1952) and Jean-Paul Sartre ('Existentialism and Humanism', 1948). Indeed it is the bewildering variety of Mairet's interests throughout his life that has limited his posthumous reputation. A mild and self-effacing man, he was above all an interpreter and publicist of the ideas of others, from C. R. Ashbee and Patrick Geddes (on whom he wrote 'Pioneer of Sociology' in 1957) to Mitrinovic, Adler, and Eliot. As such he was at the forefront of some of the most interesting spiritual and sociological ideas of the twentieth century and, according to his friend Maurice Reckitt, 'could not fail to be a notable influence in any company' (Reckitt, 191-2). 
Mairet had a stammer throughout his life, and in his later years was short and slight with a bald head and longish grey hair at the back and sides. Owen Barfield and C. H. Sisson both described his appearance -- in the friendliest possible way -- as 'frog-like' ('Autobiographical and Other Papers', x). Latterly resident at 23 St Swithin's Terrace, Lewes, Sussex, he had a stroke at the age of eighty-six, and died at a nursing home in Seaford, Sussex, on 9 February 1975. 


@@@@@


doc= 62995


Schleger, Hans (1898-1976), graphic designer, was born on 29 December 1898 in Kempen, Posen, Prussia, the second of two sons of Eduard Schlesinger (1859-1932), doctor of medicine, and his wife, Bianca Mendelsohn (1871-1941/2). Both his parents were Jewish. About 1904 the family moved from Kempen to Berlin where Hans attended day school, bored by academic studies but showing precocious talent at drawing. He served unwillingly with the German pioneer corps in the First World War, throwing away the Iron Cross which he was awarded when war ended. He shortened his name to Schleger by the time he was twenty and was studying painting and drawing at the Kunstgewerbeschule in Berlin. 
Schleger's modernist vivacity as a designer and the range of his activity in a career that was to embrace the design of posters, packaging, exhibitions, trade marks, and corporate images can be traced back to the influence of the Bauhaus, strong in Berlin culture in the early 1920s. He consistently followed Bauhaus principles of reduction to essentials and he believed in demolishing barriers between fine and applied arts. Poster art as a populist, modernist medium attracted him: he was an early admirer of the work of A. M. Cassandre and Lucian Bernhard. 
After leaving the Kunstgewerbeschule, Schleger's first job was for John Hagenbeck's idiosyncratic film company, where he was responsible for everything from publicity design to film sets. At a time when consumer advertising was emerging as a fully-fledged profession Schleger was intrigued by new techniques of visual persuasion, with their roots in behavioural sciences and the interpretation of desire. 
In 1924 Schleger set off adventurously to New York, travelling on an oil tanker from Bremen. He spoke only limited English, had very little money and no contacts. It was now he adopted the signature Zero, a wry comment on his status as a designer starting out from scratch as well as an assertion of his emancipation from graphic traditions of the past. His creative originality was obvious in the advertising work that soon came the way of 'the 'Wunderkind', Hans Schleger, the young Berlin graphic artist, who is of all the post-war emigre artists the most successful', as he was already being described in the German professional journal 'Gebrauchsgraphik' for February 1926. 
Schleger's techniques were sophisticated. His famous series of advertisements for men's outfitters Weber and Heilbroner use photography in a then enterprising way, integrate text and image with reductionist aplomb, and introduce one of the earliest of Schleger's masterly trade marks, the three linked Homburg-hatted men about town. The illustrations made by Schleger for Park and Tilford Candies and Gunther Furriers, gently satiric of the luxuries they advertise, have a wonderful elegance of line. His dramatic magazine advertisements for the Empire State Engraving Company show Schleger's own ambivalent response to New York city, at once a place of nightmare and of fascination. 
The Wall Street crash encouraged Schleger to give up his Madison Avenue office. Another influence was his first cousin, Annemarie Mendelsohn ('b'. 1906), whom he married soon after his return to Germany, on 1 December 1929. Schleger was now employed as an art director by W. S. Crawford, a branch of the progressive London advertising agency recently set up in Berlin. In the dislocated atmosphere of Berlin at that period he arrived at images of beautiful decadence, notably in a series of airbrush illustrations used as advertisements for Hudnut, the perfumiers. 
Unnerved by the growing political intolerance Schleger left Germany in 1932, and arrived in England, a country he had never even visited in spite of his American reputation as a connoisseur of English upper-class style. His contacts among Crawford's modernist designers, Ashley Havinden and E. McKnight Kauffer in particular, were helpful in establishing him quickly at the centre of London avant-garde design. Schleger and his wife moved into a penthouse flat in Swan Court, Chelsea, adjacent to that occupied by McKnight Kauffer and the American textile designer Marion Dorn. 
Schleger's work in the 1930s had a wit and sureness that did much to spread the visual language of modernism in the Britain of that time. His posters for Shell, London Transport, and various government departments were widely circulated. In 1935 Frank Pick commissioned the famous London Transport bus-stop sign which survived for many decades. Schleger's series of advertisements for the corset maker Charnaux harnessed surrealism to commercial art. Success encouraged him to remain in England and he became a British citizen in 1939. 
The early years of the Second World War were traumatic for Hans Schleger. Work dried up. He left London and rented a cheap isolated cottage in Cobham, Surrey. His mother, whom he had failed to persuade to join him in London, was taken in November 1941 on the first transport train from Berlin to Teresienstadt and then to the ghetto in Minsk. The exact date of her death remains unknown. Schleger's wife left him and they were divorced in 1943. The strain of these events was extreme, and he began psychoanalysis which continued until his second marriage, to his design assistant, Patricia Marigold (Pat) Maycock ('b'. 1928) on 11 February 1956. 
But professionally Schleger was soon in demand again. He designed cheerfully demotic war propaganda posters: for example 'Grow your Own' for the Dig for Victory campaign. After the war he expanded his practice, becoming a consultant to the advertising agency Mather and Crowther and setting up his own office, Hans Schleger and Associates at 14 Avenue Studios in Chelsea, a purpose-built studio occupied by John Singer Sargent at the turn of the century. 
Schleger became the most important pioneer of British corporate identity, comparable only with F. H. K. Henrion, another European emigre. He was responsible for brilliant new visual interpretations of MacFisheries and Finmar, Fisons, and ICI. For twelve years he designed the graphics for the Edinburgh Festival, a formative influence in establishing its cultural significance. Schleger's rare combination of subtlety and boldness made him especially adept at the trade mark, evolving memorable symbols for Penguin Books, John Lewis, the Design Centre, and Hutchinsons. Examples of his designs are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London's Transport Museum, and the Imperial War Museum, London, and the National Gallery of Australia, Canberra. 
Schleger became a royal designer for industry in 1959. But in spite of many subsequent accolades and international honours Schleger never lost his edginess, easy to mistake for arrogance, and he was most at ease with his young office staff, his wife, and his two daughters. On the genial continental pattern, Schleger's domestic and office lives were merged. He died at his home, 15 The Boltons, London, of heart failure on 18 September 1976. His funeral service was held at St Mary the Boltons, and Schleger was cremated on 24 September at Putney Vale crematorium; he was an outstandingly resourceful and idealistic artist-designer who affected profoundly the visual life of his adopted land. 


@@@@@


doc= 62999


Whall, Christopher Whitworth (1849-1924), stained-glass artist and craftsman, was born on 16 April 1849 at the rectory, Thurning, Huntingdonshire, the third of eight children of the Revd William Whall (1808-1874), rector of Thurning-cum-Little Gidding, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Boultbee (1817-1891). Christopher Whall's rural childhood in the hamlet of Thurning was a lifelong inspiration, and his art was rooted in his sympathy with vernacular craftsmanship and a profound love of nature. He was largely educated at home but from 1863 to 1865 attended Rossall School, Lancashire. His ambition, despite parental opposition, was to be an artist. He moved to London, and in 1867 enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools, where he studied painting for the next seven years; Lord Leighton (one of his teachers) and the Pre-Raphaelites were early influences on his work. In the late 1870s he travelled in central and northern Italy for almost three years, studying painting and decorative art, guided by the writings of John Ruskin. At Lucca he felt called to dedicate himself to 'Catholic art' (C. W. Whall, 'Private Journal'). After returning to London in 1879, he became a Roman Catholic and was helped by the Rosminian Order of Charity at St Etheldreda's, Ely Place, who commissioned his first designs for stained glass for the newly restored church. The windows were only a partial success, and further experience of designing for firms such as James Powell & Sons reinforced Whall's growing frustration with the division of labour between artist and executant in the craft. 
On 10 November 1884 Whall married Florence Chaplin (1849-1936), a portrait painter, and in the following year they moved to a cottage and smallholding at Stonebridge, near Dorking, Surrey, where their five children were born. Whall's career remained precarious until in 1887, having converted part of his cowshed into a workshop, he determined to learn the technical processes of stained glass -- cutting, painting, and glazing -- so that no aspect of the craft would be beyond his experience and control. His works shown at the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society in 1888 were described as among 'the most important' ('The Year's Art', 1889, 97) and he soon gained commissions from leading architects such as J. D. Sedding and Henry Wilson (lady chapel windows, St Mary's, Stamford, Lincolnshire, 1891-3) and E. S. Prior (east window, Holy Trinity, Bothenhampton, Dorset, 1895). 
Identifying with the continuous tradition of English stained glass, not just its medieval triumphs but also the humbler work of eighteenth-century plumber-glaziers, Whall created an innovative, expressive style based on materials and honest craftsmanship. It was a logical development from Morris & Co.'s stained glass, with the added dimension brought by Whall's own constant involvement in workshop practice. His windows are emphatically glassy rather than purely pictorial in character, combining sumptuous colours, thickly textured 'slab' glasses, and bold leading patterns. The beautifully drawn figures, often framed by silvery canopies of foliage and set against backgrounds of patterned quarries, blend the Italianate grace of late Pre-Raphaelitism with a peculiarly English -- and Gothic -- sensibility. The general effect subtly echoes, without imitating, historic forms. 
By the late 1890s Daddy Whall (as he was called by his studio staff) was assisted by a team of young pupil-apprentices, many of whom progressed to distinguished careers of their own. Their collaboration was essential to his most important commission, the glazing of the lady chapel and chapter house at Gloucester Cathedral (1898-1913), which established him as the leading stained-glass artist of the arts and crafts movement. Acclaimed by the American architect Ralph Adams Cram as 'perfectly Medieval and perfectly Modern' (R. A. Cram, 'My Life in Architecture', Boston, 1936, 192), much of the Gloucester work was undertaken for payment which barely covered costs. It led, however, to many subsequent commissions: windows for Canterbury Cathedral (1900-02), for the new cathedrals at Cape Town (1908) and Pretoria (1909-10), and for churches in the USA. 
In 1896 Whall and his family had returned to London, where W. R. Lethaby invited him to teach stained glass at the London County Council Central School of Arts and Crafts and, later, at the Royal College of Art. Whall's inspirational teaching, stressing technical mastery alongside design skills, is encapsulated in his book 'Stained Glass Work' (1905), still the best manual ever written on the subject. Friends and followers felt that his windows truly expressed the man. He was, like the saints depicted in his glass, 'gentle, friendly, great-hearted' (Connick, 245). 
The extent of Whall's influence on British, Irish, and American stained glass in the early twentieth century would be difficult to exaggerate, for almost every major designer-craftworker of the period belongs, in some sense, to his 'school'. It would include, among many others, Louis Davis, Henry Payne, and James Hogan in England, Douglas Strachan in Scotland, Wilhelmina Geddes and Harry Clarke in Ireland, and Charles Connick in the USA. In art education his impact was seminal: he helped set up courses at Dublin and Birmingham and, throughout the English-speaking world, his 'Stained Glass Work' became the standard textbook on the craft. Whall was master of the Art-Workers' Guild in 1912 and closely involved in organizing the British arts and crafts exhibitions at Ghent (1913) and Paris (1914) and at the Royal Academy (1916). Although eminent within his profession, he disliked publicity and self-promotion, declining a knighthood as incompatible with his lifestyle as a practising craftsman. 
From 1907 Whall's studio-workshop was at 1 Ravenscourt Park, Hammersmith, a short walk from 19 Shaftesbury (later Ravenscourt) Road, where he lived for over twenty years. His daughter, Veronica Whall (1887-1967), began work in the studio while still in her teens and many later commissions were designed and made jointly with her, for example the east window at Leicester Cathedral in 1920. Their collaboration was formalized in 1922 as Whall and Whall Ltd. In 1921 Whall moved to 37 Harvard Road, Gunnersbury, where he died on 23 December 1924. Despite contracting leukaemia, he continued to work almost to the end. Examples of his designs are in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the William Morris Gallery, London, where an exhibition of his work was held in 1999-2000. Nature studies, including 'The Oak Tree and its Inhabitants' by Whall and his pupils, are in the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 63001


Clark, John (1798/9-1857), architect, gave his address as Edinburgh in 1826 on the foundation plate of his first recorded building in Leeds, but nothing is known about his early life or his architectural training. He was a contemporary of Thomas Hamilton and William Henry Playfair, the leading Greek revival architects in Edinburgh, and his early buildings are similar to theirs in character. It was with a Greek revival design that Clark first came into prominence in Leeds, the expanding industrial town which offered good architectural opportunities in the 1820s. In 1825 a limited competition was held for the Commercial Buildings, an ambitious undertaking estimated to cost $30,000. It was to combine commercial uses with a concert room and news room. In 1826 designs were received from Charles Barry, Robert Dennis Chantrell, Francis Goodwin, Anthony Salvin, and Thomas Taylor, as well as from Clark; the last was declared the winner, although according to the 'Leeds Intelligencer' he had been the favoured architect from the beginning. This suggests that his work was already known in the town, although his obituary in the 'Building Chronicle' states that this building 'was the occasion of Mr. Clark's introduction to Leeds' ('Building Chronicle', May 1857, 197). Built on a corner site, the curved Ionic screen on the angle was crowned by a circular drum ornamented with a cornice and a honeysuckle scroll taken from the choragic monument of Lysicrates. Inside there was an elegant room shown in Clark's watercolour 'Leeds Commercial Buildings' (n.d.) in the collection of the Thoresby Society, Leeds. 
The success of this building led Clark to set up in practice in Leeds, and his work extended also to other parts of Yorkshire. He designed mansions on the northern fringe of Leeds for wealthy merchants and industrialists, such as Gledhow Grove (1830s) for John Hives, for whom he also built Bank Mills (1833), Meanwood Hall for Christopher Beckett ('c'.1834), and Roundhay Hall for William Smith ('c'.1840, attributed). All were in a Greek style which was beginning to verge on the Italianate. For Woodhouse cemetery, a private burial-ground, he designed an Ionic mortuary chapel and a Doric gate-lodge (1835). In the town itself Clark built the Trustee Savings Bank in Bond Street (1834), a Soane-like design, and the Yorkshire District Bank in Boar Lane (1836). In the newly fashionable Woodhouse area he built a number of brick villas with stone dressings, including Woodsley House ('c'.1840-1841) in Clarendon Road for Sir Peter Fairbairn, in which Queen Victoria stayed when she formally opened Leeds town hall in 1858, houses in Woodhouse Square (1840), as well as an extension to John Atkinson's house, Little Woodhouse (1835). He made a design in the Gothic style for St George's Church, Mount Pleasant (1836-8), and ones in the Tudor style for a library and master's house attached to the grammar school (1830), and for almshouses at Woodhouse ('c'.1840). Outside Leeds, he built the Wilberforce Column, Hull (1834), a huge Doric memorial to the celebrated Yorkshire MP; Airedale College, Bradford (1831-4); a Gothic house, St Catherine's, near Doncaster, for George Banks (1838); and the Royal Chalybeate Spa, Harrogate (1835). Like ninety-six other aspiring architects, Clark submitted an entry in the competition for the new Houses of Parliament (1835); like most, he was unsuccessful. He died at 6 Park Square, Leeds, on 16 April 1857 'after a protracted illness of eight years [and was] followed to the grave by the regrets of his numerous friends' ('Building Chronicle', May 1857, 197). 


@@@@@


doc= 63003


Compton, Denis Charles Scott (1918-1997), cricketer and footballer, was born on 23 May 1918 at 20 Alexandra Road, Hendon, Middlesex, the youngest of three children of Henry (Harry) Ernest Compton, a manufacturing chemist's counterman, and his wife, Jessie Anne Duthie. Both parents resided at Woodford in Essex before moving to Hendon, where Harry Compton established himself as a painter and decorator. Denis's brother, Leslie Harry, followed Denis as a Middlesex cricketer and preceded him as an Arsenal and England footballer. His sister, Hilda, was a natural athlete. 
The sporting proclivities of the children derived from their father. Harry Compton was captain of the old boys' cricket team of Bell Lane elementary school, Hendon, and from Denis's earliest years took him to the games to score and, when the chance came, to play. Denis also attended the Bell Lane school; at ten he was in his school team, and at twelve he was scoring runs against an adult team which had to be encouraged by his father to bowl as well and fast as they could. Captain of his school team at both cricket and football, he next captained North London Schools at Lord's against the South, making 88. Aged fourteen he led the London Elementary Schools against a team of public schoolboys, also at Lord's, made 114, and helped to bowl out the opponents for an easy victory. Happily Sir Pelham Warner saw the game and in the spring of 1933 a contract was offered by MCC at the standard ground boy rate of 25's'. Denis's mother was sceptical until the Arsenal Football Club manager, the famous Herbert Chapman, signed the boy on, so providing employment all the year. 
As with most batsmen destined to reach the top branches of the tree, success arrived at precocious speed. Compton's first appearance for Middlesex came in the Whitsuntide match of 1936 against Sussex at Lord's. Success in that before a full house was followed after a few weeks by his first hundred, and G. O. Allen was soon wondering whether to take the eighteen-year-old prodigy to Australia with MCC that winter. As it was, the first of Compton's seventy-eight test appearances came in the last test of the following summer (1937) against New Zealand. Against Australia in the first test of 1938 at Trent Bridge he made the fourth hundred of a then record total of 658 for eight declared. 
It was, however, at Lord's in the second innings of the second test of the series that Compton played what in the minds of the best judges was the defining innings of his life. On a pitch made treacherous by rain and sun England, having lost five wickets for 76, faced probable defeat if he failed. In this situation Compton confronted the fire of McCormick and the spin and lift of O'Reilly with a mastery of technique and coolness of judgement which would have been remarkable in the most mature of batsmen, let alone a young man of twenty. His 76 not out enabled Hammond to declare and put Australia under pressure to draw the match. Compton made seventeen hundreds in tests, yet he always regarded this as his best innings. Henceforward, it seemed, that strong hint of genius would be frustrated only by misfortunes outside his control. 
Compton was lucky in those pre-war years in being a member of a strong side, second only to Yorkshire, led by a dashing captain of his own adventurous spirit in R. W. V. Robins: lucky also from 1937 onwards, when Bill Edrich of Norfolk arrived at Lord's to form with him what became one of the most famous partnerships of cricket history. He was fortunate also in the influence of successive head coaches of MCC. The first of them, George Fenner, saw that his cricket was essentially instinctive. 'I shouldn't say I coached him', he would demur. 'Let's just say I didn't spoil him' (West, 24). Pat Hendren, the Middlesex senior professional, and Archie Fowler, who took over from Fenner, reacted similarly. 
Crowds took to Compton warmly from the start because he communicated an obvious enjoyment of the game. With his dark good looks went an appealing, carefree spirit. Driving over Vauxhall Bridge he was once told by a fellow motorist who was listening to the radio that the day's cricket in the test at the Oval, in which he was playing, had already started. People forgave an uncertain regard for time and place -- which unfortunately grew no better with the years, as wives, tour managers, friends, and all concerned would unanimously agree. 
In 1939 Compton improved on the previous years' records with 2468 runs at an average of 56: there were eight hundreds, including his first in a Lord's test, 120 against West Indies made in only 2 hours 20 minutes in a scintillating partnership of 248 with Len Hutton. The latter, batting slowly until Compton joined him, suddenly began to match him stroke for stroke, the roundhead donning for once the plumes of the cavalier. It was to be seven years before these brightest of English stars batted again together. Hutton on the resumption had to improvise with a left arm shortened by a physical training accident. Much luckier, Compton had seen the last two years of his service with the Royal Artillery in India, where he took good advantage of some first-class cricket, playing for Holkar in the Ranji trophy tournament. 
Twelve seasons remained to Compton after the war. He reached the peak of his fame in the first four, after which his cricket was impeded by permanent trouble with his right knee. There was one operation which kept him off the field for half the 1950 summer. A more serious one entailed removal of the kneecap in 1955 following regular manipulations to increase the flexion. At the end of the 1957 summer, aged thirty-nine, the pain and frustration demanded his retirement. His record, when the restrictions of the last eight years are considered, is extraordinary: in 515 matches 38,942 runs, average 51.85, with 123 hundreds: in 78 tests 5807 runs, average 50.06, with 17 hundreds. There were 416 catches, 49 in tests. His slow left-arm bowling, little used before the war, was at times, when he developed wrist spin and a well-disguised googly, an important factor. He took 622 wickets, all told, at 32 runs apiece. He was too expensive to be a success in tests, though he might have won one. 
As an outside-left Compton was a member of the famous Arsenal teams of the 1930s. He played eleven times for England in wartime internationals. Afterwards, though the MCC tours of 1946-7 and 1948-9 restricted his football, he remained an Arsenal player. He had a powerful left foot and the same flair for the occasion which characterized his cricket. Thus, despite the suspect right knee (from which a ligament had been removed following a pre-war collision with a goalkeeper), he was picked for the cup final of 1950 against Liverpool. In this, the last game he ever played, Peter West tells in 'Denis Compton: a Cricketing Genius' how his subject considered he had played poorly in the first half. Tom Whittaker, the Arsenal manager, gave him a transforming slug of brandy at the interval, and Denis and Leslie were able to add cup winners' medals to the league winners' medals they had won in 1947-8. 
The impact of Compton's cricket now touched new heights of hero-worship. Society found an antidote in sport to war-weariness and austerity, and here was a young man who not only played supremely well but so manifestly relished what he was doing and the pleasure he was giving. 'Let's enjoy this!' he was saying as one county attack after another suffered at his hands. Gerald Brodribb in 'Champions of Cricket' has estimated that in his innings exceeding 50 (of which there were 300) his average rate of progress was about 47 runs an hour. B. J. Wakley estimated Don Bradman's rate as 42. Brodribb names only five truly great batsmen who scored faster: Woolley, Trumper, Macartney, Ranjitsinhji, and Duleepsinhji. 
Almost inevitably there were brief periods when the machinery failed to synchronize. At the height of the summer of 1946 Compton made four 0s in a row, all at Lord's, yet he still averaged 61 for the season, with ten hundreds. The other blackspot, much more calamitous, encompassed the 1950-51 series in Australia, when he averaged 7.57 in the tests and in the remaining matches 92.11. In between these extremes -- and, of course, afterwards less copiously -- the runs flowed in abundance both at home and overseas. Against Australia at Adelaide he made a hundred in each innings. In England neither his aggregate of 3816 runs (average 90.85), made in the hot dry summer of 1947, nor his eighteen hundreds for the season, made the same year, has ever been approached. No Englishman has ever scored as many runs in a home series as his 753 in the tests against South Africa. In fact Bill Edrich, his comrade-in-arms, lagged only a little behind him in that memorable summer. He too exceeded with 3519 runs (average 80) Tom Hayward's previous record total. The runner-up, however, suffered the normal eclipse of the second best: 1947 went down in history as Compton's year. 
It was as a result of his prodigious fan mail and of certain commercial offers that Compton accepted the suggestion of a businessman, Bagenal Harvey, to help manage his affairs. Harvey became the first prominent sporting entrepreneur. Theirs was a long association, one of the early fruits being the famous Brylcreem advertisement. This became something of a standing joke, for the smiling figure on the hoardings usually batted without a cap and his hair was often conspicuously untidy. 
Of all Compton's test hundreds the writer would give pride of place to his 184 in the test against Australia at Trent Bridge in 1948. It was stretched over six and a half hours and ten separate periods of play, most of them in an eerie, yellow light. In a gallant though vain effort to save the game there was scarcely a false stroke, certainly not a chance. Later in that series at Headingley his wrist spin would probably have reversed the result had not one stumping chance and two slip catches off him been missed at the outset of the winning partnership between Morris and Bradman. 
Unfit for the first four tests against Australia in 1956, Compton was picked for the last and bowed out with an innings of 94 which Sir Donald Bradman, now a 'Daily Mail' reporter, rated as the best of the series. A second visit to South Africa the following winter proved a tour too far. Back home, however, he ended his professional career with a sparkling 143 against Worcestershire at Lord's. 
In the 1958 new year honours Compton was appointed CBE. He wrote on cricket for the 'Sunday Express' with regular help from R. J. Hayter for forty years, and in the 1950s commented on tests for BBC television. In contrast with his philosophy as a cricketer he was apt to sound a forthright, sometimes almost a fierce note as a critic: he was very much 'laudator temporis acti'. He served for many years as a director of Royds public relations company. 
Compton was married three times. His first marriage, on 1 March 1941, to Doris Yvonne Rich ('b'. 1920/21), a dancer, daughter of Bernard Stewart Rich, a schoolmaster, was dissolved. They had one son. In 1951 he married Valerie Platt, of Isipingo, Natal, whom he first met in Durban during the 1948-9 tour of South Africa. There were two sons of the marriage, which was dissolved in 1960. On 23 September 1975 he married Christine Franklin Tobias ('b'. 1943/4), daughter of Benjamin Franklin Tobias, company director, with whom he had two daughters. Compton became president of Middlesex in 1990-91 and remained so almost to his death. His name was fittingly perpetuated at Lord's when in 1991 the new open stands at the nursery end were named after Compton and Edrich, one either side of the sightscreen. Edrich had died, but Compton was present on the spot where as a boy he had first watched sixty years previously. The president of MCC, Lord Griffiths, escorted him back to the pavilion to his last standing ovation. He died in hospital at Windsor, Berkshire, on 23 April 1997, survived by his third wife. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 2 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 63005


Maddocks, Ann (bap. 1704, d. 1727), tragic heroine, is believed by many to have been the subject of one of the great star-crossed romances of modern Wales. She was probably born at her father's house, Cefn Ydfa, near Llangynwyd, Glamorgan, and was baptized on 8 May 1704. Her parents were the lawyer William Thomas (died 1706) and his wife, Catherine, of Tyn-ton, Llangeinor, Glamorgan, who was the sister of Rees Price, the father of the philosopher Richard Price. 
According to popular tradition centred on Llangynwyd and the surrounding region, William Thomas, who died in December 1706, had placed his heir, Ann, in the wardship of Anthony Maddocks, a lawyer of Cwm Rhisga, who eventually compelled her, against her wish, to marry his own son Anthony (died 1764). Although there is no reference to this wardship in William Thomas's will, Ann and Anthony junior, who was also a lawyer by profession, did marry on 4 May 1725 and their detailed marriage contract is extant. There is some evidence to suggest that the marriage was not an entirely happy one. Ann died in Llangynwyd in 1727 and was buried in the church there on 16 June, barely two years after her marriage. Her daughter, Catherine, the only child of that marriage, died some three weeks previously and was buried on 28 May 1727. 
Around these facts a poignant romantic story has been woven. It is claimed that Ann was deeply in love with Wil Hopcyn (1700-1741), a poet from Llangynwyd to whom various Welsh verses are attributed by popular tradition, including 'Bugeilio'r gwenith gwyn' ('Watching the white wheat'), which, it is believed, he had composed for her. 
The story of the Maid of Cefn Ydfa, embroidered with a plethora of sentimental details and associated in particular with the song 'Bugeilio'r gwenith gwyn', became very popular in Wales during the second half of the nineteenth century. It was discussed in detail by G. J. Williams, who cogently argued that, after it had been stripped of the accumulation of details that were manifestly the product of romantic fantasy and conjecture, its central core consisted of a few facts that Taliesin Williams 
(Taliesin ab Iolo; 1787-1847)
claimed in April 1845 to have heard from the parish clerk of Llangynwyd thirty-two years previously, and that it was Taliesin who had initiated the process of conjectural elaboration others later ingeniously continued. Williams believed that it was Edward Williams 
(Iolo Morganwg; 1747-1826)
who first maintained that Wil Hopcyn was the author of the verses and that it was his son, Taliesin, who, after finding the poem in his father's manuscripts, began connecting it with the traditional story. Although it may contain a core that is genuinely old, it seems likely that Iolo himself was the author of the poem in its final form. Taliesin passed the words to Maria Jane Williams (1795-1873), who published them in her 'Ancient National Airs of Gwent and Morganwg' (1844). Later, Mrs Mary Pendrill Llewelyn (1811-1874), wife of the vicar of Llangynwyd, began to collect the Welsh verses associated by popular tradition with that area and to claim that some had been written by Wil Hopcyn and were connected with the Cefn Ydfa episode. 
The story became the theme of various literary works in the second half of the nineteenth century and some mawkish elements, similar to those frequently found in such romantic tales, were soon added to it -- the heartless mother who forcibly confined her love-smitten daughter to her room; messages being carried to the maiden's lover by a servant; love letters, written with Ann's own blood on a sycamore leaf, being concealed in the hollow of a tree; the hapless maiden incessantly languishing and eventually dying of a broken heart. The story was also the theme of an opera composed by Joseph Parry in 1902, with an English libretto by Joseph Bennett. 


@@@@@


doc= 63007


Furnese, Sir Henry, first baronet (1658-1712), politician and financier, was born at Sandwich, Kent, on 30 May 1658, the eldest son of Henry Furnese (died 1672) of Sandwich and his wife, Anne (died 1696), the daughter of Andrew Gosfright of Sandwich. Augustan satirists made much of Furnese's humble origins, but his father married the daughter of a former mayor of Sandwich, and tales of a penurious upbringing seem to rest on his father's bankruptcy. In the year of his father's death Furnese was apprenticed to one of his Gosfright uncles, a London hosier. Many of the Gosfright clan traded to Flanders and Italy, and Furnese followed in their footsteps. He had prospered sufficiently to marry, on 11 November 1684, Anne (died 1695), the daughter of Robert Brough, a linen draper of St Lawrence Jewry. The marriage, which produced one son, Robert Furnese ['see below'], was conducted by the prominent nonconformist divine Edmund Calamy sen., although it was recorded in the parish register of St Lawrence Jewry. 
The outbreak of the Nine Years' War in 1689 increased Furnese's opportunities for making money: he clothed several regiments, lent money to the government, and even used his superior communications network on the continent to win several wagers on the progress of the war. He was knighted on 8 October 1691. He was appointed to the London lieutenancy in February 1694 and, having subscribed $3000, was elected to the first directorate of the newly formed Bank of England. Furnese gradually increased his role in public finance, particularly as an agent for remitting funds to the army on the continent. Following the death of his wife in 1695, on 1 December 1697 he married Matilda (died 1732), the daughter of Sir Thomas Vernon and the widow of Anthony Balam; they had one daughter. 
In 1698 Furnese was instrumental in ensuring that the new East India Company loan of $2 million to the government was quickly subscribed. However, it was his East India connection which cut short his first attempt at a career in parliament. Having been elected for Bramber at the 1698 election, on 14 February 1699 he was unseated on the grounds that his role as a receiver and manager of the East India loan made him a placeman. He served as sheriff of London in 1700-01 and secured election to the Commons for Sandwich in January 1701. Again his tenure of a seat in the Commons was short. On 19 February 1701 he was expelled for being a trustee for circulating exchequer bills. After resigning as a trustee he was re-elected for Sandwich in December 1701, and voted consistently with the whigs. 
Following the succession of Anne and the renewal of the war with France, Furnese was regularly used as a remittancer of funds to the army. Indeed, in 1705 he negotiated a six-month contract granting him a monopoly of all remittances to the Netherlands, Germany, and Portugal. His commission was 11's'. per $100. A further reward for this service was a baronetcy, created on 27 June 1707. Such was his dominance of the remittancing business that in 1709 James Craggs the younger thought it 'not only a difficult, but a dangerous matter to oppose his schemes' (Craggs to J. Stanhope, 3 Aug 1709, Kent Archives Office, Stanhope MS U1590/0139/9/71/3). 
The fall of the Godolphin administration in August 1710 placed Furnese in a quandary, as he came under whig pressure not to deal with the incoming tory ministry. But the new ministry had already begun to ease him out of the remittance business, and he signed his last contract in November 1710. Meanwhile he was re-elected to parliament, where he continued to vote with the whigs. As a prominent supporter of the previous ministry and a moneyed man to boot, Furnese was an obvious target for those tories intent on investigating the misdeeds of whig finance. However, he avoided any such attacks before his death, his accounts being passed by his son in 1718. Furnese died of a 'violent colic', at his seat at Waldershare, Kent, on 30 November 1712. His will instructed that he be buried at St Peter's, Sandwich, and that a monument be erected to 'God's great goodness to me in advancing me to a considerable estate from a very small beginning', and his son duly saw to it, commissioning a 'towering mass of marble, with its seated female figures, cherubs, and ammonite-like volutes' ('Archaeologia Cantiana', 62, 1949, 69). 
Furnese was succeeded as second baronet by his only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 63008


Sir Robert Furnese (1687-1733), politician, who was born on 1 August 1687. He was educated at Eton College and then travelled in Germany. He was licensed to marry his stepsister Anne (died 1713), the daughter of Anthony Balam, on 1 October 1708; they had one daughter. Having been abroad during the 1708 election, Furnese secured a seat in the Commons at a by-election for Truro on 16 December 1708. He voted for the impeachment of Sacheverell in 1710. In the election that year he was returned for New Romney, and again voted with the whigs. The death of his father left Furnese a very rich man, and his second marriage (on 8 July 1714), to Arabella Watson (1693-1727), the daughter of the third Baron Rockingham, reflected his increased status. The couple had a son (who eventually became the third baronet) and a daughter. Furnese was not much interested in trade or finance, being content to live off his extensive inheritance. He continued to support the whigs, but joined Robert Walpole in opposition in 1717. With Walpole in power he returned to the government fold, and in 1727 was elected knight of the shire for Kent. He was married for a third time on 15 May 1729. His new wife was Lady Anne Shirley (died 1779), the daughter of Robert, first Earl Ferrers; they had two daughters, one of whom predeceased her father. Furnese died on 14 March 1733 of a cold, made worse by a bout of heavy drinking 'that he was not sober for ten days before he was taken ill' ('Hastings MSS', 3.15). His monument paid tribute to his parliamentary service, as well as his 'affable behaviour and liberal spirit' (Parsons, 402-3). 


@@@@@


doc= 63038


Robert McVitie (1854-1910). Born in Edinburgh he spent his whole working life in the family business, from apprenticeship onwards. His experience, gained on the continent and elsewhere, convinced him that there was a considerable untapped market for fancy biscuits and similar snack items. As his elder brother had already left the business to become a journalist, he took charge of the firm on his father's retirement. He occupied larger premises in Merchant Street, where he made shortbread and oatcakes as well as biscuits. These won a gold medal and a certificate of excellence at the Calcutta Exhibition of 1883-4. He made a wedding cake for the future George V and Queen Mary, in 1893, and later christening cakes for their children. 


@@@@@


doc= 63053


Teresa Georgina Rothschild, Lady Rothschild (1915-1996), counter-intelligence officer and magistrate, was born in London on 10 September 1915, the daughter of Robert John Grote Mayor (1869-1947), civil servant in the Board of Education, and his wife, (Katherine) Beatrice, 'nee' Meinertzhagen (1885-1971), a poet and playwright. She was the granddaughter of Joseph Bickersteth Mayor (1828-1916), philosopher and classical scholar, niece of Flora Macdonald Mayor (1872-1932), novelist, and great-niece of Beatrice Webb (1858-1943), Fabian. At the co-educational Bedales School from 1929 to 1934 she rose to be head girl, then proceeded in 1935 to Newnham College, Cambridge. At university she shone as 'the most celebrated actress of her day' ('The Independent', 31 May 1996), and she was part of a left-wing circle of friends that included several of the Apostles. On leaving Cambridge she worked for the publisher Jonathan Cape before being recruited by MI5 as assistant to Victor Rothschild, working on anti-sabotage operations. She was appointed MBE in 1945 in recognition of her bravery in dealing with an unexploded bomb. She worked briefly for Philip Noel-Baker in the foreign office before marrying Rothschild and returning with him to Cambridge. Besides caring for Victor and their children, welcoming her husband's wide range of friends and family, and hosting his dinner parties, she was involved in penal reform, lecturing at the Institute of Criminology, sitting on Home Office boards, and serving as a JP. She kept up her interest in the performing arts, being a trustee of the Cambridge Arts Theatre. She died in London on 29 May 1996, survived by her two daughters, both of whom pursued academic careers, and a son, who entered the Rothschild firm. 


@@@@@


doc= 63249


Sir (Henry John) Delves Broughton, eleventh baronet (1883-1942), was accused of the murder. Born on 10 September 1883, he was the only surviving child of Sir Delves Louis Broughton, tenth baronet (1857-1914), and his first wife, Rosamond Broughton (1862-1885). A loveless childhood left him with a lifelong sense of deprivation, which did not diminish when he inherited the baronetcy with extensive estates in Cheshire and Staffordshire. He was educated at Eton College (1897-1900), where his father's meanness supposedly drove him to steal, and at a crammer before entrance to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Commissioned second lieutenant in the Irish Guards (10 December 1902), he was aide-de-camp to the lieutenant-governor of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh (1908) and promoted major (15 July 1915) despite evading military action in the European war on the pretext of sunstroke. He retired from the army on 15 April 1919 and was excluded from the published 'List of Etonians who Fought in the Great War'. Broughton was a proud, unintelligent man who was easily bored and had few distractions except extravagant living. He lost his fortune not only on racecourses but in foolish speculations in foreign exchange markets, commodity dealing, and mining shares. For a time he was chairman of Dalkeith (Ceylon) Rubber Estates and a director of Pindenioya Rubber and Tea Estates; he also bought coffee plantations in Kenya after 1923. He funded these business forays with characteristic deviousness by selling pictures, heirlooms, and over 30,000 acres in several tranches. These were not his possessions but belonged to family trusts. His son took legal action during 1939 to protect his interests, but Broughton was determined not to be bested, and arranged for a young Harrovian to steal heavily insured pearls from a car on the French riviera that summer, and then blackmailed his accomplice into stealing three heavily insured portraits from his Cheshire seat, Doddington (October 1939). Despite these frauds Broughton (a Cheshire magistrate since 1915) had so wasted his assets that he was obliged to shut Doddington and decamp to Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 63333


Penrose, Harald James (1904-1996), airman, was born at 103 Park Street, Hereford, on 12 April 1904, the son of James Penrose, an Inland Revenue clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth Alice, 'nee' Johnson. At the age of five he became enamoured with flight after his father showed him a picture of the monoplane in which Louis Bleriot had just flown the channel. Two years later he was lifted a few feet aloft beneath a Cody-type kite. Several encounters with pioneer aeroplanes sustained his ambition to fly, not realized until 1919 in a war-surplus Avro 504K in which the former Royal Flying Corps pilot Alan Cobham was giving joyrides from a field in Reading. Failing to find employment with an aircraft manufacturer, Penrose pursued a four-year aeronautical course at the Northampton Engineering College of London University. All four students on the course gained diplomas, but Penrose was the only one to pass an early City and Guilds examination in aeronautics. In September 1926 he joined the Westland Aircraft Works at Yeovil, Somerset, and by the new year he was overseeing the construction of the Widgeon III light sporting monoplane. 
In 1927 Penrose obtained a commission in the Reserve of Air Force Officers (RAFO) and learned to fly in a Bristol type 73 trainer at the Bristol Flying School. After six hours' dual he went solo, progressing to a Jupiter-engined advanced trainer variant of the Bristol fighter. He then returned to Westland gazetted as a pilot officer RAFO, gained his private pilot's A licence in the same year, and made his first flights for Westland in the Widgeon. By March 1928, although he had less than 100 hours' total piloting experience, Penrose was authorized to fly a number of the company's new machines. He was also acting as a flight-test observer, and later that year was made manager of Westland's newly established civil aircraft department, overseeing development of the W.IV and Wessex tri-motor feeder liners. In October he qualified for his commercial pilot's B licence. On 23 March 1929, in Reading, he married Nora Sybil Bailey (1903/4-1986); they had a son and a daughter. That same year he also added responsibility for the technical side of civil sales to his company duties. 
In 1930 Penrose began flying the Wapiti general-purpose military two-seater, and early in the following year he was entrusted with demonstrating a variant in South America in landplane and seaplane configurations. Shortly after his return, in May 1931, Westland's pilot in charge, Captain Louis Paget, suffered serious injuries in a crash, and Penrose was asked to fulfil Paget's duties -- with no increase in pay, though his insurance coverage was increased. In his autobiography he recalled: 'It just seemed wonderful that Westland was letting me have extensive free flying which I would otherwise have been unable to afford'. When it transpired that Paget was permanently crippled, Penrose was appointed chief test pilot. 
In the succeeding twenty-two years Penrose made the initial test flights of all of the Westland aircraft types, most notably the unconventional Pterodactyl series of tailless monoplanes designed by Captain Geoffrey Hill, the Houston-Westland PV3 which in April 1933 made the first flight over Everest, and the Lysander army co-operation aircraft used for flying agents into and out of enemy territory during the Second World War. On 24 August 1934 he became the first pilot to bale out of an enclosed-cockpit aeroplane when the Westland P7 general-purpose monoplane he was flying suffered a disastrous in-flight structural failure. When suction forces jammed the sliding roof, he was forced to make his exit through a side window. Production test-flying intensified with the outbreak of war. In October 1938 Penrose made the maiden flight of the new Whirlwind twin-engine fighter, which proved a disappointment. A one-off experiment was tried in the form of a tandem-wing version of the Lysander, which Penrose looped on its maiden flight in July 1944, but no development ensued. Penrose also carried out the production flight tests of other manufacturers' aircraft built under licence by Westland: Supermarine Spitfires and Seafires, Fairey Barracudas, and lend-lease Curtiss Mohawk and Tomahawk fighters. The last wartime design to emanate from Westland, the Welkin high-altitude fighter, proved a troublesome mount for Penrose and his fellow pilots. 
By far the most notorious aeroplane flown by Penrose, however, was the turboprop-powered Wyvern naval fighter, which suffered from being a new airframe married to new and under-developed engines. This large single-seater, first flown on 16 December 1946, cost the lives of three test pilots during its protracted development. Only his quick and instinctive reactions saved Penrose from becoming another victim when a Wyvern in which he was returning to Yeovil suffered a failed aileron linkage and turned over on its back. 
In 1953 Penrose was appointed sales manager of Westland Aircraft Ltd, responsible for the Westland, Bristol, and Saunders-Roe helicopter group. By this time he had amassed some 5000 hours on no fewer than 250 different aircraft types, ranging from rotorcraft to jets. He continued flying for pleasure, acquiring a diminutive Currie Wot biplane after his retirement in 1967, and sampling other types whenever the opportunity arose. Penrose was also a keen ornithologist and a naval architect (he designed thirty-six boats and yachts), and he designed the house at Nether Compton, Dorset, in which he and his wife lived for fifty years. 
Gifted with an elegant prose style rare in aviation writers, Penrose wrote a number of books. His outstanding autobiographical works were 'I Flew with the Birds' (1949), 'No Echo in the Sky' (1958), 'Airymouse' (1982), 'Cloud Cuckooland' (1981), and 'Adventure with Fate' (1984). Other titles were 'Architect of Wings' (1985), a biography of Avro designer Roy Chadwick; 'Wings across the World', a history of British Airways; and an impressive five-volume history of British aviation. Penrose was made a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1936, and in 1993 -- when his tally had risen to 5500 hours on 309 types -- he was presented with honorary fellowship of the American Society of Experimental Test Pilots. He died at his home, Broad Hill, Hardington Mandeville, Yeovil, on 31 August 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 63338


Gulliver, James Gerald (1930-1996), businessman, was born on 17 August 1930 at 18 Smith Drive, Campbeltown, Argyll, the youngest child and only son of William Frederick Gulliver, master grocer, and his wife, Mary Lafferty. His father ran a successful business, and as a child Gulliver delivered groceries on the traditional errand boy's bicycle to his father's customers. He was dux (head boy) of Campbeltown grammar school and gained a first-class honours degree in mathematics and engineering at Glasgow University. He was awarded a Fulbright scholarship and finished his education at Georgia Institute of Technology. Subsequently he completed a short service commission in the Royal Navy (1956-9) before joining the management consultancy Urwick, Orr, & Partners in 1961. On 22 November 1958 he married Margaret Joan Cormack ('b'. 1930/31), a state registered nurse and daughter of John Godfrey Cormack, a medical practitioner. They had three sons and two daughters. 
Gulliver's abilities were first recognized by Garfield Weston, chairman of Associated British Foods. During the 1960s Weston sought to parallel in Britain his success in Canada with the development of a diversified food manufacturing and retailing group. Associated British Foods had created through acquisition the Fine Fare group of food stores and, in order to control Fine Fare's store development programme Weston also owned a building company, Headway. Gulliver was recruited to manage Headway and he did so with such effect that Weston, in a typically bold move, appointed him in 1965 managing director of Fine Fare. At that time Fine Fare was struggling to compete with Tesco and Sainsbury's, then a strong southern regional company. 
With great concentration and energy Gulliver became directly responsible for every aspect of Fine Fare's activities. He quickly grasped that a retail company had two prime constituents -- the customer and the supplier. He engaged at a high level with the key food manufacturers to convince them that Fine Fare would become a major and countervailing force in food retailing. Despite Weston's misgivings, Gulliver cancelled Fine Fare's contract with Pink Stamps and invested the savings in sharper pricing and heavier advertising. Gulliver's success at Fine Fare prompted Weston to invite him to tackle the problems faced by Loblaws stores in Canada. During 1972 Gulliver contributed strongly to Loblaws' revival but increasingly felt that his future should be as an entrepreneur (a word which became his leitmotif). 
In late 1972 Gulliver left Fine Fare, and he and two close associates, Alistair Grant and David Webster, acquired an investment in Oriel Foods, a small quoted food company with interests in edible oil refining and food wholesaling. Swiftly Gulliver then acquired cash and carry, retailing, and wholesaling businesses during 1973. To his surprise he was approached by the Radio Corporation of America (RCA), the large US conglomerate, which was interested in purchasing Oriel. In January 1974 Gulliver sold Oriel to RCA and became a comparatively wealthy man. For three years he and his team continued to run Oriel, with one important new acquisition, Morris and David Jones, which doubled Oriel's scale and profitability. 
In 1977 Gulliver left Oriel and set up James Gulliver Associates, which later became Argyll Group plc and eventually Safeway plc. From a small capital base Gulliver acquired significant financial interests in and effective management control of four small quoted companies: Alpine Holdings, Morgan Edwards, Louis C. Edwards, and Amalgamated Distilled Products. Each was used as the core of a discrete sectoral development programme. Alpine was sold in 1983 for a substantial profit. Morgan Edwards and Louis C. Edwards were merged in 1981, and soon afterwards Gulliver re-acquired Oriel Foods from RCA and swiftly concluded his most important deal, the acquisition of James Goldsmith's Allied Suppliers, a large supermarket business making profits of only $11 million from sales of $940 million. Allied Suppliers provided Gulliver and his team with the scale which enabled him to exploit the lessons learned at Fine Fare. Over a three-year period net margins were tripled and within five years pre-tax profits rose to $70 million. 
Modelling his ambitions on his mentor Garfield Weston, Gulliver saw that while food retailing provided an excellent business in the UK, if he wished to become a large international group the preferred strategy would be to acquire a branded consumer product business, where sales expansion would not be dependent upon real estate. He and his team decided that Scotland's premier company Distillers was grossly under-exploiting the array of liquor brands within its portfolio. As a Scot, Gulliver -- supported by his two Scottish associates Grant and Webster -- reasoned that although Distillers was considered impregnable to a hostile bid from outside Scotland, Argyll could perhaps finesse its acquisition by stressing the need for Distillers to be truly directed from Scotland rather than from its palatial St James's Square headquarters. He also reasoned that the model for the development of Distillers was cognac, which earned 40 per cent of the profit earned by Scotch whisky from 10 per cent of its sales volume, through skilful marketing and exploitation of its heritage. To give Amalgamated Distilled Products the required scale and muscle, Gulliver created the Argyll Group, by using James Gulliver Associates as the vehicle for the merger of the now substantial food interests with the rather smaller drinks business. 
In August 1985 Gulliver discussed the feasibility of acquiring Distillers through the medium of a friendly journalist. The resulting press speculation forced Gulliver, with advice from the city, to state that he had no immediate intention of making an offer. The Takeover Panel ruled that Argyll would be precluded from making a move for at least three months. Alerted, Distillers began to prepare its defence; and, more importantly, Guinness, under Ernest Saunders, realized that if Gulliver made a move, Distillers would be in play and might prefer a white knight with a 200-year-old pedigree to an aggressive Scottish predator. Argyll's formal offer for Distillers, launched on 2 December 1985, was the signal for Guinness to present itself as a preferred suitor, even persuading Distillers to finance its bid costs. After a series of manoeuvres, some underhand and some illegal, Guinness captured Distillers in April 1986. Gulliver, at that time unaware of the Guinness 'dirty tricks' campaign, wrote to Saunders wishing him success. 
During 1986 Gulliver once again decided to pursue a range of private business interests and became non-executive chairman of Argyll, retiring from the board two years later after the acquisition of Safeway from its US owners. He made his home in Scotland and gained great enjoyment from farming his land in Fife and decorating his town house in Heriot Row. His wide range of interests included serving as vice-president of Manchester United Football Club, trustee of the duke of Edinburgh's award scheme, and visiting professor at Glasgow University, which awarded him an honorary doctorate in 1989. He was an enthusiastic and adventurous skier and a keen yachtsman. He was 'Guardian' young businessman of the year in 1972, and was created CVO in 1996. 
Gulliver's first three marriages ended in divorce. His second marriage, on 12 March 1977, was to Joanne Sims ('b'. 1946/7), secretary, daughter of Rufus Graham Sims, sales manager. His third marriage, on 3 April 1985, was to Marjorie Hazel Henderson, 'nee' Moncrieff ('b'. 1955/6), secretary and restaurateur, daughter of John Moncrieff, farmer. His fourth marriage, on 24 July 1993, was to Melanie Crossley ('b'. 1963), chartered accountant, daughter of John Crossley, carpet retailer. He died at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, on 12 September 1996, and was survived by his wife Melanie and the five children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 63346


Tate, William Edward (1902-1968), teacher and historian, was born on 28 March 1902 in Retford, Nottinghamshire, the only son of three children. His parents were John William Tate (1870-1933), a railway clerk and Methodist preacher, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Woodhead (1869-1947), a schoolmistress. The Tate family had come from a farming background in Yorkshire. W. E. Tate was educated at Grove Street School and King Edward VI Grammar School at Retford, where he was a scholar. In 1917 he left school, aged fifteen, to work for two years in war service as a laboratory assistant analysing steels in Sheffield. He qualified as an elementary schoolteacher at Westminster Teacher Training College (1920-22). 
Tate taught scientific subjects at various elementary schools between 1922 and 1945, and became headmaster of Sutton Bonington village school, Nottinghamshire, in 1925, where he insisted upon higher-quality village education. Active in local politics, he was a founder and chairman of the Sutton Bonington Labour Party and of the Sutton Bonington and Normanton branch of the National Union of Agricultural Workers. His Labour Party membership was continuous from 1923. He was brought up a Methodist and joined the Church of England in 1933. His interests in agricultural history and parliamentary enclosure developed from the late 1920s at Sutton Bonington. He became a fellow of the Royal Historical Society in 1927 and of the Society of Antiquaries in 1947. In 1935 he became headmaster of the Sneyd Holy Trinity School in Burslem, Staffordshire. By all accounts he was extremely good with children and a very fine teacher. He was also a very enthusiastic Workers' Educational Association member and tutor from 1935 to 1962. 
In 1945 Tate left schoolteaching to go to Oxford University (Ruskin and Balliol colleges). He was awarded a BLitt in 1947. At Oxford he was Houblon-Norman research fellow in agrarian history (1945-7) and the G. W. Medley senior research scholar at All Souls (1948-50). From 1947 to 1950 he was senior programme assistant in the history unit of the schools department of the BBC. 
In 1950 Tate became a lecturer in the education department at Leeds University, and in 1959 he was promoted to a readership there. From 1956 he was also curator of the Museum of the History of Education, University of Leeds, which he started. In these capacities he produced many publications, particularly on the history of education and the charity schools of Yorkshire. He wrote in a 1959 curriculum vitae that 'I am a teacher with an interest in scholarship rather than a scholar with a taste for teaching, and I find myself happy, and I hope useful in the atmosphere of a Department of Education' ('Summary of particulars', Tate MS 1093). Much of his best academic work on agricultural history was pursued as a leisure-time activity. He retired from Leeds University in 1966, and went to Clare Hall, Cambridge, as a visiting fellow. 
Tate's most famous publication was 'The Parish Chest: a Study of the Records of Parochial Administration in England' (1946), an erudite and wide-ranging survey of local records. This book retains much interest and is still widely read. He also published 'The English Village Community and the Enclosure Movements' (1967). In addition he published very many county handlists of enclosure acts and awards, often in the historical and archaeological journals of local record societies. An example is 'Nottinghamshire Parliamentary Enclosures, 1743-1868' (Thoroton Society record series, 5, 1935). These came together after his death in 'A Domesday of English Enclosure Acts and Awards' (1978), a magisterial and widely consulted reference work which was completed, co-authored, and introduced by Michael E. Turner. Tate wrote many articles in scholarly journals. His publications stretched to such subjects as child welfare, the history of education, Yorkshire local history and topography, inn signs, travellers in Yorkshire, and a number of school texts. Among his lesser-known books were 'His Worship the Mayor: a Handbook of Citizenship for Children who are to Grow up in a Democracy' (1944), 'English Inns and Inn-Signs' (1951), 'British Institutions' (1955), and 'A History of Yorkshire' (1960, with F. Singleton). 
Tate married in 1925 Ethel Markham (1902-1941), a schoolteacher, with whom he had a son and two daughters. Following her death he married in 1942 Margery Whitfield (1912-1991), another schoolteacher. This marriage produced a daughter. The couple divorced in 1953. Tate married a third time in 1958, to Margery Kerr ('c'.1911-1973). He died in Bristol from a heart attack on 22 March 1968, and was buried at Westbury-on-Trym. 
Tate is best remembered as a pioneer in agricultural history -- researching local enclosures on a county-by-county basis, laying the foundation of a complete 'Domesday' of these, advancing academic study of rural history -- and as a historian who introduced many others to the broad spectrum of local and administrative records. His work has greatly assisted countless researchers in local and agrarian history. 


@@@@@


doc= 63347


William Wallace (1818-1888), born in Edinburgh on 24 March 1818, joined Frith & Co. of Bombay in 1841. In due course all the sons were to follow in William's footsteps and forsake the family's Edinburgh connections. 
In 1844 William, who apparently disliked India, returned to establish, with Frith, the London firm of Frith, Wallace & Co., East India merchants. Acting in tandem with the Bombay house this became a major London agency firm and survived as Wallace Brothers until the 1980s. Almost all the brothers made significant and diverse contributions to its success, but William and his siblings Lewis and Alexander played the most important roles in a family firm where relationships were especially close-knit. After William's return the third son, 


@@@@@


doc= 63348


Lewis Alexander Wallace (1821-1906), went out aged twenty-seven to join the Bombay partnership, which in 1848 was reformed as Wallace & Co.; it specialized not just in merchanting but in the provision of shipping agency services, and it acted as financial agents for the Ceylon government and, of increasing importance, imported Lancashire textiles. Born on 20 September 1821, Lewis emerged as a major figure in Bombay's business community, beginning an important family connection through his directorship and later chairmanship of the Commercial Bank of India. In 1850 he was joined as a partner by the fourth son, George. Subsequently both returned to become partners in London and were replaced in Bombay by their three other brothers, Alexander, Robert, and Richard. 
William, having participated in the establishment of a viable business in London, returned to India in 1853 and set about establishing connections with Burma. In either 1856 or 1857 he went there as the Bombay firm's representative to purchase teak for India's fast-expanding railways. Using the Bombay firm's capital he established William Wallace & Co., timber merchants and shipbuilders, at Rangoon and Moulmein, and purchased land. In 1862 he travelled to Mandalay to negotiate with King Mindon for the lease of teak forests in northern Burma and his firm became a major shipper of Burma teak around the world. The business rapidly diversified as other opportunities were recognized, but the extent of the investment drained the Bombay firm's resources -- a major point of friction between William, who had a reputation for determination and impatience, and his brothers. 
At the end of 1862 the two brothers then resident in London, Lewis and George, broke with their non-family partners and established Wallace Brothers & Co. with $100,000 capital. At the same time Alexander reorganized the Bombay business and thus family control was consolidated in their two interlocking partnerships. These were already of considerable size as the first balance sheet of the London firm totalled more than $450,000. This manoeuvre was followed by the equally significant transfer in 1863 of the family's Burma assets to a newly formed, publicly owned company registered in India, the Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation Ltd, in exchange for a large and lucrative shareholding. By the 1880s it was the largest business in Burma and acted as a major force for the country's modernization and for the extension of British economic imperialism. It was dominated by the Wallaces, who acted as its 'perpetual' secretaries, treasurers, and managers through to the 1950s. 
The youngest of the brothers, 


@@@@@


doc= 63353


Atkins, Humphrey Edward Gregory, Baron Colnbrook (1922-1996), politician, was born on 12 August 1922 at Tunmers, Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire, the only son of Captain Edward Davis Atkins (died 1925), a former Indian army officer who had settled in Nyeri, Kenya, as a coffee planter, and his wife, Mary Violet, 'nee' Preston. He lived in Kenya until the age of three, when his father was gored to death by a rhinoceros, and his mother returned with him to England. He was educated at Wellington College before entering the Royal Navy with a special cadetship in 1940. He first saw service as a midshipman in the battleship 'Nelson', but was then transferred, as a sub-lieutenant, to destroyers on convoy escort. A near tragedy at the age of nineteen, when his destroyer was sunk on north Atlantic convoy duty, was to change his life. He had to borrow clothes from Sir Robert Spencer-Nairn, first baronet, the 'lino king' and former president of the Scottish Unionist Association, to go to a shoot on his estate. There he met Sir Robert's impressionable 17-year-old daughter (Adela) Margaret 
(Maggie; 'b'. 1924)
, the youngest of his six children. After their marriage, on 21 January 1944, her life was initially a torment because she could never know whether he would come back from his convoy duties. In their 52-year marriage, in which she described him as a 'very phlegmatic and easy-going Anglo-Saxon' and herself as an 'emotional Celt' ('The Guardian', 8 Oct 1996), they were to have four children: Sheila Kathleen ('b'. 1944), Julia Margaret ('b'. 1946), Sally Mary ('b'. 1948), and Charles Edward Spencer ('b'. 1952). 
Atkins's marriage into the wealthy and influential Spencer-Nairn family was to be his making. When he emerged from the Royal Navy in 1948 (with the rank of lieutenant) his first job was with his father-in-law's firm in Kirkcaldy. His first Conservative candidacy, in West Lothian in 1951, was helped by his father-in-law's clout among Scottish Unionists. When the couple moved south to continue his career he worked in the London office of Spencer-Nairn and then in that of its advertising agent. When he won Merton and Morden in 1955 he did not have to live on the MP's then limited stipend. They had three homes, including one at Bembridge on the Isle of Wight. Atkins remained Conservative MP for Merton and Morden until 1970, when he transferred to the safer seat of Spelthorne (which he represented until 1987). 
Atkins's career in the tory whips' office began in opposition in 1967. When the tories returned to power in 1970 he became deputy chief whip (or treasurer of her majesty's household). In 1973 Edward Heath made him chief whip and a privy councillor. He had the reputation of being a softer whip than his predecessor, Francis Pym, and more willing to listen to rebel MPs acting out of principle. He showed stronger backbone than expected when Margaret Thatcher challenged Heath for the leadership in 1975. He insisted on the whips' office remaining neutral, as the custodian of the long-term interest of the party. Mrs Thatcher welcomed him as her own chief whip, although he failed her on one famous occasion. He told her that it would be easy to find a Scottish successor to Alick Buchanan-Smith, the shadow Scottish secretary who resigned in 1976 when she turned against devolution. She had to name rebel Teddy Taylor, who lost his seat in 1979. 
Atkins's hardest appointment was as Northern Ireland secretary, from May 1979, where he followed Roy Mason, a tough Labour right-winger, who was popular with Unionists. When Atkins was named he was ridiculed in a Belfast headline: 'Humphrey Who?'. His local knowledge was belittled by an anecdote about his being shown a coloured map during his first days. What, he asked, were the areas in orange? They were the protestant loyalists, he was told. And the green patches? Those were the Catholic republicans. And what was the area marked in blue? After some hesitation, 'That, Secretary of State, is Lough Neagh' ('The Guardian', 8 Oct 1996). Jokes aside, Atkins's life was made hell by Mrs Thatcher's demands for instant results to be imposed on Ulster's warring politicians, then including Ian Paisley and a transplanted Enoch Powell. Behind the scenes the army urged that he make their commander a local 'supremo', allowed to detain thirty to forty leading terrorists. With the support of his wife, Maggie, who unexpectedly accompanied him, he affably resisted these pressures. Nevertheless, his period as secretary of state was marked by a steady deterioration of relations between the two communities, and was overshadowed first by the murder of Lord Mountbatten and then by the IRA hunger strikes in the Maze prison, which eventually led to eleven deaths. 
In September 1981 Atkins was made lord privy seal with special responsibilities in the Foreign Office, as deputy to the foreign secretary, Lord Carrington, and the office's spokesman in the House of Commons. Again he was unlucky. The Foreign Office consistently misread the signs of Argentine pressure on the Falkland Islands, and made matters worse by endorsing the withdrawal from the south Atlantic of the seagoing gunboat HMS 'Endurance'. On 2 April 1982 Atkins calmly reassured the House of Commons that there would be no Argentine invasion, several hours after the invasion had in fact begun. Honourably, he, Carrington, and the junior minister, Richard Luce, resigned within a matter of days. 
Mrs Thatcher's loyalty to those who had served her well was legendary: following Atkins's resignation, she tried repeatedly to find him another top post. Her first attempt was in 1983, when she made it known that he was her preferred candidate to replace George Thomas as speaker of the House of Commons. The 'peasants' revolt' of Conservative back-benchers ensured that Bernard Weatherill was elected instead. Nevertheless, Atkins was appointed in 1984 to the important post of chairman of the select committee on defence (a position he held until his retirement from the Commons in 1987). In 1986 he had the potentially embarrassing task of overseeing the committee's investigation of the Westland crisis, including allegations of improper conduct by Downing Street officials acting on the authority of the prime minister. Despite his personal loyalty to Mrs Thatcher, Atkins ensured that the investigation was as full and impartial as was possible in the circumstances, and in so doing he helped to establish the authority over the executive of parliamentary select committees. 
In 1987 Atkins (who had been made KCMG in 1983) was elevated to the peerage as Baron Colnbrook of Waltham St Lawrence. He became chairman of the Association of Conservative Peers in 1990 and a member of the Press Complaints Commission in 1991. Thereafter his political activities tailed off as he fought the cancer from which he died, at his home, Tuckenhams, the Street, Waltham St Lawrence, Berkshire, on 4 October 1996. He was survived by his wife, four children, and eight grandchildren. 
Handsome and unfailingly courteous, Atkins was attractive to women and had hardly any enemies among men. His personality enabled him to soar high. Nevertheless, it is difficult to dissent from the judgement of one obituarist that he was 'a nearly man', whom 'misfortune and misjudgement dogged... at every turn, just when he was nearing the top of affairs' ('The Independent', 8 Oct 1996). 


@@@@@


doc= 63356


Wilkinson, Sir Geoffrey (1921-1996), inorganic chemist, was born on 14 July 1921 at 506 Halifax Road, Springside, near Todmorden, Yorkshire, the eldest of three children of Henry Wilkinson (1885-1975), master painter and decorator, and his wife, Ruth, 'nee' Crowther (1891-1962), weaver. Both his parents came from Yorkshire and moved to the centre of Todmorden in 1926, to 4 Wellington Road: the house is marked by a blue plaque erected in his honour in 1990, and in 1997 another plaque was erected in the town hall. 
Wilkinson's interest in chemistry came early: he was fascinated by watching his father mixing his painting materials, and by visiting the laboratory of his uncle, the manager of a small chemical factory making Epsom and Glauber's salts in Todmorden. He won a West Riding county scholarship in 1931 to Todmorden secondary school; the school had many other pupils later to become famous, including Sir John Cockcroft, who became in 1951 the first of its two Nobel laureates. Though at different times, Cockcroft and Wilkinson had the same physics teacher. Wilkinson was a brilliant pupil and won a royal scholarship to Imperial College, London, starting there in 1939. 
Wilkinson found life at Imperial competitive: in the year before his was another future Nobel laureate, Derek Barton, who like Wilkinson later rejoined the college as a professor. He read chemistry but also studied geology as an ancillary subject. He did so well at this that he won the prestigious Murchison prize in geology -- indeed he thought at one point of giving up chemistry in favour of geology. He graduated in 1941 with the top first-class honours BSc of the year, and started work towards his PhD under H. V. A. (Henry) Briscoe (then the only professor of inorganic chemistry in the country) on 'Some physico-chemical observations on hydrolysis in the homogeneous vapour phase'. This rather Delphic title concealed the fact that the main substance studied (probably part of Briscoe's war research) was the intensely toxic phosgene. Wilkinson remarked that Briscoe 'directed his Ph.D. research from a safe distance'. 
Towards the end of 1942 Wilkinson was selected by the Joint Recruiting Board to join the British contingent on the atomic energy division of the Canadian National Research Council (part of the 'Tube Alloys' atomic bomb project). He sailed out on the RMS 'Andes' from Greenock to Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 11 January 1943 -- recalling that the scientists were supposed to travel first class, but that his room, clearly marked 'for one seaman only', had to be shared with three other scientists. Some interesting incidents occurred while he was on the project. He witnessed an accident in which a glass vessel containing heavy water (then a virtually priceless material used for moderating nuclear reactions), which had been smuggled from the Norwegian heavy water plant out through occupied France, had been dropped so that all the liquid spilled on the floor. Most of it was recovered by hurriedly mopping it up with handkerchiefs. Some time later a solution containing a precious 20 mg of the intensely toxic and radioactive plutonium nitrate boiled over onto a wooden bench and soaked into it; it was retrieved by sawing up the bench and extracting the wood and sawdust with boiling water. Safety was not a prime consideration: Wilkinson would routinely pick up intensely radioactive radium-beryllium neutron sources with his fingers. In Montreal and at Chalk River he worked with many celebrated names -- among them Pierre Auger, John Cockcroft, Charles Coryell, Bertrand Goldschmidt, Jules Gueron, Alfie Maddocks, and two figures later to find notoriety as Soviet spies, Alan Nunn May and Bruno Pontecorvo. 
In 1946 Wilkinson became a research fellow at the Radiation (Lawrence Livermore) Laboratory, University of Berkeley, California, where he worked with his good friend and future Nobel laureate, Glenn Seaborg, on the production of new isotopes. In 1950 he moved to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a research associate, and in September 1951 he was appointed assistant professor of chemistry at Harvard. It was there that his interest in organometallic chemistry developed and where he did the research which was later to be the main source of his Nobel prize. On 17 July 1952 Wilkinson married Dr Lise Solver Schou ('b'. 1924), a Danish plant physiologist and medical historian, and daughter of Svend Aage Schou, professorial rector of the Pharmaceutical High School, Copenhagen; theirs was a long and happy marriage. They had two daughters, Anne and Pernille. In 1954, with the help of a Guggenheim fellowship, Wilkinson spent a nine-month sabbatical leave at the University of Copenhagen, where he worked in a laboratory in which the necessary upward draught in the fume cupboard was still accomplished by having flaming gas burners at the top. His research necessitated the use of flammable organic solvents and he had several spectacular fires. Despite this he continued pioneering research in the field of organometallic hydride chemistry. 
In 1955 Wilkinson was appointed professor of inorganic chemistry at Imperial College, taking up his position there in January 1956 at the early age of thirty-four. One of the first things that he did on arrival was to cajole a grant of $20,000 -- a very large sum in the mid-1950s -- from the authorities to purchase a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instrument, the first such commercial spectrometer in Britain. Sir Alexander Todd, then chairman of the advisory committee on scientific policy, had the remarkable prescience to recommend that the grant should be made, and it was a wise investment for research in Britain. Wilkinson and his students used the machine tirelessly and to very good effect. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1965, received its royal medal in 1981 and its Davy medal in 1996 (in the course of his life he received some fifteen medals and nine honorary degrees). He was knighted in 1976. 
In those rather formal days Wilkinson was remarkable in that he dressed casually, adopted some American habits, addressed his students by their first names and expected them, and the departmental staff, to call him Geoff. He was as popular with the cleaners -- his office and laboratories needed their particular attention -- as with his students and the academic staff. Although he had little interest in administration and really rather despised administrators ('apparatchiks', he called them) he was, from 1976 to 1988, to everyone's surprise a very effective head of the chemistry department. This he accomplished largely by inspired delegation and having an open-door policy for staff and students alike. 
In 1988 Wilkinson became professor emeritus and the college commissioned a striking portrait in oils of him by the artist Keith Grant. In the same year the firm Johnson Matthey plc provided a laboratory for him on the top floor of the chemistry building. There he continued to run a small, creative research group until the day before his death, producing some ten high-quality, innovative research papers a year, an astonishing record for someone who had supposedly retired. 
Wilkinson's work covered a wide range, but a common factor was that metals played a central role in almost all the compounds which he studied. The radiochemistry of isotopes was the topic of his early research years, from 1943 to 1951; isotopes are forms of an element with the same atomic number (number of protons) but different mass numbers (sum of the number of protons and neutrons in the atom). He amassed during this time a vast knowledge of inorganic chemistry, since radiochemists had to know in great detail the practical chemistry of the transition metals, the lanthanides, and the actinides in order to separate their isotopes. He believed that his greatest contribution in those early days was to measure the rates of formation of the products formed by fission of uranium-235, the material used in the first atomic bomb. With Glenn Seaborg at Berkeley he worked on nuclear taxonomy, the production of neutron deficient isotopes of the transition elements and the lanthanides, using the cyclotrons at the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley, and there he made more artificial isotopes than anyone else before or since -- no less than eighty-nine. He was particularly proud of his nuclear transmutation of platinum to gold, which caught the public imagination after a report in 1948 in the 'San Francisco Chronicle'. 
Wilkinson was most famed for his fundamental contributions to organometallic chemistry, the study of compounds containing a direct metal-to-carbon bond. It is fair to say that his work launched modern organometallic chemistry. The realization of the unique sandwich structure of ferrocene (bis-cyclopentadienyliron) by him and Robert B. Woodward at Harvard eventually led to a Nobel prize in 1973, awarded jointly to Wilkinson and Professor E. O. Fischer of the Technische Hochschule, Munich. In ferrocene, so named because of certain similarities with benzene, an iron atom lies between two parallel cyclopentadienyl (C5H5) rings. Although ferrocene had been made before, no one, before this pioneering work, knew or understood its unique structure. Having established the structure of ferrocene, Wilkinson went on to make analogous materials with other metals, and many other novel organometallic compounds, thereby revolutionizing perspectives on the subject. Although he did not investigate their industrial potential, many of the sandwich compounds have remarkable and useful properties, being used now in sensors and as catalysts for olefin polymerization. It was during this period too that he made creative use of the then fledgeling technique of nuclear magnetic resonance. Later he turned to the chemistry of metal alkyls and aryls, and did some remarkable work in this essentially new area -- it is typical of him that, in his Nobel speech, he spoke on this rather than on the ferrocene work that gave him his prize. 
Although principally remembered as an organometallic chemist, Wilkinson made an enormous contribution to co-ordination chemistry (which, unlike organometallic chemistry, involves compounds containing no metal-carbon bonds). This thread ran through his entire research career, for co-ordination chemistry had a crucial role to play in the separational aspects of his radiochemistry. Outstanding in this area was his work on homogeneous catalysts -- materials which in solution accelerate a chemical reaction without themselves being destroyed. His discovery in 1966 of the remarkable complex RhCl(PPh3)3, which catalyses addition of hydrogen to organic compounds, was seminal. It became universally known as Wilkinson's catalyst, and both it and its analogues were widely used in chemical and biomedical reactions. About the same time he showed the compound RhH(CO)(PPh3)3 to be a very effective and selective catalyst for the reaction of organic olefins with hydrogen and carbon monoxide (syngas) to give aldehydes. This became a widely used industrial process for converting propylene to 'n'-butyraldehyde, a precursor for plasticizers and many other useful organic compounds. His work on these and other catalysts revolutionized understanding of homogeneous catalysis by transition-metal complexes. 
Wilkinson produced 557 scientific papers on fundamental chemical research, and wrote or edited a number of books still in use many years later. Of these the most internationally influential was 'Advanced Inorganic Chemistry: a Comprehensive Text' (1962), which he and his ex-student F. Albert Cotton produced. It is no exaggeration to say that this revolutionized the presentation of inorganic chemistry to undergraduates, postgraduates, and chemists everywhere. The book was translated into many languages, much to his irritation in some cases, for he had difficulty in retrieving royalties for some of those translated versions which had been pirated. There was a hilarious correspondence between him and the Soviet authorities on this matter; for some obscure reason the recipient of these letters at the Soviet embassy was the agricultural counsellor, later to be expelled by Sir Alec Douglas-Home as a spy. Wilkinson insisted on sending copies of his letters and the deadpan replies from the agricultural counsellor to all universities and, to its extreme discomfiture, the Foreign Office. Subsequent editions of Cotton and Wilkinson, as it was universally known, were published in 1966, 1972, 1980, and 1988. The sixth edition (with Cotton, Murillo, and Bochmann) was published in 1999; two days before he died Wilkinson handed in his final, typically untidy, manuscript for typing. 
Important too for research chemists everywhere were the six-volume 'Comprehensive Coordination Chemistry' (1987), for which Wilkinson was the chief editor with R. D. Gillard and Jon McCleverty as editors, and the nine-volume 'Comprehensive Organometallic Chemistry' of 1982, revised and reissued in fourteen volumes in 1995, which he edited with F. G. A. Stone and E. W. Abel. He also launched in 1982, with Don Bradley, the successful inorganic chemistry journal 'Polyhedron'. 
If ever a chemist lived out E. M. Forster's dictum 'only connect', it was Wilkinson. For over fifty years he made fundamental contributions to nuclear, organometallic, co-ordination, and catalytic chemistry, and much of his brilliance lay in his extraordinary ability to interlink these topics, one fertilizing the other. His obituarist in 'The Independent' said that 'The spirit in his research group was more like that of an urgent gold rush in the West than the scholarly and disciplined calm expected in academia' ('The Independent', 1 Oct 1996). If anything this understates the truth: he expected his students to work as hard as he did -- seven days a week or at least six, from early morning to late evening. He was, however, remarkably tolerant of eccentric and individual behaviour, perhaps because he himself showed such traits (for example, he made remarkably ingenious and creative use of expletives). He was an excellent supervisor, communicating his own enthusiasm, but always giving the student the space to develop his or her own ideas. A valuable and all-too-rare aspect of his training of students was to insist that they write scientific papers of their results for publication, which he would then invariably return to them, after ruthless editing and alteration, for rewriting: an iterative process. 
Wilkinson's research was always original and he had limitless enthusiasm and energy for new chemistry. His work clearly demonstrated one of his dearest beliefs: that imaginative and curiosity driven exploratory synthesis provides a pivotal approach for the creative development of new science. Although he had some industrial collaboration, his work was never directed towards immediate short-term applications, and he sought (and received) little financial support from industry. One of the keys to his success was his encyclopaedic knowledge of chemistry, and particularly of what was significant in it to his own research. He rapidly assimilated techniques that were new to him, found good experts in these areas, and enthused them to collaborate with him. 
It is perhaps significant that in 1978 Wilkinson named his chair at Imperial College the Sir Edward Frankland chair of inorganic chemistry. Frankland (1825-1899) was the second professor at the Royal College of Chemistry, from 1868 to 1885. There are parallels between Wilkinson and Frankland: both came from humble backgrounds, Frankland in Lancashire and Wilkinson from very close to Lancashire. Both were organometallic chemists (Frankland is often called the father of organometallic chemistry); and both were relatively uncharismatic lecturers but gifted experimentalists. Wilkinson was amused later to receive letters addressed not to him but to Sir Edward. 
Wilkinson was fiercely protective of British science and research; despite his enormous international standing he insisted on publishing almost all his research papers in British scientific journals. He became the scourge of those responsible for higher education and research in the country: a succession of prime ministers received a flow of letters from him on this and other subjects, as did ministers of education, functionaries in research councils, university vice-chancellors, and others. His work was always original and he had limitless enthusiasm and energy for new chemistry; he wore his fame lightly and was accessible to all. 
Wilkinson was of medium height, and had a wiry figure and blue eyes which lit up and sparkled when he recognized a friend or spoke of something close to his heart, such as his beloved Yorkshire. His accent was a curious mixture of his native Yorkshire with a strong hint of the transatlantic twang which derived from his thirteen years in North America. He had a keen sense of the mischievous and, when he felt he was in the right company, would express seemingly outrageous opinions and with delight enthusiastically defend them. Although he had a forceful personality there was a certain shyness and even defensiveness in his nature -- he would only with extreme reluctance make after-dinner speeches and rarely attended conferences or gave international lectures. A happy family man, when his children were young and particularly outside term time, he went every weekend with his wife to his house in Sussex, where chemistry was entirely eschewed; he proudly claimed to have planted more than 2000 trees there. He had a great sense of fun, was an excellent raconteur, and had many interests: a favourite pastime was walking on the moors and fells of his native Yorkshire, and he had a keen interest in music. 
Some two months before Wilkinson's death an informal dinner was held at Imperial College to celebrate his forty years (1956-96) at the college; more than a hundred people attended from all over the world, and his remarkable memory was evident by his instant recognition of collaborators from the distant past. It was a happy and memorable occasion for all. He died on 26 September 1996 at his home, 14 Passmore Street, London, of coronary thrombosis, and was cremated on 8 October at Putney Vale. He was survived by his wife, Lise, and their two daughters. 
Wilkinson's contributions to many areas of chemistry were immense. He was lucky to have been part of what came to be seen as a golden age of chemical research, when pressure to obtain funds was far less insistent than later, and when there was positive encouragement to do what he did so well -- research for the sake of it, rather than for material rewards. He was fortunate too to have been associated with the atomic energy project, to which he gave much but from which he also received much in experience and in knowledge. The timing and circumstances of his first and perhaps most fundamental discovery (recognition of the true nature of ferrocene) were a great help, as was being at an institution, Harvard, where the first NMR instrument was sited and where there were so many distinguished chemists. He was fortunate also to have selected such excellent collaborators at Imperial College. Nevertheless, it needed a certain genius to have used this good fortune creatively, to have harnessed it constructively, and to have exercised the remarkable instinct which he had for the new experiment, the new area of research, which would produce really original and creative new science. 


@@@@@


doc= 63364


Wallace family (per. 1841-1925), merchants, came to prominence with the sons of Lewis Alexander Wallace (1789-1861), builder and merchant of Edinburgh, and his wife, Isabella Clerk. The couple had six sons and five daughters. In the late eighteenth century Lewis Wallace's father, William Wallace, had established William Wallace & Co., leading builders and architects, which participated notably in the building of Edinburgh's New Town. A director of the National Bank of Scotland, Lewis Wallace lived in comfortable circumstances in Regent Terrace in the New Town, in a house he had designed and built himself. However, like numerous Scottish businessmen he recognized greater opportunities in employing his capital in international trade, especially that centred on India and the East. Thus in 1841 he provided J. G. Frith, a merchant recently returned from India, with capital for the development of a merchant business in London linked to Frith's well-established business in Bombay. Lewis's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 63367


Doughty, Dame Adelaide Baillieu (1908-1986), politician, was born at Vailima, Glenferrie Road, Malvern, Victoria, Australia, on 2 December 1908, the middle of the three daughters of Edward Herbert Shackell (1869-1932), public accountant, and his wife, Amy Baillieu (1870-1966). Initially she and her sisters were educated at home by governesses. Later Adelaide went to study at St Catherine's School in Melbourne from 1920 to 1925. After completing her study there she was accepted into Melbourne University. These plans soon changed during a family visit from her cousin Clive Latham Baillieu, first Baron Baillieu, the financier, and his wife, Ruby. They suggested that Adelaide return to Britain under their care. This she did, and in 1928 entered St Hilda's College, Oxford, where she gained a second in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1931. 
Adelaide soon met Charles John Joseph Addison Doughty (1902-1973), the eldest son of Sir Charles Doughty, recorder of Brighton. Both were waiting in Victoria Station to catch a boat-train to Switzerland for a skiing holiday. He was then a solicitor, who had been called to the bar in 1926. They were engaged within the year and, once Adelaide finished her degree at St Hilda's, were married on 29 July 1931. They had a son and a daughter. 
Adelaide Doughty's public work began in 1947, when she joined the English-Speaking Union (ESU) in what was formerly known as the Common Interests' Committee; her cousin Lord Baillieu was heavily involved in the union and later became its chairman. She worked hard for the ESU, following through with this particular side of work until the Hospitality Council was set up in 1971. She was elected as ESU club director in 1950 and devoted much of her time and interests to the affairs of the club; she was elected chairman of the board of club directors in 1969. She also served as a governor of the ESU from 1958 to 1972. Her activities with the ESU included a service on the US exchange teachers' committee and a further period as a member of the speakers' committee. She was elected to the ESU policy committee in 1970 and became joint deputy chairman of the ESU in June 1971. She resigned in September 1972 in protest against the board's 'discourtesy' in signing a lease of part of its Mayfair premises to the Grand Metropolitan Hotel Group before informing its membership. 
Adelaide Doughty undertook notable work for the Conservative Party; from 1951 to 1956 she was a member of the party's south-eastern area women's advisory committee. Her husband, meanwhile, who took silk in 1954 and succeeded his father as recorder of Brighton, was elected Conservative MP for Surrey (East) in 1951 and held the seat until 1970. From 1963 to 1966 she was an outstandingly successful chairman of the Conservative Party's women's national advisory committee, doing much to shift the tory women's role towards political issues rather than administrative details. During her term in office the Conservatives elected a new leader for the first time, and she spoke in favour of Edward Heath's nomination. In 1964 she became vice-chairman of the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations and succeeded to the chairmanship in March 1967 following the death of Sir Robert Davies. She served as president of the party in 1978. She was appointed CBE in 1964 and DBE in 1971. 
During this time, Adelaide Doughty was also a governor of the Skinners' Company's School for Girls in 1951, the director of the National Institute for Housecraft from 1966, and a member of the grand council of the cancer research campaign from 1974. She died at home at Flat 4, 89 Onslow Square, Kensington, London, on 12 August 1986. 


@@@@@


doc= 63368


Drummond, Dame (Edith) Margaret (1917-1987), director of the Women's Royal Naval Service, was born on 4 September 1917 at 101 Dundonald Road, Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, one of at least two daughters of Robert James Drummond, professor at the dairy school of the West of Scotland Agricultural College, and his wife, Marion Street. She was educated at Park School, Glasgow, and Aberdeen University. She joined the Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS) as a Wren writer in April 1941 and, after her administrative skills had been made apparent, she was commissioned as an officer in September that year. 
Rising swiftly through the ranks, Drummond served early in 1944 as a first officer on the staff of the commander-in-chief, Plymouth command, and was responsible for the administration and paperwork relating to the command's role in operation Neptune, the allied landings in Normandy in June 1944. She was the first woman to know about the invasion; as Dame Katharine Furse recounted, 'About two months before D-Day she received twenty copies of the naval plans for invasion; she signed for them, and almost slept with them in the strong room, one of the cellars under Mount Wise' (Furse, 232). 
After D-day Drummond sailed for India where she worked as assistant secretary to the flag officer, helping with the instruction of the Wrens of the Indian navy, then became superintendent on the staff of the commander-in-chief, East Indies. Back in Britain, her tours of duty included that of officer in charge of HMS 'Dauntless' -- the Wrens' initial training establishment, as superintendent of the WRNS officers' training course at Greenwich, and as superintendent of training and drafting. She rose to be deputy director, became an OBE in 1960, and was appointed director in June 1964. 
During her tenure Drummond oversaw the organization of the new WRNS units in Singapore and Mauritius. She was also called before a Commons select committee to explain how it had come about that the WRNS was not subject to the 'Naval Discipline Act', an anomaly that was rectified only in 1977. She was created DBE in 1966, and she retired in 1967. 
Dame Margaret Drummond settled at Somersham Cottage, Saxlingham, on the north Norfolk coast, where she immersed herself in village life and, as a devoted Christian, to local church activities. A keen gardener, she still found time to chair a civil service interview board. She was a popular member of the community, and was affectionately remembered for her kindness, dignity, sincerity, and honour. Drummond died at her sister's house, Manor Cottage, 15 High Street, Holt, on 21 April 1987, after several years of failing health. She never lost contact with the service she loved, and was a life member and vice-president of the Association of Wrens and of the WRNS Benevolent Trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 63373


AEthelwealh (d. c.685), who was the first to accept Christianity. He was baptized in Mercia, at the suggestion of his overlord, King Wulfhere ('r'. 658-75), who acted as his sponsor and subsequently presented him with the Isle of Wight and the land around the Meon valley as a token of their new relationship in God. AEthelwealh may have been more ready to accept Christianity because he had a Christian wife, Eafe, who was originally from the kingdom of the Hwicce (roughly the present counties of Gloucestershire and Worcestershire); this marriage was probably also engineered by Wulfhere, to strengthen his overlordship over the South Saxon kingdom. In the early 680s AEthelwealh received Bishop Wilfrid of Northumbria, then in exile from his native land, and encouraged him to organize the mass conversion of the South Saxons and to set up a permanent church in the kingdom; he granted Wilfrid a large estate in the Selsey area, where the bishop founded a monastery which he used as his base for the short period he remained in the kingdom. AEthelwealh's reign ended about 685, when Sussex was invaded by a young West Saxon prince named Caedwalla, himself an exile. AEthelwealh was killed in the course of this incursion, but Caedwalla was driven out by two of the king's noblemen, Berhthun and Andhun. Shortly afterwards, in 686, Caedwalla managed to establish himself as ruler of the West Saxons, and with his additional resources he once more invaded Sussex, killing Berhthun. Sussex now became for some years subject to a period of harsh West Saxon domination. 
By 692 the people were under the rule of a certain Nothhelm, usually known as 


@@@@@


doc= 63376


Watt (fl. 692), while a later one has the subscription of a King 


@@@@@


doc= 63377


AEthelstan (fl. 714?) ('AS chart.', S 45, 1173, 42). It would appear that Sussex was now being ruled by West Saxon nominees; they may have been joint kings (with Nunna as the probable senior ruler), or there may have been some kind of territorial division. If the latter, then Nunna, who could dispose of land around Selsey and Chichester, is likely to have ruled the western part of the kingdom; Watt, followed by AEthelstan, may have been in charge of the eastern part (from which no charters survive). There is evidence from later in the century that the area around Hastings, occupied by the people known as the Haestingas, existed as a territory distinct from the rest of the South Saxon kingdom; it may have been settled by colonists from Kent. The suggestion that Watt was the ruler of the Haestingas is attractive, but unsupported by any evidence. Nunna's last appearance is in a charter dated 714 (possibly for 717 or 721), but he may have gone on ruling for some time after this. 
The next South Saxon king to emerge in the sources is 


@@@@@


doc= 63378


AEthelberht (fl. 733-747?), donor of two charters ('AS chart.', S 46 and 47, the latter being a fabrication); all that can be said for certain about him is that he was a contemporary of Sigefrith, bishop of Selsey, who was consecrated in 733 and who died at some point between 747 and 765. By the latter date Sussex had a new bishop, and at least three or even four new kings had come to power. Determining the sequence and relationship of these rulers proves very difficult. One was 


@@@@@


doc= 63379


Ealdwulf (fl. c.760), which seems to belong to the 760s, is attested by a King 


@@@@@


doc= 63380


AElfwald (fl. c.760) and a King 


@@@@@


doc= 63381


Oslac (fl. c.760). 
The independent existence of the South Saxon kingdom came to an end in the early 770s. In 771 Offa, king of the Mercians, conquered the territory of the Haestingas; he may have entered Sussex from Kent, where he was already dominant. By 772 he apparently controlled the whole kingdom. In that year he issued a diploma granting land at Bexhill to the bishop of the South Saxons ('AS chart.', S 108), which was witnessed by four men described as 'dux': Oswald, Osmund, AElfwald, and Oslac. There is reason to suspect that at least three of these men were former kings of Sussex. Osmund was probably the ruler who issued diplomas in the 760s and early 770s, while AElfwald and Oslac seem likely to have been the AElhuald and Osiai who attested King Ealdwulf's charter in the 760s. Nothing is known of Oswald, although judging from the position of his subscription in the witness list to Offa's diploma he would appear to have been the most senior of the four. It would seem that after his conquest of Sussex Offa had come to an agreement with its former rulers, who continued to rule as Offa's representatives, with the reduced status of 'dux'. In subsequent years Oslac and AElfwald both made grants of land as 'dux' of the South Saxons, but in each case the grants were made with Offa's permission or were later confirmed by him (S 1178, 1183, 1184). Sussex remained a Mercian possession until 'c'.825, when it was absorbed into the West Saxon kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 63387


Wilkie, Dorette (1867-1930), promoter of women's physical education, was born at Stendal, Magdeburg, Prussia, on 14 June 1867, the daughter of Friedrich Wilke, a cork merchant who was a Polish refugee in Germany, and his wife, Dorothea. She came to England in 1885, a penniless, delicate, sensitive, receptive teenager suffering from lateral curvature of the spine. A cure was effected through gymnastics and she enrolled at the fashionable training school of Adolf A. Stempel's gymnasium in London, where she received two years' free training in physical education in return for one year's unsalaried teaching at Stempel's and its schools. She later said: 'I am so grateful... for what gymnastics have done for me, that I want to make them a means of doing good to as many people as possible' ('c'.1899, cited in Webb, 'Challenge of Change', 13). In 1888 she became an assistant to the Misses Evelyn and Beatrice Bear at Queen Alexandra House gymnasium, and in 1891 was appointed to the staff of Battersea Polytechnic. 
In 1896, taking three students from Battersea, Wilke joined the staff of the South Western Polytechnic, Chelsea, where she had the opportunity to realize her ambition of establishing and running her own physical training college to train gymnastic and games teachers to teach in girls' schools. What later became the Chelsea College of Physical Education opened in September 1898 as the gymnastic teachers' training department of the South Western Polytechnic's day training college for women (Webb, 'Challenge of Change', 9-10). Wilke was its first headmistress, and she held the position for thirty-one years. As she said, early in her tenure, 'we are engaged... in the work of teaching the teachers for, unless the teacher has herself been taught, how can she teach others?' ('Daily News', 8 Dec 1903). 
The earliest students at Chelsea followed a two-year college diploma course, and were also eligible to gain certificates awarded by external bodies such as the British College of Physical Education and the Gymnastic Teachers' Institute. The first course of training cost 72 guineas, plus library and games subscriptions, examination fees, books, uniform, equipment, and travel expenses. Initially, no defined educational entrance standard was set, but Wilke insisted, 'My students must have brains; a healthy active body is not enough'. Scientific subjects -- physiology, anatomy, and psychology -- were added to the course of study, which had three main strands: practical studies, theoretical studies, and teaching practice. Always keen to keep in the forefront of knowledge and extend her experience, she became, in 1907, an examiner in physical training under the London county council. In 1909 she extended the course at Chelsea to three years 'in order to bring the training up to the standard of a University education' (Webb, 'Chelsea College of Physical Education', 116). The aim of the third year of study was the application of knowledge gained in the first two years to degree standard, as reflected in the following components: extension of teaching experience, theoretical and practical; remedial work; a one-year course in psychology; introduction to the principles of teaching; and research in the laboratories of the polytechnic. She encouraged students' cultural education by the establishment of many student societies. 
During Wilke's period as headmistress, the Chelsea college grew from five to more than a hundred students. Those who had passed through the course went on to hold positions in girls' schools and training colleges throughout Britain and around the world. She encouraged the extension of their knowledge and experience, and was proud of the formation of the Chelsea Old Students' Association on 28 May 1904. She set high standards for staff and students in behaviour and dress. The college uniform changed periodically, as fashions changed, but essentially the colours of the earl of Cadogan, blue, white and red, were retained. When the college opened, facilities were limited: the gymnasium was shared with the men's and boys' classes and public facilities were used for swimming. Students cycled to and from the games fields. Local students lived at home, while a few others lived in a boarding house attached to the college. In 1905 a pioneer hostel, Cadogan Lodge, was opened at 11 Carlyle Square for fourteen to twenty resident students under the supervision of a female warden. 
From 1907 Wilke developed a close association with Cecil Sharp, who in 1909 established a school of morris dancing in association with the college. She was co-opted onto the provisional committee of the English Folk Dance Society in December 1911 and encouraged Sharp to experiment and test with the students any dance which he collected. A team of second-year students often accompanied him on his tours of Great Britain to demonstrate his latest findings. 
On 1 May 1908 Wilke was naturalized as a British subject, a status which she believed would make it easier for her to carry out her duties as an examiner. Thereafter she refused to be called Fraulein and was universally known as Domina. At the same time her surname was changed by deed poll from Wilke to Wilkie. She lived in Chelsea until her retirement in 1929. After a painful illness she died of breast cancer on 19 January 1930 at Domina's Cottage, Barley Mow Hill, Headley, near Bordon, Hampshire, which she had purchased in 1914 for her retirement and holidays, and where she had entertained staff and third-year students. She was buried in Headley churchyard. She never married. 
Domina's unconventional, dynamic, colourful personality, exemplified in her dress (a red working tunic), and the ever-present sense of service to the community through teaching and voluntary work, influenced her thinking and actions. In 1902 she instituted Saturday games in Battersea Park for deprived children, and Chelsea students taught at London working girls' clubs. She was often outspoken, but her experimental scientific, analytical, and pioneering work at Chelsea resulted in a lasting legacy to British physical education. Vital and lively, with a sense of fun, she encouraged individuality in her students. Her vision for physical education was marked by her courage in overcoming difficulties. One of the early pioneers to provide a 'new' profession for women, she was a spontaneous and enduring inspiration to those with whom she came into contact. 


@@@@@


doc= 63388


Stringer, Mabel Emily (1868-1958), golfer and journalist, was born on 25 September 1868 at The Elms, New Romney, Kent, the eldest of the seven children of Henry Stringer (1838?-1912), a solicitor, and his wife, Harriet, formerly Walker ('b'. 1845?). Her girlhood impression of the game to which she was to devote her life was that it was a 'particularly stupid' and 'dull' pursuit, which could not compare with her favoured pastimes of 'cricket, pole-jumping, bird-nesting, catapult-shooting, hunting, and the like!' (Stringer, 13). In 1887 a men's golf club was established at Littlestone, close to where she grew up, and on the links there she discovered her love for the game, playing alone in the afternoons with a cleek, a heavy mashie, and a putter. When Littlestone Ladies' Club was established in 1891 she became its first captain, a post she held until 1896. 
The ladies' links at Littlestone consisted of nine holes right along the shore, facetiously dubbed the 'hen run', but they were seldom used as the women enjoyed unrestricted access to the men's links. The women were not, however, given similar access to the men's clubhouse, and had to make do with two empty rooms in an unoccupied coastguard cottage, onto which was tacked a tiny dressing-room of corrugated iron. This state of social apartheid was relaxed each Christmas, when there was a mixed foursome competition, after which the ladies were given tea in the men's clubhouse. The invitation, though, came on the strict understanding that the visitors were 'on no account to go in by the front entrance!' (Stringer, 14). Years later, when the conditions enjoyed by women golfers seemed luxurious by comparison, Stringer reflected nostalgically on the 'wretched little tin tabernacle' (ibid., 25) at Littlestone. But she felt no similar emotional attachment to the older style of dress, and wondered how women had managed to play at all in 'the outrageous garments' decreed by Victorian and Edwardian fashion: 'The golfing girl of to-day should indeed be grateful that she need not play golf in a sailor hat, a high stiff collar, a voluminous skirt and petticoats, a motor-veil, or a wide skirt with leather binding' (ibid., 29). 
In 1894 Littlestone was chosen as the venue for the second (British) ladies' championship and Stringer made her championship debut on her home course. She subsequently entered every year, until illness forced her absence in 1901. She also missed the championships of 1904 and 1905, when she pursued employment as a lady's companion, but she competed in her final championship in 1907. Although she never advanced very far in championships, she was a first-rate golfer, and joint holder of the women's course record at Littlestone. Lung trouble denied her a place on the England team to face Scotland in 1902, but she represented her country in the international cup held that year. 
The 1894 ladies' championship brought about Stringer's first meeting with Isette Pearson, a founder and honorary secretary of the Ladies' Golf Union (LGU). Pearson visited Littlestone in advance of the championship to view the course, and Stringer was asked to entertain her. A lifelong friendship began, which deepened Stringer's own involvement with the union. She represented Kent on its council for more than twenty years, and briefly deputized for Pearson when the latter was ill, serving as assistant honorary secretary. A great enthusiast for and instigator of county golf, Stringer was also involved in establishing a proper handicap system for women golfers, a regulated system that put the much looser male equivalent to shame and which she considered 'the greatest achievement' of the LGU (Stringer, 175). 
Stringer had helped to produce the early yearbooks of the LGU, and in 1903 she was asked by a national newspaper to cover a tournament in place of its regular correspondent, who was ill. This was her start in golf journalism and being 'almost the only woman in this particular work' she found regular employment. By the spring of 1906 she was making, by her own estimate, 'a fairly good living' from writing, and decided to make it her profession. Thereafter she covered the important championships for the British and foreign press, writing for a range of publications from dailies to periodicals. Her reports were then more likely to be placed in the social columns of newspapers rather than on the sports pages, but by the time that she had retired in 1924 this had changed; she had played an important part in establishing women's golf as a recognized sport, with its own news value. Her descriptions of the major tournaments, and of those who played in them, stimulated public interest and encouraged new players. She was present at all the ladies' championships from 1908 to 1923, and witnessed the debuts of many great golfers, notably Cecil Leitch at St Andrews in 1908. Stringer regarded the 1908 championship as 'the most epoch-making' because of the venue: 'not only did our presence there indicate that any prejudices against women's intrusion on men's 'rights' had been overcome, but the subsequent happenings of the week clearly showed that we had justified our right to play over the ground where other women had played three hundred years before. (Stringer, 164)' In 1914 J. S. Wood, co-proprietor and chairman of 'The Gentlewoman', to which Stringer had long been a contributor, approached her with the idea of an English girls' golf championship. Together they organized a match-play event for sixteen qualifiers. The large number of entries for the inaugural championship that year was testimony to the potential of the event, though it had to be cancelled after the outbreak of war. When in 1919 Stringer became editor of the sports pages of 'The Gentlewoman', she revived the plan, and the first girls' championship was played that year at Stoke Poges, home of the event until 1938. The tournament was an immediate success, combining a friendly atmosphere with fine competition. Stringer was the driving force behind it, making sure that the organization ran smoothly and that the girls and their anxious relatives were kept happy. 
It was Cecil Leitch who famously christened Stringer 'Auntie Mabel', and by mid-century Auntie Mabel was already 'a mythical person to the moderns' (Wilson, 108). A mentor to young players, those 'nieces' to whom she dedicated her book of 'Golfing Reminiscences' (1924), Stringer was closely involved in the founding of several important women's golfing societies, and on her retirement in 1924 seven associations raised a special collection of $160 as a token of their esteem: she used the money to install electric lighting in her simple cottage in Kent. Many women had reason to be grateful for what she had achieved in her sixty years' involvement with the game of golf. A competitor in the second ladies' championship in 1894, she lived to witness the great home triumph in the ninth Curtis cup match at Prince's, Sandwich, in 1956. She never married, and died at her home, 26 Herschell Square, Walmer, Kent, on 10 February 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 63389


Nance, Robert Morton (1873-1959), Cornish-language scholar, was born on 10 April 1873 at Clevedon Villa, The Walk, Tredegarville, Cardiff, the third of four children of William Edwin Nance (1857/8-1932), coal agent and colliery manager, of Padstow, and his wife, Jane Morton of St Ives. He trained at Cardiff Art School and under Hubert Herkomer in Bushey, Hertfordshire. He married Beatrice ('b'. 1871/2), an artist, the daughter of Bolton Michell, gentleman, on 3 December 1895, and set up an art school in Wales. They had a daughter, but Beatrice died in 1900. On 27 March 1906 Nance married another artist, (Annie) Maud (1872-1961), daughter of Richard Garnont Cawker, accountant, and moved to Nancledra in Cornwall, then, in 1914, to St Ives; they had two sons and another daughter. 
Nance had a special interest in maritime subjects, earned a sound reputation in nautical history, illustrated books, and was a skilled model maker, with examples in various museums. He was a founder member of the Society for Nautical Research, and contributed over forty articles to the 'Mariner's Mirror'. However, his principal claim to fame is his work in reviving Cornish, a native Celtic tongue not used as a spoken community language since the middle ages. The attempt was nostalgic and occasionally philologically questionable, but it was pursued with passion and meticulous attention to detail. 
In Nancledra Nance wrote dialect plays, but, having begun to collect Cornish sea-words (his glossary was published posthumously), he took up Cornish proper. After the First World War, during which he was a volunteer, he set up, with the older scholar Henry Jenner (1848-1934), the first Old Cornwall Society in St Ives in 1920. By 1924 there were enough societies to constitute a federation, with Jenner as president, succeeded by Nance. Although Jenner was never really as convinced about reviving spoken Cornish, the two established in 1928 the Gorseth Kernow, a version of the bardic gathering attached to the eisteddfod. The gorsedd is of dubious historicity, but its harmless eighteenth-century Romanticism helped raise the profile of Cornish. Jenner was the first grand bard, and Nance, who took the bardic name 'Mordon' ('Sea-wave'), succeeded him in 1934, serving for twenty-five years. Nance was president of the Royal Institution of Cornwall in 1951-5 and held other such positions, but most publicly available images show him in old age in bardic robes, angular and visionary. 
Jenner had published a grammar, but Nance reconstructed Cornish for revival purposes. Feeling that there was insufficient material in late Cornish in the eighteenth century, he returned to the (still somewhat limited) medieval literature, standardizing spellings and calling his language 'unified Cornish'. Deficient lexicon was remedied via Welsh and Breton, or with loans from Middle English or modern languages. The procedure was consistent enough, provided one accepted Nance's leap-frogging over late Cornish; not everyone did, sometimes dubbing his language 'Cornic' or 'Mordonnek' to distinguish it from genuine survivals. Nance's pronunciation system, based on phonetic representations of late Cornish and on the dialect of west Cornwall, was also criticized. But Nance was a popularizer and a pragmatist, providing a form in which the language 'could' be learnt. In 1929 he produced 'Cornish for All', and in 1934 his first dictionary, with his close collaborator, A. S. D. Smith (1883-1950); the two provided unified Cornish versions of the medieval texts with translations, as well as original material. 
One aim of the Old Cornwall societies was to 'gather the fragments'. Nance published more than two hundred articles in the journal 'Old Cornwall' and elsewhere, many about Cornish domestic history, others linguistic, sometimes salvaging a coherent sentence of Cornish from a half-remembered scrap of apparent gibberish. In an original playlet ('An Balores') written in 1932, Nance took the chough as emblem of the Cornish past, merging the bird with the spirit of King Arthur; a closing song contained the archetypally Romantic motto 'nyns-yu marow Myghtern Arthur' ('King Arthur is not dead'). 
The revival enjoyed success under Nance and Smith; unified Cornish was taught and examined, and works were written in it. After Nance's death its fortunes varied. School certificate examinations were abandoned in 1991 through shortage of numbers, although language boards in Cornwall maintain interest, as do groups in Australia and North America, and in 1999 parliament debated the status of the language within Europe. Against this, a proliferation of philologically more acceptable (but different) versions of unified Cornish, plus alternatives from different starting-points, led to severe linguistic schisms. 
Nance translated some of the 'Book of Common Prayer' for a service in 1933, but in a sense this was too late; the lack of a Cornish prayer book and 'Bible' had contributed to the decline of spoken Cornish in Tudor times. Nor was the revived language strictly necessary, as in the case of modern Hebrew. However, contact with the past is always worthwhile; Nance was perhaps the last of the great Cornish antiquaries, and the continued awareness of the Cornish language is his legacy. Vigorous until the end (he was a non-smoking teetotaller and a vegetarian by conviction), Nance died in St Michael's Hospital, Hayle, on 27 May 1959, and was buried in Zennor church on 3 June; his memorial has a Cornish inscription. 


