@@@@@


doc= 7209


David fitz Gerald (c.1103x9-1176), bishop of St David's, was the son of Gerald of Windsor (d. 1116x36) and Nest (b. before 1092, d. c.1130), daughter of the Welsh prince, Rhys ap Tewdwr (d. 1093). His eldest brother, William, was lord of Carew; Maurice, a younger brother, had a small local endowment; his sister, Angharad, married William de Barry of Manorbier. He also had half-brothers who were established in south Wales and, after 1170, Ireland. The distinction of this ambitious group was greatly enhanced by Gerald of Wales (died 1220x23), David's nephew, whose works promoted both the most successful members of his family and himself. 
By 1148, David was a canon of St David's and archdeacon of Cardigan. In that year, the canons of St David's were divided over his election as bishop, and two different motives were suggested. One, recorded by Gerald of Wales, was that some wanted a Welshman as bishop, while others opposed such an appointment. The other was that some wished to defend the metropolitan claims of St David's and others accepted Canterbury's primatial authority. Summoned to Lambeth for the election, a group of canons was persuaded by Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury, to elect David as a bishop who would not oppose the archbishop's claims to primacy in Wales. The unusually detailed promise of obedience which he gave Theobald lends credence to this view. The election has been seen as a valuable tactical victory for the archbishop. 
Although his connections with the Welsh dynasty and Anglo-Norman settlers made him potentially an important political figure, David rarely exercised political influence. He intervened with Rhys ap Gruffudd in 1167 to secure the release from prison of his half-brother, Robert fitz Stephen. This family matter had wider significance because Robert, at liberty, was obliged to join the Anglo-Norman forces preparing to invade Ireland. 
David was essentially a local bishop, appearing rarely on major ecclesiastical occasions affecting the church in Britain. In twenty-six years he assisted at the consecration of a fellow bishop only once, that of Archbishop Thomas Becket. He attended the Council of Tours summoned by Alexander III in 1163. Late in life, prompted by personal interests, he attended the Council of Westminster convened by Richard of Dover, archbishop of Canterbury, in 1175. The council enacted legislation for the Welsh dioceses; the status of St David's was again being discussed by some of his canons; and his chapter had prepared an indictment of his conduct to present to the archbishop. His links with the royal court were likewise minimal. He was at Clarendon early in 1164 to give assent to Henry II's constitutions for the church. When, in September 1171, Henry was preparing to embark for Ireland, he made a brief formal visit to the shrine of St David. To spare the bishop expense, he accepted an invitation to dinner but refused to stay with his retinue at St David's. 
David seems to have discharged his episcopal functions, though not with any great distinction. He was greatly hampered by the poverty of his diocese, compounded in turn by the spoliation of the episcopal estates by barons such as Mahel of Hereford. The problem was further exacerbated by the demands of his own family. His brother, Maurice, was promoted to be steward of the diocese and given episcopal estates. Bishop David himself, in flagrant contravention of the church's teaching for the higher clergy, had a family. He used the episcopal lands to endow his daughters, and his son (formally acknowledged as such), Miles, took part in the invasion of Ireland. David died on 8 May 1176, and was buried at St David's. 
Gerald of Wales admired David and wrote about him in a number of his works, but was nevertheless commissioned by the archbishop of Canterbury to deal with moral laxity among the diocesan clergy. An account of David's episcopate by an anonymous author, which has in the past been attributed to a canon of St David's and sometimes to Gerald himself, is much sharper in its criticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 7210


Dafydd ap Gwilym (fl. 1330-1350), poet, was born perhaps 'c'.1315 at Brogynin, an estate located partly in the parish of Llanfihangel Genau'r-glyn and partly in the parish of Llanbadarn Fawr in northern Cardiganshire, some 5 miles inland from the castle and borough of Aberystwyth. He may have died 'c'.1350, possibly as the result of the black death, and was probably buried at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida (although the Premonstratensian abbey of Talyllychau also lays claim to his bones). Place-name evidence in his poems confirms overwhelmingly his attachment to his place of birth in northern Cardiganshire, although it also shows that he wandered freely over much of Wales as it then was. It should be stressed that the dates of birth and death given above are conjectural (many scholars would prefer a somewhat later floruit), and an element of uncertainty surrounds his family history also. 
He was the son of Gwilym Gam (Crooked William) ap Gwilym ab Einion of the line of Gwynfardd Dyfed, who lived in northern Pembrokeshire during the latter part of the eleventh century and whose descendants collaborated consistently and profitably with the Anglo-Norman conquerors. According to genealogies, Gwilym married Ardudful, daughter of Gwilym ap Rhys of the line of Ednyfed Fychan ['see under 'Tudor family, forebears of (per. c.1215-1404)]; she was thus the sister of Llywelyn ap Gwilym ap Rhys, a substantial landowner in the parishes of Pen-boyr and Nevern in south-west Wales, deputy constable of Newcastle Emlyn in 1343 and deputy justiciar of south Wales (under Sir Gilbert Talbot) in 1344-5. On both his mother's side and (more distantly) his father's, Dafydd ap Gwilym was related to Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd, by far the most powerful Welsh magnate in the southern principality during the first half of the fourteenth century. As far as is known, Dafydd had no brothers or sisters, nor did he 'sensu stricto' ever marry, in spite of the fact that his attachment to women provided the matter of the greater part of his verse. 
As might be expected from his relatively high birth, and as the meagre evidence on the topic in his own verse suggests, Dafydd ap Gwilym was not left without means by his parents. The presumption is that he inherited lands that he was able to let and thus live on the income; but this income he certainly supplemented with the earnings he received from declaiming his verse (perhaps to his own musical accompaniment) in gentry households throughout Wales: judging by the surviving corpus, his love songs attracted such earnings no less than formal panegyric. Crucial to his formation as a poet was the fact that he was partly brought up at Newcastle Emlyn by his uncle Llywelyn ap Gwilym who apparently taught him the art of Welsh verse as well as more mundane accomplishments, which might have included a knowledge of French and English. It has been argued that he also spent some time at Strata Florida Abbey, where he would have learned a certain amount of Latin as well as liturgical singing. At that time important manuscripts were still being produced in the scriptorium at Strata Florida; the gentry household of Ieuan Llwyd at Parcrhydderch some 10 miles to the south-west was a focus of patronage for professional poets; and somewhere in the vicinity Einion Offeiriad (Einion the Priest) was preparing his manual on Welsh poetic art at the behest of Sir Rhys ap Gruffudd. Dafydd's innate poetic gifts were thus expanded and developed by an educative process which left him endowed not only with complete mastery of the traditional forms of Welsh versecraft but also with a sensitivity to external influence and a readiness to experiment which proved fundamental to his later career as a poet. 
Dafydd ap Gwilym's verse, in its most recent critical edition, consists of 150 poems, comprising in all rather more than 7000 lines; since 1952 a further 3 poems have been added to the canon (others are under discussion). Of these 153 poems it may be said that 27 are traditional in theme -- panegyric, satire, poetic debate, and religious devotion -- while the remaining 126 celebrate love, often but not always in a woodland setting; the line count of these love poems amounts to almost 6000. An analysis of the corpus by metrical form is equally revealing: 8 of Dafydd's poems are 'awdlau', 5 are sequences of 'englynion', and the remaining 140 are 'cywyddau'. These figures define Dafydd as overwhelmingly a love poet employing the 'cywydd' metre. This is in stark contrast to the situation obtaining in the previous century (and even, in some circles, in his own century as well), when the Welsh professional poet was typically a court official praising the king and the occasional nobleman in 'awdl' metres, although 'englynion' were also sometimes used. Dafydd thus represents a decisive break with tradition in both metrics and matter. He may indeed have invented the 'cywydd' metre by embellishing and regularizing the humble 'traethodl' hitherto used exclusively (as far as can be judged) by lower-grade poets, and he certainly popularized the 'cywydd' to the extent that it remained the staple of Welsh professional poetry for a further 300 years ['see 'Cywyddwyr (act. c.1330-c.1650)]. The break with tradition as regards matter is more difficult to assess: Dafydd certainly had his forerunners as love poet, but the scale and preponderance of love poetry in Dafydd's verse is entirely new. While it is clear that there was a shift in taste from panegyric to love poetry among the class that increasingly assumed the role of patron, that is the landowning, office-holding 'uchelwyr' (literally 'men of high birth'), it has been argued that Dafydd's love poetry may be disguised panegyric, designed to uphold the ideals and morale of the Welsh elite in the face of the Norman advance. Nevertheless, it is likely that Dafydd is chiefly a love poet because that is the role that best suited both his personality and his experience of life. 
Before describing Dafydd ap Gwilym's love poetry in more detail, however, it may be as well to glance briefly at his more traditional verse. His five conventional but skilful and sincere religious poems include a metrical version of the liturgical prayer 'Anima Christi', which had only recently become popular. Of his praise poems, seven are addressed to Ifor ap Llywelyn (Ifor Hael), and it is noteworthy that four of the seven are 'cywyddau', probably the first praise 'cywyddau' ever composed. Other recipients of his praise, whether in life or death, include his uncle Llywelyn ap Gwilym, his neighbour Ieuan Llwyd of Genau'r-glyn, Hywel ap Goronwy, dean (and later bishop) of Bangor, and Angharad, wife of Ieuan Llwyd of Parcrhydderch. There is also a group of four mock elegies for his friend and patron Rhydderch, the son of Ieuan Llwyd, and for his fellow poets Gruffudd ab Adda ap Dafydd, Madog Benfras, and Gruffudd Gryg. Dafydd's satiric 'awdl' for Rhys Meigen, which is supposed to have caused Rhys's death, is clumsy invective like so many of its kind. His acrimonious poetic debate with Gruffudd Gryg, however, has as its core one question of substance: the validity or otherwise of the self-abasement typical of the new love poetry that Dafydd personified. 
Of the 126 love poems now attributed to Dafydd ap Gwilym, nearly two-thirds are anonymous, in the sense that the object of the poet's love is not named in any of them. In 35 poems, however, she is named as Morfudd, in 9 as Dyddgu, and in 3 as Efa, Elen, and Luned respectively. It is a striking fact that the husbands of both Morfudd and Elen can be identified in records and that the father of Dyddgu can be traced -- albeit tentatively -- in pedigrees; furthermore, Luned is linked with Hugh Tyrrel, a royal official who died in Brittany in 1343, and Efa may just possibly be the second wife of Ifor ap Llywelyn. That is, Dafydd ap Gwilym's loves were indeed creatures of flesh and blood, and not figments of his imagination as was once thought. The figures given above show clearly Morfudd's pre-eminence among them, and a case can be made for assuming that the greater part of Dafydd's 'anonymous' love poems were also addressed to her. If this assumption is made, the story of their relationship becomes somewhat clearer. The daughter of a Merioneth 'uchelwr', Morfudd first met Dafydd while both were living in north-west Wales. They fell in love, and Dafydd began to compose 'cywyddau' in praise of her, probably the first 'cywyddau' ever composed: these became hugely popular. Dafydd and Morfudd may even have entered into a loose form of marriage contract with each other. Later, however, Morfudd was married formally to a man known as Y Bwa Bychan (the Little Hunchback), who was a neighbour of Dafydd's in north Cardiganshire and who henceforth (as Y Bwa Bach) was to play the role of the Jealous Husband in Dafydd's verse. Dafydd continued to pursue Morfudd, however, and was sometimes accepted and sometimes rejected. Eventually Y Bwa Bychan appears to have secured Dafydd's banishment from his house and lands in north Cardiganshire, and this may have been the occasion of his sojourn with Ifor ap Llywelyn in south-east Wales (another theory is that he may have gone to Ifor ap Llywelyn following the murder of his uncle Llywelyn ap Gwilym, which may have been connected with the granting of the castle of Emlyn to Sir Richard de la Bere in 1346). Finally Dafydd was forced to acknowledge defeat and to renounce Morfudd. It should be stressed that this outline depends entirely on the internal evidence of the poems and on later tradition -- both highly problematic sources -- but it does offer a framework into which many of Dafydd's love 'cywyddau' can provisionally be fitted. 
Such a bare outline, however, does scant justice to the rich texture of Dafydd ap Gwilym's verse and the complexity of the emotions expressed in it. As already mentioned, much of this verse has a woodland setting and Dafydd celebrates lovingly not only his beloved's beauty but also the glory of wild nature and the creatures which inhabit it. Birds are especially favoured, and are also prominent among the agents chosen by him to act as his messengers of love: some of his most dazzling passages of 'dyfalu' (a descriptive technique involving the accumulation of juxtaposed metaphors) are devoted to such. Sometimes the scene shifts to the beloved's house, but Dafydd is often ill at ease in such a setting, where hindrances to his assignations abound (although nature, too, can produce such hindrances). One memorable poem is set in Dafydd's parish church of Llanbadarn Fawr, where his devotion to the young women in the congregation rather than to the Blessed Sacrament might be thought to give point to the admonitions levelled at him from time to time by the friars (admonitions which, except towards the end of his life, he scornfully rejects). Although in a sense an Aberystwyth man, his experience of boroughs elsewhere in Wales is not uniformly happy, since these provide the setting for his most 'fabliau'-like escapades in which he is invariably worsted. Mention of 'fabliaux' serves to underline the point that Dafydd was seemingly well aware of the fashions and conventions of love poetry in Europe in his time, and that he makes considerable, if highly individualistic, use of such fashions and conventions. How he came to know of these fashions and conventions is a matter still under discussion: some of them may have reached him through sub-literary channels, others by personal contact within the mixed society of which he was a member. Moreover, it has been pointed out that there are possible direct borrowings in his work from the 'Amores' of Ovid, from 'Le roman de la rose', and from the poetry of Jean de Conde. It is not as a confusing blend of influences that Dafydd's verse impresses, however, but as the product of the unified vision of a man who was able to respond to the full to the joys and sorrows of life -- for which the joys and sorrows of love provided a far from inadequate metaphor -- and to express his response in poetry of consummate craftsmanship, unflagging invention, and haunting verbal music. 


@@@@@


doc= 7211


Edward Dafydd (c.1602-1678?), Welsh poet, lived in Margam in Glamorgan. Apart from his poems little is known of his life. There are a few sparse references in the records of the Margam estate and parish but even these are sometimes uncertain since at least one other person of the same name lived there during this period. One reference in Penrice and Margam MS 1282 would seem to place his date of birth 'c'.1602. His wife was apparently named Isabell; they had at least one son. Eighteen poems are extant in contemporary manuscripts, the earliest dated 1623 and the latest 1665, and most are in his own hand. They consist chiefly of elegies and other poems in praise of his patrons among the gentry, almost all of whom lived in his own county of Glamorgan. It appears probable from estate documents in the Penrice and Margam collection that he was also a tenant farmer and that, while he would have received payment for his poems in the traditional manner, farming was his main livelihood. 
Edward Dafydd's writing shows considerable mastery of the 'strict metres' and of the bardic learning in such fields as history, mythology, and genealogy. At its best it displays not only technical skill but also energy, sincerity, and facility of expression. He probably taught something of the poetic craft to a younger generation, among them his son named, in the Welsh patronymic style, Dafydd (or David) Edward. That new generation was far more limited in its metrical range and bardic skill, although one who may well have been his pupil, the Reverend David Williams (Dafydd o'r Nant), carried on some aspects of the old poetic tradition with a measure of success into the last decade of the seventeenth century. Edward Williams 
(Iolo Morganwg; 1747-1826)
, that wayward genius of a literary forger, ascribed to Edward Dafydd an exalted position in Iolo's famous invention the Gorsedd of Bards, but this belongs to the realms of fantasy. What earns Edward Dafydd his true place in the history of Welsh poetry is that he was one of the last authentic practitioners of a bardic system reaching back in an unbroken line to Taliesin and Aneirin in the sixth century. 
The Margam parish register for 1678 records the burials of two persons named Edward David, one on 14 May and the other on 10 July, and it can reasonably be assumed that one of these was the poet. 


@@@@@


doc= 7212


Davids, Thomas William (1816-1884), ecclesiastical historian, born at Swansea on 11 September 1816, was the only child of William Saunders Davids, minister of the Congregational church meeting in Providence Chapel, Swansea, and his wife, Bridget, daughter of Thomas Thomas of Vrowen in the parish of Llanboidy, Carmarthenshire. He was a descendant of David Jones (1736-1810), rector of Llan-gan, Glamorgan, the 'Wesley of Wales'. Thomas's father died in December 1816, and his mother in 1831; the orphan was adopted by his uncle, Thomas Thomas of Llanbedr Felffre, a man of considerable means. For some years Davids was educated for the medical profession, but in 1835 he decided to become an Independent minister. In 1836 he entered the old college at Homerton, then under John Pye Smith, and there studied for the ministry, until in 1840 he was invited to become minister of the Congregational church meeting in Lion Walk at Colchester in Essex. 
In 1841 Davids married Louisa, the daughter of Robert Winter, solicitor, of Clapham Common. They had ten children, among them the orientalist Thomas William Rhys Davids. Under her superintendence the Sunday school attached to his church soon became known as a model, and after its transfer to new and extensive premises she published in 1847 an essay entitled 'The Sunday School'. It was awarded a prize offered by the committee of the Sunday School Union, passed rapidly through four editions, and was for some years regarded as the standard textbook on the management and organization of similar institutions among all denominations. Following Louisa's death in 1853, Davids remarried, on 28 April 1859; his new wife was Mary, the daughter of William Spellman of Norwich. 
Davids had marked success as a minister. The church became too small for the congregation, and it was through his efforts that the new Gothic church in Lion Walk was built. He also devoted much attention to the organization of his denomination within the county, and for many years was secretary of the Essex Congregational Union and the Home Missionary Society. 
Meanwhile Davids had given such time as he could spare to the study of the religious history of Essex. In connection with the bicentenary celebration of the eviction of the nonconforming clergy in 1662, he was asked in 1862 to prepare a memorial of those who were evicted in Essex. He devoted immense labour to this volume, searching the Essex parish registers, the Public Record Office, the British Museum, Dr Williams's Library, and elsewhere, for all references to the puritans settled in Essex at the time of the eviction and to the previous religious history of each parish in the county. The more important results of his researches appeared in the 'Annals of evangelical nonconformity in the county of Essex from the time of Wycliffe to the Restoration, with memorials of the Essex ministers ejected or silenced in 1660-1662' (1863). But the bulk of his genealogical, parochial, and other collectanea remained unpublished in six folio volumes, which, frequently added to and carefully indexed, were purchased, after his death, for the library of the Congregational Memorial Hall (now administered by Dr Williams's Library). The minute details of the personal and family history of the early puritans contained in the published volume were of special interest in America, and the author was elected an honorary corresponding member of the New England Historic Genealogical Society. 
A larger question, however, began increasingly to occupy Davids's time. While searching in each case for the direct or indirect sources of the puritan belief held by the evicted clergy, the author was led to the opinion that there had been an unbroken tradition of so-called evangelical belief stretching back to a period long before the time of Wyclif and Hus, and probably even to the earliest beginnings of Christianity. The task of tracking this undercurrent of belief throughout Europe occupied his retirement after his resignation from ministerial work in 1874. His 'Annals of Reformers before the Reformation' were never completed. However, Davids did contribute numerous articles to Smith's 'Dictionary of Christian Biography', and a paper entitled 'Evangelical nonconformity under the first of the Plantagenets' was published in the 'British Quarterly Review' (September 1870). 
Davids died at 4 St George's Square, Upton, Essex, of heart disease on Good Friday, 11 April 1884, and was buried in Colchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 7213


Davidson, Alexander Dyce (1807-1872), Free Church of Scotland minister, was born in Aberdeen on 8 May 1807, the son of George Davidson, a superintendent in the Devantia Brewery. He was educated at the Aberdeen grammar school and the Marischal College, before becoming a tutor in the family of James Blaikie, an advocate and provost of Aberdeen. He was licensed as preacher in March 1830, and was ordained minister of South Church on 3 August 1832. On 11 August 1840 he married Elizabeth Blaikie (died 1842); both she and their only child died early, but Davidson never remarried. 
Davidson was a devoted minister, who sought neither promotion nor a role in public life: 'if ever a minister spent his whole time and strength on a congregation, Dr Davidson did' (Wylie, 212). The transformation of religious opinion in Aberdeen from moderate to evangelical can be attributed largely to his influence; at the Disruption of 1843 Davidson led his own congregation into the Free Church, ministering to it from January 1844 in Belmont Street and from February 1869 at a newly built church in Union Street. Davidson devoted himself particularly to preaching, spending many hours in his study carefully preparing his sermons. In 1859 he published a series of sermons on the book of 'Esther', and at his death he left 1800 completed lectures and sermons, a selection of which were published posthumously in 1872. He was awarded a DD in 1854 by the University of Aberdeen; he died in Aberdeen on 27 April 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 7214


Davidson, Harriet Miller (1839-1883), writer, was born on 25 November 1839 at Cromarty, Scotland, the second but eldest surviving child of Hugh Miller (1802-1856) and his wife, Lydia Falconer Fraser ['see 'Miller, Lydia Mackenzie Falconer (bap. 1812, d. 1876)]. She had two brothers, the elder of whom was three years her junior. While Hugh Miller, the son of a shipowner who had served in the British navy, had received no formal training in science, he was a self-taught expert in geology, and during his daughter's childhood he became a popular writer and lecturer. Lydia Miller, who shared her husband's intellectual interests, was a teacher and writer, and published a novel, 'Passages in the Life of an English Heiress', in 1847. Harriet Miller, who is said to have been a very beautiful and highly gifted child, with a remarkable talent for improvisation in verse and song, was educated at Edinburgh, where she won a prize for poetry (Allen, 107), and London, where she travelled with her parents. Her life changed dramatically when on Christmas eve 1856 her father, who had been subject to fits of severe anxiety and depression for several years, committed suicide in what was described in the post-mortem report as an 'impulse of insanity' ('Scottish Nation', 3.167). According to Margaret Allen, Hugh Miller's suicide 'always haunted' his daughter and 'the remembrance of it visited her again and again' (Allen, 107). None the less, Miller continued her London education in the years following her father's death. On 14 April 1863 she married the Revd John Davidson (1834/5-1881), minister of the Free Church of Scotland at Langholm in Dumfriesshire. 
Davidson began her literary career by contributing poems to local journals, but she soon turned to fiction. The British Library catalogue attributes the anonymous 'Lines for Little Life' (1856) and 'The Two Babies' (1859) to her, but the attribution is almost certainly incorrect, as the latter, published four years before Davidson's marriage, proclaims itself to be 'by a Mother' and is signed with the initials H. D. Davidson's first novel, 'Isobel Jardine's History', is a temperance tale and was published under the auspices of the Scottish Temperance League in 1867. This story was very popular and ran through several editions. An advertisement for a later edition quotes 'The Scotsman' as observing that while many 'would be inclined off-hand to dismiss a work put out by a Temperance League', the work transcended its didactic purpose and could be read for its 'simple and attractive' style and its 'naturally sketched' characters (Davidson, 331). 'Christian Osborne's Friends' (1869) followed, a story suggesting several references to Davidson's seafaring ancestors. 
In 1869 Davidson emigrated to Australia with her husband, who had been appointed minister of Chalmers's Church in Adelaide, South Australia. He was later appointed to a chair in English literature and mental philosophy at the University of Adelaide. For a time Harriet Davidson ran a small private school at her house in Adelaide, and she also became a contributor to the local newspapers, publishing articles, poems, and stories until shortly before her death. Among these stories she considered 'A Man of Genius' -- a temperance tale serialized in the 'Adelaide Observer', but not subsequently reprinted -- the best of her prose writings. 'Sir Gilbert's Children', the last of her stories, was left unfinished, but was completed from her instructions to a friend. Margaret Allen sees both these novels as quasi-autobiographical; long after Hugh Miller's suicide, Davidson continued to explore the subject of daughters abandoned by brilliant, charismatic fathers (Allen, 115-16, 122). Davidson also contributed to 'Chambers's Journal', where 'Daisy's Choice' appeared in 1870, and 'The Hamiltons', a story of Australian life, in 1878. Her short stories were never collected, and none of her writing has been republished since the nineteenth century. Harriet Davidson was in a precarious state of health from at least 1877, when she visited Europe for medical treatment, and from 1880 she was a confirmed invalid. She died in Adelaide on 20 December 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 7215


Davidson, James (1793-1864), antiquary and bibliographer, was the eldest son of James Davidson ('b'. 'c'.1748, died after 1802) of Tower Hill, London, a stationer and printer and deputy lieutenant of the Tower, and Ann, his wife, only daughter of William Sawyer of Ipswich. He was born at Postern Row, Tower Hill on 15 August 1793. On 6 March 1823 he married Mary, the only daughter of Thomas Bridge of Frome St Quentin, Dorset; they had two sons and three daughters. 
When nearly thirty years old Davidson bought the estate of Secktor, near Axminster in Devon, and enlarged the small cottage there. Here he lived for the rest of his life, interesting himself in Devon antiquities in general, but concentrating especially on the topography and history of the parishes in and around the valley of the Axe. His works on this district were: 'The British and Roman Remains in the Vicinity of Axminster' (1833); 'History of Axminster Church' (1835); 'History of Newenham Abbey, Devon' (1843), an abbey about a mile south of the town of Axminster; and 'Axminster during the Civil War' (1851). Davidson's sole excursion into general literature consisted of 'A glossary to the obsolete and unused words and phrases of the holy scriptures in the Authorised English Version' (1850), a valuable compilation in its time. He published in 1861 a selection of 'Notes on the Antiquities of Devonshire, from before the Norman Conquest', and he left behind in manuscript four volumes of notes on almost every church in Devon, the results of many country rambles. His most significant work was, however, the 'Bibliotheca Devoniensis: a Catalogue of the Printed Books Relating to the County of Devon' (1852) and its supplement (1861). It did not include a bibliography of the works of Devon authors but within the limits of Davidson's scheme it was an accurate and complete catalogue. Davidson spared neither pains nor expense, and the libraries in London and the universities were fully checked. His extensively annotated copy of the bibliography is in the Westcountry Studies Library, Exeter. He was a regular contributor to 'Notes and Queries'. In 1859 he published a series of antiquarian papers in 'Pulman's Weekly News', and an article by him entitled 'British antiquities at Winford Eagle, Dorset' appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1827. George Oliver acknowledged his assistance with the section on Newenham Abbey in his 'Monasticon diocesis Exoniensis' (1846). 
Davidson died at Secktor House, Axminster, on 29 February 1864, and was buried in the cemetery of that town; his wife survived him. Many of his manuscript compilations passed into the hands of Joshua Brooking Rowe, who bequeathed them to Exeter City Library. Davidson's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 7216


James Bridge Davidson (1824-1885), a lawyer, who shared his antiquarian interests, was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1850 and from 1865 worked as a law reporter for chancery and equity cases. He died unmarried at 1 Raymond's Buildings, Gray's Inn, London, on 8 October 1885, aged sixty-one. He was the author of many papers, but did not publish any work separately. Many of the books included in the Secktor House library, which was formed by the father and the son, were sold by William George of Bristol in 1887. The extensive collection of Devon pamphlets was bequeathed to the Plymouth Institution. A catalogue was published in 1894 but the collection was destroyed during the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 7217


Davidson, John (c.1549-1604), Church of Scotland minister, was born in Dunfermline to unknown parents. Educated at St Leonard's College, St Andrews, where he matriculated in 1566, aged about seventeen, he served as a regent in the college after graduating MA in 1570 and acted as examiner before entering the ministry at Liberton in 1579. When teaching in the university, he heard Knox preach there during the latter's residence in St Andrews, wrote a play which Knox attended for the marriage of a minister, and followed it with his first poem, 'Ane Breif Commendatioun of Uprichtnes', printed in 1573, in praise of Knox; he also prepared a shorter poem on Knox's death in 1572. He incurred the hostility of Regent Morton in 1574 by writing 'Ane Dialog or Mutuall Talking Betuix a Clerk and ane Courteour Concerning Foure Parische Kirks till ane Minister', a satirical attack on Morton's reorganization of stipends by grouping several adjacent parishes together under the oversight of one minister, for which he was prosecuted by the privy council. Forced to flee to Argyll and then abroad, Davidson was aided by the early Ayrshire reformer Robert Campbell of Kingzeancleuch, who advised him to contact Christopher Goodman (once minister of St Andrews) in England who would find him safe passage to La Rochelle in France. His indebtedness to Campbell is reflected in his poem composed in 1574 (and printed in 1595) 'A Memorial of the Life and Death of Two Worthye Christians, Robert Campbel of Kyneancleugh and his Wife Elizabeth Campbell'. 
Davidson pursued his academic interests by proceeding to Switzerland, matriculating at the University of Basel in 1575 or 1576, and before returning home to serve as minister was recommended as chaplain in 1577 for the English Merchant Adventurers at Antwerp, but unsuccessfully, for the man appointed was his fellow presbyterian, Walter Travers. Expelled from England for offending Elizabeth by his preaching, Davidson was permitted by Morton to return home and was appointed minister of Liberton in 1579. He executed the church's sentence of excommunication in 1582 against Robert Montgomery, promoted by the crown to the archbishopric of Glasgow, for which he was threatened with assassination. He strongly opposed the government's efforts to remove John Durie from his ministry in Edinburgh, and was active in defending ecclesiastical independence and a presbyterian polity. In the general assembly of June 1582, Andrew Melville as moderator had to ask Davidson 'to moderat his zeale' and in 1583 David Ferguson feared that Davidson would presume too far in his criticism of King James (Calderwood, 4.623-4). He made common cause with the English puritan leader John Field, with whom he corresponded in 1583 on whether the general assembly might intervene on behalf of the English presbyterians. Field's response was positive, and when the general assembly met, representations were made to King James that he urge Queen Elizabeth to 'disburdein their brether of Ingland of the yocke of ceremonies imposed upon them against the libertie of the Word' (Thomson, 2.613-14). 
With the onset of Arran's anti-presbyterian administration at home, Davidson was one of the presbyterians who fled to England in 1584, serving for a spell as minister to the exiled ultra-protestant lords who had assembled at Newcastle, before proceeding south to London. He visited Oxford and Cambridge universities and in London he attended the funeral of James Lawson, minister of Edinburgh, who had died in exile in London on 12 October 1584. Encouraged by his fellow exiles to refute Cardinal William Allen's 'A True, Sincere and Modest Defence of English Catholiques' (1584), in which Allen had condemned the Scottish ministers as seditious and rebellious, Davidson prepared a short vindication in 1584. He was active, too, in preaching twelve or thirteen sermons in St Olave Jewry, in London, on Sundays and holy days, beginning on 8 November 1584, and 'so railed against the king of Scots in the pulpit' that he was known 'at court and among the bishops as a thunderer' (Laing, 428-9; Calderwood, 4.247). Commanded to cease preaching by the bishop of London in January 1585, Davidson ministered to the banished Scottish nobles at Westminster in May 1585. By November the lords were back in Scotland and, following their 'coup d'etat', an invitation was extended from those ministers who had arrived at Stirling with the nobles to Davidson and fellow exiles to return home. He is known to have 'remained a long tyme in Ingland' where he saw for himself 'the corruption of the Bishops there' and on returning home he denounced 'that corruption at all tymes as occasion offered' (Row, 420). 
Davidson may have returned by 1586, when the general assembly appointed a minister of that name to a committee to investigate the character and conduct of certain bishops and commissioners, though this more probably was the minister of Hamilton who shared his name. In any event, he did not return to a settled ministry, and it is tempting to identify him with 'Daverson, a Skott, who preached at Aldermanbury church on St Peters day' in London on 29 June 1588 (Donaldson, 79). In that year, too, he declined an invitation to return to his old congregation at Liberton, and in June 1589 was chosen to preach first in Edinburgh and then in the Canongate, until such time that he obtained a particular charge. Nothing came of a proposal in September 1589 to appoint him minister of Dalkeith, but, at the request of Edinburgh presbytery he wrote a reply that year to Richard Bancroft's sermon at Paul's Cross in London against the polity of the Scottish church. His tract 'D. Bancroft's Rashnes in Rayling Against the Church of Scotland' was printed in Edinburgh by Waldegrave in 1590, despite James's efforts to have it suppressed. He also addressed a letter, at the request of ministers, to Queen Elizabeth in 1590 defending the polity of the Scottish church against Bancroft's attack. 
Davidson opposed Queen Anne's coronation on the sabbath in 1590, and in 1591 admonished the king for his 'contempt of our ministrie' (Calderwood, 5.130-31). In a sermon in 1592 he succeeded in offending the king once again; and in 1593 quarrelled with the moderate David Lindsay, minister in South Leith, who was susceptible to royal influence. To Archbishop John Spottiswoode, he was the maddest man he ever knew, but presbyterians saw him in a different light, as 'a man of authoritie in the Word and Spreit of God' and 'a zealus grave father' ('Autobiography and Diary of... Melvill', 172, 357), as 'a free rebuker of sinne' (Calderwood, 5.238), and as 'a learned man, and a worthie preacher, yea, a verie prophet of God' (Row, 420). Opposed to ecclesiastical representation in parliament, he firmly believed in the doctrine of the 'two kingdoms' and in 1598 went so far as to inform the king that he sat in assemblies not 'as 'Imperator', but as a Christian' (Calderwood, 5.683). When James complained in 1598 that Davidson spoke 'anabaptisticall-like' and was too friendly with the English puritan John Penry, who spent some time in Scotland between 1589 and 1592, Davidson responded that 'he was no Anabaptist, and agreed not with Mr Penrie' (ibid., 698). He voiced a strong protest when the king discharged Andrew Melville from attending the assembly in 1598, and he himself was warded in 1601 for a letter sent by him to the general assembly at Burntisland. 
Inducted to the parish of Prestonpans in Haddingtonshire in January 1596, Davidson founded a school and built a church and manse largely at his own expense. There he prepared a catechism, printed in 1602 by Waldegrave in Edinburgh under the title 'Some Helpes for Young Schollers in Christianity', in which he quoted scriptural passages from the 'Bishops' Bible' produced in England by Archbishop Matthew Parker in 1568 instead of the 'Geneva Bible' of 1560 which had proved more popular in Scotland. Before his death, which occurred in August or September 1604, he wrote 'De hostibus ecclesiae Christi' wherein he affirmed that 'the erecting of Bishops in this Kirk is the most subtill and prevalent mean to destroy and overthrow religion that ever could have been devysed' (Row, 421). He was also the author of several other texts. 


@@@@@


doc= 7218


Davidson, John (c.1724-1797), antiquary and lawyer, was the son of James Davidson of Haltree, an Edinburgh bookseller, and Elizabeth, sister of William Brown, Church of Scotland minister, also of Edinburgh. He was educated for the law, being apprenticed to George Balfour, writer to the signet, and was himself admitted as writer on 3 April 1749. He was deputy keeper of the signet from 1778 until his death. He was for many years crown agent, and was also agent for a number of Scottish noblemen and landowners, having a successful and lucrative practice. 
Davidson lived in Edinburgh with his wife, Helen Gibson (died 1796), and their one son. He knew many of the city's eminent literati and antiquarians, including Lord Hailes, William Tytler, George Paton, David Herd, and Callander of Craigforth; he frequently located rare books for Bishop Percy. Davidson's specialism was Scottish legal history and antiquities. He printed several works on these subjects for private circulation, and was understood to have superintended the 1797 edition of Lord Hailes's 'Annals of Scotland'. The third and fourth appendices of this edition were taken entirely from work previously published by Davidson, which is acknowledged in the preface. William Robertson acknowledged Davidson's assistance in the preface to his highly successful 'History of Scotland', published in 1759. 
Davidson died at Castle Hill, Edinburgh, on 29 December 1797. His son having died young he left his estate of Haltree to Lord Glenlee, a younger son of Sir William Miller, bt, and his farm, Cairntons, near Edinburgh, to Henry Dundas, Lord Melville. His legal practice was left to Hugh Warrender, his first clerk, who also received Davidson's house in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 7219


Davidson, John (1797-1836), traveller, the son of an opulent tailor and army clothier in Cork Street, London, originally from Kelso, Roxburghshire, was born on 23 December 1797. He was educated at a private academy near London, and in 1814 was apprenticed to Savory and Moore, chemists and druggists, a firm in which he ultimately purchased a partnership. Later he became a pupil at St George's Hospital, and entered the University of Edinburgh with the intention of becoming a doctor. His health failed, however, and he gave up the study of medicine to travel. He went first to Naples in 1827 and thence through much of central Europe. He went to Egypt at the end of 1829, visited the pyramids, and passed overland to Quseir on the Red Sea coast where he embarked for India on his way to China and Persia. An attack of cholera, however, drove him back to Quseir. He made an excursion through Arabia, and visited Palestine, Syria, the Greek Isles, Athens, and Constantinople, collecting much geographical information, which he afterwards communicated in papers read at the meetings of the Royal Society and the Royal Institution of London. In 1831 he went to America, travelling in the United States, and in Spanish America where he visited and surveyed the pyramids of Choluteca; he then settled down for a time to the study of Egyptology. On 13 July 1833 he delivered an address on embalming at the Royal Institution, when he unrolled a mummy in the presence of a deeply interested audience; he later published a pamphlet describing the occasion. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1835. His craving for travel was, however, irresistible. He decided to explore in Africa, planning to go by way of Fez and, after examining the southern slopes of the Atlas Mountains, to Nigritia and across the Sahara to Timbuktu. He left England in September 1835, accompanied only by a black companion, Edward Donnelan or Abu Bekr. From Gibraltar he crossed the straits into Morocco, where his medical knowledge was so highly valued by the sultan that he had great difficulty in obtaining permission to depart. He estimated that he treated twelve hundred patients in Morocco, and he also gave instruction to local physicians. When leaving he was obliged to plead that his stock of medicine was exhausted, and at his request a medicine chest was forwarded to the sultan from England. He started for the Sahara at the end of November 1836 after numerous delays, but while stopping at a watering-place called Swekeza he was robbed and murdered on 17 or 18 December 1836 by a party from the tribe El Harib, who are thought to have been bribed by the merchants of Tafilelt to seize the traveller and his goods. The findings of his travels were recorded in letters, published later in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' (1836 and 1837). After Davidson's death his brother printed privately a book of pathetic interest entitled 'Notes Taken during Travels in Africa' (1839). 


@@@@@


doc= 7220


Davidson, Samuel (1806?-1898), biblical scholar, was the son of Abraham Davidson and his wife, Margaret-Measha. He was born at Kellswater, near Ballymena, co. Antrim, Ireland, probably in September 1806, but possibly in the following year. His parents were of Scottish descent and Presbyterians by religion. He attended first the village school and then a school at Ballymena until 1824, when he became a student of the Belfast Academical Institution, with a view to becoming a Presbyterian minister. His college course was distinguished with first prizes in Hebrew and theology, but interrupted by teaching at Londonderry and Liverpool and was therefore not completed until 1832. In November 1833 he was licensed to preach by the Ballymena presbytery, then in 1835 the General Synod of Ulster offered Davidson the newly created chair of biblical criticism at the Belfast Academical Institution. 
On 21 September 1836 Davidson married Anne Jane Kirkpatrick of Belfast. They had a daughter and four sons. In 1838 Davidson received from Marischal College, Aberdeen, the degree of LLD. His first book, 'Lectures on Biblical Criticism' appeared in 1839. He resigned from his professorship in 1841, having moved from the Presbyterian to the Congregationalist viewpoint. He accepted in 1842 the chair of biblical literature, oriental languages, and church history at the newly founded Lancashire Independent college in Manchester. 
Before he left Ireland Davidson finished his monumental work 'Sacred Hermeneutics Developed and Applied' (1843), in which an extensive knowledge of German systems of thought was revealed. In the summer of 1844 he made the first of a series of visits to Germany, beginning many friendships that lasted all his life. His knowledge of German biblical scholarship was unrivalled during this period. Through the recommendation of F. A. G. Tholuck and H. Hupfield he received an honorary DTheol from the University of Halle in 1848. 
In 1848 Davidson published the first volume of his 'Introduction to the New Testament' (the second volume appeared in 1849 and the third in 1851). He also rewrote his first work and republished it in two volumes in 1852 as 'A Treatise on Biblical Criticism, Exhibiting a Systematic View of that Subject'. In 1855 he published 'The Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, Revised from Critical Sources'. In 1854 Davidson had agreed to rewrite the volume on the 'Old Testament' for the tenth edition of T. H. Horne's 'An Introduction to the Critical Study and Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures' (1856), but only on condition that he could cover 'new ground'; that is, 'such ground as the subject has been brought to... especially in other countries' ('Autobiography', 37). His contribution appeared in October 1856 as part of the second volume of the tenth edition of Horne's 'Introduction'. It was entitled 'The text of the Old Testament considered; with a treatise on sacred interpretation, and a brief introduction to the Old Testament books and the Apocrypha'. In the November after its publication, the Lancashire College committee were made aware of dissatisfaction felt in orthodox circles with the religious views expressed in the volume, one letter having been sent to the 'Record' by Dr S. P. Tregelles, whom Davidson had originally recommended to rewrite the volume on the 'New Testament'. A committee appointed to examine whether certain views in Davidson's volume were 'unsound' reported in February 1857. He was then called upon to justify areas of his work which might have caused offence. Thus Davidson produced in May 1857 his pamphlet 'Facts, Statements and Explanations'. The committee did not find his explanations satisfactory, and after some correspondence Davidson resigned from his post. 
Davidson's request to the committee for specific charges against his orthodoxy was not met, but criticisms tended to focus around his attitude towards the Mosaic authorship of the 'Pentateuch', prophetic authorship and inspiration, and his doctrinal views. There was also a charge, to some extent justified, of plagiarism from German authors. These charges were summed up in a pamphlet written by E. Mellor and J. G. Rogers and published in October 1857 as 'Dr Davidson: his Heresies, Contradictions, and Plagiarisms. By Two Graduates'. In his support appeared 'Dr Davidson's removal from the professorship of biblical literature in the Lancashire Independent college, Manchester, on account of alleged error in doctrine' (1860) by Thomas Nicholas, which cited Bishop Thirlwall, Dean Alford, and Canon Cureton in Davidson's favour. J. A. Picton's account of the proceedings seemed to Davidson to be the most fair, and he included it in his own 'Autobiography' of 1899. But he did not offer an account of the story himself, perhaps because he never lost the feeling that he had been treated unjustly. In his later years, from about 1870, he attended services of the Unitarian church, and sometimes the Church of England. 
After his resignation many friends gathered round Davidson, and a large testimonial, which finally reached $3000, was presented to him. He retired to Hatherlow, in Cheshire, where he worked as a private tutor. He moved to London in 1862, having been elected scripture examiner in the University of London. His life then was taken up with writing, and visits to the continent; it was also punctuated by domestic bereavements. He and Anne lost three sons before Anne's own death in 1872. After his retirement from Manchester, further publications included 'An Introduction to the Old Testament, Critical, Historical, and Theological' (3 vols., 1862-3), a work more radical in tone than similar projects published before the controversy, and 'An Introduction to the New Testament' (2 vols., 1868). His essay 'On a Fresh Revision of the English Old Testament' (1873) was written for a projected second volume of 'Essays and Reviews' which never saw the light. Other work included contributions to Kitto's 'Cyclopaedia' and to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. In 1862 he became an occasional contributor to 'The Athenaeum', and for three years from 1871 he reviewed philosophical and theological books in the 'Westminster Review'. He died at his home, 14 Belsize Crescent, Hampstead, on 1 April 1898, and was buried in Hampstead cemetery on 5 April. For his courage in presenting biblical-critical ideas Davidson paid a heavy price in his dismissal. Following a benefaction by his daughter in 1925 he was commemorated by the foundation of the chair of 'Old Testament' studies at the University of London, which was named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7221


Davidson, Thomas Randall (1747-1827), Church of Scotland minister, was born Thomas Randall at Inchture, Perthshire, in July 1747, the son of Thomas Randall ['see below'] and his wife, Mary (died 1775), daughter of Thomas Davidson, minister at Dundee. The elder 
Compared to the writings of his father, Davidson's were neither prolific nor especially influential. He was the author of three sermons preached on public occasions between 1775 and 1802, as well as a funeral sermon preached in 1803 upon the death of his fellow minister John Erskine. These sermons were known more for their polish and the benevolence of their sentiments than for any striking originality. 
Davidson married twice. His first wife was Christian, daughter of John Rutherford of Edgerton, whom he married on 29 January 1772; she died on 6 July 1797. His second wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Archibald Cockburn, baron of the exchequer, whom he wed on 20 August 1798. He had three children with his first wife and six with his second. Davidson died on 25 October 1827; Elizabeth lived on until 30 March 1850. 
Davidson was described in a contemporary publication as 'a sound, practical and zealous preacher' (Kay, 1.388-90). He was known to contemporaries as an evangelical and benevolent clergyman who put forth a cultured and respectable image for the popular party. His reputation for benevolence secured for him an honorary doctorate of divinity from Harvard University in 1793. Davidson's career is notable for illustrating the extent to which evangelical ministers of the later eighteenth century, including such contemporaries as Henry Moncreiff Wellwood, were able to transcend an earlier reputation for crudeness and a lack of polish, and establish themselves as polite men of letters and well-connected gentlemen. 


@@@@@


doc= 7222


Davidson, Thomas (1838-1870), poet, was born at Oxnam Row, near Oxnam Water, a tributary of the Teviot, about 4 miles from Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, on 7 July 1838, the son of Jonah Davidson, a shepherd from Wooler, Northumberland. His mother, of whom further details are unknown, came from Belford in the same county. He was educated at various village schools and, having displayed a passionate love of books along with an interest in writing poetry in his early years, he was sent in 1854 to the Nest Academy at Jedburgh. He studied at the University of Edinburgh from 1855 to 1859. In 1859 he won the second prize in his rhetoric class for the poem 'Ariadne at Naxos', which one of his friends sent without his knowledge to Thackeray, who published it with an illustration in the December 1860 issue of the 'Cornhill Magazine'. 
Davidson had early formed a resolution to enter the ministry and in 1859 began the first of the prescribed five autumnal sessions of the theological course of the United Presbyterian church. Between sessions he was assistant schoolmaster at Forres (1859-61) and later in Dr Douglas's School, Edinburgh (1861-3). During this period he continued writing poetry, and his songs and poems were published in 'The Scotsman'. Davidson was licensed as a preacher on 2 February 1864, and in accordance with church regulations spent the next few years travelling extensively and preaching at various churches in Scotland, England, and Ireland. Many poems resulted from his travelling experiences, such as the humorous 'Yang-Tsi-Kiang' used by the supporters of Carlyle in the contest for the lord rectorship of the university, and popular as a students' song. 
A cold caught in June 1866 seriously affected Davidson's health and he retired to Jedburgh in December to recuperate. He was an invalid for more than three years, during which he wrote memorable, mournful songs such as the love ballad 'Myspie's Den' and 'Auld Ash Tree', many of which were published in 'The Scotsman'. He died of consumption on 29 April 1870 at Bank End, Jedburgh, and was buried at the new cemetery, Jedburgh. Some of his poems were republished in his memoir by John Brown in 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 7223


Davidson, Thomas (1817-1885), natural history artist and palaeontologist, was born in Edinburgh on 17 May 1817, the eldest of the three children of William Davidson, the wealthy owner of Muirhouse and other Midlothian estates, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Alexander Horsebrugh of Peeblesshire. From the age of six he was educated in France, Italy, and Switzerland, developing a natural artistic talent as well as a strong interest in natural history. His inclination for the fine arts was encouraged by attending classes in Paris, and then as a pupil of Paul Delaroche and Horace Vernet. Access to the lectures of leading scientists at the major French institutions also widened Davidson's understanding of natural history. From 1832, under the guidance of Constant Prevost, he concentrated on geology and palaeontology, returning to Scotland briefly in 1835-6 to study at Edinburgh University, then carrying out further fieldwork on the continent from 1836. After meeting Leopold von Buch during 1837 he was persuaded to undertake a comprehensive study of both living and fossil Brachiopoda. While studying in France Davidson met Caroline Charlotte Pittar, daughter of Isaac Pittar, of East Brixton, Surrey; there followed a distant and hesitant, but constant, courtship. Once they were engaged Davidson could no longer endure their frequent separations and within a few months they were married, on 29 November 1841. Shortly afterwards they went to Rome, where Davidson concentrated on art. 
An adequate private income allowed Davidson to devote his life to brachiopod research. In describing the wealth of British fossil taxa his artistic talent assisted him in the illustration of their distinctive features, and his genuine enthusiasm encouraged many British palaeontologists to assist him in building up an extensive research collection. His great knowledge of the phylum resulted in numerous publications. The Palaeontographical Society monograph on 'British Fossil Brachiopoda' became his 'magnum opus'; the first part was issued in 1851 and, with successive parts published over the next thirty-five years, formed six volumes containing 2280 pages and 234 lithographed plates of his drawings; the last part, 'A Bibliography of the Brachiopoda' (1886) was only completed in 1884. He also published a description of the 'Challenger' expedition material (1880), and started a monograph on the Recent species. 
The substance of Davidson's classification of the Brachiopoda has endured and confirms his thorough understanding of that phylum. His diary records his enormous capacity for work; his research on Elizabeth Gray's collection of Girvan Brachiopoda began on 11 February 1882 and was completed by 22 May, during which he distinguished 118 species. Professor Lapworth considered that the resulting 'table of Girvan brachiopods was the most useful piece of work' he had encountered (see T. Davidson, letter-book 27, NHM). Others subsequently acknowledged Davidson's devotion and energy as he persevered with this research throughout his life, and fellow workers later maintained that he had left very little for future students to accomplish. On his death he was considered to have been one of the most single-minded naturalists of the century. 
Davidson's role and scientific achievements were widely acknowledged during his lifetime. He was elected FRS in 1857 and made the first honorary member of the Geological Society of Glasgow in 1858. He served on the council of the Geological Society of London in 1858-60 and as its secretary in 1858-9. He was awarded that society's Wollaston medal in 1865; a 'Silurian medal' by Murchison in 1868; and one of the gold medals of the Royal Society in 1870. In 1880 he was the British representative at the fiftieth anniversary meeting of the French Geological Society, and he was awarded an honorary LLD by St Andrews University in 1882. 
After moving to Brighton at the end of 1856, Davidson was involved in the foundation of the 'free' library and museum, becoming chairman of the museum committee until his death. He died at his home, 9 Salisbury Road, Brighton, on 14 October 1885 following a long illness. He left several virtually completed manuscripts that were published posthumously over the next three years. His library, collections, and manuscript notebooks were bequeathed to the British Museum (Natural History), London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7224


Davidson, William (c.1756-1797), privateer, was born in Scotland; further details of his family and upbringing are unknown. In 1791 he was serving as an able seaman on the 'Niger', then commanded by Sir Richard Keats. Davidson was noted as a comparatively well-educated man of gloomy and silent disposition, but liable to sudden outbursts of temper. While the ship was at Deal he was condemned to be flogged for drunkenness and insolence to his superior officer. The punishment caused him excessive agony, and at the fifth stroke he fell into convulsions. The sentence was then remitted, but he later struck an officer and was again condemned. While being brought to the gangway he attempted to cut his throat and, this failing, he tried in vain to throw himself overboard. His punishment was not proceeded with, but he was ordered into confinement. 
The whole circumstances of the case led to an inquiry into Davidson's past life, which gave rise to a rumour that he possessed a journal (as yet not authenticated) giving an account of singular atrocities in which he had been engaged. Davidson's chest was ransacked, and the journal was found, and laid before the officers. It claimed that on 1 December 1788 Davidson had enlisted on the 'Saint Dinnan', a Russian privateer, which on 3 December had sailed from Leghorn for Messina. He and the other Englishmen on the ship were discharged at Trieste on 6 September 1789 with wages and prize money amounting to $230 per man. During the period at sea the 'Saint Dinnan' cruised in the Levant, took a large number of Turkish ships, robbed them, murdered the crews, and burnt the vessels. The privateers also attacked and plundered some of the smaller Grecian islands. On one occasion they had a terrible combat with another pirate, whose crew of over 300 was brutally murdered on capture. These and other horrors Davidson, if the genuine author, narrated in plain methodical order. 
'The Bloody journal', as it was called, came to have considerable renown with sailors, among whom it was probably current in manuscript versions. A copy was procured for Sir Walter Scott, who had heard of it, and thought it might form a good subject for a poem. 'On perusal he pronounced it too horrible for versification' but later he printed it in the 'Edinburgh Annual Register' (published in 1812, vol. 3, part 2). Copies of the work, of which the full title is 'The Bloody Journal Kept by William Davidson on Board a Russian Pirate in the Year 1789', exist in the library of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and the library of the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich. The book is full of errors of composition. Whatever its true provenance, Davidson probably found his position on the 'Niger' very uncomfortable. He deserted from her at Portsmouth some time in 1793, was afterwards pressed on the 'Royal George', where he became a gunners' mate, and was accidentally drowned in January 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 7225


Davies, Benjamin (1814-1875), Hebrew scholar, was born at Wern, near St Clears, Carmarthenshire, on 26 February 1814. He studied for the Baptist ministry in Wales at the Bristol Baptist college (1830), at Glasgow, and at Leipzig, where he was awarded a PhD degree in 1838. He then moved to Montreal where he trained missionaries for the Canada Missionary Society. While there Davies married Eliza Try, from Portland, Maine, with whom he remained for thirty years. They had several children. In 1844 he returned to England as president of Stepney Baptist college, but stayed only two and a half years, returning to Canada in 1847 to take up a professorship at McGill College in Montreal. He went back to London in 1857 to become professor of oriental and classical languages at his former college, which had just moved to Regent's Park from Stepney. Davies is best known for his published translation of Gesenius's 'Hebrew grammar and lexicon', which became a standard reference work; he also translated several epistles for the 'Paragraph Bible', which was issued by the Religious Tract Society, and edited various other scholarly works. He died at Frome in Somerset on 19 July 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 7226


Davies, Catherine (b. 1773, d. in or after 1841), governess and author, was born at Beaumaris, Anglesey, one of a family of thirty-three children of a twice-married father. At fifteen she went to Liverpool to work in a merchant's family and subsequently to London to live with her sister, who she said was 'married to an eminent artist'. In 1802 she was engaged as a governess to a family who were moving to France, but they shortly returned to England because of the tension between the French and the English at that time. However she was engaged by Madame Murat, Napoleon's third sister, who was looking expressly for Englishwomen to take care of her three, and later four, children. Davies was apparently treated with kindness and considerable familiarity in the true sense of the word, maintaining firmly her Welsh origins. Napoleon's visits to his sister were generally secret, but on one occasion at Fontainebleau, when the children greeted their uncle, Miss Davies had a conversation with him and he asked her if she preferred the English to the French and congratulated her on the honesty of her somewhat evasive reply. 
In 1808 Murat was made king of Naples by Napoleon and the family took up residence there, visiting the Princess Borghese in Turin on the way after coming through the Mont Cenis Pass. It was then that Davies started to write the book which is her claim to fame, entitled 'Eleven Years' Residence in the Family of Murat, King of Naples' (1841). The details which she gives of life in this court from the vantage point of the nursery contain anecdotal, but probably reliable, information. Her health was not good and she sought cures for an affliction of the neck at Ischia and Portici, eventually returning to Wales in 1818 to settle in Beaumaris. She was to be called as a witness at the trial of Queen Caroline, but never took the stand. 
In 1841 Davies's book was published by How and Parsons at 12's'. 6died 'for her sole benefit', the preface being dated May of that year. Reviews appeared in both the 'Monthly Review' and the 'Literary Gazette'. A friendly letter from her charge, Prince Achille, by then postmaster in Lipona, Florida, formed one of the appendices to the book. The date of her death is not known but is thought to have been shortly after the publication of the book in 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 7227


Davies, Cecilia (1756/7-1836), singer, was the daughter of the flautist and composer Richard Davies (died 1773) and his wife, Cecilia, and sister of the glass armonica player Mary Ann Davies, who was her first singing teacher. In August 1767 she joined her sister and father in three concerts at the Swan and Hoop tavern, London, singing music by Handel and Arne, after which the family travelled to the continent. In Vienna they lived in the same house as the composer Hasse, who taught Cecilia singing, while she and Mary Ann taught his daughters English. The sisters performed together, becoming favourites at court; Empress Maria Theresa commissioned a cantata for soprano and armonica from Hasse and Metastasio for Archduchess Maria Amalia's wedding in June 1769. Metastasio wrote in praise of Cecilia's pleasing and flexible voice, which imitated the armonica 'so exactly, that it is sometimes impossible to distinguish one from the other' (Burney, 'Metastasio', 3.83). In January 1772, although Hasse felt her unready, Cecilia sang as prima donna in his 'Ruggiero' at Naples. Mary Ann wrote that her sister was a success, despite her youth (she was fifteen) and the cabal against her. 'L'Inglesina' sang also at Florence, becoming the first Englishwoman to perform leading roles in Italian opera houses. 
The family returned to London, where Signora Davies sang at the Italian Opera in the 1773-4 season, receiving 'thundering shouts of applause' on her debut ('General Evening Post', 23 Nov 1773). She failed to charm Horace Walpole, but Charles Burney praised the flexibility and clarity of her voice, not loud but perfectly in tune, and admired the accuracy of her rapid divisions. David Garrick told James Harris that Cecilia Davies was the best opera actress he had ever seen. Her father died in December 1773 and it was Mary Ann whom Fanny Burney blamed for the disputes in which Cecilia, 'a sensible, well bred & engaging Girl' ('Early Journals', 2.106), became involved at the Opera. In 1775 Cecilia was engaged in a law suit against the Opera managers and, although she won her case and received $2000 plus expenses, she sang again at the Opera only from January to July 1777, when she replaced the inexperienced Anna Pozzi as prima donna. During these four years she sang at a number of London concerts, mainly for charitable foundations, and at several provincial festivals. 
The sisters were in Paris by January 1778 and in 1779-80 Cecilia sang leading roles in opera houses in Venice, Florence, Genoa, and Leghorn. In 1784 she appeared at Florence, having earlier refused engagements because of her sister's serious illness. Mount Edgcumbe later found them at Florence 'unengaged and poor' (Edgcumbe, 17) and assisted their return to England. Cecilia sang in the 1787 Professional Concerts in London and in oratorios at Drury Lane in 1791, still described as 'L'Inglesina'. By 1797 she and Mary Ann were supporting themselves by giving music lessons. Cecilia was seriously ill after Mary Ann's death in December 1818, and by the mid-1820s she was dependent on charitable donations. The publication by subscription in 1829 of six pieces composed for her by Hasse and others raised little money. She grew increasingly frail and became nearly blind, but remained alert and communicative about the successes of her youth. She died at her lodgings at 58 Great Portland Street, on 3 July 1836, and was buried at St Marylebone on 7 July as Cecilia Anglecina Davies. 


@@@@@


doc= 7228


Davies, Christian (1667-1739), female soldier, was, according to 'The Life and Adventures of Mrs. Christian Davies' (1740), born Christian Cavenaugh in Dublin. She was raised by her parents on a farm at Leixlip, co. Kildare until, seduced by a cousin at the age of seventeen, she moved to Dublin to live with an aunt. Her father, a brewer and maltster, died in the service of the Jacobite cause in 1691, whereupon the family property was seized. Inheriting a Dublin public house upon the death of her aunt, she managed the business for several years, marrying Richard Welsh, an employee, about 1688 and giving birth to two sons. Her husband disappeared in 1692 and, in a letter she received a year later, revealed that he was in the army in Flanders. 
After arranging settlement of her business and children, Welsh began the search for her husband, enlisting as a foot soldier under the name of Christopher Welsh. Wounded before the battle of Landen in 1693, she recovered and was taken prisoner and then exchanged in 1694. Passing the winter of 1694-5 with her regiment in Gorkhum, she courted a burgher's daughter for whom she fought a duel. Bidding farewell to the girl under pretence of seeking a commission, she enlisted as a dragoon under Lord John Hay, fighting until the treaty of Ryswick ended hostilities in 1697, when she returned to Dublin, maintaining her disguise as Richard Welsh. 
With the renewal of war in 1701 Welsh re-enlisted and, according to the 'Life', fought in most of the battles of Marlborough's campaign, evading discovery of her masquerade even when she was wounded. Following the battle of Blenheim in 1704, she recognized her husband faithlessly courting a Dutch woman, chastised and then forgave him, and arranged with him to serve together (in celibacy), passing as brothers. Wounded at the battle of Ramillies, Welsh was discovered to be a woman by the surgeons and was reported to her officers, who responded with surprise and commendation. Christian and Richard Welsh then wed a second time in the camp, and she continued in the campaign as his acknowledged wife, serving as a sutler foraging for the troops. With the death of Richard Welsh at the battle of Malplaquet (1709), Christian's lamentations earned her the sobriquet Mother Ross from one Captain Ross, a sympathetic bystander. Several months later she married a grenadier named Hugh Jones who was soon killed at the siege of St Venant (1710). In 1712 Christian returned to England where, commended by the duke of Argyll, she was presented to the queen who awarded her, as pension, a shilling a day for life. Having returned to Dublin and been unable to claim the property she had settled in the 1690s, Jones set up a pub and pie house, married another soldier, named Davies, followed him to England, and eventually used her influence to have her husband admitted as a pensioner in the Royal Hospital at Chelsea, where she lived with him until she died of a fever on 7 July 1739. According to the 'Life and Adventures' she was buried in Chelsea College burial-ground. 
Brief accounts of her life, such as that in 'London Magazine' (July 1739), appeared at the time of Christian's death. In 1740 a first-person account, 'The Life and Adventures of Mrs. Christian Davies', was published in London, purportedly 'taken from her own Mouth'. This narrative appeared in several editions, including a third-person abridgement of 1742 ascribed to 'J. Wilson, formerly a Surgeon in the Army'. A biographical 'history' in the picaresque mode, the 'Life and Adventures' clearly mixes, in an ultimately undeterminable ratio, elements of fact with legends and motifs conventional in early modern popular ballads and prose narratives about masquerading heroines. Often cited, paraphrased, and reprinted, the 'Life and Adventures' was mistakenly included among the works of Daniel Defoe until the twentieth century. A separate strand of traditions about Davies surfaces in histories of Chelsea and the military facilities there. From a 'list of old admissions into Chelsea Hospital', G. R. Gleig quotes in 1838: '19th Nov.1717. Stair's Dragoons: Catherine Welch, a fatt jolly-breast woman, received several wounds in the service, in the habit of a man; -- from the 19th July 1717' (Gleig, 2.227). In some fifty pages of 'A tradition of King William's wars' Gleig then recounts the 'life' of 'Catherine Cavenaugh, otherwise Catherine Welch, otherwise Catherine Davies, otherwise Mother Ross' (ibid., 228) in a narrative which parallels the popular 1740 account but includes as well a number of episodes not found in it. 
The legendary Christian (or Catherine) Davies poses a challenge to the biographer. A remarkable person who did exist, Davies supplies a glimpse of the lower social ranks which remain largely invisible to history. But events of her picaresque 'life' as variously recounted are controvertible and contradictory. Documentation in a patronymic culture is difficult to trace for any multiply married woman, especially a woman of the underclasses. In addition, the masquerading Davies specialized in fabrication in her actions and undoubtedly in her reporting of those actions. Furthermore, her 'life and adventures' took on larger cultural significance as a legend which contributed to established narratives of early modern cross-gender masquerade. Stories of Davies's soldiering thus predictably conform more to the preoccupation with cross-dressing women in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century European popular songs and prose accounts than to heretofore identified records of military history. Her masquerading experiences were wrought into widely known stories which, however apocryphal, accrued imaginative force and cultural meaning for several generations of readers. 


@@@@@


doc= 7229


Davies, David (1742-1819), Church of England clergyman and writer on social issues, was born on 9 February 1742 of Welsh parentage. His origins and early life are obscure, although his will suggests that his family originated in the border area of Merioneth and Denbighshire and came from a background of small farmers and country craftsmen. In 1755 he entered Codrington College, Barbados, as a foundation or charity scholar, and late in 1760 was appointed temporary usher, following the departure of the previous incumbent. He continued in that post until his resignation from the college on 14 June 1766. Between February 1762 and the autumn of 1763 he also acted as temporary headmaster, following the sudden death of the previous head. At that time he refused to take holy orders because of a reluctance to subscribe to certain of the Church of England's doctrines, and it was because of this that he left the college to become manager of a local sugar plantation. He remained there for three years, but clearly disliked the slavery associated with it. In early March 1791 he gave evidence before a select committee on the African slave trade in which he condemned the cruel treatment accorded the slaves. 
About 1769 Davies returned to England and by March 1771 was engaged as tutor to Arthur Fowke, a nephew of Colonel John Walsh, a nabob and close friend of Robert Clive. He remained in Walsh's service as tutor and later secretary until at least the end of 1777. By March 1780 he had become tutor to the only surviving son of Lord Dartrey, an Anglo-Irish banker, who was raised later to Viscount Cremorne. In April 1782, while still in the Dartrey household, Davies was offered the rectory of Barkham, Berkshire, although as yet he had not taken holy orders. 
On 28 April 1782 Davies was ordained deacon by the bishop of Chester on letters dimissory from the bishop of Salisbury, in whose diocese Barkham lay. On 26 May he was ordained priest and the following day was instituted into the benefice of St James, Barkham. He remained incumbent until his death. Despite this change of career, his links with both his previous employers in England remained strong and Viscountess Cremorne was a beneficiary under his will. 
Davies's importance as a social commentator lies in his painstaking survey 'The Case of Labourers in Husbandry Stated and Considered' (1795). It was based initially on researches into the living conditions of the labouring poor of Barkham but was extended to include labourers' budgets from many English counties, as well as a few from Wales and Scotland. The work was dedicated to the board of agriculture, since Davies considered that it possessed powers to investigate the economic plight of rural householders and to recommend pay increases where necessary. The book was well received, the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of December 1795 expressing a hope that it would 'attract a degree of attention proportioned to the importance of the subject, and the merit of the execution' ('GM', 65, 1795, 1023). A second, abbreviated version was published in 1828, when the anonymous editor detailed some of the changes which had occurred in Barkham since the rector's death in 1819. Davies was also contacted by some of the leading poor-law reformers of his day, including the radical MP Samuel Whitbread. 
Davies died on 6 February 1819 at the rectory, Barkham; his estate was valued at about $4700, the bulk of it in stocks held at the Bank of England. Apart from legacies to his three servants and to Viscountess Cremorne and some of her servants, he bequeathed $2127 to various Welsh relatives and acquaintances. The remainder of his estate went to charity (including the poor of Barkham, to whom he had given frequent help in his lifetime), and to English friends. In an obituary the 'Reading Mercury' paid tribute to his 'humility of manner and attention to the wants of his poorer brethren' (15 Feb 1819), an indication that he had applied the theories advanced in his book to his daily duties as rector. 


@@@@@


doc= 7230


Davies, David Charles (1826-1891), Calvinistic Methodist minister and college head, was born at Aberystwyth on 11 May 1826, the eldest son of Robert Davies (1790-1841), a draper, and Eliza, daughter of David Charles of Carmarthenshire. His father was one of the leading laymen among the Calvinistic Methodists of Wales during the first half of the nineteenth century, and it was at his house in Great Darkgate Street, Aberystwyth, that their articles of faith ('Cyffes ffydd') were drawn up in March 1823. 
Davies was educated first at Aberystwyth under the noted mathematician John Evans (1796-1861), who had also taught Lewis Edwards. He then went to Bala, where Lewis Edwards had opened an academy in 1837, later a theological college. In 1841 he went to Hanley as a private pupil of the Revd William Fletcher, a Congregational minister. At Hanley his occasional addresses to the Welsh colony prepared the way for the Welsh churches subsequently established in the Potteries. In November 1844, he became a student at University College, London, where his contemporaries included Walter Bagehot, Isaac Todhunter, Richard Holt Hutton, and Sir William Roberts. He graduated BA in 1847. After a short period at New College, Edinburgh, where he was taken ill, he returned to University College, London and graduated as MA in 1849, being placed second on the list. His parents had originally intended him for the bar but deep religious convictions led him to choose a ministerial career. 
Davies began his career as a preacher in August 1848, at his home church, Tabernacl, Aberystwyth. Two years later he became minister of an English church at Newtown, Montgomeryshire. In 1850 he was admitted a member of the South Wales Association and was appointed its assistant secretary for two years. In 1852 he became pastor of the bilingual church of Alpha at Builth Wells and was fully ordained at the Llanelli Association on 4 August 1852. In November 1853 Davies left Builth Wells for the English church of Windsor Street, Liverpool, where he remained until March 1856. On 20 May 1857 he married Jane, third daughter of Ebenezer Cooper, a currier in Llangollen. They had no children. Davies resumed his old charge at Builth until May 1858, when he returned for a year to the English church at Newtown. In 1858 he moved to the Welsh church at Jewin Crescent, and remained there until 1876. Owing to failing health he returned to Wales and took charge of the English church at Menai Bridge, though he retained a connection with London until 1882. 
Despite poor health, Davies contributed widely as a preacher, lecturer, author, and teacher, publishing several volumes of sermons, commentaries, lectures, and articles in the Welsh language. Much of his work was prepared for the press by friends or pupils, in some cases from shorthand notes taken at his lectures; a series of lectures 'Darlithiau ar Gristionogaeth', delivered in Welsh at London (1879-1883), was published in 'Y Traethodydd' (1881-8) from the notes of Sir E. Vincent Evans. For many years Davies held a unique position, among Welsh nonconformists generally, owing to powers of analysis and abstract reasoning unrivalled among his contemporaries. A powerful and influential preacher and teacher, his sermons and writings made a strong appeal to both Welsh and English congregations of all ages. During his years as a preacher, repeated efforts were made to induce him to undertake educational work at one of the denominational colleges. As early as 1861 he was offered a tutorship at Trevecca College, while the principalship was offered to him in 1863 and 1864. Twelve years later, in 1873, he was invited to succeed John Parry as principal at Bala. In 1888, he eventually agreed to accept the principalship of Trevecca, following the death of William Howells. However, his tenure of the post lasted only three years, for he died on 26 September 1891, at his house, Bronhwfa, Bangor, and was buried on 30 September at the cemetery, Aberystwyth. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7231


Davies, David Christopher (1827-1885), geologist and mining engineer, was born on 13 September 1827 at Oswestry, the son of Edward Thomas, labourer of Pentre Clawdd, and Elizabeth Davies, servant, of Leg Street, Oswestry. He was probably illegitimate and was orphaned at an early age; he had little or no formal education. When he was eleven he was apprenticed to Mr Minshall, a local ironmonger. However, an article on geology in Chambers's 'Information for the People' stimulated a lifelong passion for the subject, and he gradually devoted most of his efforts to geology. 
Davies was working as a tin-plate worker in Upper Brook Street, Oswestry, when he married Ellen Davies, daughter of a whitesmith of Ellesmere, on 5 July 1849. By 1855 he had set up in business as a brazier in Leg Street, and within a few years he was writing papers on geology. Thereafter his contributions appeared in the 'British Architect', 'British Quarterly', the 'Colliery Guardian', 'Iron', the 'Geological Magazine', and the journals of the Liverpool Geological Society, the Powysland Club, the Geologists' Association, and the Geological Society, to which he was admitted as fellow in 1872. Even such humble outlets as the 'Youths' Play-Hour and Boys' Journal' attracted his notice, and he was for many years the north Wales correspondent to the 'Mining Journal'. 
All the while, Davies was preparing his major work, 'The geology of the north Wales border', but the manuscript was never quite finished, and its fate, like that of his extensive geological collection, is unknown. He gained several eisteddfod prizes including one of 30 guineas in 1880 for a paper entitled 'Metalliferous deposits of Flintshire and Denbighshire', and another in 1884 of 20 guineas for 'The fisheries of Wales'. 
Davies led the British Association for the Advancement of Science to the Llangollen area in 1870, and became associated with many prominent geologists including Robert Etheridge, Joseph Jukes, John Phillips, Joseph Prestwich, and Andrew Grantie Ramsay, whom he found overbearing. In 1872 he began to turn his knowledge to account and in the next few years opened up bedded phosphate deposits in the Berwyn Mountains for F. C. Hills of Deptford. This was followed by an important paper on the phosphorite deposits of north Wales. 
Davies also promoted coal enterprises near home, and for a time managed the Ifton colliery near Chirk, but for much of his life he walked a financial tightrope, often borrowing from his bachelor friend William Whitwell FGS (1839-1920). The failure of a new pit at Ifton Rhyn, with which he was also concerned, came as a sore disappointment although his judgement was vindicated by events: the mine eventually developed into the biggest in Shropshire, and lasted until 1968. 
In 1874 growing consultancy work enabled the Davies shop to be disposed of, and a year later the family moved from Coneygreen House to Ebnal Lodge, a smallholding near Gobowen, which helped to supplement their income. Further commissions involved examining and opening many metal mines and quarries both at home and in France, Germany, and Norway. Between such activities Davies found time to write three textbooks on mining and quarrying which received widespread acclaim at the time and later proved valuable to industrial archaeologists and historians. Easy to read, clear, and inviting to the layman, they were published by Crosby Lockwood -- 'Slate and Slate Quarrying' (first published 1878; it ran to five edns), 'Metalliferous Minerals and Mining' (1880, six edns), and 'Earthy and other Minerals and Mining' (1884, two edns). 
Davies was also a compulsive and devoted Congregationalist lay preacher for forty years; much of his correspondence with Whitwell concerned religious matters. His volume of sermons, 'The Christ for All Ages' (1871), has fallen into obscurity. 
Davies and his wife, who was seven years his senior and who predeceased him, had five children. George Christopher (1849-1922) became clerk to Norfolk county council and was author of many popular titles on adventure and natural history. Edward Henry ('b'. 1858) worked closely with his father and illustrated his books before setting up independently as a geologist and mining engineer. His book, 'Machinery for Metalliferous Mines' (1894), formed a companion to his father's titles. It was a favourite of W. H. Auden, who as a boy had a passion for abandoned lead mines, and it was still in his library when he died. 
From his earliest years Davies had driven himself unceasingly, but found time to serve on Oswestry town council and to take an active interest in its public library. He died suddenly of heart failure while on board the SS 'Angelo' returning from a mining visit to Norway; he was found dead in his berth on 19 September 1885. He was buried at Oswestry cemetery. In an age when mining was rife with fraud and ignorance of even basic geology, Davies's experience, good judgement, and integrity stood out, and served as an example to others of how Christian principles might be applied to the world of business and commerce. To him, God, geology, and mining were all part of a great and indivisible unity. His books were sermons, and his readers, the congregation. 


@@@@@


doc= 7232


Davies, Edward (1756-1831), antiquary and author, was born on 7 June 1756 at a farm called Hendre-einon, in the parish of Llanfaredd, Radnorshire, the eldest son of Edward Davies and Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Owens. He came from farming stock; various members of his family owned ten farms in the neighbourhood. His sight was impaired when he met with an accident at the age of six, and this weakened him for the rest of his life and resulted in blindness in his old age. His knowledge of the Welsh language was probably more competent than some commentators have suggested (he wrote a hymn in Welsh, completed by August 1776). He spent only one year as a pupil at Christ College, Brecon, in 1774. Undeterred, he opened a school of his own in the Methodist meeting-house at Hay in 1775. In 1779 he was ordained deacon, and between 1779 and 1783 served as a curate in several parishes in Herefordshire. About this time he produced three five-act plays: two comedies, 'The Gold Mine' and 'The Guardian', and a tragedy, 'Owen, or, The Fatal Clemency'. 
From 1783 to 1799 Davies was a master at the endowed grammar school at Chipping Sodbury and was appointed to the curacy of the neighbouring parish of Badminton. In 1783 he married his first wife, Margaret Smith (died 1814) of Whittington. During the last decade of the eighteenth century he devoted himself, in spite of failing health and anxiety neurosis, to a variety of interests connected with Celtic antiquity and with the transcription from manuscript sources of early and medieval Welsh poetry. He made the acquaintance of William Owen Pughe and Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg). Many of his transcripts were published in 'The Myvyrian Archaiology' (3 vols., 1801-7), to the editors of which he had lent his huge collection. 
Davies was a self-educated scholar and prolific author who was, by and large, poorly qualified, misguided, and uncritical, although at times he could show considerable care, sagacity, and a good instinct for new and valuable interpretation. His enthusiasm for writing appears to have been fired by a polemical spirit, in part reacting to jibes made by his Chipping Sodbury parishioners who ignorantly claimed that the Welsh language was a 'barren jargon'. 
Davies's earliest significant work was 'Aphtharte, the Genius of Britain' (1784), a mannered and patriotic poem that reflected his conviction of a connection between Greek and Celtic mythology. 'Vacunalia, Consisting of Essays in Verse', which showed the influence of Virgil's 'Bucolics' and a knowledge of Ossianic literature, appeared in 1788. He also wrote an early novel, now an extremely rare book, 'Elisa Powell, or, Trials of Sensibility' (1795). An overambitious attempt at studying, 'inter alia', the origin of speech and the fundamental principles of language came to fruition in 'Celtic Researches, on the Origin, Traditions and Language of the Ancient Britons' (1804). In 1809 he published 'The Mythology and Rites of the British Druids' (1809), which ranged from a consideration of classical sources to false suppositions concerning cromlechs and Stonehenge and 'British' superstition. Another work, 'The Claims of Ossian Examined and Appreciated' (1825), was an attack on Macpherson, not least for disparaging the Welsh bards. 
In 1799 Davies was appointed to the less demanding curacies of Elberton and Olveston in Gloucestershire, enabling him to combine more effectively his pastoral duties and his insatiable interest in early Celtic history. Theophilus Jones, the Brecon historian who had been his contemporary at school, supported him in his quest for preferment and for subscribers to his publications. In 1802 he secured the perpetual curacy of Llanbedr in Radnorshire and in 1805 became rector of Bishopston in Gower. He continued to live in Olveston until 1813, when he moved to Bishopston. From that year until his death he made his home at Bishopston. In 1816 he married his second wife, Susanna Jeffreys. He died on 7 January 1831 at Bishopston rectory and was buried in Bishopston cemetery. 
Edward Davies is remembered today chiefly for his extensive works the 'Celtic Researches' and the 'British Druids'. Yet his ability to cope with a complex range of sources relating to ancient mythology, patriarchal religion, and linguistic variation was too limited for tackling the tasks on which he worked so assiduously. However, even though his knowledge was too inadequate for producing a reliable interpretation of early and medieval Welsh poetry, his enthusiastic activity was important for the transmission, publication, and study of much of this literature. It is to his credit that he was one of the first to query the authenticity of fallacious claims made by Iolo Morganwg with regard to the Gorsedd of Bards. 


@@@@@


doc= 7233


Davies, Lady Eleanor (1590-1652), prophetess, was the fifth daughter of George Touchet, eleventh Baron Audley (1550/51-1617), and his first wife, Lucy Mervyn (died 1609/10), daughter of Sir James Mervyn of Fonthill Gifford, Wiltshire. She had two younger brothers. Her father's barony was recalled in one of the variants of her name which she was to deploy in her writings: Eleanor Audeley. She was to be fluid in the use of the names which birth and marriage gave her, deploying them in pamphlet and petition according to context and the identity she was presenting. Audley was a soldier; he served successively as governor of Utrecht in the Netherlands and governor of Kells in co. Meath. In 1616 he was created Baron Audley of Orier, co. Armagh, and earl of Castlehaven, co. Cork. Eleanor Touchet probably spent much of her childhood at the family home in Stalbridge, Dorset. She was literate in Latin as well as English, and had a good understanding of theology and the law (she administered her father's estate after his death). Some time between the ages of ten and fifteen she moved with her family to Ulster. 
At the age of nineteen, in March 1609, Touchet married the poet and attorney-general for Ireland Sir John Davies (bap. 1569, d. 1626), who was not only more than twice her age but also had a violent temper and was, according to his contemporaries, ugly and exceedingly overweight. The couple had three children. Their daughter Lucy Davies ['see 'Hastings, Lucy] was born in Dublin in 1613. In her eleventh year Lucy was married to the son and heir of the earl of Huntingdon, but continued to reside with her mother for another two years and remained her close friend and supporter throughout her life. Of the two sons, one, Richard, died in infancy, and the other, Jack, who may have been autistic, drowned in Ireland in 1617 or shortly thereafter. In 1619 Sir John Davies was relieved of his position by the king, and the family moved to London. Some three years later, Eleanor Davies became involved in at least two personal disputes, one of which was brought to Star Chamber. By 1623 she was living in the manor of Englefield in Berkshire. 
In 1625 Davies took a thirteen-year-old Scottish boy, George Carr, into her protection. Carr, who was deaf and mute, had impressed London society by his fortune-telling abilities. Under Davies's care, he began to speak and to utter prophecies, but when his talents failed him he ran away to sea. None the less, he had a profound effect on his patron. On 28 July 1625 Davies was awakened by a heavenly voice which declared, 'There is Ninteene yeares and a halfe to the day of Judgement and you as the meek Virgin' (E. Douglas, 'The Lady Eleanor, her Appeale to the High Court of Parliament', 1641, 15). That same year of 1625 she published her first pamphlet, 'A Warning to the Dragon and All his Angels', in which she interpreted political developments in Europe as a fulfilment of the books of 'Daniel' and 'Revelation'. Her husband's anger at her activities prompted him to burn her prophecies. Davies responded by dressing in widow's weeds and predicting that he would die in less than three years. One day in December of the following year, she began to weep uncontrollably during dinner, and three days later her husband died. There followed a protracted legal dispute over Sir John Davies's estate between his widow and the family of their son-in-law, and Lady Eleanor temporarily lost possession of Englefield and also her estate at Pirton in Hertfordshire (purchased by her husband as her jointure). This was only the first of many court cases involving Davies's ownership of these properties. 
In the spring of 1627 Davies remarried. Her second husband was a professional soldier, Sir Archibald Douglas (died 1644). Lady Eleanor gained increasing renown for her prophecies, many of which were anagrammatic; she read into her own name of Eleanor Audelie the exhortation 'Reveale O Daniel'. She was even consulted about Henrietta Maria's first pregnancy, first by a royal servant and then by the queen herself. However, she also encountered hostility from Charles I's household, especially for her prognostication concerning the death of the duke of Buckingham and her personal warnings to the king. Sir Archibald, possibly in the hope of regaining royal favour, proceeded to follow his predecessor's example in destroying her papers. On this occasion Lady Eleanor announced that her husband would be judged by God, arguing that the prophecy was fulfilled when he became afflicted by a mental disorder. 
If the encounter with Carr signals one turning point in Lady Eleanor Davies's prophetic career, a second is marked by the trial of her brother Mervin Touchet, second earl of Castlehaven, in 1631. Castlehaven was indicted for sodomy and for abetting the rape of his wife by a servant. Sir Archibald and Lady Eleanor's sisters petitioned unsuccessfully for his release, while she continued to protest his innocence for many years. But the tide of public opinion was against him after he was found guilty and executed. In 1633 she travelled abroad on the pretence of accompanying her husband to the Spa. In Amsterdam she organized the printing of more of her prophecies, but after smuggling them back into England she presented a hand-written paper to Archbishop Laud, 'to give him a taste or warning of his judgment at hand, the hand writing ('Dan'. 5) served on him in his gallery' (Cope, 'Handmaid', 65). He had the illicitly printed books publicly burned. She was arrested, brought before high commission, fined $3000, and imprisoned. At this point her second marriage effectively ended. 
A year after her release from the Gatehouse in 1635 Davies, accompanied by two friends, Marie Noble and Susan Walker, caused a series of disturbances in Lichfield Cathedral by claiming the right to sit in the seats reserved for the wives of cathedral dignitaries. Then, on a subsequent occasion, Davies entered the cathedral, sat on the bishop's throne, and declared that she was primate and metropolitan. This gesture was followed by one equally shocking: she poured tar over the altar, telling worshippers that she was sprinkling it with holy water as preparation for their next communion. In her 1652 tract 'Bethlehem Signifying the House of Bread', Davies explained that she had been driven to her act by the erection of a giant crucifix in the cathedral and by the installation of a purple woollen altar hanging which obscured the ten commandments on the wall. She saw her spectacular attack on these profane objects as the fulfilment in the Last Age of 'Exodus' 32:20, in which Moses destroyed the golden calf worshipped by the Israelites. She was immediately re-arrested and committed to Bethlem Hospital (Bedlam). In April 1638 she was moved to the Tower, from which she was released in September 1640. She was imprisoned for debt and infringements of the publishing laws on at least two more occasions, and in 1651, the year before her death, she was again gaoled for a short period. 
Despite her imprisonments, Davies published extensively during the 1640s. She was convinced that the end of the world was imminent, originally claiming that the day of judgment would occur in 1644. Her periodization of history and her predictions of the apocalypse fit into established traditions of prophetic writing, and, indeed, her tract entitled 'The Everlasting Gospel' (1649) takes its name from the famous work attributed to Joachim of Fiore. Despite her attacks on the authority and corruption of the church, and her opposition to Arminianism, ritual, and ceremony, which she described as sinful idolatry, Davies's religious beliefs bear some affiliation to not only Anglicanism but also Catholicism. She often dated her tracts according to the liturgical calendar, and increasingly her writings dwelled on the importance of the Virgin Mary, not only as intercessor but also as a new redeemer. She had, for a time, some sympathy with the Calvinist doctrine of absolute predestination, but later in her life she developed a strong belief in the ultimate salvation of all humankind. Davies does not seem to have been part of any specific religious sect or movement, and she formulated her own interpretations of scripture and opinions on theological matters. None the less, her writings reveal that she was acquainted with the ideas of the Coleman Street preacher John Goodwin and of the Digger leader, Gerrard Winstanley. She was as preoccupied with matters of politics as with matters of religion, denouncing the reign of Charles I and declaring her support for the protectorate of Oliver Cromwell. In her poem 'To Sion most Belov'd I Sing', which was first printed in 1633 and republished at least four more times before her death, she likened Charles to the 'Old Testament' king Belshazzar, whose downfall was predicted in the writing on the wall. However, her opinions on social matters, and especially the importance of hierarchy and property, were far from revolutionary and may be understood as a reflection of her aristocratic status (she was preoccupied with her own exalted lineage). She certainly did not share Winstanley's beliefs concerning communal ownership and the abolition of wage labour. 
Throughout her life, Davies seems to have made enemies easily. In 1622 Christopher Brooke likened her to Jonson's Lady Wouldbe, calling her an 'abominable stinking greate Symnell face excrement', and describing her 'scurvy contracted purse mouth', 'black patches of ugly deformitie', and 'hoodwynkt and clouded' eyes (TNA: PRO, SP 14/130/135). This description is contradicted by the much more flattering portrait miniature of a young woman, identified as Davies, painted by Sir Isaac Oliver. Although her father settled $6000 on her at the time of her wedding, the civil war, Irish rising, and her disputes with authority all had an impact on her personal wealth. Davies was an extremely litigious woman, who battled to see her properties restored to her possession. She repeatedly claimed to be destitute and refused to pay what she owed, coming into conflict with Gerrard Winstanley in 1650 after employing the Diggers to work her land. Up to her final months, she continued to rely on her daughter for financial assistance. She died in London on 5 July 1652 and was buried next to her first husband in St Martin-in-the-Fields. 
In total, Davies published almost seventy tracts. Although her works are extremely difficult to read, recent historians and critics have reassessed her life and achievements, arguing for her importance as one of the most prolific seventeenth-century prophets, and as one of the first English women to see her works through the press. 


@@@@@


doc= 7234


Davies, Evan (1805-1864), Congregational minister, was born at Hengwm in the parish of Lledrod, Cardiganshire, in 1805. He was educated in the academy at Neuadd-lwyd and in the Western Academy at Exeter; on the completion of his collegiate course he settled at Great Torrington, Devon. In 1835 he was ordained at Wycliffe Chapel, London, as a missionary to the Chinese, and was sent to Penang (the base for Chinese missionary activity) under the auspices of the London Missionary Society. After four years, ill health compelled him to return home. In 1842 he was appointed superintendent of the Boys' Mission School at Walthamstow, and in 1844 he moved to Richmond, Surrey, where he officiated as pastor of the Congregational church for thirteen years. He had a wife, Anne ('b'. 1804/5), and at least two daughters and one son. He died at Llansteffan, near Carmarthen, on 18 June 1864. 
Davies published 'China and her Spiritual Claims' in 1845, and 'Memoirs of the Rev. Samuel Dyer, Sixteen Years Missionary to the Chinese' in 1846. He also wrote on revivals in Wales (1859) and on theological subjects. 


@@@@@


doc= 7235


Davies, Francis (1605-1675), bishop of Llandaff, was born on 14 March 1605 of non-gentry parentage in Glamorgan, probably in the border vale of that county. He matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 10 November 1621, graduated BA on 26 February 1625, and proceeded MA on 14 March 1628. He became rector of Pen-tyrch and Radur, in his native part of Glamorgan, in 1630, and rector of Llan-gan, which he held with Llantrithyd, in 1638. He received preferment to the prebendary of St Andrews, in Llandaff Cathedral, in 1639. At some point soon after this he gave up the living of Llantrithyd. He took the degree of BD on 22 June 1640, after election to a fellowship at Jesus College. 
As one who was making rapid progress in the Anglican hierarchy in Llandaff diocese Davies was opposed to church reforms of the 1640s, and was ejected from Pen-tyrch and Llan-gan some time between 1646 and 1650. His offence, according to his sympathizers, was having refused to accept the directory of worship produced by the presbyterian Westminster assembly. An even more compelling reason for his ejection was that he was among the Laudian clergy who had helped lead a revolt in Glamorgan in summer 1647 against the county committee of parliament. Even so, after the introduction of the 'Act for the Propagation of the Gospel in Wales' in 1650 there was evidently more local sympathy towards him than towards some other Anglican ministers. He enjoyed a number of concessions: he retained the fourth part of the valuable living of Llan-gan, and the tithes there were let to his brother, Maurice Davies; and in 1655 it was ordered that even though unmarried he should receive the allowance to ejected ministers' families, known as 'fifths', from the vicarage of Pen-tyrch. Another clergyman brother of his, Rice Davies, received small sums from the state-controlled tithes, and occasionally officiated at Pen-tyrch using the outlawed 'Book of Common Prayer'. Despite threats by Major John Gawler, of the Cardiff Castle garrison, Francis Davies 'received the small tithe of Radur for the space of ten years without any molestation' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Walker c. 4). It was said that because of Davies's 'great piety, learning and excellent parts' (Jenkins, 38), his discreet benefactor during these years was Colonel Philip Jones, prominent among the lay propagators. As another way of augmenting his income during the 1650s Davies kept a school in one of the parishes where he had influence. Evidently the arrangements for his maintenance collapsed around 1656, according to Davies's nephew because Philip Jones tired of them, but more probably because Jones lived virtually continuously in London during the protectorate, and others were by then responsible for running the state church in Glamorgan. To secure an income Davies, through the good offices of friends, moved to London to become for three or four years the chaplain of Penelope, countess of Peterborough, whose husband, Henry Mordaunt, second earl of Peterborough, was a prominent royalist. 
At the Restoration Davies was thus well placed to recover his livings. In August 1660 he petitioned for the archdeaconry of Llandaff, pleading his attempts to maintain the king's cause and the prayer book liturgy, and was supported by Gilbert Sheldon, the cleric closest to Charles II. Having been restored to his livings Davies was made archdeacon of Llandaff on 6 August 1660 and was installed in October. He took the degree of DD on 21 May 1661. A local ally of Davies's was Sir John Aubrey of Llantrithyd, a leading high-church royalist. While archdeacon he had the whip hand over ministers of the king who had ousted him in the previous decade, but was sufficiently conciliatory to offer a living to Samuel Jones of Brynllywarch, Llangynwyd, who in return propounded a series of questions to Davies on the validity of the liturgy and orders of the Anglican church. On 24 August 1667 Davies was consecrated bishop of Llandaff and gave up his other livings except a Llandaff prebendary which he held 'in commendam' with the bishopric. Although well connected with the dominant party in church and state he was content to devote himself to restoring the fabric and reputation of his cathedral. He remained resident in the diocese, at Matharn, re-established the cathedral library, broken up during the Commonwealth, and installed what became the largest bell in the Llandaff bell-tower. He never married, and in his will dated 6 March 1675 disposed of a very small estate to his brother Rice and several servants, nephews, and a niece. He died on 14 March, his seventieth birthday. He was buried before the altar in his cathedral; having been long lost the gravestone came to view again after enemy bombing of Llandaff in 1941. Davies's nephew, another Francis Davies, provided John Walker with material on east Glamorgan for his 1714 martyrology, 'The Sufferings of the Clergy'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7236


Davies, Griffith (1788-1855), actuary, son of Owen Davies (1761-1854), farmer and quarryman, and his wife, Mary William, was born at Ty Croes, at the foot of Cilgwyn Mountain, in the parish of Llandwrog, Caernarvonshire, on 28 December 1788. He was taught to read and spell in Welsh at the Sunday school of Brynrodyn Chapel, Llandwrog. At the age of seven he began learning English at an English school at Llanwnda. He subsequently discovered a special aptitude for arithmetic, but his parents' poverty obliged him to work as a farm labourer, horse driver, and quarryman. He was often seen with an iron pen, covering slates with arithmetical calculations, and he attended elementary school, though only for short periods. 
Desirous of improving his English, which was still very limited, Davies sailed for London in September 1809. There he attended a school to perfect his writing and grammar, and in January 1810 secured an appointment as a teacher of arithmetic at a salary of $20 p.a. In his spare time he started calculating the times of the eclipses and exhibiting their mode of occurrence by diagrams. He opened a school of his own in the summer of 1811 in James Street, Old Street; in the following year he moved into a better house in Lizard Street, Bartholomew Square, in the parish of St Luke, and joined the Mathematical Society in Crispin Street, Spitalfields. Davies published, in 1814, his 'Key to Bonnycastle's Trigonometry', which made his name as a mathematician and brought many pupils to his school; these included the explorer John Franklin, who was keen to increase his knowledge of the mathematics of navigation, and also several employees of insurance offices. This led to actuarial work and contact with William Morgan, the actuary of the Equitable, who furnished him with a certificate of actuarial competency. In 1820 Davies was awarded the large silver medal of the Society of Arts for an ingenious sundial which he had constructed. 
In 1821 the projectors of the Guardian Assurance Company applied to Davies for advice and assistance when drawing up their constitution, and he was engaged to construct the necessary life tables. Towards the end of 1823 he was appointed the regular and permanent actuary of the Guardian at an annual salary of $150, an appointment which he held for the rest of his life. He constructed the first of many life tables for the newly established Reversionary Interest Society in 1823. Two years later he published 'Tables of Life Contingencies', which provided an extensive scale of premiums for life assurance. He also introduced a pioneering remodelling of the columnar method of constructing mortality tables devised by George Barrett. 
In 1812 Davies married Mary Holbut, the sister of one of his pupils. They had four daughters, but only one survived childhood. Mary died in 1836, and in February 1841 Davies married Mrs Mary Glynne (died 1848), a widow, daughter of Euan Owen; they had a son, also called Griffith, who became an actuary like his father. 
Davies's fame spread and on 16 June 1831, on the recommendation of Benjamin Gompertz, the astronomer and actuary, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1843 he was one of the proponents of the publication of mortality tables based on data collected from all the life offices. When the Institute of Actuaries was founded in 1848 Davies declined the honour of being its first president (he was already then becoming something of a recluse), but the institute recognized him as 'the father of the present race of actuaries' (Chambers, 70). The actuarial consultancy work that Davies undertook during the latter part of his career added to his reputation. In 1829 the directors of the East India Company submitted the documents concerning the Bombay military fund for his investigation and report, for which he was paid $3000. From that time until 1851 his actuarial advice was regularly sought on the various Indian funds. He wrote no fewer than twenty reports on them, each containing extensive insurance tables. He was also engaged from time to time for the Bank of England. This private practice was extremely lucrative; Davies also received $850 p.a. from the Guardian company and $150 p.a. from the Reversionary Interest Society. 
Griffith Davies was a man of deep religious feelings, and belonged to a chapel of Welsh Calvinistic Methodists in Jewin Street, Cripplegate. In his final years he absented himself from all society save that of the chapel and his office. On 5 December 1854 he was seized with a paralytic stroke, and he died at 25 Duncan Terrace, Islington, London, on 21 March 1855. He was survived by a son and a daughter, and was buried at Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington. 


@@@@@


doc= 7237


Davies, Henry (1782-1862), physician, was born in London. His father was of Welsh descent; after leaving the navy, where he had been a surgeon, he set up practice in St Martin's Lane, London. Henry was apprenticed to Mr Hammond, a surgeon at Malling, Kent, and after attending lectures by George Pearson, Joseph Carpuc, and Joshua Brodres, he was admitted a member of the College of Surgeons in 1803. Davies became a surgeon in the army, and after serving for several years, in various parts of Europe and America, he resigned his commission and took a house in London in 1817. He made visits to Paris, Dublin, and Edinburgh, where he attended the hospitals and medical schools, before obtaining his MD from the University of Aberdeen in 1823 and becoming a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December 1823. He gave up all practice but midwifery, became physician to the British Lying-in Hospital, and was also for some years lecturer on midwifery and the diseases of women and children in the medical school of St George's Hospital. Davies was described as 'a man of kindly disposition, and great shrewdness and tact at the bedside' (Munk, 280). He edited a tenth edition of Michael Underwood's 'Treatise on the Diseases of Children' in 1846. His additions are marked by his initials, but his contemporaries considered that he had spoiled the original work by numerous interpolations from other authors. He also published 'The Young Wife's Guide' (1844). Deafness made it increasingly difficult for Davies to practise and in 1851 he was forced to retire to the country, but returned to London after a year, and died there following an attack of 'fever' on 9 January 1862 at his home, 6 Duchess Street, Portland Place. He was survived by at least one son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 7238


Davies, Herbert (1818-1885), physician, son of Thomas Davies (1792-1839), a physician, was born in London on 30 September 1818. After education at North End House School, Hampstead, in 1836 Davies entered the London Hospital where his father was assistant physician. He matriculated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1838, was a scholar in 1839-40, but migrated to Queens' College on 6 March 1840 and graduated BA as thirty-first wrangler in 1842. He took the degree of MB in 1843, was elected a fellow of Queens' College in 1844, and graduated MD in 1848, his thesis being 'On the origin of gout'. During these years he also studied medicine at Paris and Vienna as well as in London, and on 5 August 1845 he was elected assistant physician to the London Hospital. In 1850 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and in 1854 he became full physician to the London Hospital, an office which he held for twenty years. He lectured in the medical school of that hospital, first on materia medica and afterwards on medicine; in addition he was examiner for medical degrees and assessor to the regius professor of physic at Cambridge University. 
Davies married Caroline Templar, daughter of John Wyatt, on 24 August 1850. They had three sons and four daughters. Their second son, A. T. Davies, also became a physician. Davies lived in Finsbury Square, London, was physician to the Bank of England, and had a considerable practice in the City. His practice among the Jewish community was so large that he was nicknamed 'the king of the Jews' (Clark-Kennedy, 31). He also acted as physician to the Royal Hospital for Diseases of the Chest, and to the National Assurance Society. His research included observations on the relative magnitude of the areas of the four orifices of the heart, and he advocated the application of blisters to the swollen joints in acute rheumatism. 
Besides several papers in the 'London Hospital Reports' and in the 'Transactions of the Pathological Society', Davies published a manual entitled 'Lectures on the Physical Diagnosis of the Diseases of the Lungs and Heart' (1851), which reached a second edition in 1854 and was translated into German and Dutch; and 'On the Treatment of Rheumatic Fever in its Acute Stage, Exclusively by Free Blistering' (1864). His papers on the form and areas of the heart's orifices were published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' in 1870 and 1872. 
Davies died at his address at Vale Mount, Hampstead, London, on 4 January 1885, and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7239


Davies, Hugh (1739-1821), botanist and Church of England clergyman, was born on 3 April 1739 in Llandyfrydog, Anglesey, the youngest of six children of the Revd Lewis Davies, rector of Llandyfrydog, and his wife, Mary Knight. Only Hugh and two sisters survived their childhood. The father also died early, in 1750, but nevertheless the son was well educated at the free grammar school at Beaumaris and followed his father to Jesus College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1757 and gained his BA in 1762. He took holy orders, being ordained deacon in 1763 and priest in 1764. From 1763 to 1787, he was a cleric in Anglesey. He served curacies at Llangefni (1763-6), Llan-faes and Penmon (1766-75), and Penmynydd (1775-8). At Llan-faes and Penmon he also held the post of usher at his old school at Beaumaris. In 1778 he was inducted rector of Llandegfan with Beaumaris. Even when he left Anglesey in 1787, he did not stray very far, merely crossing the Menai Strait to take up his ultimate appointment as rector of Aber, Caernarvonshire. About 1801, suffering from a nervous condition, he returned to live at Beaumaris, though he did not resign his benefice at Aber until 1816. 
Davies's interest in natural history is first noted through his association with Thomas Pennant. Their friendship dated at least from the period when he was a young curate at Llan-faes and Penmon, sending specimens to his fellow naturalist. In 1774 he accompanied Pennant on his tour of the Isle of Man and returned the following summer to make a second review of the plant life on his behalf. From 1776 onwards Davies regularly helped authors, supplying them with details of the natural history of north Wales, particularly the botany of Anglesey and Caernarvonshire. He provided data for Pennant's 'British Zoology' (4th edn, 1776-7), for the same author's 'Journey to Snowdon' (1781), and for William Hudson's 'Flora Anglica' (2nd edn, 1788). In 1790 the second edition of Pennant's 'Indian Zoology' was published; Davies made a considerable contribution to this volume, compiling most of the 'Indian faunula' included therein. Other contributions were to 'English Botany' by James Sowerby and James Edward Smith (1790-1814) and to Smith's 'Flora Britannica' (1800-04), as well as to 'The Botanist's Guide through England and Wales' (1805) by Dawson Turner and Lewis Weston Dillwyn. 
In 1790, Davies was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society. He was an active member and four of his papers were read at its meetings and subsequently published in the 'Transactions'. Undoubtedly his main achievement was the publication of 'Welsh Botanology' in 1813. This volume is important in several respects. It was the first published correlation of Welsh plant names with their binomial equivalents. The first part, a flora of Anglesey, has further importance as the first detailed flora of any of the Welsh counties. The second part ('Llysieuaeth Gymreig') is also of special significance as it is considered, even today, as the most complete listing of Welsh plant names. 
Specializing as he did in the detailed accumulation of the plant records of one area -- Anglesey -- Davies's achievements marked a big step forward from the random plant-hunting expeditions which so characterized botany in eighteenth-century Wales. He died, unmarried, at Beaumaris on 16 February 1821, and was buried in Beaumaris churchyard on the 21st. The genus 'Daviesia' (Leguminosae), named by J. E. Smith in 1798, commemorates his services to botany. 


@@@@@


doc= 7240


Davies, James (1820-1883), classical scholar, was born in Kington, Herefordshire, on 20 May 1820, the second son of Richard Banks and his wife, Esther, niece of James Davies of Moor Court, Herefordshire. Educated at Repton School, he matriculated as James Banks at St Mary Hall, Oxford, in 1841, but migrated to Lincoln College, where he held a scholarship, graduating BA in 1844 (taking third-class honours in classics) and MA in 1846. In 1847 he married Frances Helen, daughter of Abraham Henry Young. From 1847 to 1852 he was incumbent of Christ Church, Forest of Dean, and was headmaster of Ludlow grammar school from 1852 until 1857; he was also diocesan inspector of schools. 
In 1858 Banks changed his name to Davies by royal licence on succeeding to his uncle's property at Moor Court, where he resided, combining the functions of squire, clergyman, and banker, becoming a partner in his brother's bank. He erected a church in his own grounds for the convenience of his neighbours, for whom the parish church was too remote. He was made a prebendary of Hereford in 1875. His time, however, was principally devoted to literature, especially the pursuits of classical scholarship. 
For many years Davies wrote the majority of the classical articles in the 'Saturday Review', and he was the author of a lengthy essay entitled 'Epigrams' in the 'Quarterly Review' for January 1865. In 1860 he published a metrical translation of the 'Fables' of Babrius, from the text of his friend Sir George Cornewall Lewis. This version included the apocryphal second part, the spuriousness of which was not then generally recognized. He produced several editions and translations of classical authors, including prose versions of Hesiod, Theognis, and Callimachus for 'Bohn's Classical Library', and in 1873 and 1876 wrote volumes on Hesiod and Theognis, and on Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius, for Collins's series 'Ancient Classics for English Readers'. A volume of original verse entitled 'Nugae' was published in 1854. Davies also wrote on architecture, archaeology, topography, and horticulture. He revised several of 'Murray's Guides' for the press, and contributed many articles to 'Blackwood's Magazine', the 'Contemporary Review', and the 'Quarterly Review'. He died after a prolonged decline of health at Moor Court, Herefordshire, on 11 March 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 7242


Davies, Sir John (1560x63-1625), administrator and conspirator, was the son of John Davies of London. He was born in London about 6 a.m. on 8 February 1560 according to Anthony Wood; the precision suggests that Wood may have seen a copy of Davies's horoscope. An enemy later made much of (and no doubt quite likely exaggerated) Davies's humble origins. However, Davies's funeral monument, which recorded that he died in the sixty-third year of his life, suggests that he was born in 1562 or 1563. He was educated in 'grammaticals' in London before being admitted to Gloucester Hall, Oxford, where his tutor was the mathematician and astrologer Thomas Allen (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.373). Gloucester Hall had a reputation as a centre for sheltering church papists nominally conforming to the Church of England, and Davies later owned that Allen had instructed him in the Catholic faith. He graduated BA on 1 July 1577 and proceeded MA on 4 July 1581, continuing at the college for a while thereafter. William Camden considered Davies 'an excellent mathematician' and he reportedly wrote much on mathematics and astrology, none of which had survived by the late seventeenth century, and compiled with John Dee and Matthew Gwinne a volume of letters 'concernyng chymical and magical secrets' (ibid.). 
Davies went to London, where he learnt more of astrology from Simon Forman. Their connection was parodied in the title of a pamphlet which appeared in 1590 at the time of the Marprelate controversy: 'Sir Martin Mar-people: his collar of esses. Workmanly wrought by Maister Simon Sooth-saier, coldsmith of London. And offered to sale upon great necessitie, by John Davies'. In 1595 Davies spoke ill of Forman to the latter's mistress's husband and the following year Forman dreamed that Davies stood by watching while a crowd fired arrows at him. 
In February 1588 Davies made his entrance at the royal court, where he seems soon to have come to the notice of the earl of Essex. He may already have embarked on a military career: in 1598 he claimed to have served four years in the Low Countries. In 1589 he served with Essex on the expedition to Portugal and may also have gone to France, as Wood claimed. Wood's comment, 'whereby he advanced his knowledge, as to men, and the languages of those countries very much', perhaps hints that Davies had an intelligence, as well as a military, role (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.374). He certainly served with Essex and his brother Walter Devereux in 1591 when they fought in Normandy in support of Henri of Navarre. He was at the taking of Cadiz in 1596, where he was one of thirty-three men knighted on 15 September by the earl. He was also on the expedition the following year to the Azores. About 1593 Davies married his first wife, the widow of Sir Henry Rowse of Devon. 
By 1590 Davies had acquired a gunner's place at Sandown Castle. From there in November 1598 he wrote to Essex, then master of the ordnance, seeking the post of surveyor of the ordnance, the third place in the hierarchy of the department, 'the principal military storehouse in the kingdom', after the lieutenant and the clerk (Ashley, 'War in the ordnance office', 338). To support his application he enclosed a three-page treatise 'On the perfection of artillery', together with 'some short collections of my former studies in artillery wherein if I had that practice as this place doth of necessity draw a man unto I would not doubt but in short time to discover the true effect of artillery more sufficiently than hitherto hath been by any of our nation. ('Salisbury MSS', 8.440-41)' Davies was duly appointed surveyor on 31 January 1599 through the earl's offices. 
Later that year Davies went 'as a prime officer' with Essex to Ireland (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.374). The earl issued a warrant to the master of the ordnance in Ireland, Sir George Bouchier, to appoint Davies his lieutenant of the ordnance. Later, during Essex's brief lieutenancy of Ireland, Davies was also a factor of the purveyors of victuals for his forces. Davies and his superior Sir Robert Newcomen, the victualler-general for Ireland, were ordered to produce all books and reckonings, 'whereby Her Majesty may have a perfect knowledge and account of the matters of victuals in Ireland which now lies wrapped in the folds of much confusion' ('CSP Ire.', '1599-1600', 312). Davies accompanied Essex in his apparently unexpected return to England: leaving Dublin on 24 September 1599 they arrived at Nonsuch Palace, Surrey, four days later. Essex was suspended from all his offices, and bitter conflict ensued in the ordnance office where the lieutenant, Sir George Carew, hastened to fill key places with his clients, his kinsman George Harvey and Richard Palfreyman, to Davies's outrage. He physically ejected Palfreyman as being 'no officer', and in front of the lieutenant of the Tower rounded on Harvey as 'insolent and no deputy' ('Salisbury MSS', 10.100-01). 
In the submissions to the committee of inquiry that followed, a flood of defects and frauds in the conduct of the officers of the ordnance was revealed, not to speak of the sea of mutually recriminatory allegations. Harvey described Davies as 'a shepstar's son, hatched in Gutter Lane' -- that is, the son of a dressmaker, or indeed simply the woman who cuts cloth up for dressmaking -- and one 'who plots that no man shall serve her Majesty in the office but himself and such as depend upon him'. Were not reforms undertaken, the queen could lose and yet again 'be deceived of almost 100,000'l'.' ('Salisbury MSS', 10.399). Legal proceedings and further enquiries were overtaken by the Essex conspiracy. 
At the final planning meeting of 3 February 1601 Davies produced the most realistic of the various plans discussed for Essex's attempt to seize the court, the city of London, and the Tower, advising taking the Tower and its munitions at the outset, then carrying out a methodical plan to take the court. Sir Charles Danvers, Sir Christopher Blount, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and their followers would be stationed at strategic points in Whitehall Palace and at a given signal would seize control and open the way for Essex to approach the queen and present a petition on behalf of himself and the realm. Gorges refused to co-operate and the earl of Southampton angrily dissolved the meeting. In the event the carefully contrived plan was replaced by an ill-organized and hot-headed escapade which misguidedly relied on Essex's popularity with the London citizenry but which ended in the earl's surrender and the siege of Essex House where Davies was left guarding the key government hostages, Lord Chief Justice Popham and Lord Keeper Egerton. The rebellion was over the day it began, 8 February 1601. 
In the aftermath the authorities made much of Davies's Oxford past and of his Catholicism: 'that traitor knave Sir J. Davies, a conjuror and Catholic, who at Oxford occupied himself in the idle art of figure casting', according to Sir Robert Cecil, 'a traitor now in hold, brought up in Oxford, and by profession a setter of figures' in the words of the official 'Directions for the preachers' ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 555, 566). At his trial Davies owned that his early instruction in Catholicism at Oxford had been confirmed in Ireland by his fellow conspirator Sir Christopher Blount, carefully explaining (when Blount became angry at the claim) that this had been achieved by Blount's example rather than by any direct attempt at conversion. Davies was convicted and sentenced to death on 5 March 1601, but was subsequently pardoned and 'saved his life by telling first who was in the deepest' (Ashley, 'War in the ordnance office', 343-4). Davies suffered but six months' imprisonment and was restored to his forfeited property in St Leonard Shoreditch in 1610, and in 1613 purchased the erstwhile monastic property of Bere Court in Pangbourne, Berkshire. 
Controversy and suspicion continued to dog Davies. In 1610 he sought an act of parliament to restore him to the blood. His recusancy remained a cause of concern. The bill was lost in the Commons but not before it had been debated in the Lords. The bishop of St Asaph noted that he had heard Davies 'confess that when he was to die and was required to have a minister, he answered that he did willingly embrace the minister, but required to have a priest. So then he halted between two opinions. Since that time he hath continually refused to receive the sacrament... I think it is not fit to restore him to his own blood that refuseth to receive the Lord's blood. (Foster, 'Proceedings', 1.206)' Other peers and bishops, including Cecil, were more sympathetic, seeing his promising signs in his willingness to come to Anglican church services and in his taking the oath of allegiance at a time when most recusants were refusing it. The bishop of London was all the more optimistic about Davies's conformity, 'because he is forward to finish the holy and good work of founding a college begun by Mr Wadham' (ibid., 1.207). 
However, Davies's part in managing Wadham's trust for establishing an Oxford college led to bitter contention with Dorothy Wadham, the widow and executrix. Davies was possibly related to Nicholas Wadham through his second wife, Elizabeth White of Fiddleford, Dorset, whom he had married by 1609. Summoned to Wadham's deathbed in October 1609, he had induced him to make out an instrument making him jointly responsible with Dorothy for establishing the college, 'even in a manner at my husbondes last gaspe' (Briggs, 61). Accusations and counter-accusations of misappropriation of funds ensued. Angrily rebutting his charge that she was herself backward in the business, she bitterly complained that, 'his zeale is greater to compasse his owne endes, then benefit the Colledge' (ibid., 62). Davies perhaps intended to benefit the interests of Gloucester Hall as well as his own. He was excluded from the trust established in July 1610 under a collusive action in chancery directed against him. 
Davies died at Bere Court on 14 May 1625. He was buried with his two wives in St James the Less, Pangbourne, where an elaborate tomb, 'large of grey stone, three recumbent effigies, coupled Tuscan columns left and right' (Pevsner), commemorates the Davies family. His son John succeeded as a minor; he also went to Gloucester Hall and was knighted in 1662. The manor at Pangbourne was sold in 1671. 


@@@@@


doc= 7244


Davies, John (1564/5-1618), poet and writing-master, was born at Hereford (his birthplace was always noted on his title-pages -- 'John Davies of Hereford' -- apparently to distinguish him from the prominent contemporary poet Sir John Davies). He was probably born a Roman Catholic and was certainly identified as one in 1611 (Peck, 461), but nothing in his voluminous religious poetry suggests a strong adherence to Catholicism. Of his early life it is known only that he was of Welsh descent and that he had two brothers and two sisters. He had no higher education, but because he resided for a time at Oxford as a teacher of handwriting, some (notably Anthony Wood) mistakenly thought he had studied there. By 1605 at the latest, Davies took up residence in London. 
It is not certain how Davies acquired his handwriting expertise, although a hint from Pepys's calligraphical collection suggests that he was tutored by a London writing-master named Daniel Johnson. Thomas Fuller in his 'Worthies of England' called Davies 'the greatest master of the pen that England in her age beheld' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.79), and his renown reached as far as Germany according to a commendatory poem in Davies's 'Microcosmos' (Davies, 104). His book 'Writing Schoolmaster, or, The Anatomy of Fair Writing' (earliest surviving edition, 1633) exhibits engraved specimen-copies of his handwriting together with a set of practical directions for learners. His writing students included royalty (Prince Henry) and the highest nobility. If his incessant complaints are to be trusted, Davies was not richly rewarded for his teaching. The earl of Northumberland's book of household expenses would seem to confirm this, recording in 1607 a payment 'To John Davis for teaching Lord Percy to write, for a year, 20 l.' ('Sixth Report', HMC, 229). None the less, his teaching put him in contact with many of the most important families in the country including (in addition to the Percys, with whom he resided in 1607 and 1609-10) the Herberts, the Pembrokes, Thomas, Lord Ellesmere, and his wife, the countess dowager of Derby. He was also friendly with many of the great artists of the period. Even if Davies's links to Sir Philip Sidney are questionable, he was on the periphery of the brilliant circle of wits (among them Donne and Jonson) who wrote panegyric verses for the 1611 edition of 'Coryat's Crudities', Lord Herbert of Cherbury wrote a prefatory poem to him, and he was an acquaintance of Inigo Jones. 
This constant contact with the great and famous must have given Davies the social mobility that explains his marriages to women distinctly above him socially. Mary Croft (died 1612), his first wife, was a relative of the family that owned Croft Castle, Shropshire. With Mary he had his only child, a son named Sylvanus. In 1613, when he was aged forty-eight, he married Dame Juliana Preston (died 1614), the widow of Sir Amyas Preston, the naval commander and keeper of the stores and ordinance in the Tower of London. While only the first name of Davies's third wife, Margaret, is known, the mention in his will of the 'plate and jewells as were hers before marriage' suggests that she too was well placed. About such marriages, he passed on some apparently hard-earned wisdom: '
He that would faine reduce an high-borne Wife 

Unto the Compasse of his meane estate, 

Must not at first, stick for a little Strife. 
('Wittes Pilgrimage', Davies, 1.xvi)' Anthony Wood declared that 'finding not a subsistence by poetry', Davies earned his living as a writing-master (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 2.260). Nevertheless, throughout his teaching career Davies published vast quantities of poetry. He attempted every kind except the dramatic, but his main efforts were religious, moral, and psychological treatises or sermons. The seriousness of his ambition is suggested by the title to his first separately published poem, 'Mirum in modum: a Glimpse of Gods Glorie and the Soules Shape' (1602). His second and longest poem, 'Microcosmos' (1603), is similarly ambitious, a 6000 line treatise on the passions and affections with many digressions on human affairs in general. There were ten more weighty volumes, most of them the sort of didactic religious poetry then much in vogue. Patrons of poetry like the Sidneys and King James wrote such poems themselves; literary theory (for example, Sidney's 'Defense') called for such subjects, and Guillaume du Bartas's 'Divine Works and Days', especially in Josuah Sylvester's version, served as a highly esteemed model. 
But Davies never gained any recognition or financial profit for his poetry; only one of his works ever reached a second edition. The reason would seem to be distressingly clear. As Douglas Bush put it, 'the master (in Fuller's words) of fast, fair, close, and various handwriting was as a poet slow, laborious, diffuse, and flat' (Bush, 86). Davies's creative method was to versify prose tracts like Pierre de la Primaudaye's 'L'Academie Francoise' (1577), Sir Philip Sidney's translation of Mornay's 'Verite de la religion chriestienne', and Puttenham's 'Art of Poesie'. Davies condensed, simplified, and omitted much from his sources, and the product was an incoherent and clumsy patchwork of philosophical fragments, often in unreadable technical language. Davies may have been one of the most voluminous didactic poets of the age; he was also one of the most tedious. 
While the bulk of Davies's poetry was religious, he also wrote love sonnets, satires, epigrams, panegyrics, eclogues, among other kinds. In the 'Wittes Pilgrimage' volume (1610-11?) there is a sonnet sequence about a frustrating love affair that is much superior to his religious poetry. Unfortunately it was written at a moment nearly saturated with dazzling Petrarchan sonnet sequences and, refreshingly, he seems to notice the mediocrity of the 101 sonnets he has been creating. In sonnet 102 he suddenly asks: '
Busie Invention, whie art thou so dull 

And yet still doing? 

' It is a question he should have asked more frequently. With his 'The triumph of death or the picture of the plague... [of] 1603' in 'Humours Heav'n on Earth' (1609), Davies had a compelling subject in plague-stricken London. It led unavoidably to some effective descriptions, but his inveterate prolixity and comparison with such vivid accounts as Dekker's 'The wonderful year 1603' once again make his version forgettable. 
In fact, of all Davies's work only his volume of epigrams 'The Scourge of Folly' (1610) is mentioned today. It is not because he had discovered in epigrams the natural medium for his muse -- they too are relatively lame -- but because he addresses many of the 292 epigrams to the greatest writers and most important figures of the period: the king, Francis Bacon, Sir John Davies, Fulke Greville, Thomas Campion, Samuel Daniel, Ben Jonson, William Shakespeare, John Fletcher, John Marston, Joseph Hall, Herbert of Cherbury, Francis Beaumont, Michael Drayton, and George Chapman, among others. It is unclear how many of them he knew personally, but the fact that he says to Chapman, 'I know thee not (good George) but by thy pen' suggests some personal knowledge of the others. Unfortunately, Davies's writing is so vague that little is gained from whatever intimacy he might have had with his subjects. This is particularly disappointing in the case of Shakespeare, who is promisingly addressed as 'our English Terence', but in maddeningly cryptic language Davies tells Shakespeare that: '
hadst thou not played some kingly parts in sport, 

Thou hadst been a companion for a king. 

' With all the vast ingenuity spent on Shakespearian biography, no one has come close to explaining those lines.Davies did have one respectable contemporary admirer, William Browne of Tavistock, who in his 'Britannia's Pastorals' enthusiastically linked him with the poet George Wither: '
by whose Muses' power 

A natural day to me seems but an hour 
('Poems', 1.240)' Few subsequent readers have had Browne's endurance. Davies died on 6 July 1618 and was buried that day near his first wife in the church of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London. His wife Margaret survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7245


Davies, Sir John (bap. 1569, d. 1626), lawyer and poet, third son of Edward Davies (died 1580), a Welshman settled at Chisgrove in the parish of Tisbury, Wiltshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Bennett of Pitt House, Wiltshire, was baptized at Tisbury on 16 April 1569. He is described by Anthony Wood as the son of a 'wealthy tanner'. At his entry to Middle Temple it was recorded in the register that his father was a gentleman. Apparently first educated at Winchester College, Davies matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 15 October 1585. It does not appear that he graduated. After a brief spell at New Inn, London, he was admitted to the Middle Temple on 3 February 1588, and was called to the bar in July 1595. 
In the previous year Davies had registered with the Stationers a poetic work entitled 'Orchestra, or, A Poeme of Dancing', the earliest extant edition of which is dated 1596. It was dedicated to Richard Martin, Davies's contemporary at the Middle Temple. At Bridgewater House 100 years ago was preserved a copy of the first edition, with a manuscript dedicatory sonnet to Sir Thomas Egerton, written by Davies in 1600 on the death of the lord chancellor's second wife. About the same time as he wrote and published 'Orchestra', Davies went into print with a number of epigrams, notorious for their 'roughness, even coarseness' which their modern editor ascribed to 'the 'Wild Oats' sowing, of the Poet's youthful period' ('Complete Poems', 1.21). Manuscript transcripts of certain 'Gullinge Sonnets', addressed to Sir Anthony Cooke and kept in Chetham's Library, Manchester, were probably also written by Davies the lawyer. 'Nosce teipsum', a poem on the immortality of the soul and its relation to the body, much commended by contemporaries and modern critics alike, was written about 1594. A manuscript copy was preserved at Holkham Hall, Norfolk, as late as 1888, with dedicatory verses 'To my honorable patron and frend Ed. Cooke, Esq., her Maties Attorney-Generall' ('DNB'). Another manuscript copy has a dedication to the earl of Northumberland. In 1594 Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, presented Davies at court, where the queen had him sworn as servant-in-ordinary. Davies then went as one of the official party sent to the baptism of Prince Henry in Scotland, where he first came to the attention of James VI as the author of a poem already well regarded. 
Although clearly an able student of the law, Davies was evidently no model citizen. His 'flamboyant and tempestuous personality' is attested by numerous infractions of the disciplinary code at the Middle Temple, not all of which can be adduced to the ritualized 'misrule' of Candlemas (Pawlisch, 16). He and his friend Richard Martin were temporarily expelled in 1591 for unruly behaviour. In February 1598 Davies was disbarred permanently from the society for a violent assault on the same Martin, and he returned to Oxford, apparently spending some time at New College, where it was once believed he composed 'Nosce teipsum' in a fit of remorse. In Trinity term 1601 Davies secured the support of no lesser personages than Sir Robert Cecil and Sir Thomas Egerton for his readmission to the Middle Temple, which was secured by his public apology to Martin. In the same year he was returned to parliament as one of the representatives for Corfe Castle. He attained prominence in the Commons by his insistence on legislative redress to the abuse of the queen's prerogative of monopoly, much to Cecil's distaste. Yet by this time Davies's talents seem to have commended themselves to the secretary of state. When Cecil entertained the queen in 1602 at his new house in the Strand, London, Davies composed for the occasion 'A Contention betwixt a Wife, a Widdow and a Maide'. 
On the queen's death in March 1603 Davies may have accompanied Sir Robert Carey in his journey to the Scottish court, and he was certainly recorded as present during the new king's progress south. The tale that James now took Davies to his bosom as the author of the much admired 'Nosce teipsum' is almost certainly apocryphal. 
Although nine years earlier James had indeed delighted to meet the author of the 'Nosce teipsum', Davies was not among the 906 new knights created in the first month of the reign. On 18 September 1603 the king did, however, write to Lord Mountjoy to cause a grant of the office of solicitor-general for Ireland to be passed under the great seal to Davies, and in the following November Davies arrived in Dublin to assume the office; he received his knighthood there at the hands of the lord deputy the following month. A few days after his arrival he sent to Cecil a graphic account of the state of Ireland. Pestilence and famine were raging, and 'the face of things appeared very miserable' ('DNB'). But his first gloomy impressions were dissipated when he observed that the law courts were commanding respect. 'I conceave', he wrote, 'a very good hope that after a parliament wherein many mischiefs may be removed and prevented, and after the people ar acquainted with the forms of justice... this kingdom will grow humane and civile' (ibid.). 
This view of the civilizing power of the law and its institutions was one by which Davies set great store throughout his association with Ireland. On 20 February 1604 he sent to Cecil from Castle Reban another long letter, in which he complained of the slothfulness and ignorance of the protestant clergymen, whom he described as 'meer idols and cyphers, and such as cannot read their neck-verse if they should stand in need of the benefit of their clergy' ('DNB'). He found churches ruined and preaching neglected, and he asked that commissioners might be sent from England to inquire into these abuses. He also protested at the ease with which royal pardons were obtained in cases of robbery and murder, recommended the holding of quarter sessions, and condemned the debased quality of the coinage. That spring he went on the Leinster circuit. In April 1605 he travelled to England with Sir Richard Cooke, chief baron, to report on the state of Ireland, taking with him a letter to the lords of the council in which his 'industrious pains' and 'toilsome travels through most part of the kingdom' were highly commended by the lord deputy, Sir Arthur Chichester (ibid.). He returned to Dublin in July 1605, the lords of the council showing their own appreciation of his services by ordering that Chichester pay the arrears of his allowance. In 1606, on the elevation of Sir Charles Calthorpe to the bench, Davies succeeded to the post of attorney-general for Ireland, and was afterwards called to the degree of serjeant-at-law. 
Davies firmly believed that the successful government of Ireland could not be achieved through military conquest alone, but depended instead on laying the legal foundations for a civil society. He once wrote to Cecil saying that 'the multitude was ever made conformable to edicts and proclamations' ('DNB'). From 1606 he was busy with the management of the work deriving from the establishment of the commissions for defective titles and the implementation of arrangements for the surrender and regrant of lands by tenants of the crown. This was a crucial element in his long-standing campaign to entrench the full-scale operation of property law in Ireland as the bulwark of English rule, and was designed specifically to undermine and finally to abolish Gaelic para-legal forms of land tenure and inheritance which were much more fluid, based on kinship and the sept, and the tribal allegiances underpinning them. Religious reform was also integral to the 'new English' project of establishing 'civility' in Ireland, and Davies was a strong advocate of the expulsion of Catholic priests from Ireland and the firm establishment of the protestant religion. The punishment of recusancy was a political football in early seventeenth-century Ireland, but Davies was consistent in his support for the levying of penal exactions on those who failed to attend protestant churches. He also agitated for the reconstruction of the Irish polity from the ground upwards, recommending that reform of the Dublin corporation, and in particular the proscription of Catholics from the government of the city, would serve the purpose of encouraging reform in urban centres across the kingdom. Davies showed immense energy in the task of legal administration in Ireland, in the conduct of which his lifestyle was highly peripatetic, in and out of term. In May 1606 he was in Munster on assize. That summer he travelled through Monaghan, Fermanagh, and Cavan, recording observations in a long letter to Cecil. In 1607 he went on circuit through the counties of Meath, Westmeath, and Longford, and King's and Queen's counties, and reported to Cecil that it was almost a miracle to see the quiet and conformity that everywhere prevailed. 
All was not equally well everywhere else. In September Davies sent Cecil a full report of the flight of the northern earls, and the following January he went himself to Ulster to indict Tyrone and Tyrconnell. In July he returned thither, this time with the lord deputy and the other commissioners appointed to view the escheated lands in the province. A letter from Davies to Cecil, dated 5 August 1608, gives a picturesque account of the journey, describing how the 'wild inhabitants' of the remoter districts 'wondered as much to see the king's deputy as the ghosts in Virgil wondered to see AEneas alive in hell' ('DNB'). Davies was long absorbed in the establishment of the new plantation, which made at least one false start, and profited not a little by it as one of the principal servitors in the only category (councillors of state) permitted also to undertake for estates. In all he obtained 5500 acres. It was also his counsel that secured the seizure of the upper Bann fishery, the richest in Ulster and a key means for the enticement of investors in the province. 'In the absence of fully adequate common law precedents, Davies fortified his brief... by citing 'divers rules of the civil law and the customary law of France agreeablee to our law in this point'... Although the dictates of natural geography tell us that rivers flow towards the sea, Davies' application of the civil law led to the government's seizure of the Bann fishery because the sea flows into rivers. (Pawlisch, 173)' It is open to question whether Davies ever really saw his posting in Ireland as anything more than a means to the advancement of a legal career in England. As early as 1610 he petitioned his patron, Salisbury, for a new appointment elsewhere. In doing so he detailed aspects of his record of reform in Ireland, citing 'the assimilation of the autonomous gaelic lordships to the crown, the reduction of medieval corporate liberties, the implementation of religious conformity and the reinvigoration of the Irish revenues' (Pawlisch, 30). There may have been personal reasons for his staying there, however. About March 1609, probably while in England on business connected with the Ulster plantation, Davies married Eleanor Touchet (died 1652), the fifth daughter of George, Baron Audley, future earl of Castlehaven. This was not a felicitous match. The attorney-general's in-laws enjoyed unsavoury reputations. He died five years before the family's ultimate disgrace, the execution of the second earl for gross sexual misconduct against his wife the countess and her daughter, his own stepdaughter. But his own married life had been less than happy. His wife's religious exuberance was frequently aimed aggressively at her husband, the exact timing of whose demise she cheerfully prophesied. 'From that time until his death in 1626, Davies suffered the uncomfortable experience of staring across the breakfast table at a hopelessly insane wife dressed in mourning' (ibid., 29). The marriage produced no surviving male heirs, two sons, one an idiot, having died in minority. Davies's daughter, Lucy, was married at the age of eleven to Ferdinando Hastings, the sixth earl of Huntingdon, on condition that his estate pass to Lucy rather than his somewhat unpredictable wife. Perhaps partly in avoidance of her, Davies remained in the thick of things in Ireland for some years yet. In 1610 he defended at law the crown's plantation of Cavan against counsel under instruction from dispossessed natives. In 1612 he published his 'Discoverie of the true causes why Ireland was never entirely subdued nor brought under obedience of the crown of England until his majesties happie reigne', which argued for the full establishment of a system of law based on land rather than blood. 
In 1613 the king himself picked Davies as the best-qualified candidate to take the speaker's chair when parliament opened at Dublin in May. Davies played a crucial role in contriving the first ever protestant majority in the Irish parliament, based on the enfranchisement of new boroughs created during the plantation of Munster and Ulster. The Catholic Old English disputed the validity of many returns, and contested the election of the speaker. Nominated by Sir Thomas Ridgeway, Davies, who sat as knight of the shire for Fermanagh, was chosen by the protestant majority. Thereupon Sir James Gough, as champion of the Catholic party, proposed Sir John Everard, former second justice of the king's bench, whom Davies had forced to resign on grounds of his recusancy. Everard was installed in the chair, which he then refused to vacate to make way for Davies. Therefore, Ridgeway and Sir Oliver St John 'took Sir John Davys by the arms, lifted him from the ground, and placed him in the chair, in Sir John Everard's lap, requiring him still to come forth of the chair' ('DNB'). Eventually Everard was ejected, and he and his party withdrew, angrily insisting that they would seek redress at the hands of the king himself. However, the commission of inquiry that arrived the following September confirmed Davies's election. In 1615 the attorney-general published 'Le primer discours des cases et matters in ley resolues et adiudges en les courts del roy en cest realme', translated in 1762 as 'A Report of Cases and Matters in Law', 'elaborating step by step the innovative judicial measures he had employed to consolidate the Tudor conquest of Ireland' (Pawlisch, 31). If it was written in the same trumpet-blowing spirit as the letter Davies had sent Salisbury in 1610, then it had precisely the same effect. A few years later Davies petitioned Buckingham for leave to lay down his commission in Ireland. On 30 October 1619 he was finally replaced by Sir William Ryves. 
During his Irish service, Davies had spent a lot of time in England on business, and evidently maintained important political contacts. He is said to have been elected to sit for the borough of Newcastle under Lyme in the 1614 parliament, and he certainly represented the Staffordshire town in 1621. Back in 1609 the king had conferred on Davies the dignity of king's serjeant, and it was in this capacity that he now continued his professional practice in England, where he also went on circuit as a judge. The historian of his legal career in Ireland has said that Davies's charge to the jurors at York in 1620 'represents a classic contemporary exposition of the jurisprudence on assize justice' (Pawlisch, 32). In 1622 Davies published a revised edition of his three major poems, 'Nosce teipsum', 'Astrea', and 'Orchestra'. At some point he also abridged Coke's reports, although his labours were not published until 1651. In 1624 he translated the 'Psalms'; a manuscript copy, with several poems appended, was noted by the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as being in the Laing collection in Edinburgh University Library. These, like all his other writings, were published by Alexander Grosart in three volumes for the 'Fuller Worthies' Library' between 1869 and 1876, dedicated, with his permission, to William Gladstone. The accession of Charles I in 1625 cheered Davies, who wrote that he believed the new king was 'like to restore the glory of our nation by his wisdom and valor' (ibid.). The author of a manuscript tract, not published until 1656, on the prerogative right to levy impositions without parliamentary consent, building his argument on the Roman-law concept of 'ius gentium', or the law of nations, Davies evidently also commended himself to the new king. In 1626 Charles appointed him chief justice of the king's bench in place of Randolph Crew, who had refused to declare the legitimacy of the forced loan. 
Early in December 1626 Davies prepared for his new judicial appointment by purchasing the robes of office. On the night of 7 December he was at a supper party given by Lord Keeper Coventry in Westminster, and on the following morning he was found dead of apoplexy; this was the very day he was due to be installed as chief justice -- an act of God, wrote the English judge James Whitelocke, that prevented 'so inconvenient an intention to the commonwealth' (Pawlisch, 33). The funeral oration was preached by John Donne, and on 9 December Davies was interred in St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. His wife survived him and remarried, visiting on her new husband, Sir Archibald Douglas, sufferings almost identical to those undergone by her first, who himself failed to elude her for very long, she being buried beside him in 1652. 
Davies's contemporary and posthumous influence was signal. As well as a poet noted in his time, he was an enthusiastic antiquary, and in 1592 had travelled to Leiden to meet the famous Dutch jurist and professor of civil law Paul Merula, with letters of introduction from William Camden. Davies, Sir Robert Cotton, and others were jointly engaged in re-establishing the Society of Antiquaries early in the seventeenth century. Davies's immersion in civil- and canon-law traditions was no doubt deepened during his brief association with New College, Oxford, and possibly by continental study under Merula (printed editions of Davies's youthful epigrams having allegedly originated at Middleburg). It has been cited as prima facie evidence for the need to question the hegemonic grip of common-law insularity and the ancient constitution over the minds and imaginations of early modern English lawyers. Davies's view, expressed only fleetingly, but forcefully, during the 1621 parliament, that 'Ireland is a member of the crown of England... [and] that this kingdom here cannot make laws to bind that kingdom, for they have a parliament of their own', raised a problem which recurred at different stages, and in differing guises, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. But it is his contribution to English 'imperialism' in Ireland which constitutes the most substantial portion of his legacy, and in particular his expansion of the use of civil law there in an attempt to justify and consolidate English sovereignty. His assertion of an English title to Ireland by right of conquest after the conclusion of Tyrone's rising in 1603 effectively reduced the entire kingdom to the condition of virgin territory over which none but the crown could claim any proprietary right, and simultaneously eradicated the jurisdiction of ancient Brehon law. This later proved a pivotal stage in the collapse of Gaelic society in Ireland. It did much to help provoke both the flight of the northern earls and the rising of Sir Cahir O'Doherty (the first of which Davies seems to have connived at quite deliberately), events which themselves cleared the way for the plantation of Ulster. Conquest doctrine continued to serve as a justification for English sovereignty over Ireland until shortly before home rule. But Davies had an altogether more subtle impact on Anglo-Irish legal institutions and culture than his pronouncements on the extirpation of Gaelic traditions might suggest. Aspects of the Brehon code he effectively attempted to assimilate to the customary practice of the Tudor kingdom. And given the insistence of his campaign to reduce Ireland to protestant conformity, it is ironic to note, for example, that his application of canonical law in cases such as the right of ministers to hold plural livings 'in commendam' had the effect of ascribing to the popish canons of Catholic Europe the status of English customary law. In this, Davies perfectly embodied some of the more fruitful contradictions of his age. 


@@@@@


doc= 7246


Davies, John (c.1570-1644), Church of England clergyman and Welsh scholar, was born at Llanferres, Denbighshire, the son of Dafydd ab Ieuan ap Rhys, said to have been a weaver, and his wife, Elizabeth ferch Lewis ap Dafydd Lloyd. It was within a few miles of his birthplace that he came in contact with two men who set the course for his life and achievements. The first, the Gamaliel (the teacher of St Paul) at whose feet he was brought up, as he described him in the preface to his 1632 dictionary, was William Morgan, translator of the 'Bible' into Welsh, and, at the time, vicar of a neighbouring parish. The second was Richard Parry, future bishop of St Asaph, then headmaster of the grammar school at Ruthin, which Davies attended. Davies graduated from Jesus College, Oxford, in 1594. During the following decade his movements are not known: he is speculated to have returned to teach in Ruthin or to have joined Morgan at Llandaff. 
Davies was appointed rector of Mallwyd, Merioneth, in 1604 (the living of Llanmawddwy was added in 1613). The following year he became chaplain to Parry (elevated to St Asaph in 1604), and became a canon of the cathedral in 1612. About 1609 he married Jane Price, daughter of Llwyn Ynn, in the parish of Llanfair Dyffryn Clwyd, Denbighshire. She was a granddaughter on her mother's side of Baron Lewis Owen of Dolgellau, and her sister was the wife of Richard Parry. In 1608 he resumed his studies, as a student of Lincoln College, Oxford, where he was in residence as reader of the sentences. He graduated BD the same year, and DD in 1615 (relinquished in 1621 for Llanfor). He became chancellor of St Asaph in 1617 with the prebendal stall of Llanefydd, Denbighshire. 
Davies's achievements touched on many fields but were united by a common purpose, to propagate the faith to the people in their native tongue. The unavailability of sufficient numbers of Morgan's 'Bible' of 1588 resulted in a plan to produce a new translation, one which could take into account the Authorized Version of 1611. The 1620 Welsh 'Bible' appeared under Parry's name, but is generally regarded to have been the work of Davies. Davies is also credited with revising the 'Book of Common Prayer', republished the following year, again under Parry's name. 
Further works focusing on the Welsh language itself were an attempt to provide materials through which English-speaking clergymen could learn Welsh in order to communicate with their Welsh-speaking parishioners. Davies's Welsh grammar in Latin, 'Antiquae linguae Britannicae... rudimenta' appeared in 1621. In 1632 he published a Welsh-Latin dictionary, 'Antiquae linguae Britannicae... dictionarium duplex'. Davies wrote the Welsh-Latin section of the dictionary himself, and used Thomas Wiliems's work for the Latin-Welsh sections, abridged and revised. He was forced to spend almost a year in London while the work was in the press in order to oversee its production. His dictionary was subsequently used and cited as an authority in the English dictionaries of Thomas Blount (1656) and Edward Philips (1658), and Dr Johnson had a copy of the 'Dictionarium duplex' in his library. 
In addition to his scholarly works Davies also published pastoral materials. He translated 'The First Book of the Christian Exercise Appertayning to the Resolution', the Jesuit Robert Parsons's introduction to Christian truths (as revised by Bunney), as 'Llyfr y resolusion' (1632). He edited 'Y llyfr plygain a'r catechisme' (1633), a mix of secular almanac and abridgement of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. It was uncommon in being pocket-size at a time when editions of the 'Book of Common Prayer' were normally folio. 'Yr articulau' (1664) appeared posthumously. 
From 1594 onwards Dr Davies copied a vast quantity of poetry of various periods, often hiring scribes to work for him. This extensive study of the Welsh language, and poetry in particular, informs all his published work. In 1710 Dafydd Lewys of Llanawddog printed a collection of some of Dr Davies's extracts of Welsh poetry under the title 'Flores poetarum Britannicorum'. 
Davies is said to have died at Harlech on 15 May 1644, and was buried at Mallwyd four days later. His widow later married his curate and successor, Edward Wynn. 
Davies's achievements in propagating both the 'Bible' and the Welsh language deeply influenced Welsh culture. Rowland Vaughan, a contemporary, described him as 'the only excellent Plato of our tongue', and Sir Glanmor Williams continues to see Davies as 'the greatest Welsh scholar of his age, if not of all time' (Williams, 'Recovery', 476). 


@@@@@


doc= 7247


Davies, John (1625-1693), translator, was born at Kidwelly, Carmarthenshire, on 25 May 1625. He was the son of William Davies, yeoman of Kidwelly, and his wife, whose maiden name was Griffiths. He attended school in Carmarthen and entered Jesus College, Oxford, on 16 May 1641, matriculating on 4 June. When the civil war broke out he was removed from Oxford by relatives, and placed in St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 14 May 1646. Wood claims that there he was trained up by presbyterians which 'made him ever after, till his majesty's restoration, keep pace with the times of usurpation' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 382). At Cambridge he became acquainted with the Durham poet John Hall, who was at St John's in 1645/6. Davies wrote the preface to Hall's book of essays, 'Horae vacivae' (1646), claiming that this work represented not only the learning of the university but that of the more serious sort of men in three nations. It was through Hall that Davies acquired the manuscript of 'The Ancient Rites, and Monuments of the Monastical, Cathedral Church of Durham', which he translated from the Latin and published in 1672, dedicating it to another native of Durham, James Mickleton, of the Inner Temple. Davies's fluency in French came from the years he spent in France during the interregnum. After the Restoration, Davies wrote 'The civil warres of Great Britain and Ireland: containing an exact history of their occasion, originall, progress, and happy end' (1661), which he dedicated to the duke of Richmond and Lennox. Davies claims that this work is an unbiased and impartial account of the wars, although it contains a hagiographical account of Charles I's execution: 'Then after some short discourse with Doctor Juxon, his Majesty with an Heroick patience submitted his Head to the Block, which after the Sign given, was at one blow cut off... Thus fell Charles... the Martyr of the People, a Prince certainly endowed with much piety, magnanimity and patience, as any that ever this kingdom could boast. (pp. 280, 282)' A Scottish edition of the work was published in 1664.It appears that Davies earned his living by translating works from French, Spanish, and Latin. The first of these was 'The Extravagant Shepherd' from the French of C. Sorel (1653). He translated an esoteric selection of works, which included 'The Art of How to Know Men' (1665), originally by De La Chambre, dedicated to Charles Howard, earl of Carlisle, recommending it to him for the use of ambassadors. Other works Davies translated also had a practical function, such as 'The voyages & travels of the ambassadors sent by Frederick duke of Holstein, to the great duke of Muscovy, and the king of Persia', dedicated to the 'English Merchants in Muscovy', which was published together with the 'Travel of John Albert de Mandelslo' in 1662. Davies also translated novels and pseudo-scientific works such as 'The History of Magick' (1657). 
Davies hoped to gain the patronage of well-connected men through his translations. 'Observations on the Poems of Homer and Virgil' (1672), translated from the French of Rene Rapin, was dedicated to Sir John Berkenhead, 'The History of Appian' (1679), a translation of the work of Appianus, to the earl of Ossory, and 'The History of Henry IV' (1663), from the French of the bishop of Rodez, to Charles II. Davies did not forget his countrymen or his relatives. It is from the dedications to his translations that the few details known about his life can be reconstructed. Murtada's 'The Egyptian History' (1672) was dedicated to his uncle John Griffith, of Llangwendraeth, Carmarthenshire, whom Davies had entertained with stories from the book, and to whom it was now dedicated as recompense for Griffith's having lost his collection of papers and books on Wales. 'Political and Military Observations' (1679) was dedicated to Sir Thomas Davies, a bookseller and mayor of London. Davies was acquainted with Nahum Tate and Richard Lovelace, the latter writing a prefatory verse for 'Letters of Affaires of Love and Courtship' (1657), translated from the French of Vincent de Voiture. The translations were workmanlike. Davies hoped they were pure, simple, and sensible. Davies was buried in Kidwelly church on 22 July 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 7248


Davies, John (1679-1732), college head, was born in London on 22 April 1679 and baptized on 13 May at either St Vedast, Foster Lane, or St Michael-le-Querne, London. He was the son of John Davies, merchant, who died while Davies was young, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Turton, justice of the court of king's bench. He was educated at the Charterhouse School, and in 1695 matriculated from Queens' College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1699, was elected fellow of his college on 7 July 1701, and commenced MA in 1702. In 1709 he was junior proctor of the university. He was ordained deacon at Ely on 21 September 1711, and priest on 23 September, and in that year was collated by Dr John Moore, bishop of Ely, to the rectory of Fen Ditton, near Cambridge, and to a prebend in the church of Ely; he also took the degree of LLD. From 1712 to 1718 he held the rectory of Glemsford, Suffolk, another living in Moore's patronage. 
On the death of Dr Henry James, president of Queens' College, Davies was elected to succeed him on 23 March 1717. A fervent whig and supporter of the Hanoverian succession, he was created DD when George I visited Cambridge in the same year. In 1726 he was elected vice-chancellor of the university. At some stage he married Sarah, who is mentioned in his will, but nothing more is known of his marriage. 
Davies was a close friend and ally of the eminent classical scholar Richard Bentley. Bentley's scholarly influence can be seen in Davies's correct editions of works by Caesar, Lactantius, and Minucius Felix; his second edition of 'Maximi Tyrii dissertationes' (1703; 2nd edn, 1740) contained material supplied by Bentley. Davies projected new and beautiful editions of Cicero's philosophical treatises to supplement Graevius's edition of Cicero's works, and accordingly published the first, 'Tusculanarum disputationum libri quinque', at Cambridge in 1709; five more volumes were published in the series, and most went to a second edition. Davies had got as far as editing the middle of the third book of Cicero's 'Offices' when he died, on 7 March 1732 at Fen Ditton. He was buried in Queens' College chapel. In his will he entrusted his unfinished edition of the 'Offices' to the care of Dr Mead, who gave it to Bentley's nephew Dr Thomas Bentley to prepare for the press. All Davies's notes and emendations were lost in a fire at the house where Bentley lodged, in the Strand, London, caused by his carelessness while reading in bed. 


@@@@@


doc= 7249


Davis, John Scarlett (1804-1845), painter, was born on 1 September 1804 at 2 High Street, Leominster, Herefordshire, the second of the five children of James Davis (1775-1828), silversmith and watchmaker, and Ann Scarlett, a distant relative of Sir James Scarlett (1769-1844), the attorney-general (later Lord Abinger). His Davis forebears had moved from Neath in Glamorgan, Wales, to Leominster at the end of the sixteenth century. At the age of five he demonstrated enthusiasm and talent for drawing; at eleven he copied an anatomical engraving seen in the surgery of the family physician, for which he received a silver palette (awarded by the Society of Arts) from the duke of Sussex, and was declared by the 'Hereford Journal' of 5 June 1816 to be 'a young self-taught genius'. In presenting the prize, the duke observed that Davis was so much younger than the other candidates that at first the duke could not see him -- but that his merit was soon apparent. 
While at school in Leominster, Davis made a number of pencil portraits of the town's leading citizens, receiving $1 for each. Possibly he was among the private pupils of the landscape watercolourist David Cox, who then lived in Hereford. From early 1818 until December 1819 he boarded at Paul De La Pierre's academy in Well Street, Hackney, Middlesex, and in July 1820 he entered the Royal Academy Schools; in 1822 he first exhibited at the Royal Academy itself, and undertook a sketching tour in Wales, producing a group of drawings now in the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff. 
Of the twenty-seven works exhibited in Davis's lifetime at the major London venues, most were oil paintings; and he enjoyed a successful practice as a portrait painter. Yet his modern reputation rests almost entirely on his watercolours -- and above all on his interior views, in which his particular genius was revealed. In his freedom and facility of touch he can be regarded as a worthy follower of Richard Parkes Bonington, and the draughtsmanship in some of his interior scenes owes an apparent debt also to Rembrandt. 
In 1824 Davis made a series of copy-drawings of the paintings in the Royal Collection and in the marquess of Stafford's gallery at Cleveland House in London. In October 1825 he went to Yorkshire, where he spent the next three years painting portraits (often through introductions supplied by Sir Thomas Lawrence) and showing his work at the Northern Society exhibitions in Leeds. In the 1830s he gained more and more commissions for his interior views of galleries, churches, and (sometimes) palaces. He now toured the continent regularly, often in the company of his wife, Elizabeth Jane Abbott, whom he married on 12 July 1832. He fulfilled a large commission for Lord Farnborough, which included work in the Grande Galerie of the Louvre. His principal patron, however, was the merchant and naval agent John Hinxman, who at his death in 1846 owned 489 of the artist's works. These included 'The Long Gallery of the Uffizi, Florence' (oils, 1833; exh. RA, 1834; ex-Sothebys, London, 14 July 1993), and his last and probably largest oil, 'The Interior of St Peter's, with Figures' (7 ft 2 in. x 9 ft 10 in.), painted in Rome in 1842. A version is in the City Museum and Art Gallery, Hereford, which holds a diverse collection of his work. 
After several years of illness Davis died of 'diseased lungs' at 11 Bedford Street, Bloomsbury, London, on 29 September 1845, aged forty-one; he was buried at All Souls, Kensal Green, Middlesex. According to the 1874 edition of Samuel Redgrave's 'Dictionary of Artists of the English School', Davis 'became drunken and of demoralised habits, got into prison, and died before the age of 30' (113) -- a characterization entirely at odds with his surviving papers (discovered in 1928), which indicate a man settled in his domestic life and dedicated to his art. 


@@@@@


doc= 7250


Davies, Jonathan (bap. 1737, d. 1809), schoolmaster, was born at Eton College, where he was baptized on 26 June 1737, the son of John and Sarah Davies. He was nicknamed by his pupils Barber, which may indicate his father's job. He was a scholar at Eton and proceeded to King's College, Cambridge, whence he matriculated at Easter 1756. Elected a Craven scholar in 1757, he graduated BA in 1760 and proceeded MA in 1763. He returned to Eton as assistant master, appointed by Edward Barnard, in 1760. On the resignation of the very unsuccessful John Foster in 1773 he became headmaster. The following year he became rector of Scaldwell in Northamptonshire. As headmaster he somewhat restored Eton's fortunes, and the number of boys rose from below 250 to above 400, and many subsequently distinguished men were educated there in his time. Memoirs recall his loud voice and fondness for good living. He had his troubles too, though in general he proved more acceptable to the boys than to the masters. He was an exacting headmaster and his staff collectively offered their resignations in 1783; in their absence from duty the boys became rebellious, which compelled the masters to return to re-establish order. Davies prudently closed the school early for the Christmas holidays. 
When Provost Barnard died in 1781 Davies might have expected to succeed him, but George III appointed his personal favourite, William Hayward Roberts, and Davies was made a canon of Windsor as a consolation. He did, however, succeed Roberts in December 1791 and continued until his death at Eton on 5 December 1809; he was buried at Eton. He had already restored some prizes which had lapsed, and by his will he created a scholarship for Eton scholars who were not elected to King's, and left $1000 to found a classical scholarship in his name at Cambridge, similar to the Craven scholarship which he had won. He also left $2000 to King's College. 


@@@@@


doc= 7251


Davies, Lady Lucy Clementina (1795-1879), author, was born at the chateau of St Germain, France, on 21 November 1795. Her father, commonly called Lord Leon Maurice Drummond de Melfort (1761-1826), was the fourth son of James Drummond, third duke of Melfort in the Jacobite peerage and in the peerage of France, who would have been earl of Melfort in the peerage of Scotland but for the attainder of his ancestor. Her mother (died 1824) was Marie Elizabeth Luce de Longuemare. The attainder was reversed in favour of her brother, George Drummond, sixth duke of Melfort, who became fifth earl of Perth and second earl of Melfort, in 1853, and she was granted a patent of precedence as an earl's daughter. She was educated in Edinburgh under Miss Playfair, sister of Professor Sir Lyon Playfair, and her time was divided between England and France. She married, on 8 September 1823, at Marylebone, Middlesex, Francis Henry Davies, a registrar of the court of chancery, who died at Koblenz on the Rhine on 22 October 1863, aged seventy-two. They had one son and two daughters, including Lucy Elizabeth Drummond Sale-Barker. 
She died on 27 April 1879 at 22 Palace Gardens Terrace, Kensington, London, the home of John Sale-Barker, barrister, the second husband of her daughter Lucy Elizabeth. In 1872 she published two volumes entitled 'Recollections of Society in France and England', containing her family history and particulars of the court of France under the Bourbons and the Bonapartes. 


@@@@@


doc= 7252


Davies, Mary Ann (1743/4-1818), instrumentalist and singer, was the daughter of the flautist and composer Richard Davies (died 1773) and sister of the soprano Cecilia Davies. She is often found in reference books as Marianne Davies, the form of her name that she used when writing in French. At her first public appearance at the age of seven at Hickford's Great Room, London, on 30 April 1751 she played a harpsichord concerto by Handel and two flute concertos (one composed by herself) and sang. Two songs composed by her father in praise of her musical skills were published in the early 1750s. Mary Ann had annual benefit concerts in London until 1761; she continued to perform on both flute and harpsichord but was not advertised as singing again until 1760, when she also played an organ concerto. In autumn 1755 she went with her father to Dublin, where she played the flute between the acts at the Smock Alley Theatre. Back in London, she played the Irish tune 'Ellen a Roon' at Covent Garden on 23 March 1756. 
Mary Ann was the first to play Benjamin Franklin's new version of the musical glasses, his glassychord or armonica, introducing the instrument to the public at Bath and Bristol in January 1762. It became the family's main means of livelihood. For several weeks a venue was hired where Mary Ann gave performances on the armonica, sometimes accompanied by her father on the flute; she sang to her own armonica accompaniment and played the flute and harpsichord. Private demonstrations of the armonica were given and Mary Ann taught the harpsichord and singing. Such series took place in London in 1762-4. Mary Ann played the armonica at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, in the winter of 1763-4 and then gave armonica demonstrations and sang in Dublin oratorio performances organized by Passerini. The Davies family travelled to Paris after their 1764 London concerts and Mary Ann next played the armonica in London between June and August 1767. Her young sister, Cecilia, sang at the last three of these concerts. 
The Davies family then began a European tour, armed with letters of recommendation from J. C. Bach and others stressing their musicality, virtue, and Roman Catholicism. In Vienna the sisters found favour with Empress Maria Theresa and lodged in the same house as Johann Adolf Hasse, who composed 'L'armonica', a cantata with words by Pietro Metastasio, for them to perform at a royal wedding in June 1769. Metastasio praised Mary Ann's skill and the 'uncommonly sweet, and celestial tones' of her instrument (Burney, 'Metastasio', 83). The family went on to Italy, and had a joyful reunion with the Mozart family at Milan in September 1771. (The date of their first meeting is not known.) In 1772 Cecilia sang at opera houses in Naples and Florence, after which the family returned to London. 
With Cecilia's success Mary Ann no longer needed to give armonica performances. In her journal Fanny Burney blamed Mary Ann for Cecilia's problems at the Italian Opera in London. She described her as 'short, crooked & 'squat'' ('Early Journals', 106). Mary Ann became ill and the sisters returned to the continent, meeting Franklin in Paris in 1778. In April 1783, after a further lengthy illness and the loss of their money through a failed investment, Mary Ann wrote from Florence to Franklin, her 'worthy Friend and Benefactor', unsuccessfully seeking his help in obtaining a pension from Marie Antoinette. The sisters were enabled to return to England in 1786 by the proceeds of a concert, at which they both performed, arranged by English residents of Florence at the instigation of the second earl of Mount Edgcumbe. Cecilia obtained a few more engagements but they later supported themselves by giving music lessons. Mary Ann was in poor health by 1813 and died in London, in late December 1818. She was buried on 5 January 1819 at St Marylebone. Cecilia remained devoted to her memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 7253


Davies, Myles (b. 1662, d. in or after 1719), bibliographer, was born at Tre'r Abad, in the parish of Whitford, Flintshire, the son of George Davies and Elizabeth Blount. The family were Roman Catholics, and on 28 September 1686 Davies was admitted into the English College at Rome; he took the oath on 10 May 1687 and was ordained priest on 17 April 1688. He left on 15 October 1688 with a letter from Cardinal Philip Howard, protector of the college, to the bishop who had jurisdiction in Wales. According to the dedication of his recantation of 1705, he had been educated in the seminaries of St Omer, Douai, Liege, Paris, and Rome; after his return he acted as 'missioner and popish emissary in Worcestershire, Glocestershire, Herefordshire, Flintshire, &c. and popish confessor and chaplain to the Roman catholick families at Hill-End, at Malvern and Blackmore Park, and others, near the city of Worcester' (Davies, 'Recantation', title-page). He explains in the preface that when abroad he had gone under his mother's family name of Blount, but that in Britain he had been known as Pollet. The recantation, embodying a sermon on 'Revelation' 18:4, is dedicated to William Beveridge, later bishop of St Asaph, as a result of whose ministry at St Peter Cornhill Davies eventually conformed to the Church of England. His career for the next ten years is obscure, but he seems to have taught French and Italian, and taken part in religious controversy (from an extreme anti-Catholic and anti-Jesuit angle), though this gained him no advancement in the church. He also refers to himself on the title-pages of his later publications as a barrister-at-law or a counsellor, but there is no evidence that he was a member of any of the inns of court. His education had, however, equipped him to write adulatory verse in Latin, which, like his later books, he dedicated to persons of eminence (including royalty after 1715), often without receiving any money in return, but rather ridicule and humiliation. 
Davies began the series of volumes later entitled 'Athenae Britannicae' in 1715, with ''Eikon mikro-biblike', sive, Icon libellorum, or, A Critical History of Pamphlets... by a Gentleman of the Inns of Court'. It was reissued in the following year under the author's name, with the title 'Athenae Britannicae', and this title, an allusion perhaps to the author's origins, recurs spasmodically in the subsequent volumes. In total there are six volumes, all except volume 4 in octavo format; the imprint suggests that they were issued at Davies's expense, from the corner of Little Queen Street, Holborn, London, which was perhaps where the author was living. They contain a great deal of bibliographical information about pamphlets and controversial writings, evidently gleaned from libraries in London, and perhaps Oxford, which Davies frequented. Rancour against the Church of Rome, and against the Jesuits in particular, is omnipresent. The fourth volume, in substantial quarto format, collects several series of educational 'posts', in the newly popular periodical form, notably a 'Lawyer's Post' in fourteen numbers, though whether these were separately distributed is unclear. Volume 6, 'Containing the present and former state of physick, diseases, patients, quacks and doctors', with dedications to eminent members of the profession, may indicate that Davies, having exhausted the benevolence of the church and the law, was cultivating medicine. The latest date in any part of the 'Athenae Britannicae' is 1719, and Davies may have died about that time or shortly after, presumably in London. 
The incoherence of Davies's method and presentation have obscured the true bibliographical merits and lively style of his books, which are not as rare as they have been thought to be. Isaac D'Israeli, to whom Davies's biography was otherwise unknown, drew a colourful picture of Davies as a 'Mendicant Author, the hawker of his own works' (D'Israeli, 1.67), whose life was passed in the study of languages and the sciences, who was 'not only surrounded by his books, but with the more urgent companions of a wife and family' (ibid., 1.70), 'while his faculties appear to have been disordered from the simplicity of his nature, and driven to madness by indigence and insult' (ibid., 1.67). 


@@@@@


doc= 7254


Davies, Owen (1752-1830), Welsh Wesleyan Methodist minister, was one of twin sons born in Wrexham to Owen Davies ('b'. 1724/5), a tailor; he was baptized on 28 March 1752. He went to London in his youth and then moved to Brentford, where he became a Wesleyan Methodist. There he married a widow, Mrs Hemans, who was a schoolmistress at Ealing, and whose son Thomas also entered the Methodist ministry. In 1789 Davies was appointed an itinerant preacher, and, in 1800, on the establishment of the Welsh Wesleyan Mission, he was sent to Wales as superintendent to work alongside John Hughes (1776-1843). 
Davies was a capable administrator and a persuasive preacher. Although he was unable to preach fluently or write in Welsh, several of his works were translated from English. These include a defence of Wesleyan Methodism, a criticism of Calvinism, a catechism for children, and collections of sermons. He died in Liverpool on 12 January 1830 and was buried there at the Brunswick Methodist Chapel; his main achievement was to have done much to lay the foundations of Wesleyan Methodism in Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 7255


Davies, Richard (c.1505-1581), bishop of St David's and biblical translator, was born at Plas y Person, Gyffin, Caernarvonshire, the son of Dafydd ap Gronw, curate of Gyffin in the diocese of Bangor, and his 'wife', Sioned, daughter of Dafydd ap Richard; such clerical marriages were common in Wales before the Reformation. Both parents were of gentle stock; Davies's father was descended from the line of Ithel Felyn and his mother from Ednowain Bendew. He was reputedly born in either 1501 or 1509, although a date of about 1505 would best fit other facts known about him. No certainty exists concerning his early education, but his kinsman, a leading poet, Gruffudd ab Ieuan ap Llywelyn Fychan ('c'.1485-1553), seems to have given him the run of his library. He entered New Inn Hall, Oxford, about 1522 or 1523, where he graduated MA in 1530 and BTh in 1536. He was created DTh at London on 30 October 1566 by virtue of a commission from the University of Oxford. 
It was at Oxford in his youth that Davies appears to have been converted to his reforming beliefs. His movements between 1536 and 1549 are obscure; but he may have remained at the university and may also have been the canon called Richard Davies preferred at St Asaph in 1540. He was certainly presented by Edward VI to the living of Maidsmorton, Buckinghamshire, in 1549 and to neighbouring Burnham, a traditional stronghold of Lollardy, in 1550. Such royal patronage strongly suggests protestant sympathies on his part. This is further attested by his taking advantage of the act of parliament of 1549 to marry Dorothy, the daughter of Thomas Woodforde, gentleman, of Brightwell, Burnham. Following the accession of Queen Mary, Davies was summoned to appear before the privy council on 17 September 1553 -- presumably on account of his heretical opinions. By December 1553 he had been replaced as vicar of Burnham. Richard Davies may also be the married cleric of that name ejected from Northales, Suffolk, in 1555. In the same year, he and his wife and family withdrew into exile in Europe. His name is found in the city records of Frankfurt am Main in 1555 and 1557, but not in those of Geneva, where Sir John Wynn believed that Davies had taken refuge, a claim that has been followed by many later historians. While he was in Frankfurt Davies sided with the more conservative wing of the exiles who stood by the 'Book of Common Prayer'. His contacts with exiles like Richard Cox and Edmund Grindal, both to be influential leaders of the Elizabethan church, may well have been of considerable influence in shaping his later career. 
Davies returned from Europe in 1559 following Elizabeth I's accession in the previous November. In July 1559 he was appointed to lead the panel of royal visitors entrusted with enforcing the Elizabethan church settlement in the four dioceses of Wales and those of Worcester and Hereford. Simultaneously, contemporary visitors in the county of Buckingham restored his living of Burnham to him. In the course of his own visitation, begun at Llandaff in August 1559, Davies was elected as bishop of St Asaph on 4 December 1559. He was consecrated at Lambeth on 21 January 1560 by Archbishop Parker and was allowed to retain 'in commendam' his two Buckinghamshire livings, the rectory of Llansanffraid-ym-Mechain, Montgomeryshire, and a canonry at St Asaph. His tenure at St Asaph was short, but not without significance. In response to an enquiry from Archbishop Parker of November 1560, he dispatched a valuable report on the state of his clergy: how many were resident, in orders, married, learned, and able to preach. He also established friendly relations with a circle of learned humanists in his diocese, of whom the most notable were William Salesbury, Humphrey Llwyd, and Gruffudd Hiraethog. 
On 21 May 1561 Davies was moved to St David's to succeed Thomas Young, who had been translated to York as archbishop. For the next twenty years he would be the leading figure in the Welsh church. His new diocese was much the largest and most lucrative bishopric in Wales. It sprawled over about three-quarters of south Wales, was mountainous and thinly populated (about 80,000-90,000 inhabitants in 1563), had poor communications, and was difficult to administer. It had been the scene of fierce conflicts, religious and personal; most of its livings were poorly remunerated; there was a shortage of clergy, particularly of educated men who could preach; and a majority of its population was Welsh-speaking and conservative by religious inclination, but no provision had yet been made in the way of Welsh bibles or prayer books. Davies's sole surviving register, dating from 1561 to 1565, although giving evidence of his diligence in seeking, ordaining, and installing suitable clergy, also reveals the very slow improvement being achieved. 
More important was the lead Davies gave in seeking a Welsh translation of the scriptures, his countrymen's most pressing religious need. It was he, William Salesbury, and Humphrey Llwyd who were probably responsible for securing the private act of parliament of 1563, which authorized the translation into Welsh of the 'Bible' and the 'Book of Common Prayer' and their use within all parishes where the language normally spoken by the population was Welsh. Davies also appears to have steered the passage of the act through the House of Lords. To expedite work on the translation he invited Salesbury to the episcopal palace at Abergwili. Salesbury undertook the bulk of the work, being responsible for translating the 'Book of Common Prayer' and most of the 'New Testament'. Davies's share consisted of translating '1 Timothy', 'Hebrews', 'James', and 1 and 2 'Peter', while the precentor of St David's, Thomas Huet, translated the book of 'Revelation'. Both the prayer book and the 'New Testament' were published in 1567, the prayer book appearing first. 
Davies was an accomplished author, writing Welsh with greater ease and fluency than his more celebrated collaborator, Salesbury. He also prefaced the 'New Testament' with a highly influential letter addressed to the Welsh nation ('Epistol at y Cembru'). This rewrote Welsh church history from a protestant standpoint from the time of the ancient Britons onwards. It maintained that the island of Britain had first been converted to Christianity by Joseph of Arimathea in apostolic times. It emphasized two cardinal points in order to rebut central criticisms usually levied against the Reformation in Wales: that it was newfangled heresy; and that it was the faith of Saxons. Conversely, Davies contended that it was the religion of the earliest forefathers of the Welsh, and that superstitious Roman beliefs and practices had been introduced into Wales at the point of the sword by the papal emissary, Augustine of Canterbury, and his Anglo-Saxon minions. This revamping of traditional history was to be extremely influential for centuries to come. Davies also participated in the English 'Bible' of 1568 known as the 'Bishops' Bible'. At Parker's invitation he translated the books of the 'Old Testament' from 'Joshua' to '2 Samuel'. He and Salesbury had originally intended to translate the 'Old Testament' into Welsh, and they continued with their task after 1567, but never succeeded in completing it. According to Sir John Wynn, their failure to do so was caused by a quarrel between them over a single word, but it may very well have been due to a difference over the wider issue of how best to present the Welsh language in print. 
Davies was, without doubt, one of the most active and vocal champions of the Reformation in Wales. His 'Letter to the Welsh nation', his comprehensive diocesan report (1570), and the 'Funeral Sermon' (1577) on the earl of Essex are some of the most forthright statements in favour of protestant reform issued by any Welshman during the period. He condemned the 'great number' in his diocese who were 'slow and cold in the true service of God, some careless for any religion and some that wish the Romish religion', while others indulged in 'pilgrimages to wells and watchings in chapels and desert places' and were 'bearers of superstition and idolatry' (Thomas, 33, 43). He was unsparing in his criticism of the clergy's inadequacies and their failure to preach regularly, and urged the privy council to take appropriate remedial steps. He further drew the council's attention to the desperate poverty of many livings and how this inevitably led to pluralism, non-residence, and failure to hold services regularly. He criticized the tendency among clergy to 'serve three or four, yea sometimes five livings, but never one aright', and to 'come hither galloping from another parish' (ibid., 43), so that the parishioners were little or nothing the better for it. 
Himself a learned man, and praised by contemporaries not only for his knowledge of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew but also for his familiarity with French and German, Davies was anxious to maintain his own contacts with scholarly circles. He was in correspondence with Matthew Parker and Sir William Cecil on topics of mutual interest, and kept up his links with the humanist circle around Edmund Grindal and the poet Spenser. In the latter's 'Shepherd's Calendar' Davies is very probably the original on whom one of the shepherds, Diggon Davie, is based. He maintained at Abergwili a lively and bountiful household, the subject of much praise by some of his contemporaries. Regular preaching of the gospel was heard there, and he hosted a wide range of scholars, clerics, and men of letters. Davies also recognized the pressing need to raise the level of education among the clergy. To this end he was associated with his friend Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex, whom he praised so warmly in the 'Funeral Sermon' to him as an outstanding embodiment of the virtues of protestant aristocratic humanism. In 1576 they joined together to take a leading role in founding Queen Elizabeth Grammar School at Carmarthen, which was to make an invaluable contribution to the education of the clergy in the diocese for centuries to come. On the other hand, Davies was himself censured for bestowing valuable benefices on friends and relatives. He placed Philip Sidney, son of his friend Sir Henry Sidney, as a prebendary when only ten years of age. His own sons, Peregrine and Gerson, also benefited from their father's solicitude. The former became archdeacon of Cardigan at the age of ten, and the latter received preferment worth $110 a year when he was seventeen. Davies's successor at St David's, Marmaduke Middleton, accused him of alienating the bishop's rights of advowson over all livings worth more than $10 per annum, although the chapter records show him to have granted only 38 out of about 150 within his gift. 
Davies blamed the laity for many of the deficiencies apparent in the contemporary church and among its clergy. He was appalled by the 'insatiable covetousness and ambition' that reigned on all sides: the 'whole world seeketh to be made blessed by worldly goods and possessions' (Davies, ciii). He accused the office-holding gentry of being responsible for conniving at pluralism and simony and highlighted their reluctance to impose discipline on clerics and laymen: 'they continue the kingdom of Antichrist, defend papistry, superstition and idolatry, pilgrimages to wells and blind chapels', 'procure the wardens of churches to perjury, to conceal images, rood lofts and altars' (Davies, ciii-civ). He unreservedly condemned the absence of scruple on the part of what he described as the 'insatiable cormorants' with which his diocese abounded. The most damaging loss inflicted by these predators was occasioned by George Cary, groom of the queen's chamber, who procured a commission of concealment to inquire into the state of the church of Llanddewibrefi, which he claimed to be a collegiate church being unlawfully withheld from the crown. There ensued a prolonged legal battle which did not end until after Davies's death, with Cary victorious. The victor was then permitted by the queen to lease the church and its prebends for $40 a year, which he promptly sublet for $140 a year. The outcome was that the annual revenues of St David's diocese were reduced from $457 to $263. 
Davies's talents as an administrator were freely employed on secular as well as religious affairs. He attended the House of Lords and the upper house of convocation regularly, though without playing an outstanding role in either. He served as a justice of the peace and as a member of the council in the marches, which commissioned him to act on its behalf to execute a variety of administrative tasks. The most taxing of the duties assigned to him was to act as the privy council's representative in dealing with piracy along the south Wales coast in 1565, 1572, and 1578. Piracy was increasingly prevalent in south-western Wales and was made all the worse by the complicity of the local population. Coping with it was a thankless and burdensome task, which led to friction between the bishop and two prominent local landowners, Sir John Perrott and Richard Vaughan. Another neighbour with whom Davies quarrelled was a fellow member of the council in the marches, Fabian Phillips, who took him to task for his laxity over moral delinquency in the diocese and for blatantly siding with his son-in-law, William Penry, in a dispute between the latter and Phillips's kinsmen. 
Davies was the subject of a number of tributes by contemporaries. He was, as might be expected, lavishly applauded by the Welsh poets Wiliam Llyn, Wiliam Cynwal, Hywel ap Syr Mathew, and Robert Middleton, all of whom had been recipients of his generosity. Two leading antiquaries also testified enthusiastically to his merits. Sir John Wynn described him as a 'rare scholar and especially an Hebrician', and spoke of how his heart warmed 'in recording the memory of so worthy a man' (Wynn, 64-5). George Owen, for his part, declared that Davies was a: 'man no less in his time much reverenced for his rare virtues and excellency in learning... than honoured for his public hospitality and liberality... bearing himself as he was inwardly affected of the good, and never detracted but of the bad. (Owen, 1.240)' Davies made his will on 13 September 1581, in which he provided for his widow, three sons, and two daughters. He died on 7 November 1581 at the bishop's palace in Abergwili, Carmarthenshire, and was buried in the churchyard at Abergwili, as requested in his will. His original gravestone has disappeared, but he is commemorated as one of the translators of the Welsh 'Bible' in the national memorial erected at St Asaph in 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 7256


Davies, Richard (bap. 1635, d. 1708), Quaker preacher and autobiographer, was baptized on 22 March 1635 at Welshpool, Montgomeryshire, the son of Edward Davies. The name of his mother is unknown. 
Richard Davies's parents had a small estate and he was given 'a little learning' (Davies, 13). Brought up an Anglican, at twelve or thirteen he was troubled concerning the state of his soul. He attached himself to the Independents (fairly numerous in the area), attended their meetings in various parishes, and even wrote some of their sermons. He was bound apprentice to a felt maker of the same persuasion but he soon eagerly espoused the beliefs of a visiting Quaker. His lifelong convincement had begun. The fury of the Independents was unabated (for Davies's apostasy was not exceptional), especially that of his master's wife, who severely assaulted him because he addressed her in 'the pure language of 'Thee' and 'Thou'' (ibid., 25). Ostracized by relations, neighbours, and former friends, he was overwhelmed by depression and he long remembered sitting 'under an ash tree, weeping and mourning' (ibid., 35). A handful of kindred spirits, widely scattered and without a home of their own, held meetings on the sheltered side of a hill. As occasionally happened to Friends, they were looked upon as witches. 
Apprenticeship completed, Davies settled in his trade in London, where he married a Quaker at the Horselydown meeting, Southwark, on 26 June 1659. She died in 1705, and may be the Tace Davies who signed the Quaker women's petition against tithes in 1659. However, Davies became convinced that God intended him to bear witness in Wales and to Welshpool he returned with his wife. They were later compared to Zacharias and Elisabeth 'walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless' (Davies, 52). There speedily followed bouts of imprisonment, for instance in Montgomery in 1660 and in Shrewsbury in 1661. They did not, however, last long in his case. Seldom a 'close' prisoner, he was usually allowed almost unlimited freedom, which he used to great effect. 
Davies was a central figure in the monthly meetings of north Wales Quakers, notably at Dolobran, Meifod parish, Montgomeryshire, where Quakers were relatively strong. He was one of the foremost apostles of Quakerism in Wales, often preaching in Welsh, an indispensable requirement if Quakerism was to prosper in Wales. At Whitehall he spoke Welsh to his countryman, the querulous secretary of state, Sir Leoline Jenkins, concerning the first appearance of Christianity in the British Isles. He was one of two selected to distribute devotional books sent to Wales from Devonshire House and it was he who successfully pressed for a measure of devolution whereby Welsh Friends had their own yearly meetings. 
In confrontations with high and low, Davies avoided the self-righteous admonitions not infrequently delivered with gusto by some early Quakers. His calm, courteous demeanour tended to disarm antagonists, but there was more to it than sanctified tact. It was his shining sincerity. He may not have entirely won the day with Edward, third Baron Herbert of Cherbury, but he was on the best of terms with Bishop William Lloyd of St Asaph (later one of the 'Seven Bishops'). Although his exchanges at Whitehall with Leoline Jenkins began badly, they concluded cordially, Jenkins thereafter apparently moderating his asperity towards Quakers. At Oxford in 1706 unruly students interrupted a Quaker meeting, but having heard Davies they sobered down, some remaining until the end of the proceedings. 
Davies consulted lawyers in order to discover loopholes in the law. Thomas Corbet, 'the Welch counsellor' (Davies, 104), as he became known, a barrister who lived in Davies's neighbourhood, often advised him. Corbet was largely instrumental in securing George Fox's release from Worcester gaol in 1675, having argued in Westminster Hall before Sir Matthew Hale and others that no one should be imprisoned upon the writ of 'praemunire', which had long oppressed Quakers. Fox acknowledged Davies's role in arranging for Corbet to act on his behalf. 
Davies was well known to English Friends. He attended meetings in the Severn and the Thames valleys, frequently accompanied, as elsewhere, by his daughter Tace. On one occasion he was away from home for three months. To London Friends he was a familiar figure. His reputation was such that the yearly meeting of Friends in England appointed him one of twelve to wait upon Queen Anne at Windsor to thank her for the continued protection of Friends. Davies, it seems, was the chief spokesman. He was one of thirteen who signed the frame of government for Pennsylvania drawn up by Penn. 
In his autobiography Davies says little concerning the exodus of Quakers from Wales to Pennsylvania, much in the minds of Friends from 1681 onwards. Yet we know that he bought 5000 acres there, subsequently reselling them to Friends in small parcels. Presumably he was acting as agent for prospective emigrants. Why he did not himself leave cannot now be determined. Perhaps, like other Friends, he was hostile to the migration which denuded Welsh Quakers at home of several of their sturdier members. 
Another matter invites speculation. Quakers and Roman Catholics were not natural allies, especially when also divided by a social chasm. Nevertheless, Richard Davies spoke of the first marquess of Powis, the premier Catholic aristocrat, and his wife as 'my particular friends' (Davies, 98). At Powis Castle he sought the aid of the marquess, who allowed him to use his name to curb the excesses of a justice of the peace who had maltreated Friends. Davies called upon him, too, at his home in Lincoln's Inn Fields in 1685 to be advised concerning the sufferings of Friends. This he did after 'I had ended my country business with him' (ibid., 127), which may mean that Davies had some oversight, hitherto unrevealed, of Powis's estate. Even so, it was an intriguing relationship. 
There is no known likeness of Davies, but one Friend recalled 'his gravity and grey hairs, his manly presence, and lovely countenance, especially when he stood up in a meeting' (Davies, 11). A 1667 halfpenny trade token of his as felt maker has survived. Glowing testimonies to his memory by Friends provide few hard facts. A brief tribute by his daughter Tace is more informative, indicating, in addition, that sweetness of disposition had been transmitted from one generation to another. Davies's true memorial is his autobiography, which first appeared in 1710; nine editions followed and a translation into Welsh in 1840. 
At an unspecified date, Davies moved a short distance from Welshpool to Cloddiau Cochion. He died at his home there on 22 March 1708 and on 25 March was laid to rest close to his wife in the nearby burial-ground which he had helped to secure for Friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 7257


Davies, Richard (d. 1761), physician, was a native of Shropshire, of whose early life nothing is known. On 19 August 1726 he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, at that time under the presidency of his relative, John Davies (1679-1732). He graduated there as BA in 1730, MA in 1734, and MD in 1748. He was a fellow between 1730 and 1740. He was also elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 8 June 1738, but withdrew two years later. He went on to practise in Shrewsbury, and later in Bath. 
Davies's main professional interest was the analysis of human blood, and he published several works on this subject. He died in Bath at the end of 1761, leaving a widow, Jane. He was buried there on 25 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 7258


Davies, Robert (1658-1710), naturalist and antiquary, was born on 15 March 1658, probably at Gwysane, Flintshire, one of eight children of Mutton Davies (1634-1684) and his wife, Elizabeth Wilbraham (1641-1678). His father was a great traveller and significantly improved his house and gardens at Llannerch, Denbighshire. Davies matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 2 April 1677 and became a member of the Inner Temple. He subsequently served as an alderman of Denbighshire (1685) and high sheriff both of Denbighshire (1687) and of Flintshire (1704). He married Letitia, daughter of Edward Vaughan and a granddaughter of Sir John Vaughan of Trawsgoed, Cardiganshire, on 2 December 1681. They had at least three children. He continued a family tradition of scholarly enquiry. His great-grandfather Robert Davies (1581-1633), or perhaps his grandfather Robert Davies (1616-1666), prepared 'A catalogue of ye British names of plants', a list of some 250 Welsh names of plants which was printed in the second edition of John Gerard's 'The Herball, or, Generall Historie of Plants' (1636). His great-grandfather also seems to have been actively interested in his library, judging from a few references to books and manuscripts in his correspondence. His grandfather Robert Davies was called upon to assist the genealogist Randle Holmes in his work. 
Robert Davies (1658-1710) built upon the foundation collections which he had inherited to create at Llannerch one of the major libraries of seventeenth-century Wales and one which, to their great credit, he and his heirs opened to Welsh scholars. A catalogue compiled in 1740 listed 42 Latin manuscripts (including 'Liber Landavensis'), 30 English manuscripts, and 16 Welsh manuscripts (including the translations made by their kinsman Bishop Richard Davies for the 1567 'New Testament' in Welsh). Robert Davies was but one of a circle of antiquaries and naturalists in north Wales: these included Thomas Price, William Maurice, and later Humphrey Humphreys and Josiah Babington, with whom Edward Lhuyd formed close links and who gave the Oxford scholar information and practical support. 
Most of Davies's correspondence with his wife deals with personal and family matters, but a few of her letters refer to their gardens at Llannerch. Other letters refer to the purchasing of books and manuscripts and to the repair of his telescope. His correspondence with Edward Lhuyd, and indirectly with Josiah Babington, reveals more of his serious interest in contemporary Welsh scholarship. He gave Lhuyd informed views on manuscript collections, Welsh history, local antiquities, seals, heraldry, inscriptions, and natural history, and also consulted manuscripts at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford. Though little of their correspondence has survived, it is clear that the two were on friendly terms. Davies contributed generously to the costs of Lhuyd's research tour of the British Isles and Lhuyd listed some of the contents of his library in 'Archaeologia Britannica' (1707). Davies died on 8 July 1710 at Llannerch, Denbighshire, and was buried at Mold church, Flintshire. 
His son, Robert Davies (1685/6-1728), pursued similar interests and was acknowledged as a serious antiquary. He studied at Brasenose College, Oxford, matriculating on 27 June 1702. He died on 22 May 1728. A notable effigy of him by Henry Cheere was erected in Mold church, showing him attired in Roman costume, and a portrait of him is at Gwysane. Robert senior's grandson Robert Davies (1710-1763) continued the tradition of scholarly patronage. He was a friend of the Welsh scholar and poet Evan Evans (Ieuan Fardd), who referred to him warmly and composed an elegy to him. His son, Peter Davies, died unmarried and intestate in 1785, and the estate and the library were divided and passed to his two sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 7259


Davies, Robert (1769-1835), Welsh-language poet, was born in the parish of Nantglyn, Denbighshire. He was a tailor by trade, and for four years (1800-04) lived in London, where he filled at intervals the offices of bard and secretary to the Gwyneddigion Society. He was a warm supporter of the eisteddfodau patronized by the society at the end of the eighteenth century, and of the provincial eisteddfodau of the early nineteenth century. On returning to Wales he settled at Nantglyn, near Denbigh, from which he took his bardic name, Bardd Nantglyn. He occupied the bardic chair for Powys at the Wrexham eisteddfod in 1820 by reason of his prize elegy on the death of George III, which contains his famous line 'Beibl i bawb o bobl y byd' ('A bible for everyone in the world'), although this has also been attributed to Robert Williams (1744-1815). On different occasions he obtained eleven medals for his prize poems, including several awards given at Beaumaris in 1832. He also acted as adjudicator in some of the competitions, including the controversial Denbigh eisteddfod of 1819, in which Edward Hughes of Bodfari was given the prize instead of Dewi Wyn (David Owen). 
Most of Davies's compositions are published in his work entitled 'Diliau barddas' (1827). He also wrote an excellent Welsh grammar, 'Leithiadur neu ramadeg Cymraeg' (1808), which had run into five editions by 1848, and which had a profound effect on poets throughout the century. Davies died on 1 December 1835 and was buried at Nantglyn, where he had been for some years the parish clerk. 


@@@@@


doc= 7260


Davies, Robert (1793-1875), antiquary, eldest son of Peter Davies and his wife, Ann, daughter of Robert Rhodes, was born at York on 19 August 1793, and educated there at St Peter's School. Having qualified as a solicitor in 1814, he practised for many years in York. He married in 1826 Elizabeth, youngest daughter of George Cattle of York. 
As town clerk from 1828 until 1848, Davies was active in local implementations of the 'Municipal Reform Act', and left his legal partnership in 1834 to serve the new corporation. He was a member of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society from 1824 and his legal and antiquarian interests resulted in an edition of 'The Freeman's Roll of the City of York' (1835) and publication of 'Extracts from the Municipal Records of the City of York' (1843). After his retirement he was elected a magistrate and continued his scholarly work, concentrating on more recent history. His 'Memoir of the York Press' (1868) remains an important source for the history of printing, and his posthumously published 'Walks through the City of York' (1880), edited by his widow from papers read to the Yorkshire Philosophical Society, adopted an approach to topographical and historical writing that has often been copied. He contributed to publications of the Surtees Society and other local societies, and was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 22 December 1842. Davies died at his residence in The Mount, in the city of York, on 23 August 1875, and was buried in York cemetery on 29 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 7261


Davies, Rowland (1649-1721), dean of Cork, was born at Gille Abbey, near Cork, the son of Rowland Davies, a customs officer of Bandon, co. Cork, and Mary Smith ('nee' Scudamore). He was descended from an ancient Herefordshire family and, having received his early education in Cork under Mr Scragg, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 23 February 1665; he graduated BA in 1671, and proceeded MA in 1681 and LLD in 1706. Initially he planned to enter the medical profession but on 9 April 1671 priest's orders were conferred upon him, and on 11 May he was admitted to the prebend of Kilnaglory, in the diocese of Cork. He was collated on 26 October 1673, and in 1676 granted the prebend of Iniscarra, in the diocese of Cloyne. In 1674 he exchanged his prebend of Kilnaglory for that of Iniskenny, in the same diocese; and he was instituted on 10 February 1679 to the deanery of Ross by the archbishop of Cashel. To these benefices was added the prebend of Liscleary, in the diocese of Cork, on 20 October 1679. He composed a detailed manuscript 'Account of the state of the diocese of Cork in 1682'. In 1674 he married Elizabeth (died 1715), daughter of Captain Robert Stannard and granddaughter of Archbishop Boyle of Armagh, lord chancellor of Ireland. 
Dreading the arrival of James II in Ireland, Davies left Cork in company with many others in March 1689, and sought employment in the ministry in England. Initially he was curate of Camberwell, Surrey, of which his fellow countryman Dr Richard Parr was vicar. Though he applied repeatedly for livings he was disappointed, but at Camberwell he faithfully discharged the duties of his profession. In July 1689, through the interest of friends, he was appointed by the corporation of Great Yarmouth to a lectureship there, which, however, in a few months he resigned. 
When William III sailed for Ireland Davies obtained an appointment as chaplain to one of his regiments, and he landed again in his native country on 11 May 1690. His arrival at Belfast and the active part he took at the battle of the Boyne, the siege of Limerick, and generally through the whole Irish campaign, are particularly recorded in his journal. He was, with many more, attainted by King James, but after the close of the war he regained his preferments. In 1693 he became vicar-general of Cloyne, an office for which from his knowledge of canon law he was well qualified. In 1695 the county of Cork publicly acknowledged his 'great services against the torys' (Bishop Downes's manuscripts, TCD). In 1707 he became precentor of Cork and, resigning the deanery of Ross in 1710, he succeeded to that of Cork, on the death of Dean Pomeroy, by patent dated 17 February. In the same year he was also presented to the rectory of Carrigaline, near Cork, which he resigned in 1717. 
Davies died at Dawstown, co. Cork, on 11 December 1721, and was buried in the family vault in Cork Cathedral, where there is an inscription to his memory and to those of three descendants. A fine portrait of him in his doctor's gown, and some of his manuscripts, were in the possession of his descendants in 1857. With his wife, who predeceased him on 28 February 1715, he had four sons who reached manhood, besides other sons who died young, and several daughters. One of his sons was preferred to the archdeaconry of Cloyne in 1742. 


@@@@@


doc= 7262


Davies, Rowland (1740-1797), composer and Roman Catholic priest, was born on 9 May 1740 in London, son of Rowland Davies and his wife, Jane Nicholas. He was a pupil of George Frideric Handel, and is said to have played the organ at the coronation of George III in Westminster Abbey in 1760. He converted to Catholicism and in December 1765 took the college oath at the English College at Douai, where he was ordained priest in 1772. While he was there he taught classics and philosophy. After returning to England he was stationed in turn at Cliff in Yorkshire, Warwick Street in London, and Bosworth Hall, the residence of Francis Fortescue Turville. He died on 16 March 1797, probably at Bosworth Hall. He composed a number of masses, a 'Te Deum', a 'Magnificat', and responses for the dead; none appears to have been published. 


@@@@@


doc= 7263


Davies, Sneyd (1709-1769), poet, was born on 30 October 1709 and baptized the next day in St Mary's Church, Shrewsbury. His father, John Davies (1668/9-1732), was rector and patron of Kingsland, Herefordshire, and prebendary of Hereford and St Asaph. His mother, Honora ('b'. 1668), daughter of Ralph Sneyd of Keele Hall, Staffordshire, was second cousin to John Dryden, the poet, and was the widow of Thomas Ravenscroft (died 1698). By her marriage to Davies she had three boys and a girl: Sneyd was the second and favourite son. Honora died before her second husband; he took as his second wife Isabella Hartstonge, widow of the bishop of Derry. 
Davies was king's scholar at Eton College (1724-9), was admitted as scholar at King's College, Cambridge, on 4 July 1729, and was fellow of King's (1732-3; BA, 1733; MA, 1737). His Eton friends included Charles Pratt (also a fellow of King's, Cambridge), afterwards Lord Camden, and Frederick Cornwallis, future archbishop of Canterbury. 
John Davies died in December 1732. He had quarrelled with his eldest son, John (1704-1735), so he bequeathed his rectory to Sneyd, who promptly took orders as deacon; he was ordained priest (Ely diocese) in December 1733. As a bachelor recluse at Kingsland, Davies amused himself with English and Latin poetical compositions and found a congenial crony in Timothy Thomas (died 1751), rector of nearby Presteigne, who shared his tastes as far as superior age and fatness permitted. Davies's letters to Camden and other old college friends express contentment with his humble rectory, but he was pleased when Cornwallis, on becoming bishop of Lichfield, made him his domestic chaplain in February 1750 and, over the next five years, appointed him canon residentiary, master of St John's Hospital, Lichfield (2 July 1751), prebendary of Longdon, and archdeacon of Derby (5 May 1755). 
In the 1750s Davies resided mainly in Lichfield, where he became known in literary circles. The young Anna Seward (1742-1809) wept 'tears of delight' at his 'voice of tremulously pathetic softness' and 'religious energies, struggling through constitutional timidity' ('Letters of Anna Seward'). No sermons of his are extant. He obtained a Cambridge DD degree in 1759 as a step to possible further preferment, and dropped hints to his old friend Lord Camden who, however, was unable or unwilling to oblige until Davies was too old and ill to care. 
Sneyd Davies was a poor horseman, except on a chamber-horse; he was fond of smoking his pipe, and had a passion for bowling. He was never married, and was singularly simple, modest, and unworldly. A lady having once taken a seat in his carriage, he showed his discretion by pulling up the blinds as he passed through the town. 
Davies never collected his poems. They include Latin verses, imitations of Horace's epistles, serious and burlesque imitations of Milton, whom he specially admired, and verses in the manner of Swift. Some appeared, initialled S. D., in collections (1732 and 1745) by his school and college friend John Whaley; nine were reprinted in Dodsley's 'Collection' (vols. 5 and 6, 1758). Davies helped to edit the Duncombes' 'Works of Horace in English Verse' (1757), contributed imitations to it anonymously, and received the dedication of the fourth volume. His 'Caractacus' (written in 1757 for an annual meeting of admirers of that hero on Caer Caradog) was first printed in Pennant's 'A Tour in Wales' (vol. 2, 1783). More poems appeared in 1780-81 in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and Nichols's 'Collection' (vols. 6 and 7); more again were printed in a rambling life of Davies by George Hardinge (1743-1816) in Nichols's 'Illustrations' (vol. 1, 1817). There are manuscript copies of his verses in Nottingham University and the British Library (Stowe MSS 5832, 5845). By 1761, in Bath for his health, Davies was weak and paralytic and suffered from irritable nerves; in 1763 he had a stroke. He died on 20 January 1769 and bequeathed Kingsland rectory (income $800 p.a.) to the Revd Richard Evans (1710-1797). 


@@@@@


doc= 7264


Davies, Thomas (c.1511-1573), bishop of St Asaph, was born possibly at Llanbedr-y-cennin, Caernarvonshire, the son of Dafydd ap Robert, a gentleman of substantial means of Caerhun in Arllechwedd Isaf and descendant of Sir Gruffudd Llwyd of Dinorwig and Tregarnedd, and Margaret, daughter of Rhys ap Wiliam, a descendant of Iarddur. He came from a family that served prominently in local administration, and was educated at Oxford, where he was influenced by religious reforms and obtained sinecure benefices in the dioceses of Bangor and St Asaph. He graduated LLD from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1548. 
Davies was appointed chancellor of Bangor Cathedral (1546), archdeacon of St Asaph (probably in 1558-61), and, on Bishop William Glyn's death in 1558, was granted by Cardinal Pole the custodianship of the spiritualities of Bangor diocese until 21 December 1559 when Rowland Meyrick was elected to the see. He accepted Mary I's changes and kept his preferments on her death. On Richard Davies's removal from St Asaph to St David's in 1561 he was elected bishop of that see. He was confirmed on 23 May, consecrated at Croydon on 26 May, and the temporalities were restored on 2 April 1562. Davies made sixteen presentations to livings, most of them of resident, hospitable, and scholarly Welsh clergy, such as Thomas Powell, rector of Llanfechain (1562) and the historian and antiquary David Powel, vicar of Rhiwabon (1576). 
Thomas Davies proceeded to establish a learned ministry in his diocese and emphasized the need to educate children in the protestant faith. In 1561 he issued diocesan council orders which stipulated that the catechism, the epistles, and the gospel were to be read in English and then in Welsh every Sunday to educate parishioners and children. The litany was to be sung or said on Wednesdays and Fridays and all 'feyned relyques and other superstycyons' were to be discarded. Also, after the ordination of priests and deacons on 31 October 1568, it was ordered that they were not to minister outside the diocese without the bishop's licence and were to use the 'New Testament' in Latin and English and Erasmus's paraphrase of them. They were also required to learn chapter 1 of St Paul's epistle to the 'Romans' and chapter 6 of the gospel of 'St John', to recite them in the bishop's presence, and to say morning and evening prayers daily. 
In 1563 Davies informed the privy council of the poor condition of his diocese owing to an ill-endowed clergy, non-residence, and pluralism, but proceeded to improve clerical standards and appoint schoolmasters. In 1570 he informed William Cecil that he had succeeded in reorganizing the diocese but requested that an ecclesiastical commission be appointed to review it. He held several sinecures but kept the rectories of Llanbedr-y-cennin and Trefriw, the comportionary rectory of Llandinam, and the living of Caerhun. He also retained the archdeaconry of St Asaph and the chancellorship of Bangor. These preferments were necessary in order that he might maintain a standard of living worthy of a bishop and be able to offer hospitality. Although William Salesbury lived in the diocese Davies seems not to have befriended him nor to have taken any part in his translation of the scriptures. However, with Bishop Richard Davies of St David's and Humphrey Llwyd, MP for Denbigh borough, he formed a Welsh lobby in parliament and was present in the House of Lords for the first two of three readings of the bill for a Welsh 'Bible' in 1563. He supported the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' in convocation (1563) and the disciplinary canons (1571). 
Thomas Davies was an administrator rather than a theologian and contributed significantly to the organization of his see under the new protestant order. In 1565 he sat on a commission for the suppression of piracy on the Flintshire coast, and on the Lords' committee dealing with the bill for keeping records in the shires of Wales (1563). He was bequeathed books in the will of Arthur Bulkeley, bishop of Bangor, and in turn left books and $10 in his will (19 April 1570) to Friars School, Bangor, and to Queens' College, Cambridge. He bequeathed his interest in a mill and lands at Abergele to that college towards maintaining a scholarship which, however, was not administered. His estate was divided between his wife and executor, Margaret (of whom no other details are known), and his daughter Katherine, wife of William Holland of Abergele. He was a supporter of the classical bards, and laudatory odes were composed for him by Robert ap Dafydd Llwyd, Sion Tudur, and Wiliam Cynwal. So highly regarded was hospitality at his palace that Sion Tudur and Sion Phylip disputed in verse their respective claims to enjoy his bountiful patronage. Davies died a rich man at Abergele, Denbighshire, on 16 October 1573, after completing his will, and was probably buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 7265


Davies, Sir Thomas (1631/2-1680), bookseller and lord mayor of London, was born between March 1631 and February 1632, one of the five children of John Davies (died 1652) of Old Jewry in the City of London, merchant adventurer and member of the Drapers' Company, and his wife, Mary (died 1665), daughter and heiress of Stephen Pecock and his wife, Elizabeth, sister of the 'infinitely rich' Hugh Audley. His grandfather was a Leicestershire man. Educated at St Paul's School, Davies was apprenticed to a bookseller in April 1648 and to his father in November 1648. The latter apprenticeship was probably a formality; John Davies died in a debtors' prison four years later, and Thomas was made free of the Stationers' Company in April 1655. He set up as a bookseller at the Sign of the Bible, St Paul's Churchyard, and entered into several joint publishing agreements between 1656 and 1662, apparently specializing in books in or translated from French and Latin. In 1662, Hugh Audley, who had made and changed a number of testamentary dispositions, finally gave his valuable property in Middlesex to Thomas and his brother Alexander Davies, and made Thomas one of his executors and residuary legatees. Alexander bought Thomas's share of the Middlesex land, and died in 1665, leaving his fortune to his daughter Mary, who married Sir Thomas Grosvenor; there were disputes as to whether Alexander had left money to Thomas, or died in his debt, but Thomas was, at any rate, a rich man. 
Davies became less active in the book trade (although as late as 1672 the copyrights of Milton's 'History of England' and the second part of 'Hudibras' passed through his hands), and entered civic life as alderman of the ward of Farringdon Without in 1667. As sheriff in the same year, he was present when the foundation stone of the new Royal Exchange was laid, and was knighted on that occasion, 'a strange turn methinks', as his old schoolfellow Samuel Pepys observed in an unfriendly note (diary, 23 Nov 1667); he also became a member of the governing body of his livery company. This entailed a payment of money to the company, which he did not make for many years. He became its master in 1668 and 1669, and neglected or refused to make the appropriate payment of venison on his election. In February 1669 he married Elizabeth, daughter of an alderman, William Ridges, with whom he had four sons. 
In 1676 Davies became lord mayor of London, which necessitated his transferral to the Drapers' Company, of which he became master in the following year. His mayoralty is commemorated by inscriptions on Lamb's Conduit (rebuilt, like the Royal Exchange, after the great fire) and the Monument, and his life by a monument in St Sepulchre's Church, where he was buried in 1680. He died about March or April 1680, leaving property in Yorkshire, and a house at Cressing in Essex, where his eldest son shot himself. He was survived by his wife. A report said to have been prepared for Charles II in 1672 described Davies as 'A mean spirited person; when he was Sheriff of London he would (in a blind tavern) be drunk with his bailiffs and sergeants... He seldom appears in any business but his own' ('GM', 516). 


@@@@@


doc= 7266


Davies, Thomas (c.1712-1785), bookseller and actor, is of unknown origins. He attended the University of Edinburgh between 1728 and 1729 to prepare for one of the learned professions, but left, presumably to become an actor. His first known appearance on the stage was at the theatre in the Haymarket, London (then under the management of Henry Fielding), where on 26 May 1736 he originated the role of Young Wilmot in George Lillo's domestic tragedy 'The Fatal Curiosity'. Although the reviewer in the 'Daily Advertiser' (28 May) observed that the play was acted 'with the greatest applause that has been shewn to any tragedy for many years' and that the 'scenes of distress were so artfully worked up, and so well performed, that there scarce remained a dry eye among the spectators' (Van Lennep and others, 3/1.588), the performance did not enable Davies to find steady work as an actor. Shortly afterwards he attempted bookselling at Duke's Court and Round Court, but when the business failed he once more turned to the theatre, and for several years belonged to various companies in York, Dublin, and Edinburgh. While in York he met and married Susanna (died 1801), actress and daughter of Joseph Yarrow, an actor and writer; her 'beauty was not more remarkable than her private character', which 'has ever been unsullied and irreproachable' ('European Magazine', 5). The couple returned to London and for the 1753 season were engaged at Drury Lane Theatre, 'where they remained for several years in good estimation with the town, and played many characters, if not with great excellence, at least with propriety and decency' (ibid.). 
Believing that Davies and his wife earned $500 a year from the stage Samuel Johnson considered it 'folly' when Davies left the profession to return to bookselling in 1762. Johnson believed that Davies had been driven from the stage by a line in Charles Churchill's 'The Rosciad' (1761) -- 'He mouths a sentence, as curs mouth a bone' -- and wondered 'what a man is he, who is to be driven from the stage by a line?' (Boswell, 'Life', 3.223). An early biographer of Davies thought that 'Churchill's indiscriminate satire' had 'endeavoured to fix some degree of ridicule on Mr. Davies's performance; but the pen of a satirist is not entitled to implicit credit' ('European Magazine', 5). Davies himself blamed his leaving the stage on Garrick's 'warmth of temper' ('Letters', 1.385n.). Whatever the cause he set up as a bookseller at 8 Russell Street, Covent Garden, where he lived until his death. There, in the back parlour of the bookshop, James Boswell first met Johnson, on 16 May 1763. When Boswell published his 'Life of Samuel Johnson', twenty-eight years later to the day, he added a note to the passage, describing the first meeting: 'No. 8. -- The very place where I was fortunate enough to be introduced to the illustrious subject of this work, deserves to be particularly marked. I never pass by it without feeling reverence and regret' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.390n.). 
In conversation with John Nichols, Davies described how he had published 'a silly pamphlet' in 1742 and then 'was smit with the desire of turning author' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 9.665), but it was not until the 1770s that he turned seriously to writing. Johnson's remark that 'the biographical part of literature... is what I love most' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.425) applies equally to Davies, all of whose writings -- apart from 'Love Poems' (1761), 'Miscellaneous and Fugitive Pieces' (1773-4), and his catalogues of books for sale -- are biographies, contain biographies, or provide materials for future biographies. Davies edited important editions of the works of William Browne (1772), Sir John Davies (1773), Dr John Eachard (1774), George Lillo (1775), and Philip Massinger (1779), all with biographies of varying lengths. In addition he wrote 'The characters of George the First, Queen Caroline, Sir Robert Walpole, Mr. Pulteney, Lord Hardwicke, Mr. Fox, and Mr. Pitt, reviewed. With royal and noble anecdotes: and a sketch of Lord Chesterfield's character' (1777) and 'A genuine narrative of the life and theatrical transactions of Mr. John Henderson, called the Bath Roscius' (1777). His most important biography was 'Memoirs of the Life of David Garrick' (1780), in two volumes, which had gone through three editions by the following year. It is a wide-ranging 'life and times', but with important information, not only about Garrick but also about Johnson and other contemporaries. Johnson himself contributed the opening sentence, information on Garrick's early life in Lichfield and London, and many anecdotes. 
Johnson's assistance to Davies with the memoir was part of a larger attempt to help him to recover from bankruptcy in 1778. Nichols reports that Davies's 'great and good friend Dr. Johnson... exerted all his power on his behalf' ('GM'), rallying friends to contribute to make it possible for Davies to recover his household belongings and prevailing on Richard Brinsley Sheridan, patentee of Drury Lane Theatre, to allow him a benefit. On 27 May 1778 Davies returned to the stage one last time, after an absence of sixteen years, to play Fainall in William Congreve's 'The Way of the World'. 
Davies's financial problems appear to have been of long standing, and one of his schemes for making money has become legendary. In autumn 1773, when Johnson was touring the Hebrides with Boswell, Davies published the first two volumes of 'Miscellaneous and Fugitive Pieces', which he advertised as 'By the Authour of the Rambler' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.270-71), without Johnson's knowledge or consent. The volumes included some early, uncollected writings by Johnson but also pieces with which he had no connection. Johnson reported to Mrs Thrale (Hester Lynch Piozzi) that when he confronted Davies 'I was a fierce fellow, and pretended to be very angry, and Thomas was a good-natured fellow, and pretended to be very sorry: so 'there' the matter ended: I believe the dog loves me dearly' (Piozzi, 78). 
The success of the memoir of Garrick encouraged Davies to publish the three-volume 'Dramatic miscellanies: consisting of critical observations on several plays of Shakespeare... with anecdotes of dramatic poets, actors, &c.' (1783-4), which drew on a lifetime of experience and interest in the theatre. After Johnson's death, on 13 December 1784, Davies was thought to be among those undertaking a life. Although his own death would preclude such a project he did provide information for Boswell's life, as well as for William Shaw's 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Late Samuel Johnson' (1785). He also, according to Nichols, continued to produce miscellaneous writings, 'fugitive pieces without number, in prose and verse, in the St. James's Chronicle, and almost all the public newspapers' ('GM'). 
Davies was a member of the club of major booksellers that met monthly at the Shakespeare tavern, where, according to Nichols, 'the germ of many a valuable publication' originated, including the life of Garrick, the 'Dramatic Miscellanies', and the ideas that led to the publication in 1779 of 'Works of the English Poets with Prefaces, Biographical and Critical, by Samuel Johnson' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.325). Davies was one of three booksellers who had visited Johnson to propose the project. Nichols, who 'knew Mr. Davies well; and for several years passed many convivial hours in his company at a social meeting; where his lively sallies of pleasantry were certain to entertain his friends by harmless merriment', describes him as 'a man of uncommon strength of mind, who prided himself on being through life a companion for his superiors' ('GM'). Boswell described him as 'a man of good understanding and talents, with the advantage of a liberal education. Though somewhat pompous, he was an entertaining companion; and his literary performances have no inconsiderable share of merit' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.390-91). Johnson praised him as having 'learning enough to give credit to a clergyman' (ibid., 4.13) but also thought that no one could 'bring more amusement on his tongue, or more kindness in his heart' (ibid., 4.231). 
On Davies's last visit to the club 'he wore the appearance of a spectre; and, sensible of his approaching end, took a solemn benediction' ('GM'). He died on 5 May 1785 and was buried in the vault of St Paul's, Covent Garden. He was survived by his wife, who died on 9 February 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 7267


Davies, Thomas (1792-1839), physician, was born in Carmarthenshire, and, after some schooling in London, was apprenticed to his maternal uncle, Mr Price, then apothecary to the London Hospital. He became an apothecary, and practised in the East End of London, but after two years had symptoms of phthisis. He went to Montpellier for his health, and afterwards to Paris, where he learned the then new art of auscultation under R. H. T. Laennec, at the Necker Hospital. This led to him being known later as 'the man with the horn' among his patients in London. Davies graduated MD at Paris on 8 December 1821. After returning to London he was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, on 30 September 1824, and began practice at 30 New Broad Street, London, as a physician. In 1825 he was elected physician to the Infirmary for Asthma (later the Royal Hospital for Diseases of the Chest). Davies lectured at his house on diseases of the lungs and heart, and explained all he had learned from Laennec. The lectures brought him professional recognition, and he was elected the first assistant physician to the London Hospital on 5 December 1827. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 4 July 1838. 
Davies's next post was as a lecturer on the practice of physic at the London Hospital. He published a course of lectures on the diseases of the chest in the 'London Medical Gazette'; these appeared as a book entitled 'Lectures on the Diseases of the Lungs and Heart' (1835). The book shows that its author had understood and tested for himself all the observations of Laennec and of James Hope, but he added nothing to what they had taught, and though he writes at length on pericarditis, and had examined many examples 'post mortem', he was unaware of the existence of a pericardial friction-sound in such cases. Davies also gives an account and description of the exploring needle, which he introduced as a means of diagnosis in certain thoracic conditions. 
Davies was married and had several children, one of whom was the physician Herbert Davies (1818-1885). His chest disease returned, and it caused his death, at New Broad Street on 30 May 1839. Davies was fond of telling his patients, 'Keep up your spirits', and needed to take his own advice during his last illness, when he suffered from depression. He was buried in the churchyard of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7268


Davies, Thomas (1837-1892), mineralogist, was born on 29 December 1837 in the parish of St Pancras, London, the only son of William Davies (1814-1891) of the geological department of the British Museum and his first wife, whose maiden name was Bradford. He left school and went to sea at the age of fourteen, visiting parts of Asia and South America. In 1858 he was appointed third-class attendant at the British Museum, working on the mineral collection under Professor Story-Maskelyne, and, the following year, he married Jane Sabey of St Pancras. They later had four sons and five daughters. 
At the British Museum, Davies developed an ability readily to identify mineral specimens and his capacity to determine the localities of minerals from their associated matrices was renowned. More than 140 years later many thousands of the museum's specimens retained his characteristic hand-written labels. In 1880 he was promoted to the grade of first-class assistant; by coincidence, his father obtained the same promotion on the same day. 
An indefatigable worker, Davies was for a time editor of the 'Mineralogical Magazine' and, latterly, foreign secretary of the Mineralogical Society. He was elected fellow of the Geological Society in 1870 and was awarded the Wollaston fund by the council in 1880 'as a testimony of the value of his researches in Mineralogy and Lithology' ('Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society', 36, 1880, 31). Yet his recorded publications amount to only nine items, several on mineralogical topics and others on Precambrian rocks of Wales and Scotland. They appear in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society', 'Geological Magazine', and 'Mineralogical Magazine'. 
Davies spent the latter part of his life at 14 Perryn Road, Acton, where he died on 21 December 1892 after several years of failing health. He was survived by his wife and their nine children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7269


Davies, Thomas Stephens (1794?-1851), mathematician, was probably born in 1794, but little else about his early life is known. A formative influence was the mathematician William Trail (1745-1831), best known for his 'Account of the Life and Writings of Robert Simson' (1812). It was Trail who instilled in Davies a lifelong fascination for geometry and a profound interest in its history. Davies began his career as a schoolmaster in Bath. His first scientific communications were published in the 'Leeds Correspondent' in July 1817, and the 'Gentleman's Diary' for 1819, and he subsequently contributed largely to the 'Gentleman's and Lady's Diary', to Clay's 'Scientific Receptacle', and to the 'Monthly Magazine', the 'Philosophical Magazine', the 'Bath and Bristol Magazine', and the 'Mechanics' Magazine'. These papers earned him a considerable reputation as a mathematician and scientific writer. He became a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1831, and contributed several original and elaborate papers to its 'Transactions'. That on the 'Geometrical character of the hour-lines upon the antique sun-dials' ('Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', 12, 1832, 77-122) led to the discussion of the 'Equations of loci traced upon the surface of the sphere' (ibid., 259-362; 379-428) and the development of a new system of spherical geometry, by means of spherical co-ordinates. This system, more general than its predecessors, deserves more recognition than it has subsequently received. Further research on this subject was published as a supplement to John Radford Young's 'Elements of Plane and Spherical Trigonometry' in 1833. On 18 April that year, Davies was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London, and served on that body's mathematical committee until 1844. 
Davies's principal area of research was geometry, in which he exhibited equal skill in both ancient and modern methods and acquired a reputation as 'the first of British geometers' ('Westminster Review', 55, 1851, 83). Among the numerous subjects which engaged his attention were the properties of the trapezium, Pascal's 'hexagramme mystique', Brianchon's theorem, symmetrical properties of plane triangles, the geometry of three dimensions, and stereographic projection. However, he also wrote on many other areas of science and literature, contributing papers on the 'Phenomena of terrestrial magnetism' to the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' (1835, 1836) and on 'Determination of the law of resistance to a projectile' to the 'Mechanics' Magazine', as well as many other papers in the 'Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal', the 'Civil Engineer', 'The Athenaeum', the 'Westminster Review', and 'Notes and Queries'. Many such contributions were anonymous or published under a pseudonym such as 'Pen-and-Ink', 'Peter Twaddleton', or 'Knickerbocker'. He also edited, with William Rutherford and Stephen Fenwick, the first volume of 'The Mathematician' (1845). 
In 1834 Davies was appointed one of the mathematical masters in the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. While there, he helped to publish several useful textbooks for the use of its students. The eleventh edition of Charles Hutton's 'Course of Mathematics' (1837) was principally Davies's work. In 1840 he produced 'Solutions of the Principal Questions in Dr Hutton's 'Course of Mathematics'', containing 4000 solutions to problems in nearly all mathematical subjects and at every degree of difficulty. Next appeared the twelfth edition of Hutton's 'Course' (2 vols., 1841-3) 'with considerable alterations and additions' by Davies -- so considerable, in fact, that it contained 'not a single line of the original work'. Finally, his geometrical part of 'An Elementary Course of Mathematics Prepared for the Use of the Royal Military Academy' was published as volume 2 in 1852. 
Davies's deep interest in the history of geometry led to his election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 19 March 1840. He was also a council member of the short-lived Historical Society of Science, founded by James Orchard Halliwell in 1840. The last six years of his life were plagued by bronchitis. His death, following an attack of influenza, took place at his home, Broomhall Cottage, Shooter's Hill, Kent, on 6 January 1851, when he was in his fifty-seventh year. 


@@@@@


doc= 7270


Davies, Walter (1761-1849), antiquary and poet, was born on 14 July 1761 at Y Wern, near Tomen y Castell, Llanfechain, Montgomeryshire, one of the seven children of William Davies, a labourer, and his wife, Catherine Bennett ('b'. 1733). He developed an early passion for books from his mother, who was respected in the area for her learning. As a boy he spent much of his time in the company of local poets and was educated by the parish priest until the age of twelve. He was thereafter apprenticed to a cooper and practised his craft in a barn near Tomen y Castell. 
In 1789, taking the bardic name Gwallter Mechain, Davies became an eager competitor for prizes at the local eisteddfodau, which were being fostered in north Wales by the Gwyneddigion Society of London. This brought him to the attention of Owen Jones (Owain Myfyr), a literary patron, whose financial assistance enabled him to obtain a place at St Alban's Hall, Oxford, in 1791. He subsequently obtained a clerkship at All Souls College, and in 1792 worked as curator at the Ashmolean Museum, where he gained access to some of the manuscripts of the Welsh scientist and philologist Edward Lhuyd. He read widely during this period, taking an interest in medicine and astrology as well as in literature and antiquities. He graduated BA from Oxford in 1795, and shortly afterwards was appointed curate at Meifod in Montgomeryshire. He proceeded MA as a member of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1803. In 1797 he was invited by the board of agriculture to compile a survey of agriculture and the domestic economy in north Wales. This was published in two volumes in 1810 and 1813, and followed in 1815 by a second report on south Wales, on which he collaborated with Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg). On 15 October 1799 Davies married a widow, Mary Pryse of Rhosbrynbwa, at Meifod. They had four children. 
In 1807 Davies was appointed rector of Manafon in Montgomeryshire, where he became associated with a group of antiquaries later known as 'yr' hen bersoniaid llengar (literally 'the old literary clerics'). From 1818 onwards, together with John Jenkins (Ifor Ceri), William Rees of Cascob, and others, Davies sought zealously to promote regional eisteddfodau and to encourage the publication of Welsh literary and historical manuscripts, thus, in effect, continuing the work of Owain Myfyr and the Gwyneddigion Society. He also worked with Daniel Rowland of Llanddewibrefi to found provincial societies throughout Wales to stimulate interest in literature and antiquarian scholarship. 
Davies was greatly respected by his contemporaries as an adjudicator of poetry at eisteddfodau. He insisted upon the classical canons of criticism favoured by Goronwy Owen and other poets of the mid-eighteenth century. His own obsessive urge to compete for literary prizes continued into old age, yet his work has little merit and is seldom read today. His most enduring work was as an editor of the works of major poets such as Huw Morys (1823) and Lewys Glyn Cothi, whose work he edited in collaboration with John Jones (Tegid) in 1837. On 18 November 1837 Davies became vicar of Llanrhaeadr-ym-Mochnant, in Denbighshire. He died there on 5 December 1849 and was buried in the churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 7271


Davies, William (d. 1593), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born at Croes-yn-eirias in the parish of Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire, son of William Dai and grandson of Dafydd (Dai) Nantglyn, the most distinguished harpist of his day. His mother (or stepmother) was Katherine Evans, wife of 'William Day o'r Groes'; she was listed as a recusant in Llandrillo-yn-rhos in 1587-8. His father was a protestant, however. William Davies, possibly he who matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in 1575 and graduated in 1578, was admitted to the English College, Douai (at Rheims), in 1582, ordained in 1585, and in the same year arrived as a missionary in north Wales, on home ground. His centre of activity was probably Plas Penrhyn, the home of Robert Pugh. Both he and Robert Pugh were in 1587 of the company of recusants obliged to flee overnight from the cave at Rhiwledin, near Penrhyn, where they had established themselves with a printing press; the one book incompletely produced on this press (the first known book to be printed in Wales) was the anonymous 'Y drych Cristianogawl' ('The Christian mirror'). 
In 1592, again in the company of Robert Pugh, in Holyhead, while arranging the passage of four Welsh seminary students to Valladolid, Davies was arrested (Pugh escaped). He was imprisoned in Beaumaris Castle, with the four students. Condemned at his first trial, he was removed to Ludlow, to Bewdley, and to other prisons, but, refusing to recant, was brought back to Beaumaris and tried again. On 27 July 1593 he was hanged, drawn, and quartered in Beaumaris Castle. During his time at Beaumaris he became the focus of fervent local support; executioners, and even the material for the execution, had to be brought from afar. His one surviving letter describes his first trial; there are three accounts of his martyrdom. He was declared venerable by Pope Leo XIII in 1886, and beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1987. A single poem by him survives, in Welsh: a meditation on Lent, it echoes poems of Richard Gwyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 7272


Davies, William (fl. 1598-1614), traveller, was born in Hereford, and states himself to have been a barber-surgeon, although no trace can be found of him in the register of admissions to the freedom of that company. He states that he was a gentleman by birth and had served in many naval and military operations. His family may have had Cornish connections since he sailed from there and his brother settled there. On 28 January 1598 he sailed in a trading ship (the 'Francis') from Saltash, Cornwall, and reached Civita Vecchia, the port of Rome. He subsequently visited Algiers and Tunis. On leaving Tunis his ship was attacked by six galleys of Ferdinand de' Medici, grand duke of Tuscany. Davies was captured and taken to Leghorn, where he worked as a slave for eight years and ten months. For much of his time he was a galley slave and he recounts the extreme miseries of such a state. Indeed, of thirty-six men taken with him only thirteen remained alive nine years later. 
In 1608 an Englishman, Robert Thornton, who had entered the duke's service after absconding with his English ship, was appointed captain of the 'Santa Lucia', one of three ships fitted out by the duke for an expedition to the West Indies. The voyage seems to have been conceived by Robert Dudley, the illegitimate son of the earl of Leicester, who provided Thornton with maps and charts. Thornton asked the duke's permission to take Davies with him as surgeon and physician, in which capacities he was said to be experienced. The duke demanded 500 crowns as security for Davies's working under Thornton's orders, and the money was paid by William Mellyn of Bristol, who happened to be in Italy. 
Davies spent ten weeks in the Amazon delta area, mainly on the north shore, but his description of it is tantalizingly brief. The explorers found none of the silver or gold that the duke hoped for and Davies evidently considered the region more of a curiosity than a place which would repay further exploration or exploitation or settlement. 
On returning to Italy in June 1609 Davies's ship was attacked by an English pirate, and an English sailor, Erasmus Lucas of Southwark, was fatally wounded. Davies landed with the body at Leghorn, and finding that Lucas would be denied burial in sacred ground because he was not a Roman Catholic, Davies proceeded to bury the body himself according to protestant rites. While thus engaged he was arrested by agents of the Inquisition. He lived on bread and water in an unlighted underground dungeon for sixteen days, and after a first examination was moved to a large open prison, the charge against him, that he had buried a Catholic according to protestant rites, having been dropped. An English shipowner, Richard Row of Milbroke, Cornwall, who knew Davies's brother in Plymouth, helped him to escape, and after sailing in the Mediterranean in the 'Porrion' he reached London in 1614 and wrote an account of his travels, published that year as 'A True Relation of the Travailes... and Captivitie of William Davies'. It was reprinted in 1746 in Osborne's 'Travels and Voyages', volume 1. This was the fullest account of the voyage, though only two brief chapters concern the Amazon and the Caribbean. Other information brought back by Thornton was recorded by Robert Dudley on a manuscript map, which was a revised version of that which Dudley had supplied him at the outset. The voyage did not stimulate further Tuscan interest, Ferdinand having died while the expedition was underway, although it may have helped to keep English interests in the area alive. Nothing further is known of Davies. 


@@@@@


doc= 7273


Davies, William (d. 1820), bookseller, of obscure origins, was assistant to the elder Thomas Cadell (1742-1802), bookseller and publisher, when he was chosen by him in 1793 as a partner for his youthful son Thomas Cadell the younger (1773-1836) ['see under 'Cadell, Thomas] in the management of his business. From that time the business traded as Cadell and Davies, and Cadell the younger left the management of the business to his partner until Davies fell ill in 1813. During these years the firm continued its reputation for generosity to authors. Regardless of G. Steevens's comment to Bishop Percy in 1797 that Cadell and Davies, 'in spite of all their boasts, are not allowed to be at the head of their trade in the line of publication' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 7.30), the business seems to have been thriving at the end of the century. In 1800 the United States congress commissioned Cadell and Davies to supply 5000 dollars' worth of books, journals, and maps which would form the basis for the Library of Congress. The firm continued to publish Burns's poetical works, as well as Boswell's 'Life of Johnson', although in 1797 they declined the opportunity to publish what became Jane Austen's 'Pride and Prejudice'. A contemporary bookseller noted in the 'Aldine Magazine' that while some in the book trade found Davies somewhat 'haughty', he was in truth a 'straightforward man of business' who was 'possessed of superior abilities', although he later 'became too adventurous and liberal in his literary purchases' (Besterman, xi). Davies was a yeomanry stockkeeper of the Stationers' Company in 1800 and 1803 and a livery stockkeeper in 1812 and 1818. He and his wife, Jessy 
(or Jesse; 1777/8-1854)
, had eight children. He died on 28 April 1820, leaving his family less well provided for than might have been expected. His wife died at Bushey, Hertfordshire on 14 October 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 7274


Davies, William (1814-1891), palaeontologist, was born at Holywell, Flintshire, on 13 July 1814, the son of Thomas Davies and his wife, Elizabeth Turner. After going to school in his native town he studied botany, and on 19 December 1843 obtained a post as an attendant in the British Museum in London, working at first on the mineral collections. He became a competent general mineralogist, and was subsequently employed to work on the fossil vertebrate collections. In this field he not only acquired great technical knowledge as to the best methods of developing and preserving delicate specimens, but also was pronounced to be 'one of its most accomplished students'. He was so skilled in reconstructing the remains of extinct specimens that in 1875 he was made responsible for the whole fossil vertebrate collection. 
Davies took an active part in the rearrangement of the natural history collections in 1880, when they were transferred from Bloomsbury to the new buildings in South Kensington. He gave most valuable assistance to Sir Antonio Brady in collecting a series of Pleistocene mammal remains from the Thames valley brickearth, which he later described and figured. He was also responsible for the excavation and preservation of the Ilford mammoth head. 
In 1880 Davies was promoted to assistant, first class, having been made assistant five years earlier. He retired in 1887 and was pensioned by the museum, which he continued to provide with revised proofs of palaeontological works. He died at his home, 66 Antill Road, Bethnal Green, London, on 13 February 1891, from epilepsy and syncope. He was twice married, and with his first wife ('nee' Bradford) had a son, the mineralogist Thomas Davies (1837-1892), and a daughter. 
The Geological Society made Davies the first Murchison medallist in 1873 and elected him a life fellow in 1877. He disliked literary composition, so his scientific papers were not numerous. He was the author of about fifteen important papers, mostly contributed to the 'Geological Magazine', and published a 'Catalogue of the Pleistocene Vertebrata in the Collection of Sir Antonio Brady' (1874). 


@@@@@


doc= 7275


Davies, William Edmund (1819-1879), bookmaker, was born in London. His father was a carpenter and Davies too entered the building trade, working for Cubitt & Co., contractors and builders, Gray's Inn Road, London. On one occasion he was sent to Newmarket to help repair the inside of the subscription rooms. Whether this influenced him to begin taking bets from his fellow workers is a matter for conjecture, but his success as a petty bookmaker enabled him to give up working as a carpenter. He was a major pioneer of the betting list, in which the names of horses and the odds against them would be displayed openly, often in public-house windows. His first list was at the Salisbury Arms in Durham Street, Strand, London, and his second at a house known as Barr's Windsor Castle, 27 Long Acre, Covent Garden. At these places he and his clerks stood at huge bankers' ledgers and entered the bets. By the time the 'Betting House Act' of 1853 made such lists illegal, on the grounds that they tempted working people into crime to finance their gambling, Davies had become a wealthy man. 
Davies also moved up the betting market, abandoning his 'silver' book and setting a minimum bet of $1. At the other end of the scale he appears to have set no limit and earned himself the sobriquet Leviathan for the size of the bets he accepted, both individually and in aggregate. He established himself at the head of the profession by betting with the earl of Strafford $12,000 to $1,000 on the Cur for the Cesarewitch in 1848; he paid the money on the day after the race. From that moment he enjoyed the chief patronage of all heavy backers of horses, and his lists ruled the market. In 1850, when Lord Zetland's Voltigeur was the winning Derby favourite, Davies had to pay out nearly $40,000 over his list counter to his humbler clients who had put their sovereigns on the race. In the previous Derby, when Hotspur was beaten by the Flying Dutchman, he had lost a similar sum. The victory of Daniel O'Rourke in the 1852 Derby resulted in his having to pay more than $100,000. Yet despite his losses he opened the season of 1853 with $130,000 to his credit at the London and Westminster Bank. His constant habit was to go to Tattersall's after the Derby, however great his losses, and pay on the Monday instead of waiting until the conventional settling Tuesday; and while his lists were in force he returned every night from Newmarket to attend to them and provide the money for paying next day. In an era of turf corruption he was an honest man, one of a small number of bookmakers of whom Admiral Rous, doyen of the Jockey Club, said he would accept their word of a $10,000 bet without a written undertaking. The certainty that claims on him would be paid on demand made his winning tickets as negotiable among his customers as banknotes. 
A muscular, powerful man, who once fell through the dilapidated stand at Rochester, Davies opted for early retirement and wound up his business on the Friday of the Houghton meeting in 1857, and took his final leave of Newmarket. On his retirement he lived first at the King and Queen Hotel, Brighton, but soon moved to 18 Gloucester Place, Brighton, where he died on 4 October 1879. In his will he left property in railway shares valued at $60,000 to the Brighton corporation, subject to the payment of certain annuities. His widow, Ann Davies, gave notice to dispute the will, but on 21 January 1880 an arrangement was made by which the greater part of the property went to the corporation on her death. Preston Park, Brighton, which cost $50,000 and was opened on 8 November 1884, was purchased with this money. 


@@@@@


doc= 7276


Davis, Charles (bap. 1693, d. 1755), bookseller, the fifth son of James Davis, a chandler in Hatton Garden, London, and his wife, Mary, was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, London, on 5 February 1693. He was bound as an apprentice to the London bookseller Nathaniel Nowell on 8 November 1708 but was not freed as a member of the Stationers' Company until 3 October 1727; he was elected to the livery of the company on the same day. However, Davis was active as a bookseller from as early as 1723 when, based in Covent Garden, London, he published his earliest surviving book catalogue 'Bibliotheca literaria, seu, Librorum maxime insignium catalogus: containing a very curious and uncommon collection of books in most languages... to be sold very cheap (the price mark'd in each book)' on 3 December. Still in London, in 1726 he was recorded in Hatton Garden and by 1728, when he took his first apprentice, he had a shop in Paternoster Row. He was also based in Holborn, opposite Gray's Inn and later against Gray's Inn Gate, and was a parishioner of St Andrew's, Holborn, at his death. 
At least until 1730 Davis may have had some working relationship with the printer Henry Woodfall, since the evidence of type ornaments in five surviving catalogues suggests that Woodfall was Davis's printer. Altogether ten catalogues pertaining to Davis's business have survived, demonstrating that he was one of the earliest booksellers to retail libraries by priced catalogues. He also sold libraries by auction, including part of the extensive and valuable library of Thomas Rawlinson. 
By the date of Davis's death on 31 August 1755 he had achieved considerable eminence as a bookseller. He was unmarried, and on 17 September his estate was granted to his two bookselling nephews, Lockyer Davis and Charles Reymers (respectively sons of his eldest brother James and younger sister Elizabeth), both of whom had served apprenticeships with Davis. Davis also left a brother, Daniel. Davis's stock was sold off at auction on 21 April 1757; a unique copy of the sale catalogue, annotated with purchasers and prices in an unidentified hand, survives in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 7277


Davis, David (1745-1827), dissenting minister and poet, was born on 14 February 1745 at Goetre-isaf, in the parish of Llangybi, near Lampeter, Cardiganshire, where his father, Timothy Jacob (1711/12-1795), a farmer, and his wife, Elinor, were zealous members of the presbyterian church at Cilgwyn. David was the eldest of five brothers, all of whom subsequently adopted the surname of Davis. A manuscript once in the possession of Davis's eldest son, David, calls him Dafydd ab Ieuan Rhydderch, which was possibly his bardic style. His early religious impressions, as Davis acknowledged in one of his poems, were due to the influence of his pastor, Philip Pugh of Cilgwyn, a notable Independent preacher, in sympathy with the Methodist movement, who had been trained under Samuel Jones, one of the ejected presbyterians of 1662. Davis was accepted as a member at Cilgwyn in 1763. 
Having passed through preparatory schools at Leominster (where he spent a year and a half with his uncle, Joshua Thomas, the Baptist historian), Llanybydder, and Llangeler, Davis was sent in 1763 to the grammar school at Carmarthen under Jenkin Jenkins. At the beginning of 1764 he was admitted as a divinity student on the foundation at the Carmarthen Academy, under Samuel Thomas (died 1766). This institution, supported by the London Presbyterian Board, had been aided also by the London Congregational Board until 1755, when the theological teaching of Thomas began to be regarded as heterodox. Yet until Samuel Horsley became bishop of St David's (1788), not only dissenters of all classes but candidates for Anglican orders received their training in this academy. Under Thomas's successor (from 1765), Jenkin Jenkins, the academy was in high esteem for classical learning. Among Davis's contemporaries and lifelong friends were Archdeacon Thomas Beynon and Josiah Rees, editor of 'Trysorfa Gwybodaeth', the first Welsh periodical (1770), and father of Owen Rees, who became a partner in Longmans, the London publisher, in 1794. 
After leaving the academy, Davis accepted (1 January 1769) a call to be co-pastor with David Lloyd (Dafydd Llwyd) at Llwynrhydowen, Cardiganshire, where he received presbyterian ordination on 15 July 1773. His stipend was very small and his duties were somewhat laborious, as he had to minister to four or five presbyterian churches of Arian and Unitarian tendencies at some distance from each other. He married on 15 November 1775 Anne Evans (1745/6-1832) of Foelallt, daughter of John Evans, of Llysfaen, Llanwnnen, and they had five sons and four daughters. As a preacher in Welsh he was both powerful and very popular, having a fine voice and great command of his native language. He usually took a comprehensive view of his subject, but at times his sermons lacked preparation and he relied too much on his extemporary powers. He excelled in pathos, but this was sometimes taken to extremes. His great theme was the love of God to all his creatures. 
In addition to his pastoral work Davis conducted a school at Castellhywel from 1783, and over a period of thirty years he became distinguished as one of the most successful schoolmasters and classical teachers in Wales. The school attracted pupils from all parts of Wales and beyond. Candidates for Anglican holy orders were educated here until about 1790, when Bishop Samuel Horsley declared that he would not ordain such candidates because of Davis's theological and political views. The managers of the Carmarthen Academy were desirous of securing him as tutor, but he declined their overtures. Lloyd died on 4 February 1779, and a few years later Richard Lloyd, his son, was for a short time colleague with Davis (until 1784). Subsequently Davis's second son, Timothy, was his colleague (1799-1810). 
When he began his ministry Davis had already departed from the theological views of his earlier years. The fact that he had become Arian in his theology appears in his friendly controversy with the Revd D. Saunders, a Calvinistic Baptist, of Merthyr Tudful. But he remained more conservative in his theology than most Arians and he retained a good deal of evangelical sentiment, the fruits of Philip Pugh's ministry, as is indicated by his Welsh translation of Henry Scougall's 'God's Life in Man's Soul' (1779). As showing the latitudinarian tendencies of his time it is worth noting that, at the instance of Archdeacon Beynon, he began a Welsh translation of John Taylor's work on the epistle to the 'Romans', but this was not completed. By 1801-2 it was clear that he was not radical enough for some members of his congregations. The dissension led to the seceding of some eighty members, who established three Unitarian churches in the area. 
In politics Davis was a radical and openly supported the French Revolution. He was friendly with Richard Price, Edward Williams (Iolo Morganwg), John Jones of Glan-y-gors, Thomas Roberts of Llwyn'rhudol, and Thomas Evans (Tomos Glyn Cothi), all active propagandists in Wales and London, and he published a number of poems voicing his support for the ideals of the revolution. In 1791 he initiated resolutions of condolence offered to Joseph Priestley by the Cardiganshire dissenters after the Birmingham riots; but he never had any intellectual sympathy with thinkers of the Priestley school, and proposed the following epitaph in Welsh and English in response to his ideas of materialism and the mortality of the soul for their leader: '
Here lie at rest 

In oaken chest, 

Together packed most nicely, 

The bones and brains, 

Flesh, blood, and veins, 

And soul of Dr. Priestley. 

' This choice sample of Welsh humour was repeated by Price to Priestley, who is said to have been 'much pleased with it'. 
Davis's poems were collected and published by his son David as 'Telyn Dewi' in 1824. The poems were warmly received and rather extravagantly praised by his contemporaries, so much so that Davis regretted that he had not paid more attention to his poetry writing. Some of the poems are occasional pieces, and his hymns are far removed in tone from the emotion of those of contemporary Methodist hymn writers. A number of poems celebrating the French Revolution, however, became popular, but his most common theme is the frailty of human life and the transience of mortal glory. He is best remembered for his free translation of Gray's 'Elegy in a Country Churchyard' and for his classical 'englynion' (strict metre quatrains); his poetic references to the ruins of nearby Peterwell House presage the later Romantics. 
An engraving of Davis by Bond, from a painting by Harvey, presents a rather heavy countenance, with a forehead high but receding. He was of gentle and genial manners, though a strict disciplinarian at his school, fond of society and the idol of his circle, full of anecdote and sportive in conversation. He retired in 1820. He reached a mellow and venerable age, dying at Llwynrhydowen on 3 July 1827. He was buried on 7 July in the churchyard of Llanwenog, Cardiganshire, where a monument with an inscription in Welsh was erected to his memory. His widow died in 1832 aged eighty-six. Three of his sons entered the ministry; his second son, Timothy, the translator into Welsh of a portion of the commentary of Thomas Coke, died at Evesham, Worcestershire, on 28 November 1860, aged eighty. 


@@@@@


doc= 7278


Davis, David Daniel (1777-1841), physician, the son of Daniel Davies, was born on 15 June 1777 at Llandyfaelog, Carmarthenshire. He was educated at Carmarthen grammar school, and at Northampton under John Horsey. Born David Davies, he later altered his surname and added his father's Christian name to his own. He entered the University of Glasgow in 1797, and graduated MD there in 1801. In 1802 he was in Mansfield where he acted as a minister to a nonconformist congregation. He settled in practice at Sheffield in 1803, where he was physician to the infirmary from 1804 to 1813. He was also an active lay preacher in the city and a founder of the Sheffield Literary and Philosophical Society which flourished between 1804 and 1806. During his time in the city he also contributed to the 'Edinburgh Review'. On 5 April 1806 he married Catherine, daughter of Henry Hall, a merchant. 
Davis moved to London in 1813, was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 25 June 1813, and practised midwifery. In January 1814 he was appointed physician to Queen Charlotte's Lying-in Hospital, and became physician accoucheur to the Royal Maternity Charity in 1816. As was then customary, he delivered lectures on midwifery, which proved popular, at his house, 4 Fitzroy Street, London. He attended the duchess of Kent at the birth of Queen Victoria but, contrary to later legend, did not take an active part. He was professor of midwifery and diseases of women and children in London University (University College since 1836) from 1828 to 1841 and obstetric physician to University College Hospital from 1834 to 1841. While in London Davis became a member of radical medical circles. He was a friend of Thomas Wakley and was a member of the original committee of the London College of Medicine, formed to oppose the existing 'corrupt' medical colleges. 
Davis's first publication, in 1806, was a translation, the 'Treatise on Insanity' by Phillipe Pinel (1745-1826), with an introduction by himself, compiled from standard authors. Davis's interest in obstetrics seems to have arisen following the birth of his son Henry Hall Davis in 1807. The child was harmed by the instruments used in the delivery and died in infancy. Davis then set out to improve the design of the obstetric forceps by enlarging the blades and altering the curve. He published his ideas on the subject in his 'Elements of Midwifery' (1825). He was also aware of the risk of contagion in cases of childbed fever and insisted that his pupils changed their clothes after dealing with such cases. His most important book, 'The principles and practice of obstetric medicine, in a series of systematic dissertations on midwifery and on the diseases of women and children' (2 vols., 1836), was a work of compilation rather than original research but was well done and widely read. In 1840 Davis published 'Acute hydrocephalus'. His cures for the condition were large doses of mercury, emetics, and bleeding, but amid many pages of quotation he describes only four cases seen by himself. After a short illness Davis died at his home, 17 Russell Place, Fitzroy Square, London, on 6 December 1841. 
Davis had a son, John Hall Davis (1811-1884), who studied medicine under his father at University College and acted as a clinical assistant to his father, before developing a successful career in obstetrics and gynaecology. 


@@@@@


doc= 7279


Davis, Edward (fl. 1682-1693), buccaneer, about whom no details concerning his birth and education are known, was embarked in the late autumn of 1682 in a French privateer operating in the Caribbean under the command of Captain Yanky. Davis transferred into Captain Tristian's ship, Yanky's consort, before being embroiled in a mutiny at Petit Guaves, near Port-au-Prince. Davis sailed under a new captain, John Cook, arriving in Chesapeake Bay in April 1683 where William Dampier and other veteran buccaneers resident in Virginia were recruited for a voyage to the South Sea. On 23 August Cook sailed with Davis as quartermaster. Off the coast of Guinea they seized a Danish prize, 36 guns, which they renamed the 'Batchelor's Delight', before sailing in her to South America in late November. 
In March 1684 the 'Batchelor's Delight' joined the 'Nicholas' (Captain John Eaton) off Valdivia. Together they sailed to the Juan Fernandez Islands to be greeted by a Moskito Indian who had been stranded accidentally by Captain Bartholomew Sharpe in January 1681. Dampier's description of this man's meeting another Moskito Indian, whom they had on board, probably inspired Daniel Defoe's account of Friday's reunion with his father in 'Robinson Crusoe' (1719). On 3 May 1684 the buccaneers overhauled a Spanish ship whose crew informed Cook that the authorities were aware of his presence in the South Sea. Cook and Eaton decided to head for the Galapagos Islands. Theirs were the first English vessels to visit the archipelago. After Cook's sudden death Davis was elected commander on 19 July 1684. Davis quarrelled with Eaton and on 2 September they parted, Davis sailing for Port St Helena. On 2 October the 'Batchelor's Delight' joined the 'Cygnet' (Captain Swan), both crews combining to mount raids ashore. On 1 January 1685 Davis seized a packet-boat bound for Lima with orders concerning the departure of the plate fleet for Panama. On 7 January Davis and Swan sailed for the Pearl Islands to intercept the consignment. By 15 February the treasure had still not arrived. The Spanish fleet was finally sighted on 28 May but it had already detoured to land its cargo at La Villa, and had redeployed to engage a growing number of buccaneer vessels in the Bay of Panama. Battle was joined on 29 May and, despite being outnumbered by three to one, the buccaneers avoided defeat in an indecisive action. Shortly afterwards the buccaneers' alliance fell apart. Davis and Swan combined their forces with those of two other vessels for an attack on Leon after which, on 25 August 1685, they separated. Swan, with Dampier on board, sailed westwards across the Pacific to the East Indies. 
Davis spent the remainder of the year cruising, attacking ports in Peru and Chile with Captain William Knight. The pickings were poor, and food was as much sought after as gold. When Knight departed for the West Indies Davis decided to spend Christmas at Juan Fernandez. While approaching the islands the crew felt the shock of the earthquake which destroyed Callao and damaged Lima. Lionel Wafer records they were 450 miles off the mainland when, about four in the morning 'our Ship and Bark felt a terrible Shock [which] made the Guns of the Ship leap in their Carriages, and several of the Men were shaken out of their Hammocks. Captain 'Davis', who lay with his Head over a Gun, was thrown out of his Cabbin.' They learned later that the 'rowling Mountains of Water... drowned Man and Beast for 50 Leagues along Shore' (Wafer, 213). 
Davis resumed cruising in the new year, but by the autumn he had decided to return home. He attempted the Horn late in the season and suffered appalling weather as a result. Sailing south for three weeks, Davis never sighted Tierra del Fuego and never knew when, after turning north, he entered the Atlantic. He made his landfall near the hill of Montevideo just north of the River Plate, almost the same latitude from which he had embarked on the west side of the continent. To Davis's credit there appears to have been no mutiny, sickness, or death among the crew. From Montevideo the 'Batchelor's Delight' headed for the Caribbean, and into obscurity. Davis, Wafer, and John Hingson transferred into a vessel bound for Pennsylvania. On 22 June 1688, after a brief spell in Philadelphia, all three were arrested on suspicion of piracy as they attempted to cross from Port Comfort to the Elizabeth River in a small boat. The inventory of Davis's effects included three bags of Spanish money, and a small chest containing silver weighing 142 pounds. 
At a board of inquiry on 26 June Davis claimed to have been a trader, resident in Jamaica for about seven years. He denied ever having been a privateer but his black servant, Peter Cloise, gave contradictory evidence. On 16 August 1688 Davis petitioned for immunity from prosecution under a proclamation by James II concerning privateers, issued the previous year; and in October Lord Sutherland of the council of trade and plantations sent instructions that Davis and his men were to be prosecuted, but these orders seem to have been ignored. 
In April 1689 the council of Virginia ordered the buccaneers to be returned to England. They arrived home in November, without their possessions. In March 1692 it was agreed that Davis's property should be restored to him but a royal order withheld $300, plus a quarter of the amount still in Jamestown. The moneys forfeited may have been applied to the building of the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia. In November 1693 the council of Virginia invited creditors of the three men to come forward, perhaps indicating that full restitution had still not taken place at that date. Nothing further is known about Davis. There is no evidence to link him with Nathaniel Davis, author of a narrative entitled 'Expedition to the gold mines' which appeared in the second edition of Wafer's 'A New Voyage and Description of the Isthmus of America' (1704). Edward Davis signed his depositions in Virginia with a mark, indicating that he may have been illiterate anyway. 
Davis's modern fame chiefly rests on his dubious 'discovery' of a Pacific land mass in December 1687. According to Wafer, the 'Batchelor's Delight' was in latitude 27 degree 20' S, some 500 leagues south of the Galapagos archipelago, when a small flat island was encountered to the east of 'a range of high Land, which we took to be Islands, for there were several Partitions in the Prospect' (Wafer, 214). Herman Moll showed 'Davis's Land' in this position on his world map which formed the frontispiece to Dampier's 'A New Voyage Round the World' (1697). In 1721 the Dutch West India Company fitted out three ships under Jacob Roggeveen to search for 'Davis Land', and half a century later French and British discovery ships were still looking for it. The true identity of 'Davis Land' remains a puzzle. It may have been Easter Island, but it is equally possible that Davis and his men were deceived by a bank of cloud. 


@@@@@


doc= 7280


Davis, Edward (1833-1867), genre painter, was born at Worcester and learned drawing there before attending the Birmingham School of Design, then under the management of J. Kyd. When Kyd transferred to the Worcester School of Design Davis accompanied him, studying there for three years and winning several prizes. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1854, giving his address as 22 Foregate Street, Worcester. He showed 'Meditation', depicting an old villager sitting by a fireside, and 'Parting Words', a deathbed scene. In the following year he sent 'A Cottage Scene' to the academy and by 1856 he was living in London, at 16 Russell Place, Fitzroy Square. Among his most highly regarded works were 'On the Way to School' (engraved by William Ridgway), 'Granny's Spectacles', 'Doing Crochet Work', 'Words of Peace', and 'The Little Peg-Top', which was prestigiously placed on the line at the Royal Academy. He died young, while studying in Rome, on 12 June 1867. Examples of his paintings, which show careful draughtsmanship and a fondness for chubby figures, are in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford. An album of his drawings was sold at Christies in 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 7281


Davis, Henry Edwards (1756-1784), historian, was the son of John Davis of Windsor. He was born on 11 July 1756, and educated at Ealing. On 17 May 1774 he entered Balliol College, Oxford, and graduated BA early in 1778. On 2 May 1778 he published 'An Examination of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Chapters of Mr Gibbon's 'History'', in which the historian's alleged plagiarisms and other misdemeanours with evidence were set out at length. Edward Gibbon affected to despise Davis, concluding in his 'Memoirs' that 'victory over such antagonists was a sufficient humiliation' ('Miscellaneous Works', 1.153). Nevertheless, although Davis made some embarrassing blunders when censuring Gibbon's use of classical authors, he was altogether more acute and sure-footed when analysing Gibbon's debts to moderns such as Middleton and Beausobre. In his 'Vindication' (1779) Gibbon concentrated on Davis's weaker side and largely passed over his shrewder perceptions. It was a legitimate enough procedure, but it perhaps explains the complicated tone (half chastened, half defiant) of Davis's 'Reply to Mr Gibbon's 'Vindication'' (1779). Gibbon states that Davis was rewarded for the attack by a 'royal pension'. He took priest's orders in 1780, and became fellow and tutor of Balliol College. His health broke down and he died, after a lingering illness, on 10 February 1784. His friends praised 'the cheerfulness and vivacity of his conversation [and] the warmth and benevolence of his heart' (Chalmers, 11.325); he is said to have been very amiable, poetical, and patient under suffering. 


@@@@@


doc= 7282


Davis, Henry George (1830-1857), topographer, born on 14 August 1830 at 4 Mills Buildings, Knightsbridge, London, was the son of J. Davis, master of the parochial schools of St Paul's, Knightsbridge. He was educated at the Marylebone Philological School. Davis became a writer for the local journal, the 'West Middlesex Advertiser', to which he contributed a series of articles entitled 'Our local associations', and prepared for the press 'Memorials of the Hamlet of Knightsbridge, with Notices of its Immediate Neighbourhood'. This was published in 1859, two years after his death, by his brother Charles Davis. Two other works by Davis were left in manuscript unfinished, namely 'Pimlico' and 'Recollections of Piccadilly'. He bequeathed his collections to the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society. Many antiquarian papers written by him appeared in 'Notes and Queries'. Davis suffered all his life from chronic pleurisy, which was worsened in 1850 by rheumatic fever. He died at St Paul's parochial school, Wilton Place, Belgravia, on 30 December 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 7283


Davis, James (1706/7-1755), satirical writer and physician, was the son of Walter Davis of Chepstow, Monmouthshire. He matriculated at Jesus College, Oxford, on 18 February 1723, aged sixteen, and graduated BA on 13 October 1726 and MA on 9 July 1729. He then decided to study medicine, and graduated MB on 7 December 1732. He practised as a physician in Devizes, Wiltshire, until his death. 
Davis is remembered for the publication of 'Origines Divisianae, or, The antiquities of the Devizes in some familiar letters to a friend wrote in the years 1750 and 1751' (1754). It is described as a 'very humourous collection' by Nichols who none the less perpetuates 'upon authority which I cannot resist' a wrong ascription of the work to Dr Sneyd Davis (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 1.682). This work is a vigorous and well-sustained caricature of the antiquarian and etymological studies of Musgrave, Stukeley, and others. It has a playful sense of the absurd: 'An old woman, who shew'd Lord Bathurst's fine place by Cirencester, was ask'd by a Gentleman that came to see it -- Pray what building is that? -- Oh Sir, that is a ruin a thousand years old, which my Lord built last year; and he proposes to build one this year half as old again. (Davis, 9)' Similarly, the letters end with: 'The foregoing papers were wrote by no man living, -- for the Author dy'd some months ago. He long entertain'd a disrelish for the modern sort of scholarship and was not unwilling for these papers to go to the press to prevent many larger from going there. (ibid., 89-90)' The erudite solemnity of Davis's jokes deceived later writers who took his fancies as facts of local history. 
Davis died in Devizes on 13 July 1755, but was buried in the parish church at Chepstow on 17 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 7284


Davis, John (d. 1621), sailor, was one of at least four children of unknown parentage. He sailed as pilot on the 'Ascension' on the first East India Company voyage under Lancaster in 1601-3, a voyage on which his namesake, John Davis 'of Sandridge' was pilot major. He was pilot of the 'Expedition', then master, in the company's third voyage in 1608-9. As master on the East India Company's ship 'James', 1612-15, Davis refers to his first sighting of Martin Vaz: 'I saw this island when I was with Michelborne' (Purchas, bk 4.440) -- indicating that he had sailed on Sir Edward Michelborne's interloping voyage to the East Indies, 1604-6, during which John Davis of Sandridge had been killed, in 1605, and the captain had also been killed, leaving Davis to bring the ship home. He sailed again in 1616 as master of the 'Swan', which with the 'Defence' was bound for Banda under Sir Nathaniel Courthope's command. The expedition ran into severe difficulties, contesting trading rights and possession of the islands with the Dutch forces, leading to Courthope's death in October 1620. Davis defied Courthope's orders and went ashore for water at Wayre. He was one of a number of sailors captured by the Dutch and imprisoned at Pularoon where they 'were used very basely... kept in irons night and day' (letter, Nash to David, 3 Oct 1618, Purchas, bk 5.674). Davis was one of the survivors; he returned home in the 'Unicorn' in 1619. 
Back in England Davis wrote 'A ruter or briefe direction for readie sailings into the East India, digested into a plaine method by master John Davis of Limehouse, upon experience of his five voyages thither and home againe'. The rutter, now at BL, Sloane 3959, was inserted by Samuel Purchas in his record of voyages published in 1625 (Purchas, bk 4.444). Like his contemporaries Davis gave longitudes not from a prime meridian, but by reckoning from the meridian of some well-known location, such as the Lizard or the Cape of Good Hope. He was well aware of the compass variation experienced as a ship traversed the Atlantic from Europe to Brazil and back to Africa, and used this as an additional guide to longitude. He remarks on the tidal streams, and describes the profiles of islands and coasts as seen on approach, and on the depth and nature of the adjacent sea bed, both as hazard and as good ground for anchoring. 
Despite his experience Davis was never promoted to captain, possibly because of his quarrelsome nature and his addiction to strong drink. In January 1621 he sailed as pilot on the 'Lesser James', and succumbed to disease later that year, describing himself in his will written on 14 December 1621 as 'weake of body' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/141, 439'r'). He died before the year's end, while the 'Lesser James' was making for Jambi in Sumatra. After bequests to his brothers Simon and Robert, his sister Elizabeth, and various kinsmen, he gave instructions for the sale of his goods aboard the 'Lesser James' and ashore at Batavia, the major portion of his estate going to his wife, Jane. He also mentions that he had been to Amsterdam to demand restitution of the goods seized when he was captured by the Dutch, and was hoping that the Dutch promise to restore his possessions, made in the presence of Gabriel Towerson, would be made good on his arrival in the East Indies. When news of his death reached England Jane petitioned the East India Company directors on 9 July 1623 for his wages owing, and compensation for his imprisonment in 1618. The directors rejected her appeal, but made a token payment to relieve her poverty. 


@@@@@


doc= 7285


Davis, John Bunnell (1777-1824), physician, was one of the eleven or more children of Timothy Davis, a surgeon-apothecary at Thetford in Norfolk, who later moved to London, becoming surgeon-general to the customs. Davis was born in June 1777 at Clare, Suffolk, and was baptized on 17 July 1777 there. He studied surgery at Guy's Hospital and St Thomas's Hospital, London, and became a member of the Company of Surgeons. 
Because of severe illness, after receiving his diploma Davis served as medical attendant to a family travelling in France during the peace of Amiens, but had the misfortune to be detained in France as a prisoner of war. He made the best of his circumstances, continuing his medical studies at Montpellier, and graduating MD there in 1803, having completed a dissertation on cancer. Confined later at Verdun, he published 'Observations on Precipitate Burial and the Diagnosis of Death' (1806). He sent a copy of the work to J. N. Corvisart, Napolean's first physician, along with a petition for his release. Permission for Davis's release was granted soon after, and he returned to England in May 1806. Influenced by his detention in France, in 1807 Davis published 'More Subjects Than One', a two-volume collection of essays and reflections on France, and an account of the climate of Nice and its suitability for invalids. 
Davis proceeded to Edinburgh University and graduated MD on 24 June 1808, reading a dissertation on phthisis. In September 1809 he was appointed hospital mate for general service in the army and was sent to a hospital at Ipswich to attend to the troops invalided home from Walcheren. As a result, he published an account entitled 'A scientific and popular view of the fever at Walcheren and its consequences, as they appeared in the British troops returned from the late expedition: with an account of the morbid anatomy of the body and the efficacy of drastic purges and mercury in the treatment of this disease' (1810). The book contained an account of the symptoms of the fever, and a collection of post-mortem records. They show that what was called Walcheren fever included several kinds of dysentery, enteric fever, and enteric fever complicated with malarial fever. 
Davis resigned in 1812 and settled in practice in London, having become a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1810. He was physician to the Northern Dispensary and Surrey Dispensary, and in 1816 was the joint founder of, and physician to, the Universal Dispensary for Sick Indigent Children at St Andrew's Hill, Doctors' Commons. This was the first large-scale institution devoted to the care of sick children, and it accepted children from any locality. 
In 1817 Davis published 'A Cursory Inquiry into some of the Principal Causes of Mortality among Children', based on and containing an account of his experiences at the dispensary. The publication of 'Annals, Historical and Medical, of the Universal Dispensary for Children' followed in 1821, the year in which the dispensary was renamed the Royal Universal Dispensary for Children. 
Davis died suddenly on 28 September 1824 at the age of forty-seven, leaving a widow and three children. He was buried at Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 7286


Davis, John Ford (1773-1864), physician, was born at Bath and educated at the school of the Revd Edward Spencer. He then studied medicine, first in London and afterwards in Edinburgh, where he graduated MD on 24 June 1797. His whereabouts between that date and 30 September 1808, when he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in London, are not known, but there is indirect evidence that he was back in Bath, perhaps in dispensary practice, for at least part of the time. Certainly, very soon after he obtained his licence, he set up in practice in that city. 
Davis's first hospital appointment was as consulting physician to the Bath Eye Infirmary in 1811, the year of its foundation. He was elected physician to the General Hospital at Bath in 1817 and held the office for seventeen years; he retired in 1834 as senior physician. His main published works were his graduation thesis, 'Tentamen chemico-medicum inaugurale de contagio' (1797) and 'An Inquiry into the Symptoms and Treatment of Carditis or the Inflammation of the Heart' (1808). The thesis was based upon Y. Van Diemerbroeck's treatise on the plague, on James Carmichael Smyth's 'Description of the Jail Distemper' (1795), and on several of the chemical works of the period. It contained no original observation on fever, and, excepting two or three chemical conjectures, was a mere compilation. 
Davis's book on carditis, published very early in his career, described three cases of which Davis himself had seen only one; presumably he had been told about the others by friends and colleagues at Bath -- one of the patients had been under the care of John Haygarth, probably at Chester, more than twenty years before. The case histories were supplemented by an extensive review of previous writing, some as far back as the twelfth century, on inflammation of the heart. This somewhat slight publication is significant for two reasons. First, it was an early recognition that inflammation could involve the whole substance of the heart, resulting not only in pericarditis, a familiar pathological finding for centuries. Second, it was an example of the wrong choice being made in the debate, current at the time, on the cause of carditis. The possibility that this disease could be due to rheumatic fever had been under consideration in Britain for ten years or more, and some Bath physicians were familiar with the idea. Davis, however, and despite a suggestion by a colleague, John Sherwen, that his cases could be rheumatic, regarded this as no more than 'doubtful'. His book was quite widely quoted in the following years but was rather roughly treated by reviewers; one wrote, in the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal', 'Dr Davis has seen but one case of carditis and, out of it he has manufactured a book' ('EMSJ', 354-5). By 1832 the situation was much clearer and that year Davis published a second short volume, entitled 'Pericarditis or Rheumatism of the Heart'. 
A third subject on which Davis wrote was the composition of the Bath waters. He has been quoted as describing, for the first time, vegetable matter floating on the surface of the water at certain seasons of the year. There is no suggestion in a publication on the Bath waters by R. W. Falconer that this finding was of any therapeutic -- or toxicological -- significance. 
Davis was also active in the affairs of his native city. He was elected councillor for the first time in January 1811 and held several civic offices -- as chief constable, bailiff, and alderman. He was a justice of the peace from 1827 to 1830, and in the latter year was elected mayor. His last appearance at the council was in December 1835. Davis and his wife, Louisa, lived for many years at 13 Royal Crescent, Bath, where he died, on 1 January 1864, aged ninety. 


@@@@@


doc= 7287


Davis, Sir John Francis, first baronet (1795-1890), colonial governor and Chinese scholar, born in London on 16 July 1795, was the eldest son in the family of four sons and seven daughters of Samuel Davis (1760-1819), magistrate of Benares and a director of the East India Company, and his wife, Henrietta, daughter of Solomon Boileau of Dublin. 
In 1813 Davis was appointed writer in the East India Company factory at Canton (Guangzhou), where he early showed marked linguistic and diplomatic aptitude. In consequence he was chosen to accompany Lord Amherst on his ineffectual embassy to Peking (Beijing) in 1816. On 9 April 1822 he married Emily (died 1866), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Richard Humfrays of the Bengal Engineers; they were to have one son and six daughters. He remained at the East India Company's factory at Canton, becoming its president in 1832. Two years later he was appointed joint commissioner in China with Lord Napier, acting as second superintendent of trade. Following Napier's departure and death in the autumn of 1834 Davis was appointed superintendent of trade by the British government, which was now anxious to reverse Napier's aggressive policy in favour of quiet acquiescence to Chinese prejudices. This policy, along with his Company-bred prejudices against free trade, met with little favour among the British traders in Canton, and he resigned on 21 January 1835 and returned to England. 
Davis had already acquired a reputation as a Chinese scholar with his translations of Chinese novels, maxims, and plays (1817, 1822) and 'The Fortunate Union' (1829), and his vocabulary of Chinese words found in the Canton and Macau areas (1824). Now he published 'The Chinese: a General Description of China and its Inhabitants' (2 vols., 1836) and 'Sketches of China' (2 vols., 1841), both of which were very well received and ran through many editions, and in 1844 'Vizier Ali Khan, or, The Massacre of Benares', an account of the action in which his father had been involved in 1799. 
On 9 February 1844 Davis was appointed plenipotentiary and superintendent of trade at Canton, and, on 23 February, governor and commander-in-chief of Hong Kong, which had been ceded to Britain under the 1842 treaty of Nanking (Nanjing). The central issue facing Davis was that of the British right of entry into Canton, which, despite the terms of the treaty of Nanking, had not thus far been granted. In April 1846 he agreed with the imperial commissioner, Qiying, to delay British entry into the city in exchange for an agreement not to alienate the Chushan Islands. Attacks on the British in Canton multiplied, and in April 1847 Davis retaliated by sending an armed force which captured the Bogue (Humen) ports and occupied the Canton factories. Qiying reached a rapid agreement with Davis to open Canton in two years' time and punish those who had offended the British, and conceded the right to build warehouses and churches. 
Despite the apparent success of this venture, Davis was censured for his actions and resigned in November 1847, although he did not leave his post until the following March. Furthermore, an 1847 parliamentary select committee inquiry into British commercial relations with China, without naming Davis, succeeded in condemning his administration of Hong Kong and supporting the views of the British merchants who had consistently opposed his policies. 
Davis, who had been created a baronet in 1845, returned to England and took up residence at Hollywood Tower, Westbury-on-Trym, Gloucestershire. On 26 November 1867 he married again; his second wife was Lucy Ellen (died 1904), daughter of Thomas James Rocke, vicar of Exmouth, with whom he had a son. He continued to publish works on China, 'China during the War and since the Peace' appearing in 1852 and 'Poeseos Sinensis commentarii: on the Poetry of the Chinese' in 1870. Oxford University created him a DCL in 1876, and the following year he endowed a Chinese scholarship at that institution. He died at Hollywood Tower on 13 November 1890, and was succeeded in the baronetcy by the son of his second marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 7288


Davis, John Philip (1784-1862), portrait painter, of whose parents nothing is known, first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1811. Then, and for ten years following, his contributions consisted of portraits in oil. In 1824 he went to Rome, where he painted a large picture, 'The Talbot Family Receiving the Benediction of the Pope' (hence his nickname, Pope Davis). In the year following he was awarded a premium of $50 by the directors of the British Institution. In 1826, after his return to London, he exhibited at the Royal Academy 'Canova Crowned by the Genius of Sculpture'. Thenceforward until 1843 he was an occasional exhibitor from a variety of London addresses. With his friend B. R. Haydon, Davis was a vigorous opponent of the Royal Academy. In 1843 he published 'Facts of Vital Importance Relative to the Embellishment of the Houses of Parliament'; in 1858 'The Royal Academy and the National Gallery: what is the State of these Institutions?' Davis died on 28 September 1862 at 67 Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London. A volume of his essays, 'Thoughts on Great Painters', was published posthumously in 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 7289


Davis, Joseph Barnard (1801-1881), physician and craniologist, second child of Joseph Davis, draper, and his wife, Marianne, was born on 13 June 1801 and was baptized next day in York. In 1820, while still studying surgery, he went as surgeon on a whaling ship to the Arctic. He qualified LSA in 1823, and on 25 September that year married Elizabeth Haslam in Shelton, Hanley, Staffordshire, where he settled for the rest of his life. They had three children. 
Soon after his arrival there Davis was appointed medical officer for the Stoke upon Trent district, and acted as parish medical officer in Shelton until his death. He qualified MRCS in 1843, became FSA in 1854, and graduated MD at St Andrews in 1862. As a Methodist of the New Connexion he was concerned for the underprivileged and with the betterment of social conditions, and his religious beliefs were matched by a liberal outlook on life. The small fee he received as a medical officer meant a reduced lifestyle but despite this he doggedly pursued learned interests. In 1828 he offered to write a history of cholera for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, and in 1839 was revising a previous article for them. His commitment to disseminating information was also reflected in 'A Popular Manual of the Art of Preserving Health' (1836) which dealt with the activities common to most nineteenth-century health regimens -- air, diet, exercise, and bathing. 
For many years Davis devoted himself to craniology, and gradually accumulated a huge number of skulls and skeletons of various races, most with carefully annotated histories. Although it is unclear if Davis was influenced by the phrenological enthusiasm of the 1820s, like a number of other scientists he thought that significant information could be extracted from the study and measurement of skulls and other skeletal remains. He was elected into the Ethnological Society in 1856, and joined the Anthropological Society on its commencement in 1862. While members of the Ethnological Society had genuinely scientific interests, many of those in the Anthropological Society mixed science with politics in the shape of the behaviour and abilities of living races. Davis seems not to have ventured into print on this aspect, possibly because he was somewhat isolated from the main body of members in London. Besides a valuable memoir on osteology of the Tasmanians, he published numerous papers in 'Anthropological Review' and the 'Journal of the Anthropological Institute'. From 1870 he was a joint editor of the 'Journal' and of 'Anthropologia'. He was elected FRS in 1868. 
In 1856 Davis and John Thurnam commenced work on their 'Crania Britannica', in two volumes, completed in 1865. Supported by a grant from the Royal Society they travelled abroad to gather material to compare with British specimens, many excavated from burial mounds, seen as representing the various races which made up the British population. Davis's own collection of skulls was published in 1867 as 'Thesaurus craniorum' (1867), delineating many examples and providing 25,000 careful measurements with copious bibliographical references. Davis spared no time or expense in his collecting: he made contact with travellers and collectors throughout the world, amassing eventually a collection larger than the combined material held in other museums. He was very clubbable and by the end of his life had joined almost thirty medical, anthropological, and general scientific societies and associations in America, Italy, Holland, Spain, Russia, Germany, and Austro-Hungary, as a full or corresponding member. These contacts provided him with information and ample opportunity to publish his own work and ideas. 
After the death of his first wife Davis married, on 31 July 1878, Emma Moorhouse ('b'. 1851), a woman who was fifty years his junior. This led to friction with his son Joseph, and in his will he provided that this son of his first marriage should receive his annuity only if he resided outside the county of Staffordshire, and that the executors must ensure that his debts were not charged to the estate. 
In 1880 Davis conveyed to the Royal College of Surgeons fourteen complete articulated skeletons, representing various races, and a large quantity of bones, casts, and other objects. He died at his home, 4 Albion Street, Shelton, on 19 May 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 7290


Davis, Lockyer John (1717-1791), bookseller, was baptized at St Bartholomew-the-Great, London, on 14 November 1717, the son of James Davis, salesman of that parish, and his wife Elizabeth. His father was the eldest brother of the bookseller Charles Davis (bap. 1693, d. 1755), to whom Lockyer was apprenticed on 1 August 1732, by which time James Davis had already died. Lockyer Davis was freed on 2 December 1746 and was elected to the livery of the Stationers' Company on the same day; from 1753 he was in business over against Gray's Inn Gate, in Holborn. Two years later he succeeded to his uncle's business, and from 1757 until 1768 he was in partnership with his first cousin Charles Reymers, son of his father's youngest sister, Elizabeth. On 9 November 1769, in her forty-eighth year, his wife, Mary, died; she was buried in St Bartholomew-the-Great. A year later Davis had moved his business to 326 High Holborn. 
Like his uncle Davis bought and sold libraries, and he issued numerous catalogues, fifteen of which have survived. As a 'catalogist' (one who 'distributes books at fixed prices for ready money') he is ranked by Nichols second only to Thomas Osborne (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.625). Davis was a member of the club of major booksellers that met monthly at the Shakespeare tavern, where, according to Nichols, 'the germ of many a valuable publication' originated, including the ideas that led to the publication in 1779 of 'The Works of the English Poets with Prefaces, Biographical and Critical, by Samuel Johnson', in the imprint of which Davis's name appears (ibid., 5.325). He had earlier been involved in the publication of various editions of Johnson's 'Dictionary' and 'Plays of Shakespeare'. 
Davis was bookseller and nominal printer to the Royal Society, and one of the nominal printers of the votes of the House of Commons. His wide knowledge of scholarship and books contributed to his becoming a consultant to many of the literary figures of the day. Fewer men 'knew more of books', Nichols observes, 'or more of the world; and fewer still were equally willing to advantage others by a free communication' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 6.436). The recognition of his integrity as a man and as a tradesman, coupled with his amiable manners, made him a sought-after social companion. Among the legacies of the printer William Bowyer the younger in 1777 was one of $100 to Davis. He was a master of the Stationers' Company for 1779-80 and an honorary registrar of the Literary Fund for the Relief of Distressed Authors, founded in 1790. He contributed light, occasional pieces to the newspapers, particularly the 'St James's Chronicle', but his only acknowledged book, published in 1775 and again in 1781, was 'a new edition, revised and improved' of 'Maxims and Moral Reflections by the Duke de la Rochefoucault'. The 1775 edition contains a dedication, signed with the name Lockyer Davis, to David Garrick, 'whose various and inimitable representations display a knowledge of the human heart not inferior to that of Rochefoucault these maxims... are gratefully inscribed by one less ambitious of patronage than proud of his friendship' (sig. A3'r'). 
Davis died suddenly at his house in Holborn on 23 April 1791, in his seventy-fourth year. He was buried in St Bartholomew-the-Great, where a tablet to the memory of Davis and his wife was placed under the organ loft. 


@@@@@


doc= 7291


Davis, Mary (c.1651-1708), actress and royal mistress, was said to be 'a bastard of Collonell Howard, my Lord Barkeshire' (Pepys, 9.24), a phrase which is more likely to refer to Thomas Howard ('bap'. 1619, died 1706), the future fourth earl, than his father, Thomas ('c'.1590-1669), the then earl. A later account stated that she was the daughter of a blacksmith from Charlton, Wiltshire, the family seat of the earls of Berkshire. In the early 1660s she was one of the actresses in the Duke's Theatre Company, who were boarded in the house of the company's patentee and manager, Sir William Davenant. She was almost certainly the little girl whose dancing and singing in Davenant's 'The Law Against Lovers' Pepys admired when he first saw her on 18 February 1662. A year later her dancing in boy's clothes pleased him, 'she having very fine legs' (Pepys, 4.56). In the season of 1663-4 she played Violinda in Robert Stapylton's 'The Step-Mother' and Aurelia in George Etherege's 'The Comical Revenge, or, Love in a Tub'; on 8 March 1664 Pepys admired her in 'Heraclius': 'the little guirle is come to act very prettily and spoke the epilogue most admirably' (Pepys, 5.78-9). Etherege wrote the role of Gatty for her, the madcap girl of 'She Would if She Could', giving her a song and a jig. Pepys considered her much superior to Nell Gwyn as a dancer, and the company's prompter, John Downes, praised her dancing at the end of John Dryden's 'Sir Martin Mar-All', in which she created the role of Millisent. In November 1667 the company had a great success with a revival of Davenant's 'The Rivals', in which Moll Davis, as the mad Celania, sang 'My lodging it is on the cold ground'. Downes remembered that she 'perform'd that so Charmingly, that not long after, it Rais'd her from her Bed on the Cold Ground, to a Bed Royal' (Downes, 55). On 11 January 1668 Pepys learned that Miss Davis was leaving the company because the king, who was in love with her, had given her a ring worth $600 and was furnishing a house for her. Three days later Mrs Pearce told him that the 'homely jade' was showing the ring to everyone, that the house was in Suffolk Street, and that Lady Castlemaine, the king's mistress, was jealous. On 31 May 1668 Pepys recorded that she was 'quite gone' from the theatre and had appeared in a play at court, when the queen left before she danced her jig (Pepys, 9.24, 219). 

'The School of Venus' (1716) recounts the story that Nell Gwyn gave her rival sweetmeats laced with a laxative before she visited the king, with the result that Moll was pensioned off with $1000 a year. However, Mary, her daughter with Charles II and the last of the king's offspring, was not born until 16 October 1673 and Moll certainly continued as a performer in court entertainments. In his 1673 'Epigrams' Richard Flecknoe added his poem 'On her Excellent Singing' to his 1669 effusion 'To M. M. Davies. On her Excellent Dancing'. Between February and April 1675 she was the principal singer in the performances of John Crowne's court masque 'Calisto'. The young princesses Mary and Anne had the leading acting roles, while Moll Davis portrayed the River Thames in the sung prologue and the shepherdess Sylvia in the musical interludes. Crowne defended his unorthodox casting of a woman as the River Thames, saying that his purpose was to delight the court: 'and the graceful motions and admirable singing of Mrs. 'Davis', did sufficiently prove the discretion of my choice' (Crowne, sig. a3). A satire of 1681 implied that Moll Davis was the mistress of Baptist May, the keeper of the privy purse, who kept her at the king's expense. In the 'Masque for the Entertainment of the King', John Blow's opera 'Venus and Adonis' (BL, Add. MS 22100), she created the role of Venus, while her daughter, Lady Mary Tudor, sang Cupid. The performance took place after 10 December 1680, when her daughter received her title, and before April 1684, when the opera was performed by a cast of young gentlewomen at Josias Priest's school at Chelsea. The king granted his daughter an annuity of $1500 in September 1683 and she was married to Edward, Viscount Radcliffe, later earl of Derwentwater, in August 1687. Two of their three sons were to be executed for their parts in the Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1745. 
In December 1686 Mary Davis (flatteringly described on the marriage allegation as aged about twenty-five) married the instrumentalist and composer James Paisible (d. 1721), a fellow performer in 'Calisto'. Paisible was a member of James II's private musick and became a performer in his Catholic chapel. The Paisibles appear to have spent some time at James's exiled court in St Germain-en-Laye, although in February 1692 they began a chancery suit in England to recover money owed to Mrs Paisible. During 1693 both James and Marie Paisible obtained French passports to return to England. Paisible re-established himself in London's musical life, and in January 1698 he and his wife were granted a licence to remain in England. 'James Paisible now in London', who received $50 in Paisible's will, was probably not her son, but the 'James Peasable of James & Eliz. born 8 July Bastard' who was baptized at St Anne's, Soho, on 19 July 1702. Mary Paisible died probably at her home in Dean Street, Soho, and was buried at St Anne's, Soho, on 24 February 1708. 


@@@@@


doc= 7292


Davis, Nathan (1812-1882), traveller and excavator, was born in 1812. Nothing is known of his education, save that he is referred to as Dr Davis. He was an American who for many years lived in an old Moorish palace, 10 miles from Tunis, where he extended his hospitality to various travellers. He published his experiences of northern Africa in: 'Tunis, or, Selections from a Journal during a Residence in that Regency' (1841); 'A voice from North Africa, or a narrative illustrative of the... manners of the inhabitants of that part of the world' (1844); and 'Evenings in my tent, or, Wanderings in Balad, Ejjareed, illustrating the... conditions of various Arab tribes of the African Sahara' (2 vols., 1854). In 1852 he edited the 'Hebrew Christian Magazine', and afterwards became a nonconformist minister. From 1856 to 1858 he was engaged on behalf of the British Museum in excavations at Carthage and Utica and between 1857 and 1860 numerous cases of antiquities were sent by him to that museum where the chief antiquities discovered -- Roman mosaic pavements -- were preserved. His benefactions were particularly appreciated by the museum since he was an American. Davis described his explorations in 'Carthage and her Remains' (1861) which, although rather unscholarly in presentation, was widely circulated. It was followed by 'Ruined Cities within Numidian and Carthaginian Territories' (1862). He also published 'Israel's True Emancipator' (two letters to Dr Adler, 1852), and, with Benjamin Davidson, 'Arabic Reading Lessons' (n.d. [1854]). Shortly before his death Davis revisited Tunis, but the journey tried his strength, and he died at Florence on 6 January 1882 of congestion of the lungs. 


@@@@@


doc= 7293


Davis, Richard Barrett (1782-1854), landscape and animal painter, was born at Watford, Hertfordshire, and baptized on 25 July 1782 at Hemel Hempstead, the eldest of the nine sons of Richard Davis (1750-1825), who became huntsman to George III's private harriers in 1789, and his wife, Sarah. At the end of the eighteenth century the hunt moved to Windsor, and it was here that the king saw and admired some drawings by the young Davis. Sir Francis Bourgeois RA, landscapist to the king, did not take pupils but, when told it was the royal wish, he became Davis's tutor in 1804. It is also said that Davis studied under Sir William Beechey RA. Subsequently the young artist studied at the Royal Academy Schools, although he was not registered as a pupil. Davis had already exhibited a landscape at the Royal Academy in 1802, and two landscapes with cattle the following year. His progress and aptitude for animal painting was demonstrated by his picture 'His Majesty in his Travelling Chariot Returning to Town from Windsor', which was shown at the Royal Academy in 1805, and 'Mares and Foals in his Majesty's Stud at Windsor' the following year. He started exhibiting at the British Institution in 1808 and at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists in 1827. At the last venue he regularly exhibited the maximum number of nine paintings allowed annually for the next ten years. He held various offices in the society, including briefly being president in 1832, ceasing to be a member in 1843. In 1828 he was made animal painter to George IV, and later held similar appointments to William IV and Queen Victoria. In 1831 he painted an enormous panoramic frieze (128 ft 4 in. long) of the coronation procession of William IV (Royal Collection). 
William Henry Davis ('c'.1795-1885), a younger brother of R. B. Davis, initially painted similar subjects to his brother, but later turned to scenes from Shakespeare. W. H. Davis exhibited paintings at the Royal Academy and British Institution between 1803 and 1849. He was appointed animal painter to William IV in 1837 and to Queen Victoria in 1839. R. B. Davis's daughter, Sara, painted portraits and six of her miniatures were shown at the Royal Academy between 1846 and 1854. The majority of R. B. Davis's paintings shown at the Royal Academy were of horses including, in 1840, 'Portrait of the Hermit, Celebrated in the Royal Hunt, the Property of her Majesty', followed in 1842 by 'Portrait of Mr Davis, her Majesty's Huntsman, on the Hermit'. This was Charles Davis, another younger brother, who became huntsman to the royal buckhounds in 1822, and held that post for forty-four years until his death in 1866. Without doubt the royal patronage and associations with hunting brought many commissions to the industrious R. B. Davis. Despite exhibiting regularly at the Royal Academy for fifty years, he was never elected as an associate of the academy. His output was variable but his honest, if slightly dull, portraits of horses and riders set in recognizable landscapes and of other animals (his painting of hounds was particularly fine) afforded him a comfortable income at this stage of his life. In 1836, in conjunction with the print publishers A. H. Bailey & Co., Davis started producing a series of prints of different hunts: 'The Hunter's Annual'. This comprised pages of letterpress describing four contemporary packs of hounds, each with a hand-coloured lithographic equestrian portrait after paintings by the artist of their principal huntsman. These sets of four plates continued, in the series in 1838 and 1839, and in what was described as a second series, in 1841, 'The Hunter's Annual' was in aquatint. A number of Davis's engagingly composed shooting scenes were also engraved, and he contributed thirty subjects for the 'Sporting Magazine'. Towards the end of his life when Victorian morals led to hunting becoming less fashionable, commissions became fewer, as did the number of his paintings shown at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists. When he died on 13 March 1854, at his home, 9 Bedford Place, Kensington, London, as a result of a tetanus infection, he was a poor man, and left a widow, Lucy. 


@@@@@


doc= 7294


Davis, Thomas Osborne (1814-1845), politician and journalist, was born at Mallow, co. Cork, on 24 October 1814, not on 16 October as has sometimes been asserted. His father, James Thomas Davis, held a commission in the British army, and as a surgeon in the Royal Artillery was for many years stationed in Dublin. Appointed head of the British ordnance medical department in Portugal, he was on his way there when he died at Exeter, Devon, in September 1814, a month before Thomas, his sixth child, was born. Of these children only four lived to adulthood: the three brothers John, James, and Thomas, and their sister Charlotte. Dr Davis's family was of Welsh origin, long settled in England. Davis's mother, Mary Atkins, traced her ancestry to a Cromwellian settler whose descendants, though occasionally intermarrying with Irish families, continued protestants in the English interest. On a fragment of his remaining papers Davis had written that he was brought up a high tory and episcopalian protestant. In his maternal ancestry there was a great-grandmother who belonged to the Gaelic O'Sullivan Beare family of co. Cork. Davis's eldest brother, John Nicholas Atkins Davis, like his father a medical doctor, was also a famous genealogist, known in Dublin as 'pedigree Davis'. Of him Davis once wrote that 'there is no family in Munster but he knows the pedigree of' (Duffy, 'Davis', 174). Davis's mature ambition to bring Irishmen of whatever origin to work for their common country may well be traced to this knowledge of his own mixed ancestry. 
When Davis was four his mother moved her family to Dublin, settling first at Warrington Place and later at 61 (now 67) Lower Baggot Street, where Davis lived his brief life, and where he died in 1845. Some of his early education was at a school on Lower Mount Street kept by a Mr Mongan, from which he entered Trinity College in 1831. There is little evidence of Davis's early years except that he was dreamy, self-absorbed, and quickly emotional. Of his knowledge of Ireland during his youth little is known, except that he spent holidays in co. Tipperary, where an aunt was the wife of the Anglican rector in Templederry. At Trinity he was known as a steady plodding student, reading on a wide variety of subjects -- history, law, political philosophy -- and works of travel. In his own eyes he was filling the gaps he found in the Trinity curriculum. After graduation in 1836, Davis went to London to keep his terms as a law student, and was called to the bar in 1838. He did not practise. In 1837 he had privately printed a pamphlet, 'The Reform of the Lords', arguing for an elected upper house, though leaving it with an absolute power of rejecting bills. 
A succession of authors commenting on the origins of Davis's nationalism have suggested that it was the result of a journey before 1840 to Germany, where he was influenced by the writings of Lessing, Herder, Fichte, and the Schlegels. No solid evidence of any continental or German visit exists, but rather more telling is the statement in Duffy's biography that Davis had never travelled. A manuscript in Davis's own hand states that his ideas of national independence and national policy had been formed in the historical societies of Trinity College, Dublin, and came from Trinity College protestants and a few Roman Catholics. Moreover, there was Davis's own early admiration for Daniel O'Connell. In the debates in the Trinity College Historical Society Davis played a prominent part and as president in 1840 delivered an address on 'The utility of debating societies in remedying the defects of a university education'. This address ranged widely over many subjects, and its famous sentence 'Gentlemen, you have a country' has been seen as Davis's public debut as an Irish nationalist. It was also an appeal for reform, for the improvement of education at all levels, and for the responsibilities of the educated classes in an age of growing democracy. It indicates the influence on Davis's thinking of Alexis De Tocqueville's 'Democracy in America' (1835). 
In 1841, with his Trinity friend John Blake Dillon, Davis joined O'Connell's recently formed Loyal National Repeal Association. Journalism rather than law attracted him and between 1839 and 1843 he wrote articles for 'The Citizen', a monthly journal later called the 'Dublin Monthly Magazine', founded by members of the Trinity College Historical Society. These articles -- on Grattan's parliament, on India, on Afghanistan, on the Irish parliament of 1689 and on peasant proprietorship -- suggested Davis's promise as journalist, politician, and historian. In the spring of 1841 both Davis and Dillon wrote for the Dublin 'Morning Register', an engagement which ended after six months. An acquaintance with Charles Gavan Duffy, the successful editor of the 'Belfast Vindicator', led to discussions on Irish journalism and in 1842 a decision on the part of all three to found a weekly journal to be called 'The Nation'. Its first issue appeared on 15 October 1842. The prospectus, written except for one sentence by Davis, had renewal as its theme: emancipation from old and tired issues and the direction of the popular mind and the sympathies of educated men to nationality and the blessings of domestic legislation. The journal endeavoured to bring all Irishmen of whatever origin to patriotic action for their common country. 'The Nation' was at once successful, its circulation soon far higher than that of any other Dublin paper. Although Duffy was an outstanding editor, 'The Nation' was very much Davis's paper in its intellectual qualities, and in the number of essays, editorials, book reviews, and smaller pieces written by him. During the first year, Davis had written about 210 essays and editorials; and between 1842 and 1845 he published about eighty poems. Duffy was the second most frequent contributor, and sometimes he and Davis wrote most of the paper. For his work Davis received $500 a year -- a considerable sum for those days. 
At Duffy's urging Davis tried his hand at poetry, and his first effort, 'Lament for the Death of Owen Roe O'Neill', was followed by other poems recalling famous incidents, military engagements, tragedies, and disasters in Irish history. There were songs and love poems as well. His ballad 'A Nation Once Again', first published in 'The Nation' on 13 July 1844, became widely adopted as an unofficial national anthem. Critics of Davis have noted the disparity between 'The Nation's' editorial advocacy of non-violence, following O'Connell, and the martial and military cast of so much of Davis's poetry; but the poems were meant to give Irishmen the history they would never hear in the national schools, and to arouse pride in their country's past. 'The Nation' was very much a part of the heated atmosphere surrounding O'Connell's mass meetings for repeal during the spring and summer of 1843. After Peel proscribed O'Connell's planned monster meeting at Clontarf in October 1843, followed in 1844 by O'Connell's trial for conspiracy and by his brief imprisonment, 'The Nation' entered a new phase, keeping up enthusiasm for a now distant repeal of the union. 
During 1844, while O'Connell and Duffy were imprisoned, Davis, acting with William Smith O'Brien, who had become a repealer, prepared reports on various governmental issues, and assumed heavy responsibilities for 'The Nation'. In the newspaper he urged the election to parliament of men of character and ability who would stand together for Irish reform. He was also editing the speeches of John Philpot Curran which were published in 1845. His biography of Wolfe Tone was to remain unfinished, indeed hardly begun, at his death. Working in the general committee of the Repeal Association, Davis rarely spoke in public. In May 1845, however, he encouraged the association to welcome Peel's bill for Irish higher education, and to rejoice in the three projected colleges where Catholic and protestant students would be educated together. Despite his endorsement of amendments which would protect the faith and morals of students, Davis was harshly attacked by O'Connell for his stand for secular education. The quarrel was made up, though opinions did not change. 
By 1845 Duffy, Davis, and Dillon had become the centre of a group of young men who contributed to 'The Nation' and who talked and planned together. A journalist called them Young Ireland, and the name remained. Their history would be written in the 1880s by Gavan Duffy. Close to 'The Nation''s founders were John Pigot, John O'Hagan, and Denny Lane of Cork. But Duffy, in his historical works, left no doubt that Davis was their true leader. His wide knowledge, his frank, unpretentious manner, his good nature and fairness attracted friends who would remember him with affection. Writing in 1890, John O'Hagan recalled in him 'a grace of nature and manner which never failed to attract'. Among Dublin's intellectual circles there were many, notably Samuel Ferguson, who disagreed with Davis's nationalist politics but remained his friends. 
In the late summer of 1845 Davis became engaged to marry Annie Hutton, whom he had first met in 1843. In early September he became ill with what he described in a note to Duffy as 'some sort of cholera, and perhaps a slight scarlatina'. Dr Stokes was in attendance. A few days later Davis wrote of 'a horrid sore throat'. Improvement was followed by a relapse and on 16 September Davis died at his home in Lower Baggot Street. He was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery. A public funeral attended by those prominent in Dublin's political and cultural life attested to the regard which he had won from all shades of opinion. Commemorative articles in 'The Nation', where his poems had appeared under the name The Celt, revealed his life and identity to a wider public. In 1846 Gavan Duffy edited Davis's prose articles, and in the same year Thomas Wallis published a collection of his poems. Both volumes went through many editions. A statue by the sculptor John Hogan now stands in the foyer of the Dublin city hall across from that of O'Connell. 
Davis was politically moderate, even though unwavering in his ultimate goals. He wanted true independence for Ireland, but was at one point prepared to accept as a step on the way a subordinate parliament. Probably his goal was the responsible representative government which Canada in the 1840s was attaining and which Duffy was to endorse in 1848. Peasant proprietorship on the land must come, but not by violent means. The fervour with which he wrote sometimes concealed his moderation. His hostility to England and to the landlords was a bitter legacy, but in the case of the landlords he could also see their problems. Much of Davis's patriotism was non-political. Preservation and improvement are themes which thread their way through his 'Nation' essays. There must be no road through New Grange; old buildings and older ruins must be saved; Irish music and the Irish language should be cherished. The Irish language, a precious cultural inheritance, was necessary for writing the early history of the country, and for understanding its nomenclature and place names as well as its soul and spirit. He advocated education at every level and set great store by repeal reading-rooms, public lectures, and provision for healthful amusements. Often cited as opposed to modernization, he urged industrial education, hoping that in Ireland, should industrialization come, its worst effects might be avoided. 
If Davis has affinities with English Victorian reformers, in Ireland he also belongs, outside political nationalism, in a line of descent going back to the Royal Dublin Society (1731) and to the Royal Irish Academy (1785), and forward to the work of George Russell and Horace Plunkett. His own deepest ambition was to write a history of Ireland, and at one time he sought a leave of absence from 'The Nation' to begin it. He was much attracted to the romantic historical writing of Augustin Thierry. His 'Citizen' essays on the 1689 parliament of James II won high praise from the historian Lecky, but were republished only in 1893 (as 'The Patriot Parliament'). In all the cultural, artistic, and historical activities of Dublin in the 1840s Davis was deeply involved, and in January 1845 he became a member of the Royal Irish Academy. His untimely death caused much speculation, both then and since, on what his life might have become. The dedicated patriotism of Davis's life made him ever afterwards an example and an inspiration to Irishmen of widely different political views. 


@@@@@


doc= 7295


Bennet, John (d. 1690), thief, of unknown parentage, is at present visible only in the last year of his life. On 9 September 1689 the authorities had -- or thought they had -- him in Newgate prison and advertised in the 'London Gazette' for witnesses to come forward to identify the notorious thief, the Golden Farmer. They knew him under two of his aliases, William Freeman alias Hill, housebreaker, 'aged between 50 and 60 years of age' ('London Gazette', 9 Sept 1689). 
For whatever reason, Bennet was free within a few weeks and on the afternoon of 16 October 1689 he was among those who broke into the house of an Essex magistrate, Charles Palmer, at Gray's Thurrock, stealing over $400 worth of goods. Seven men had attacked the house and four, including Bennet, entered, tying up the magistrate and his servants, forcing Palmer's wife, Elizabeth, at gunpoint to lead them to the valuables in the house, and overcoming some soldiers from a nearby blockhouse who came to investigate the disturbance. On 26 February 1690 he and others robbed the house of Thomas Bird in Ware, Hertfordshire, stealing $500 worth of goods. 
However, later that year he was informed against by one of his fellow gang members, who reported other crimes and named his chief accomplices: one Marshal, Jenkins the barber, and 'Old Mobb'. Bennet went into hiding but his betrayer's wife and sister, Elizabeth Holt and Anne Holland, found him by following his wife. On 26 September he was drinking at the Rose and Crown ale house in Dorset Gardens in St Bride's when they came in with a warrant to arrest him for a robbery. In the disturbance that followed, with the two women shouting 'stop thief, a highwayman', a soldier, Charles Taylor, tried to detain him. Bennet shot him in the stomach with a double-shotted pistol and fled; Taylor died of his wounds two days later. Bennet took refuge in Southwark, where he was discovered soon after. Chased by a group of butchers, he shot one of his pursuers, who also later died of his wounds, but he was finally cornered and knocked down by brickbats. He was committed to Newgate on 23 October, 'accused upon oath for having committed several Robberies upon the Highway and severall Burglaries' and for Taylor's murder (CLRO, SF374, gaol calendar). Again, advertisements were placed in the 'London Gazette', identifying him as 'William Netherway, alias Freeman, alias Bennet, but commonly known by the name of The Golden Farmer, a tall red faced Man, his Face full of Pimples, above 50 years of Age, his Head shakes' ('London Gazette', 23 Oct 1690). 
They also had in custody two of his accomplices, and the advertisement charged the three men with highway robbery on Bagshot and Hounslow heaths and between Edmonton and Enfield -- that is, on roads to the south, west, and north of London -- and housebreaking in Middlesex, Hertfordshire, and Essex. Elizabeth Palmer came forward and identified Bennet as one of the men who had broken into her house (though she knew him as William Newman, alias Nethway), while Thomas Bird was also bound over to testify against him. Bennet was tried and convicted at the Old Bailey on 18 December 1690 for the Essex housebreaking and for Taylor's murder. Awaiting execution, he showed remorse for his crimes, but insufficient to satisfy the ordinary (the prison chaplain): pressed to make recompense to the victims of his crimes, he asked what more could he give than the law taking his life. The ordinary explained that 'he Paid his Life to the Justice of the Law; it made no Satisfaction nor Recompense to those he had despoil'd of their Estates' (Smith). He must not regard his charity to the poor from the profits of theft as acceptable to God. He was hanged on Fleet Street, near the site of Taylor's murder, on 22 December 1690. On 26 December his body was hanged in chains on Bagshot Heath, Surrey. His death was commemorated in a ballad, 'The Golden Farmer's Last Farewell', in which the condemned man acknowledged his involvement with 'a gang of robbers, notorious hardy highwaymen who did like ruffians reign' and bade farewell to his accomplice Old Mobb. Within the year Richard Awson, alias Old Mobb, had followed Bennet to the gallows, accused by a fellow gang member, Anthony Dunn, 'as being menconed in their Maties proclamacon for being a Notorious Highwayman' (LMA, MJ/SR 1783, gaol calendar). 
The ordinary of Newgate's account and the Old Bailey trial report concur that Bennet was the Golden Farmer. However, his identity became lost when Captain Alexander Smith linked the nickname of the Golden Farmer to the name of William Davis (d. 1689), reputed highwayman, in his 'The History of the Lives of the most Noted Highwaymen' (1714), a best-seller which had reached its fifth edition by 1719-20 as 'A Compleat History'. Smith's William Davis took his nickname from his practice of always settling his debts in gold. In the account provided by Smith and elaborated on by later Grub Street hacks, Davis was born into a farming family near Wrexham in Denbighshire and moved to Chipping Sodbury in Gloucestershire, where he married the daughter of a wealthy innkeeper with whom he had eighteen children. He later settled near Bagshot Heath, Surrey, living a double life as a respectable farmer and busy highwayman, unsuspected by his neighbours, for over forty years. The many robberies attributed to Davis by Smith are characterized by cunning, repartee, and ruthlessness, often involving a sort of rough-and-ready justice against social stereotypes ripe for their come-uppance -- a canting Quaker, a tinker, a greedy lawyer, a dim gentleman, a magistrate. Once Davis confided to a wealthy grazier that there were highwaymen about and asked him to hide some money for him. In hiding the money, the grazier inadvertently showed Davis where he had concealed 50 guineas of his own. Soon Davis announced that since nobody would take the trouble to rob either of them that day, he would be obliged to rob the grazier himself. On another occasion, he held up Anne Monck, duchess of Albemarle, on Salisbury Plain. Having been the well-known scold Nan Clarges before her marriage, it is not surprising that she obstinately refused to hand over anything. Infuriated, Davis forcibly removed her rings while at the same time reproaching her for her painted face. 
According to Smith, Davis was a master of disguise, which helps explain why he went undetected among his neighbours. One anecdote recounts that Davis, having paid 70 guineas rent to his landlord, caught up with him later in full disguise and took back his money; the landlord never suspected that he had been robbed by his own tenant. Later accounts claimed that Davis may have given up highway robbery for some years as his farming business (and according to one version a corn-chandler's shop in Thames Street, London) prospered. He robbed again when he needed money to buy adjacent farmland. The same later accounts claimed that Davis was shot in the back as he escaped from a hold-up and was taken to the King's Arms at Bagshot, where his identity was revealed to his astonished neighbours. 
Smith certainly knew something of the real Golden Farmer. Though he presented Davis as a man who worked alone, he recorded his association with Old Mobb (in his life of the latter). His account of the pursuit of the Farmer is reasonably true to the actual event. Smith gave Davis's date of execution, in his sixty-fourth year, in Fleet Street, as 20 December 1689; almost exactly a year out from Bennet's. Smith evidently conflated William Davis (one of several men of that name who appears in the sessions records in the 1680s and 1690s), who was convicted of burglary at the Old Bailey sessions in December 1689, with the real Golden Farmer, John Bennet, convicted in December the following year. Smith may have known that he had misidentified the Golden Farmer. However, historical accuracy was not a high priority in Smith's picaresque accounts of highwaymen's lives. 


@@@@@


doc= 7296


Davis, William (1771/2-1807), mathematician and publisher, probably made his early career as a surveyor and teacher of mathematics. He is first known in 1796 and 1797, as a contributor to mathematical periodicals. About this time he must have issued his first publication, 'An Easy and Comprehensive Description and Use of the Globes', in an edition which is as yet untraced. In 1798, the year in which the second edition of this work was published, he was a bookseller at 2 Albion Buildings, Aldersgate Street, London; and he described himself as a member of the Mathematical and Philosophical Society of London. In the same year he published 'A Complete Treatise of Land Surveying', a popular work which went through five editions by 1813; it has a five-page subscription list in which many of the provincial names are from Cheshire, Denbighshire, and Flint, from which it may be hazarded that he had worked in those parts before establishing himself in London. In 1798 he also launched the 'Companion to the Gentleman's Diary', a mathematical annual renamed in the following year the 'Gentleman's Mathematical Companion' after objections from Charles Wildbore, the editor of the 'Gentleman's Diary'. 
Davis was married; his wife's name was Anne. His publishing business produced a steady flow of essential mathematical texts. In 1803 he brought out a three-volume edition of Andrew Motte's English translation of Newton's 'Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica', which he dedicated to the astronomer royal, Nevil Maskelyne. Motte's 1729 translation is still regarded as the best, and Davis's edition made this available to a number of generations of nineteenth-century students. In 1805 Davis revised Thomas Simpson's 'The Doctrine and Application of Fluxions', which he published together with a life of the author. He also issued 'Keys' to a number of John Bonnycastle's elementary mathematical textbooks, a new edition of Daniel Fenning's 'The Young Algebraist's Companion', and, on a more advanced level, brought out a new edition of Colin MacLaurin's 'Treatise of Fluxions', as well as of John Rowe's 'Introduction to the Doctrine of Fluxions'. 
Davis continued to edit his annual 'Mathematical Companion' up to his death at the age of thirty-five, on 8 February 1807. Considering that he had simultaneously attended to his business, his mathematical output over the space of ten years was quite remarkable. After his death the 'Mathematical Companion' was edited by John Hampshire, who died in 1825, and it ceased with the number for 1827. Davis's 'mathematical and philosophical book warehouse' at Aldersgate was continued by his widow, who published the fifth edition of his 'Complete Treatise' in 1813, with a portrait of her husband opposite the title-page. Anne Davis remarried: her second husband was a London bookseller and printer by the name of J. S. Dickson, and in 1814 the name of the firm was changed to Davis and Dickson. She died on 15 October 1822, when the business was wound up. The stock was auctioned in November and December 1834, and in May 1836. Its sale catalogue was of considerable interest to mathematical antiquaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 7297


Davis, William (1812-1873), landscape painter, was born in Dublin in August 1812, the son of a solicitor. His family was socially well connected, but found themselves in reduced circumstances. He first intended to train for the law, but later turned to art, attending drawing and modelling lessons at the Royal Dublin Society. In 1833-5 he exhibited portraits at the Royal Hibernian Academy. In 1837 he moved to England, living first in Sheffield and settling in Liverpool about five years later. He enrolled as a probationer in the Liverpool Academy Schools in 1846 and as a student in 1848. He was elected an associate of the same institution in 1851 and a full member in 1853. Between 1856 and 1859 he served as professor of drawing at the Liverpool Academy. Davis maintained his connection with the Liverpool Academy until its final dissolution in 1867. He sent works to exhibitions from a succession of addresses in Liverpool, until 1863 when he used addresses in London. By 1870 he was permanently settled in South Hampstead, London. 
William Davis's first patron was John Miller, merchant and shipowner in Liverpool, who had in his collection distinguished Pre-Raphaelite paintings including works by Millais, Ford Madox Brown, and Holman Hunt. H. C. Marillier believed that Miller encouraged Davis to abandon figure painting in favour of landscape. The Liverpool artist Robert Tonge (1823-1856) seems also to have led Davis towards pure landscape subjects. In 1853 the two shared a painting expedition to Ireland, where Davis met his wife. 
Davis found his landscape subjects in the countryside around Liverpool, on the Wirral peninsula, and on the north shore of the Mersey towards Runcorn. On occasions he ventured further afield into Cheshire and north Wales, and he also painted on the island of Bute in Scotland, where John Miller had a house. Among his early works as a landscape painter is 'Bidston Moss at Wallasey' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), of 1855, showing a view westwards from the Wirral across the Dee estuary towards the Flintshire coast. Davis returned to Ireland in 1857, and it was perhaps on this occasion that he painted 'Rye Water Near Leixlip, County Kildare' (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). 
Davis exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1851, in the first place showing still lifes. In 1855 he sent a landscape painting -- a view in Cheshire entitled 'Early Spring Evening' -- a work that caught the eye of D. G. Rossetti, who mentioned it in a letter to William Allingham as one of 'the four best landscapes in the place' ('Letters of Dante Gabriel Rossetti', 1.252). Rossetti also drew Ruskin's attention to Davis's painting. In a first reference to 'Early Spring Evening' in a supplement to the 1855 'Academy Notes' Ruskin explained that 'my friend [had said that] it contains the 'unity of perfect truth with invention'', but subsequently he gave a more qualified account of the painting, judging it as 'merely good Pre-Raphaelite work' ('Works', 14.30, 32). 
That Davis's landscapes were particularly admired by fellow artists is demonstrated by Ford Madox Brown's rapturous comments on 'Wallasey Mill, Cheshire', shown at the 1856 Royal Academy, as a painting of 'leefless ['sic'] trees & some ducks which is perfection'. He went on: 'I do not remember ever seeing such an english landscape, it is far too good to be understood' ('Diary', 175). In September 1856 Brown met Davis at John Miller's house in Liverpool, describing him as 'one of the most unlucky artists in England... crushed by disappointment & conscious dependency of Millar ['sic'] who has entirely kept him for years' (ibid., 190). In 1873 Davis's obituarist in 'The Athenaeum' (probably F. G. Stephens) wrote of him: 'No man saw further than Mr Davis into the opportunities of a quiet rural subject: a hedge, a stream, a drenched autumnal pasture, a flitting of light and shadow over an English sky' ('The Athenaeum'). 
In 1857 Davis sent six works to the Russell Place exhibition of Pre-Raphaelite art, the titles of which indicate that they were landscapes and paintings of animals. Ruskin saw these and took it upon himself to give advice. In a letter which was apparently never sent, Ruskin told Davis to treat landscapes with more prominent subjects and with more obvious associations: 'Your work... cannot become popular unless you choose subjects of greater interest.' (Ruskin had taken particular exception to a painting of Davis's that he described as 'that 'ditch and wheatfield''.) Furthermore, Ruskin felt that Davis was too dependent on a technique of allowing oil colour, opaque as well as loosely diluted with glazes, to mix and coalesce over a ground of pure flake white. This was the method by which Davis and his contemporaries in Liverpool achieved effects of dense texture and vibrant colour, but Ruskin warned against 'too great trust to the liquidity of the vehicle in blending your colours'. He explained: 'Good use has been made of this quality by the masters of the Pre-Raphaelite school, but it is a dangerous temptation: the highest results in oil-painting depend on judicious and powerful use of dryer, in no wise 'floating' colour' (Rossetti, 'Ruskin', 169-70). 
Davis operated on the fringe of the Pre-Raphaelite circle, and as such participated in the American travelling exhibition of Pre-Raphaelite art in 1857-8 and in 1858 was invited as one of a group of Liverpool painters to join the Hogarth Club. A total of sixteen paintings by him were shown at the Royal Academy, the last in 1872, but according to Marillier the selectors turned many others of his works away. A painting entitled 'Harrowing', shown first in Liverpool in 1859 but later rejected at the Royal Academy, was exhibited at the 1862 International Exhibition in London and described by W. M. Rossetti in his review of the exhibition as 'profoundly actual in its broadly realized facts, and poetical in its impression and suggestiveness' (Rossetti, 'Fine Art', 160). 
Like J. W. Inchbold, Davis worked slowly and struggled to sell his paintings. William Michael Rossetti described him as a 'modest hard-working man, and an artist of uncommon gifts'. Rossetti further observed that Davis was 'greatly admired in a circle too strictly limited. He had a large family, and always found difficulty in 'making the two ends meet'' (Rossetti, 'Ruskin', 168). He compounded his problems by consistently refusing commissions from dealers. Gradually, however, his work came to be appreciated by certain Pre-Raphaelite collectors, including George Rae and Joseph Beausire, both of Liverpool, James Leathart of Gateshead, and Humphrey Roberts of London. 
In his last years Davis suffered from angina. He died in London on 22 April 1873, it was said as a result of the nervous strain brought on by seeing two of his paintings badly hung at the 1873 International Exhibition. A memorial exhibition was organized by Ford Madox Brown to raise an annuity to support his widow. Two of Davis's sons, Valentine (1854-1930) and Lucien (1860-1951), followed him in becoming painters. 


@@@@@


doc= 7298


Davison, Alexander (1750-1829), government contractor, was born at Lanton near Wooler, Northumberland, on 2 April 1750, the third son of Alexander Davison, a farmer at Lanton, and Dorothy Neal of the next parish of Yeavering. As a young man he travelled to London, where he started work in the counting-house of Robert Hunter, but after several years in his service he was sent by Hunter to Canada. Together with his younger brother, George, he steadily built up his wealth as a merchant and shipowner in the Canada trade during the American War of Independence. 
While in Quebec Davison joined the freemasons and was appointed to the legislative council, which was composed of crown nominees, one of whom was his brother George. The two brothers appear to have had the monopoly of the Canadian 'posts' and were of considerable assistance to the governor, General Frederick Haldimand. It was Haldimand who recommended Alexander Davison to Evan Nepean, an under-secretary of state, as a man who could be useful to Pitt's government as a government contractor. After his return to Britain Davison settled in London and was commissioned in 1784 by the duke of Northumberland as a lieutenant in the Northumberland militia. On 18 February 1788 Davison married Harriett (1770-1826), daughter of John Gosling, banker, of Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. They had six children: three sons and three daughters. The eldest two were twin boys born on 19 December 1788: Major-General Hugh Percy Davison (1788-1849), who was named after the duke of Northumberland and who served in the 18th hussars, and Lieutenant-Colonel Sir William Davison (1788-1873), who served in the Northumberland militia, the 2nd or Queen's Royal regiment and, unattached, in the Hanoverian army. For many years Sir William was aide-de-camp and equerry to the first duke of Cambridge, when he was viceroy of Hanover. A daughter, Harriett, died in infancy on 9 April 1796, as did another son (died 2 November 1806), who had been baptized Alexander Horatio Nelson Davison in honour of his godfather, the great admiral. 
For more than twenty years, from 1784, Davison worked for the government in providing army uniforms, weapons, transports, and general supplies. He supplied both the earl of Moira's expedition to support the French loyalists in western France in 1793 and the duke of York's army in Flanders in 1793-4. He also acted as commissary-general to the army at Southampton and the Isle of Wight for two years, supplied large orders for the government of Portugal, and acted as supply agent for all the marines in Britain. By the 1790s he had built up a very successful and wide-ranging business in London as a merchant, government contractor, and prize agent. He later also joined a banking house. He was soon very well connected with leading political figures and his government contacts enabled him to build up a lucrative business. The profits from this helped him to buy a substantial house in St James's Square, London, where he regularly entertained Horatio Nelson and other notable figures of the day, including the prince of Wales, the duke of Clarence, William Pitt, and various cabinet ministers and admirals. He was soon wealthy enough to purchase, in 1795, Swarland Hall and Park, 7 miles south-west of Alnwick in Northumberland. Over the next decade or so he spent a fortune improving the house and grounds, and buying adjacent land. He also built up a superb collection of paintings on English historical subjects by British artists, as well as fine collections of plate, porcelain, jewels, and books. He regularly lent money to his friends and numerous contacts, no doubt increasing thereby his influence in government and naval circles. 
Davison first met Nelson at Quebec in 1782, when Nelson was captain of the frigate 'Albemarle'. According to Robert Southey he was instrumental in saving Nelson from a rash and imprudent marriage to the sixteen-year-old daughter of the provost-marshal of the garrison. Although irritated by his interference at the time, Nelson later established a close relationship with Davison, who acted as his financial adviser as well as confidant, and they corresponded regularly thereafter until very shortly before Nelson's death. Davison became prize agent for Nelson and his whole fleet after the battle of the Nile in 1798, which he commemorated by spending about $2000 to pay for medals for all those who participated in this great victory. When Napoleon threatened to invade in 1803-4 Davison established a volunteer corps, the Loyal Britons, at a cost of nearly $3000; he served as its lieutenant-colonel. A correspondent of both Nelson's wife and his mistress, Davison was a leading mourner at Nelson's funeral and he repaid the admiral's friendship by giving financial assistance to Emma Hamilton after Nelson's death. To commemorate their friendship he erected an impressive obelisk on his estate at Swarland Park, beside the road from Morpeth to Alnwick. 
Late in December 1794 Lieutenant-General Oliver De Lancey, barrack-master-general, approached Davison to offer him a virtual monopoly to supply all new barracks with both a wide range of supplies (including beds, bedding, utensils, and candles) as well as a separate contract to supply them with coal. After securing a commission of two and a half per cent on all his costs, Davison agreed to what proved to be his most lucrative contract. In the absence of a detailed agreement with De Lancey, Davison took advantage of the public purse by supplying poor quality goods and charging inflated prices. After agreeing a separate contract with De Lancey in April 1795 to supply coal, Davison provided coal in winter, when it was more expensive, despite having bought it at the cheaper summer rates, and under-supplied the weight of coal paid for, by weighing the coal when wet, and therefore heavier. Furthermore he charged the Treasury in advance far in excess of the goods he supplied in the succeeding six months when he submitted his half-yearly accounts. As a result he had very large sums of public money in hand which he could use and invest to his own advantage. Given that Davison was paid over $1 million in cash, and provided accounts for provisions much less than this, it is hardly surprising that the commissioners of inquiry in 1807 calculated that he had built up a fortune at the expense of the public purse and that the barrack office really ought to have procured its supplies by competitive bidding and open contracts as was the case in other public departments. 
The government did not become suspicious of Davison's business practices until his enemies, including commercial and political rivals, began to raise complaints against him. It may have been his ill-judged attempt to enter parliament that led to a more serious examination of his business activities. In 1802 Davison was persuaded that he might be able purchase a parliamentary seat at Ilchester in Somerset. He was encouraged to build properties (known as 'Davison's Folly'), which would confer the vote on the householders put in them, and to offer to pay $30 per vote to all those electors who would support his candidacy. His willingness to use bribery and corruption to win the election became so notorious that Sir William Manners, who hoped to gain control of the borough himself, warned him that his conduct would lead him into serious trouble. Davison withdrew from the contest well before the poll, but two other candidates (also rich London merchants) employed agents using similar practices in order to corrupt the voters. When Manners and his ally, James Graham, petitioned against these two candidates who had been returned for the borough, a parliamentary committee of inquiry eventually concluded, in March 1803, that Davison and the two parliamentary agents working for the successful candidates had been involved in corrupting the voters at Ilchester and ought to be prosecuted. Although some leading MPs, including Richard Brinsley Sheridan, tried to save Davison from prosecution, he was arraigned at Taunton in April 1804, convicted and imprisoned for a year in the Marshalsea prison. 
In 1802 the secretary at war was first alerted by another merchant that Davison might be defrauding the barrack office. Although a strict inquiry was not made for some time, the government put the management of barrack supplies under the commissary-general. In May 1803, after Davison had been criticized by parliament for his electoral malpractices, George III refused to let him stand proxy for Lord Nelson at his installation as a knight of the Bath. In November and December 1805 two correspondents to 'The Times' -- Aristides and Verax -- urged an inquiry into what funds Davison had collected from the public to erect a monument to the nation's naval heroes and to what use he had put these unused funds. Davison was forced to defend himself in a letter to 'The Times' on 22 January 1806, in which he claimed that not enough money had yet been subscribed to build the proposed naval pillar and what had been collected had been invested at interest. This dispute may have led him to build the obelisk to Nelson on his own estate. 
When General De Lancey retired as barrack-master-general in November 1804 it soon became obvious that the financial accounts of the barrack office were in a very confused state and a commission of military inquiry was appointed by act of parliament in 1805 (45 Geo. III, c. 47). Davison was called upon to give evidence before it in December 1805 and May and June 1806. The commissioners concluded quite early that 'it was impossible for us to ascertain the loss to the public, or the gain to Mr Davison, through the improvidence of the late Barrack Master General in the bargain made with him, and the inattention of the Barrack Office' ('Commissioners of military enquiry', 2.224). Nevertheless on 19 May 1806 the attorney- and solicitor-general agreed that Davison ought to be charged with fraud over the supply of coal to the barracks (ibid., 2.297). In that month Davison repaid the government $6047 17's'. 11died because he admitted he had received more money than he was owed; but no criminal proceedings were taken against him for many months. His career was not immediately ruined since the 'ministry of all the talents' appointed him to serve as treasurer of the ordnance in 1806-7. He sought to defend himself by bringing out a pamphlet, 'A Reply to the Committee of Military Enquiry Respecting Barrack Supplies' (1807). 
Early in 1807 Lord Archibald Hamilton MP, a vigorous opponent of corruption, urged the House of Commons to press the attorney-general to prosecute Davison, but Lord Henry Petty, the chancellor of the exchequer, persuaded him to withdraw the motion so that the Treasury could be given a chance to recover money from Davison. At the end of 1807 'The Times' expressed surprise that Davison had still not been brought to justice as a 'notorious peculator' ('The Times', 28 Dec 1807) and suggested that he was being protected by friends in high places. It pointed out that he had recently left London for Yarmouth in the company of Sir Home Popham, a naval officer who had himself recently faced a parliamentary inquiry and a court martial. Six months later Lord Archibald Hamilton again asked Spencer Perceval, chancellor of the exchequer, why, so long after parliament had received such a damaging report on Davison's activities, he had still not been prosecuted, yet received the same explanation as before. 
Davison may well have been trying to negotiate a financial settlement with the Treasury yet, once General De Lancey was fit enough to attend the trial as a key witness, Davison was finally brought to trial at the court of king's bench, before Lord Ellenborough and a special jury, on 7 December 1808. He was charged with falsifying his vouchers and receipts between 1798 and 1802, and thereby implying that two men who were working in his own warehouse were independent merchants. This allowed him to supply the barracks with goods from his own army clothing warehouse in Bedford Street, while still receiving a commission of two and a half per cent. His defence argued that he did nothing that had not been agreed in advance with De Lancey, though the latter denied all knowledge of a commission being agreed on goods supplied directly by Davison, rather than being purchased from other merchants. His defence also argued that he had abandoned the claim for commission once he realized he was not entitled to receive it. Lord Moira, Evan Nepean, the earl of Chatham, William Huskisson, and others testified to Davison's probity and public spirit over many years, but he was still found guilty on 6 February 1809. On 27 April he was ordered to pay $18,883 13's'. 1died commission back to the exchequer and was sentenced to twenty-one months' imprisonment in Newgate. 
This conviction ruined Davison's career as a government contractor and his finances were seriously embarrassed for a time as he disputed with the government over his accounts. He claimed that the government owed him over $17,000, but the Treasury counter-claimed in February 1814 with a demand for two sums totalling just over $65,000. Not until 25 November 1826 was this amount finally reduced on appeal and Davison paid up and was finally discharged from responsibility for any further payments. While in prison in November 1810, he mortgaged Swarland Hall to the duke of Northumberland for $25,000; he redeemed it on 13 January 1811. He remained a wealthy man for some years, however, though no doubt to meet his debts to the Treasury he sold his house in St James's Square and his plate, porcelain, gems, and books by auction in 1817 and his splendid collection of British paintings by auction in 1823. When he died 'after a short illness' in fashionable Regency Square, Brighton, on 10 December 1829, in his eightieth year, he still owned his Northumberland estate ('The Times', 12 Dec 1812). His extensive will made substantial bequests, and included gifts given to him by Nelson. He was buried in the same massive vault as his wife in St Gregory's churchyard at Kirknewton, Northumberland, within a mile or so of where he had been born. His son William later raised an obelisk to his memory on a hill overlooking the church. 
Davison was a man of great energy, efficiency, and ambition. He clearly had a good head for business, a great capacity for making friends and for building up business and government contacts, and a love for the good life that great wealth could buy. He was loyal to and financially supportive of his friends and allies, and they clearly regarded him as a man of probity, but his business success undoubtedly alienated rival merchants and aroused the hostility of the press. He was probably fraudulent in his dealings with the barrack office, though he made very little money from the particular offences for which he was convicted in 1809 and undoubtedly profited much more from other aspects of his decade-long and loosely drawn contract to supply the army's barracks with coal and a wide range of other goods. He may not have been any more guilty of robbing the public purse than many other government contractors of the day, but at a time when the public was alarmed by military setbacks and shocked by the revelations of corruption in high places he suffered the penalty when his actions came to the attention of a rattled government and parliament, and an aroused press. Davison is probably the original model for Alexander Willemott, an army contractor, in Captain Frederick Marryat's 'The Way to be Happy' (1837). 


@@@@@


doc= 7299


Davison, Edward (1788-1863), Church of England clergyman, born in Durham in April 1788, was the only son of Edward Davison BA (1760-1839), mayor of Durham in 1815 and incumbent of the church of St Nicholas, Durham, and his wife, Hannah Hopper. He matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1803, graduating BA in 1807 and MA in 1810, the latter as a member of University College, where he was a fellow from 1807 to 1816. He was ordained in 1817, and was presented by his father to the rectory of Harlington, Middlesex, in 1822. He succeeded his father in 1825 to the living of St Nicholas, which he retained for thirty-one years. He was an eloquent preacher and a diligent parish priest. He was the author of 'Tentamen theologicum, or, An attempt to assist the young clergyman of the Church of England in the choice of a subject for his sermon on any Sunday throughout the year' (1850). He was married twice: firstly to Isabella White and secondly, on 11 May 1824, to Margaret Pearson Wolfe, with whom he had two sons. The elder son, John Robert Davison (1826-1871), was Liberal MP for Durham, 1868-71. Davison died at his home in Church Street, Durham, on 22 May 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 7300


Davison, Francis (1573/4-1613x19), poet and anthologist, was the eldest, or eldest surviving, son of William Davison (d. 1608), secretary of state, and his wife, Catherine, daughter of Francis Spelman (who was the nephew of Sir John Spelman (1495?-1544)) and his wife, Mary, and cousin of the earl of Leicester. He matriculated as a fellow-commoner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1586. He was a clever young man: in 1589 his cousin George Cranmer wrote him a formal Latin letter congratulating him on his learning. In 1593 he was admitted to Gray's Inn, and over the winter of 1594-5 he took part in the revels which culminated in the performance before the queen of the 'Masque of Proteus', which he wrote. It was well received, and was in one very important respect innovative: being performed on a stage, it was 'the first English masque to conceive, in however small a way, of the masquing hall as a theater' (S. Orgel, 'The Jonsonian Masque', 1965, 9), thus anticipating the masque designs of Inigo Jones. 
In May 1595 Davison and his tutor Edward Smyth were given a licence to travel in Europe, procured by the earl of Essex, who gave him 400 crowns towards his expenses, and presumably hoped to use him to gather information. The tour was not a success. Davison and Smyth lived expensively and ran into debt: by the beginning of 1596 Smyth was asking William Davison to extend the allowance he was making them, commenting that Francis could not eat inexpensive food. Although in 1596 Davison sent a treatise on the state of Saxony to Anthony Bacon, who commended it and forwarded it to Essex, a proposed sequel on the state of Tuscany never materialized. He quarrelled with Essex's agent in Venice, and with Smyth. In May 1597 he entered his name to study law at the University of Padua, but by summer 1598 he was back in England, quarrelling more seriously: in or shortly before mid-July he killed one Richard Thornell in a duel. In 1600 he received a pardon from the branding which was the usual penalty for manslaughter. 
By that year Davison was nearly thirty. His father was neither rich nor influential. Essex's patronage had not extended far, and was not to be relied on. Davison needed an income. He looked elsewhere for patronage, beginning a treatise on the annulled first marriage of the earl of Bath which was designed to ingratiate him with the Russell family (the countess of Bath was a Russell), and appearing as one of the secretaries whom Sir Thomas Parry engaged in the first half of 1602. The treatise, however, remained unfinished, and the secretaryship lasted only a couple of months. 
Davison's next move was to publish a collection of poetry. It is for this, 'A Poetical Rapsody' (1602), that he is remembered. It is the last of the series of printed poetry collections which begins with 'Tottel's Miscellany' in 1557. It is made up from groups of poems by Francis Davison himself, his brother Walter, and an anonymous third writer or group of writers, to which a few poems by Philip Sidney, the countess of Pembroke, Edmund Spenser, and others are added at the beginning and end of the volume. Davison claimed, perhaps disingenuously, that these additions were the printer's responsibility. They certainly accord with his invocations of Sidney in his dedicatory sonnet to the earl of Pembroke and elsewhere, and with the nostalgic, backward-looking quality of the collection, with its Spenserian pastorals and experiments in quantitative metre, as a whole. Some of Davison's contributions are highly conventional; but they also include sharp political commentary, such as a poem in which the lamentations of a grave shepherd called Eubulus who has been harshly treated by his mistress Astraea dramatize the fall from favour of William Davison, and another in praise of the recently executed earl of Essex. 
After 'A Poetical Rapsody' Davison continued to write, publishing a broadsheet of Latin anagrams on the names of various noblemen, beginning a translation of the psalms, and planning a 'Relation of England'. He owned a manuscript of Donne's satires, and attempted to obtain more poetry by Donne and others in manuscript, perhaps with a second anthology in mind. He added material to the second edition of the 'Rapsody' in 1608, but does not seem to have had any connection with the third in 1611. The last work of his which can be dated is a racy poem called 'The Counterskuffle', about a fight in a debtors' prison in February 1613, which claims to be based on firsthand observation. Another poem, the epigram 'On Painted Ladys', whose main point is a pun on fucus (the name of a cosmetic) and 'fuck us', is dated 1615 in a commonplace book, but may have been written earlier. 
The antiquary Ralph Starkey possessed a number of Francis Davison's manuscripts as well as the state papers of William Davison which were confiscated from him in 1619. All these manuscripts presumably came to him as a single collection, probably after Francis's death, which can therefore be dated between 1613 and 1619. 




@@@@@


doc= 7301


Davison, James William (1813-1885), music critic, was born on 5 October 1813 in London, the son of James Davison (died 1858) and his wife, the actress and singer Maria Rebecca Davison, nee Duncan (1780x83-1858). He was given his first lessons in singing and the piano by his mother, and was then educated at University College School. Abandoning plans for the bar, he went to the Royal Academy of Music, where he studied the piano with W. H. Holmes and composition with George Macfarren. He wrote some orchestral music (including an overture that was played at a concert of the Society of British Musicians), some piano music (notably a duet overture, 'Fortunatus'), and songs, especially settings of Keats and Shelley. However, he soon abandoned composition for criticism. His first writings appeared in the 'Musical Magazine'. He was founder and first editor of the weekly 'Musical Examiner' (1842-4), later merged into the 'Musical World', which he edited for the rest of his life. In 1846 he became music critic of 'The Times', a post he retained until 1879. Other journals to which he contributed included the 'Saturday Review', the 'Pall Mall Gazette', and (until 1884) 'The Graphic'. His further activities included writing programme notes for the concerts at St James's Hall, where in 1844 he persuaded Louis Jullien to improve the content of the programmes; he also wrote notes for Charles Halle's recitals. His only book was 'An Essay on the Works of Frederic Chopin' (London, n.d. [1849]). He was one of the founder members of the Purcell Society (1876). 
For many years Davison wielded an almost despotic sway as a critic. He was not a highly educated or cultured writer, though his style was terse and energetic. He was celebrated for his attachment to Sterndale Bennett and Mendelssohn, whose popularity in Victorian England owed much to his advocacy, and was personally acquainted with Rossini, Auber, Spohr, Meyerbeer, and Halevy. He was also, unexpectedly for so conservative a critic, one of the first to recognize the merits of Berlioz, including as a conductor, and did much to champion him in England; with Liszt and D'Ortigue, he was the only person outside Berlioz's family to be addressed as 'tu'. However, he was bitterly hostile to Schumann, Gounod, Liszt, Wagner, and Brahms, and initially even to Schubert, all of whom he regarded as dangerous innovators, not least because they seemed to threaten the composers whose cause he espoused. He thought Spohr 'a dream -- an ideal being', and that 'a more overrated man never existed' than Schubert. He once wrote: 'Robert Schumann has had his innings, and been bowled out -- like Richard Wagner. 'Paradise and the Peri' has gone to the tomb of the 'Lohengrins'.' He moved in literary as well as musical circles, numbering Dickens, Thackeray, and Theophile Gautier among his friends. Sir George Grove, another friend, wrote that 'his knowledge and his extraordinary memory were as much at the service of his friends as the keen wit and humour -- often Rabelaisian enough -- with which he poured them forth. He was very much of a Bohemian.' On 12 May 1859 he married Arabella Goddard, who had been his pupil since 1850; they had two sons, Henry, who wrote his father's memoirs, 'From Mendelssohn to Wagner' (1912), and Charles. Latterly he suffered from ill health, and went to live first in Malvern, then in Margate, where he died on 24 March 1885. 
Davison's wife, 
Back in England, her stature now widely recognized, Goddard played Bennett's concerto at the Philharmonic Society on 9 June 1856, and also performed at the Crystal Palace and at the Monday Popular Concerts. In 1857 and 1858 she played all Beethoven's late sonatas (opp. 106 to 111), as well as a wide repertory of new music, and in 1859 gave his 'Eroica' symphony as a piano solo at the Bradford festival; she also appeared at festivals in Leeds (1858), Birmingham (1861-70), and Gloucester (1865). She married Davison on 12 May 1859. From 1873 to 1876 she toured America, Australia, and India; before leaving, she gave a farewell concert in March 1873, accompanying some of the most distinguished soloists of the day as well as playing solos. She virtually retired in 1880, though her last concert was with Sims Reeves on 21 March 1882; she was given a benefit concert at St James's Hall on 9 March 1890. The latter part of her life was lived at Tunbridge Wells in failing health and comparative obscurity. She died in Boulogne on 6 April 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 7302


Davison, Jeremiah (c.1695-1745), portrait painter, was born in England of Scottish parents. He copied the works of Sir Peter Lely before setting up in practice with the assistance of the well-known drapery painter Joseph van Aken. Frederick, prince of Wales, sat to him in 1730 (location of portrait unknown) and Admiral Byng, Viscount Torrington, was among his sitters the following year (portrait in National Maritime Museum, Greenwich). 
Having met James, second duke of Atholl, at a masonic lodge in London, Davison painted his portrait and presented it to the lodge. Subsequently he painted another portrait of the duke, together with that of the duchess, and under their patronage went to Scotland about 1737. There he painted a large number of the duke's Murray relatives, remarking afterwards that he had made nearly $1500 sterling on his Scottish trip (Vertue, 3.129). Not long after his arrival he produced a handsome pair of full-length portraits of James Moray of Abercairney and his wife, Christian, he in tartan, she in a satin dress and elegant plumed hat, apparently to commemorate their marriage in February 1737. One of the most accomplished works from this period is his charming family group showing James, fourteenth earl of Morton, with his countess and their children, dated 1740, and formerly at Dalmahoy, the Morton family seat near Edinburgh (Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh). 
Davison returned to London about 1740, set up his studio in his house in Leicester Fields, and prospered, charging 8 guineas for a quarter-length picture, 16 for a half-length, and 32 for a full-length. He made his will on 13 November 1745, leaving about $1000, the residue of his estate, to his seven-year-old daughter Frances. He died, presumably at his home, between 24 and 29 December of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 7303


Davison, John (1777-1834), theologian, was born on 28 May 1777 at Morpeth, Northumberland, the eldest son of John Davison and his wife Mary. He was brought up at Durham, to which his father, a schoolmaster, had moved shortly after his birth, and was educated there, either at the grammar school or the cathedral school. In 1794 he proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, where in 1798 he gained both a Craven scholarship and his BA. In 1800 he was elected a fellow of Oriel College, shortly afterwards becoming a private tutor outside the university. He was ordained in 1803. In 1810 he returned to Oxford as one of the tutors at Oriel, and served occasionally as public examiner and Whitehall preacher until November 1817, when Lord Liverpool presented him to the vicarage of Sutterton, near Boston in Lincolnshire. In 1818 the bishop of Durham, Shute Barrington, appointed him rector of Washington, near Gateshead. On 20 July 1819 he married Mary, daughter of Robert Thorp, elder brother of Charles Thorp: they had four sons and six daughters. In 1824 he became prebend of Sneating in St Paul's Cathedral, and in 1826 Lord Liverpool appointed him a prebendary of Worcester Cathedral and subsequently rector of Upton upon Severn. 
Davison was the theological scholar of the early Noetics, the group of Anglican clergymen at Oriel College, Oxford, who defended Christianity on the grounds of its reasonableness. It is perhaps significant that he was the tutor of Renn Dickson Hampden, the theologian of the later Noetics whose controversial Bampton lectures Davison both read and approved. However, unlike Hampden, he achieved neither notoriety nor university office; the consequence is that he has been unjustly forgotten. 
Davison's earliest publications were occasional contributions to the 'Quarterly Review' which began to appear after his return to Oriel. Like his fellow Noetics, Davison did not confine himself to religious themes. In 1811 he supported Edward Copleston in his defence of an educationally reformed Oxford University against the calumnies of the 'Edinburgh Review'. He recognized the importance of educating country gentlemen in the performance of their duties by giving them a broadly based Christian education through the medium of the classics, so that they should have some better pursuit than that of partridges. Like Richard Whately, he also supported educating the poor by preaching in favour of National Society schools: there was, he believed, no necessary connection between knowledge and insubordination. Again like Richard Whately, although no liberal (in his dialogue between the Christian and the Reformer, published in 1819, he was on the side of the anti-radical Christian), he supported the whig Sir Samuel Romilly's campaign for the abolition of capital punishment for minor property offences. 
In Davison's 'Considerations on the Poor Laws' (1817), his principal publication of this period, he advocated the strengthening of relief for the infirm and the gradual abolition of automatic relief for the able-bodied over the course of a decade: such relief encouraged dependence and denied a man his self-respect. Abolition was possible on the assumption that able-bodied persons were capable of acting responsibly by making provision for themselves in good times to tide them over the bad. In the case of manufacturing workers, this would be by savings, and in the case of agricultural labourers, by cultivating smallholdings and other sources of income. Although some provision for the destitute would be required, this would be supplied by the rich making voluntary donations to a fund to assist the poor. However, independence had its limits: although not opposed to free trade, in his 'Letter to Mr Canning' of 1826 Davison opposed the sudden abolition of duties on the importation of silk, which had caused misery to the domestic industry. 
Davison's principal works of theological scholarship did not appear until after he had become a parish priest. The chief of these -- much admired by his Oriel colleagues, Thomas Arnold and John Henry Newman, among others -- were his Warburtonian lectures on prophecy (1824), which were characteristically Noetic. They emphasized the primacy of revealed religion in view of the insufficiency of natural religion, and considered prophecy as one of the evidences of Christianity. They also endorsed the Noetic theme that such evidences were adapted to the minds of those to whom they were addressed, and thus presented the reader with difficulties and mysteries just as the natural world did. The novelty of the work lay in its discussion of the progressive nature of revelation, a doctrine which influenced Davison's fellow Noetic, Baden Powell, and in Davison's view that prophecy was a preparatory revelation of Christianity, the principal age of prophecy having passed. The polemic was obvious: it was a scholarly attack both on the prophetic interpretation of contemporary political events by millenarian evangelicals and on the advocates of rational religion. 
These themes were continued in Davison's work on the origins of primitive sacrifice (1825), a subject touched on in the earlier work. He attacked the evangelical Archbishop Magee's view that primitive sacrifice was divinely ordained, at the same time as he contended that this did not undermine the divine nature of the doctrine of the atoning power of blood as stated in the Mosaic law. This was a wholly new doctrine, and an instance of the progressive nature of revelation that he had outlined in his earlier work. He expressly attacked Unitarians for denying the doctrine of the atonement. According to him, such a denial was possible only if they also ignored or disputed the divine inspiration of the 'Bible'. 
Davison did not enjoy good health at Upton, the preferment that his theological writings had obtained, and in January 1834 became ill enough to have to move to Cheltenham, where he died on 6 May of the same year. He was buried in the chancel of Worcester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 7304


Davison, Maria Rebecca (1780x83-1858), actress, is reputed to have been born in Liverpool, where her parents were provincial performers. From an early age she played children's parts (hobgoblins, fairies, cupids, and so on) in Dublin, Liverpool, and Newcastle, and her first recorded appearance in a speaking part was in Newcastle in 1794-5 as the duke of York to the Richard III of George Frederick Cooke; she also played there Tom Thumb. Elizabeth Farren, by whom she was seen in 'The Woodman', is said to have recognized in her a talent similar to her own, and referred to her as 'a little wonder'. In 1796 she appeared in Dublin as Rosetta in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'Love in a Village' and Priscilla Tomboy for her father's benefit. Her first regular engagement was from Tate Wilkinson, as a member of whose company she appeared in York, playing on her first appearance Sophia in Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin' and Gillian in Charles Dibdin's 'The Quaker'. With her reputation increasing, she acted in Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Liverpool. At Margate in 1804 she was seen by a Mr Graham as Widow Cheerly in Andrew Cherry's 'The Soldier's Daughter', and he recommended her to Richard Wroughton for Drury Lane, where she appeared on 8 October 1804, billed as Miss Duncan from Edinburgh, playing for fifteen nights Lady Teazle to the Sir Peter of Charles Matthews and the Charles Surface of R. W. Elliston. She took many leading parts during her first season, including Rosalind, Lady Townly, Lydia Languish, and Letitia Hardy in Hannah Cowley's 'The Belle's Stratagem'. On 31 January 1805 she created the role of Juliana in John Tobin's 'The Honeymoon', which ran for twenty-eight nights: her song at the end of act V was constantly encored, and the part finally made her name. She remained with the Drury Lane company for fourteen years, and migrated with it to the Lyceum and elsewhere. The presence of Dorothy Jordan was somewhat of an obstacle to her career as Maria Duncan played similar parts, but she enjoyed considerable popularity, even in roles associated particularly with Mrs Jordan, such as Peggy in Garrick's 'The Country Girl'. 
On 31 October 1812 Maria Duncan married James Davison (died 1858), and on 5 November she played, as 'Mrs Davison, late Miss Duncan', Belinda in 'All in the Wrong'. The marriage was not happy and it was said that her husband deserted her for the gaming tables. They had two sons, the elder being James William Davison, music critic of 'The Times'. She continued on the stage, and appeared in November 1816 in Birmingham, where her 'increasing embonpoint' was remarked upon. On 8 September 1819 she reappeared in London as Lady Teazle to W. C. Macready's Joseph Surface at Covent Garden. The following year she returned to Drury Lane as Julia in 'The Rivals'. At Covent Garden on 14 June 1821 she again played, for her benefit, Lady Teazle. She then moved to the Haymarket to take leading business, but was once more at Drury Lane until 13 June 1829, when she played Mrs Subtle in 'Paul Pry', probably her last performance there. 
Maria Davison was rather tall, a full, handsome person, with extremely black hair, dark hazel eyes, strongly formed features, and a rich, sweet voice, which was heard at its best in Scottish ballads and in duet with John Braham. She was noted for her 'breeches parts', such as Macheath: Leigh Hunt observed that 'she wears the breeches much better than becomes her'. As a successor to Elizabeth Farren, she was regarded by J. W. Cole as the first high-comedy actress of the London stage for many years. She was said to have made 'a nice little fortune' on a final salary of $15 a week. She lived for many years in retirement and died shortly after her husband, on 30 May 1858, at 5 Alfred Place, Brompton. 


@@@@@


doc= 7305


Walter Davison (1581?-1602x8), Francis's younger brother, wrote eighteen of the poems printed in the first edition of 'A Poetical Rapsody' when he was in his late teens. Seventeen of these comprise a competent but unmemorable sequence of amatory poems; the last is a translation from the Latin of a misogynistic epigram. In 1602 Francis described him as a professional soldier, then serving in the Low Countries; since he is not mentioned in the will of his father in 1608, he had presumably died before then. 


@@@@@


doc= 7306


Davison, William (d. 1608), diplomat and administrator, presents a number of biographical problems. Sir James Melville of Halhill recorded that Davison told him that he 'was com of Scotismen and was a Scotisman at hart', but hardly anything is known about his background or his personal life ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 328). His parents cannot be identified, although a brother is mentioned in a letter of 1583, and he left his sister Anne, who married a John Carpenter, an annuity in his will. He is found in no extant university or inns of court records, and all that can be said of his education is that he was fluent in French as well as Latin. 
About 1570 Davison married Catherine, daughter of Francis Spelman, a minor Norfolk squire, and his wife, Mary Hill, daughter of Elizabeth Isley, who married first Richard Hill and then Sir John Mason. Elizabeth Isley was also first cousin to Jane Guildford, the mother of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester (1532/3-1588), who always addressed Davison as 'cousin Davison'. Davison's wife predeceased him, but they had six children who lived to adulthood -- two daughters and four sons. His eldest son, Francis Davison (1573/4-1613x19), enjoyed a contemporary reputation as a poet, while a younger son, Walter Davison (1581?-1602x8) ['see under 'Davison, Francis (1573/-1613x)], followed a military career. 
There is also a technical reason why Davison the man remains relatively obscure. In 1619 the keeper of the state paper office, Sir Thomas Wilson, discovered that Davison's papers had been sold to the manuscript collector Ralph Starkey. Since Starkey obtained papers of Francis Davison as well, it has been assumed that Francis was the seller. However, Wilson recorded that Starkey bought them from Davison's son-in-law W[illiam] Duncombe. Wilson claimed that the papers were Davison's secretarial papers and therefore belonged in the paper office. He obtained a warrant from the privy council to seize them on 10 August 1619, and four days later he removed 'a sackfull of papers to the number of 45 pacquets' from Starkey's house, which he later had bound 'into bookes with the rest' (BL, Harley MS 286, fol. 286'r', TNA: PRO, SP 45/20/99). However, not all the papers he obtained were Davison's, nor did he obtain all of Starkey's Davison papers, for a sizeable body is now found among the Harley manuscripts. Together with the rest of Starkey's collection they were bought by Symonds D'Ewes in 1628. D'Ewes's library in turn was purchased by Humfrey Wanley on behalf of Robert Harley in 1703-6. 
Elizabethan diplomatic practice was largely a matter of personal preference. Davison does not appear to have used letter-books, but he retained drafts (minutes) of his out-letters as well as the original letters received, and his papers form one of the richest sources for Elizabethan diplomacy between 1575 and 1586. Without them the state papers for that period (particularly the state papers, foreign) would be greatly reduced. However, the papers have also been weeded of the more obviously personal material, presumably when they were sold to Starkey. Some of Davison's surviving correspondence can legitimately be described as private, but for all its size the collection sheds relatively little light on his personal life. 
By 1574 Davison was one of Francis Walsingham's confidential men of business. Thanks to the disappearance of Walsingham's own private papers, the origin of their association (and whether Davison served with him during his embassy to France in 1570-73) is unknown. The relationship is nevertheless the key to Davison's career. Melville recorded that he first met Davison when he 'was at my house in company with Sir Harry Killigrew, my auld friend, when he was resident in Scotland' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 360). Nicholas Harris Nicolas, unaware of Killigrew's later embassies to Scotland when writing his biography of Davison, assumed the meeting occurred during Killigrew's embassy in June and July 1566, a date that has been accepted since. However, this is an error, not least because in June 1566 Melville was sent to Elizabeth I to announce the birth of James VI. 
The association between Davison and Killigrew began when Walsingham attached Davison to Killigrew's embassy to Scotland in May 1574, and this was undoubtedly the occasion when Davison met Melville. Killigrew was effusive in his thanks to Walsingham for Davison's services, and he and Davison became close friends as a result. When Davison returned to London in July with a confidential memorandum Walsingham described him as 'a man of his whom he lent Mr. Killigrew' ('CSP Scot.', '1574-81', art. 25). Davison accompanied Killigrew to Scotland again in the following summer. This time Killigrew was instructed to leave Davison as resident agent in Scotland if he considered one necessary. However, this embassy never got beyond Berwick, for its arrival coincided with the border incident known as the Reidswire raid, of 7 July 1575. Davison did little more than act as a messenger for Killigrew, who nevertheless brought him to Leicester's attention, as 'a gentleman who has married a kinswoman of your lordship's, though unknown, I think, yet to you' ('CSP Scot.', '1574-81', arts. 179, 184). 
Six months later Davison was sent on his first independent mission. In January 1576 Elizabeth had been offered the sovereignty of Holland and Zeeland, which she was unwilling to accept if a broader settlement in the Netherlands could be arranged. Philip II's governor-general, Don Luis de Requesens, died on 5 March, and at the end of the month Elizabeth sent Davison to the council of state in Brussels to see if it would now grant a ceasefire. If it was willing he was then to obtain William of Orange's adherence. When he arrived at Brussels in April, Davison was informed that the council could not offer a ceasefire without Philip's prior approval. His own assessment was that it was interested only in bringing the siege of Zierickzee to a successful conclusion. On 23 April, Walsingham informed him that in view of the attitude in Brussels he may as well return, and he left early in May. 
At the beginning of 1577 the most mysterious of Davison's embassies took place. Thanks to a single reference in February 1577 to Davison's coming from Zeeland with Orange's agent Charles de Lievin, sieur de Famars, Professor G. M. Bell has suggested that he may have undertaken a short mission to Orange then. His surmise is confirmed by a letter from Leicester to Orange of 7 March, which notes that, in sending Famars, Orange had followed advice from Leicester passed to him by Davison, 'l'advis que je vous ay donne par Monsr Davison' (Kervyn de Lettenhove, 9, art. 3383). There are numerous other references to Davison's acting as an intermediary between Orange and England in spring 1577, and he is not known to have met him on any prior occasion. The mission also marked the beginning of Davison's association with Leicester, and it is just possible that he was sent privately by the earl rather than officially by the queen. In May, Leicester asked Davison to draft letters in French to Orange and his wife thanking them for naming him godfather to their daughter. 
In August 1577 Davison was sent to the Netherlands as resident agent with a daily allowance of $1 6's'. 8died, a post he held until May 1579. Dr Thomas Wilson had served as agent between November 1576 and June 1577, but it is not clear whether he was to be replaced as a matter of course. Davison was appointed in July after the news of Don Juan of Austria's seizure of Namur was received. His instructions (26 July, finalized 2 August) provided a cover story that he had been appointed before Namur to replace Wilson as resident with Don Juan. However, his real purpose was to assure the states general that Elizabeth would support them if Don Juan attempted a reconquest by force and 'covertly as of yourself' advise them to accept the leadership of Orange (BL, Harley MS 285, fols. 44'r'-45'r'). He was also expected to co-ordinate the still vague plans for English military assistance to Orange under Leicester's command. Leicester later wrote, 'my desire of your going was chiefly to deal with him [Orange] therein' ('CSP for.', '1577-8', 308). 
Davison arrived in Antwerp on 10 August and immediately reported that Don Juan was determined on reconquest with the enterprise of England as his ultimate aim. In this and later assessments Davison consistently argued that the Netherlands was the key to English security, and that he was confident that the strength of the Dutch cities would make reconquest difficult. An embassy under Charles Philippe de Croye, marquis de Havre, was sent to Elizabeth in September and negotiated the terms for English assistance. At that point it was feared that Henri Guise, third duc de Guise, might come to Don Juan's aid. It was decided that the Leicester expedition would be sent if Guise intervened. At the end of September, Leicester asked Davison to arrange for Orange to request his expedition immediately in order to capitalize on Elizabeth's willingness to act. However, in early October the states general decided that they would not need the English army until the following spring. 
On 19 September, Orange arrived in Antwerp, and Davison accompanied him on his famous entry into Brussels three days later. He now argued that Orange offered an opportunity to create a friendly Netherlands government that should not be missed. Yet he also noted the impending arrival of the Archduke Mathias of Austria. Davison was careful in his reporting -- once a week was expected -- but delays in communication, the apparent rejection of English aid, and the preference for Mathias over Orange as a replacement governor-general for Don Juan made London fretful. On 27 October, Davison supplied a calmly argued assessment that the appointment of Mathias might have its advantages. However, on 15 November he attributed the rejection of English aid to jealousy of Orange. 
On 4 November the states general complained to Davison that according to Havre (who had remained in England) his reports of dissension in the Netherlands had discouraged Elizabeth. Later in the month Leicester warned him of complaints (probably also from Havre) that 'you only follow the prince', while still noting that Davison was 'my especial agent to him' ('CSP for.', '1577-8', art. 453). Davison replied that his original commission was not to the states general, and 'there is scarce any other with whom I may frankly deal' (ibid., art. 461). 
In December, Elizabeth tried for a final time to arrange a mediated settlement with Philip, while at the same time returning Havre to Brussels with proposals for military assistance if necessary. Her efforts at mediation were conducted by a series of special envoys, and Davison could only pass on Orange's opinion that they would be fruitless. His own embassy was now reshaped by three events: the queen's decision in late January to postpone the Leicester expedition in favour of more indirect forms of financial and military assistance, Don Juan's defeat of the army of the states at Gembloux on 31 January 1578, and the intervention of Francois, duc d'Anjou, in February. On 8 March he sent Walsingham a long analysis of the situation, in which he attributed Dutch interest in Anjou to Elizabeth's hesitation. Elizabeth could not abandon the Dutch, and it made more sense to aid them openly. Walsingham showed the memorandum to Elizabeth, and it was 'greatly approved by her touching the manner, but as for the matter she takes daily less taste thereof' ('CSP for.', '1577-8', arts. 676, 714). 
Davison's position now became awkward. He informed Leicester privately that he would make sure it was known that 'this change succeeded againste the desire of your lordship' (Kervyn de Lettenhove, 10, art. 3820). On 18 April the states general informed him officially that they were negotiating with Anjou, and he warned them Elizabeth would react badly. At the same time he faced further accusations that he had not defended Elizabeth's decisions over military aid but had agreed with her Dutch critics, that he had complained that the instructions he received were 'fonde and childish', and that he was too much in Orange's pocket ('CSP for.', '1577-8', art. 835). Walsingham advised him to cease sending his own opinions and confine himself to reporting the facts. Thomas Wilkes also warned him that his criticisms had alienated men he thought were his friends. One may have been William Cecil, Baron Burghley, for in December 1578 Davison was concerned that the lord treasurer had not answered his letters for six months. 
Elizabeth's response to the Anjou negotiations was to send Walsingham and William Brooke, tenth Baron Cobham, as special envoys to the Netherlands. They arrived at the end of June, and until Walsingham returned to England in early October, Davison was very much his subordinate. In mid-March, Davison had been sent the authority to raise loans to the value of $100,000, which Elizabeth had agreed to supply to the states general. In May he was sent an instalment of $20,000 in bullion. However, he was not to disburse it until the result of the negotiations with Anjou was known, and in July he was ordered to retain custody of both the authority and the bullion until instructed by Walsingham and Cobham. 
After Walsingham's departure Davison became involved in the clash between Orange and the Calvinist radicals of Ghent, in which John-Casimir of the Palatinate (whose army Elizabeth had funded) supported the 'gantois'. Worried both by rumours that Casimir was acting on the queen's behalf and the possible effects of an open rebuke to Casimir from Elizabeth herself, Walsingham instructed Davison on his own authority to persuade Casimir to withdraw. Davison's encounter with Casimir took place in Ghent on 8 November; it was a stormy one and Casimir immediately complained to London. Although London backed Davison, Leicester in December sent Casimir's friend Daniel Rogers to calm him down. On the night of 10 January 1579 Davison, Orange, and Casimir were formally reconciled -- though with more carousing than Davison would have liked. 
The future of Davison's posting appears to have depended on the imperial offer to mediate between the states general and Philip, which resulted in the Cologne conference of summer 1579. On 19 January Walsingham informed Davison that if Elizabeth sent a delegation he would be included. Davison was now exhausted and ill and looking forward to his recall. Elizabeth hesitated for several months, but finally (after Davison had been deliberately excluded from the Cologne conference) she sent him his recall in mid-April. His last months were spent in tidying up and forwarding the paperwork over her loans to the states general. When he returned in May, he brought with him the Burgundian jewels that the states general had deposited as security with him and Walsingham in summer 1578. 
Sufficient correspondence survives from this embassy to give some idea of Davison's personal circumstances. His wife joined him in Antwerp with his son 'Frank' in November 1577 ('CSP for.', '1575-7', art. 1367). Another child (possibly a daughter) was born there in summer 1578. Most of his private correspondence consists of letters received, chiefly from Henry Killigrew, but also his wife's cousin Edward Cheke, Walsingham's secretary Laurence Tomson, John Stubbe, and Thomas Randolph. Together they arranged for the appointment of the presbyterian Walter Travers as chaplain to the Merchant Adventurers in Antwerp in early 1578. This now celebrated affair embittered Davison's relations with Nicholas Loddington, the governor of the Merchant Adventurers, who complained to Walsingham. Walsingham in turn ordered Davison firmly 'to forbear further proceeding therein' ('CSP for.', '1577-8', art. 852). Davison's letters reveal a dry and sardonic humour, but also a somewhat fastidious disapproval of Dutch drinking habits, even those of his hero Orange. 
Although he kept up his correspondence with his friends in the Netherlands, Davison was not employed there again until 1584. In July 1580 Elizabeth proposed to send him to Orange, but then changed her mind. On 19 January 1579 he was appointed clerk of the treasury and 'custos brevium' (keeper of the writs) of the court of king's bench for life. He had sued for this office in mid-1578, but Elizabeth took some persuading because she did not think it would 'serve your present necessity' ('CSP for.', '1578-9', arts. 356, 459). A further preferment was discussed with his friends in the winter of 1582-3, but it was not specified. Of his other personal affairs, all that is known is the birth of his son Christopher in December 1581 and the appointment of Sir Christopher Hatton and the baby's maternal great-grandmother, Lady Mason, as godparents. 
In 1582 and 1584 Davison was employed in two special missions to Scotland, both dealing with the aftermath of the Ruthven raid of 20 August 1582, in which a group of protestant nobles had separated James VI from his favourite, Esme Stewart, first duke of Lennox. Elizabeth's government was anxious to stabilize the new Scottish administration and prevent the French from trying to restore Lennox. The situation was made particularly awkward by the apparent Anglo-French co-operation in support of Anjou in the Netherlands. In November, Henri III sent the former ambassador to England, Bertrand de Salignac, sieur de la Mothe-Fenelon, first to London and then Edinburgh, with instructions to free James if he was a captive (as Mary, queen of Scots, claimed), negotiate a general reconciliation, and arrange for Lennox to retire to France. Although Elizabeth could not refuse him a passport, the English were suspicious that his purpose was to revive French influence. Although these fears were exaggerated, in December, Davison was given the task of escorting him to Scotland. 
This mission had its comic aspects. Initially Davison was to try to delay Fenelon until Lennox had left Scotland. As it turned out they encountered Lennox on his way south between Topcliffe and Northallerton, Yorkshire, on 27 December. The day was so stormy that Lennox and Fenelon spoke only briefly and Davison could not follow all they said. He also spent much time surreptitiously checking Fenelon's baggage for hidden money, as it was believed that he was bringing funds to bribe the Scots nobility. They entered Scotland in early January 1583, and Fenelon had his audience with James on the 18th. Robert Bowes was already in place in Scotland and Davison, considering himself superfluous, expected to return to London with Fenelon at the end of the month. However, under instructions now missing, he was ordered to remain with Bowes, thanks presumably to the arrival of a second French agent, Francois de Roncherolles, sieur de Maineville, who had sailed directly to Scotland. At the beginning of March, Davison pressed again for his revocation, as he considered that Bowes, even if he could not speak French, was able to handle Maineville on his own. His recall was finally granted on 14 March, and he left Scotland at the beginning of April. 
Davison's second Scottish embassy was a more serious affair. James escaped from the Ruthvenites on 29 June 1583 and turned to the protestant, if mercenary, James Stewart, earl of Arran. During the winter of 1583-4 a number of the nobles and clergy associated with the Ruthven regime organized a conspiracy to overthrow Arran. They were forced into action prematurely, and on 17 April some of the lords took possession of Stirling Castle, only to abandon it on the 23rd and retire to England. On 25 April, Davison was instructed to mediate between them and James, but he was also provided with $2000 to disburse if he found them in 'reasonable probability' to 'prevayle ageynst thos that does now abuse bothe the kings eare and his authority' (BL, Harley MS 286, fol. 48'r'). By the time he reached Berwick he had learned of the surrender of Stirling and did not enter Scotland. James now demanded that Elizabeth return the fugitives, and on 15 May, Davison was instructed to inform him that she considered the lords victims rather than rebels and would not hand them over. On 5 June he had an inconclusive audience with James at Falkland Palace in Fife and then retired to Edinburgh. In Edinburgh he was informed that the constable of Edinburgh Castle, Alexander Erskine, the master of Mar, was sympathetic to the exiled lords, and he became involved in an ultimately abortive scheme to persuade Erskine to rebel. 
In the face of this stalemate Elizabeth now permitted Henry Carey, first Baron Hunsdon, the captain of Berwick, to revive what was known as the 'by-course', a scheme of his own devising to reach an understanding with Arran. At the end of June a meeting between the two was agreed. Davison, who was convinced that the by-course was a waste of time, wanted to be relieved, not least because he was worried that his own involvement with Erskine might be exposed. Walsingham was willing but the queen, who had doubts about the by-course, preferred that he stay and keep an eye on things. Davison was not present at Hunsdon's meeting with Arran at Foulden, near Berwick, on 13 August, but his open scepticism came to the notice of Hunsdon, who accused him of trying to sabotage the by-course out of jealousy. However, on 1 September, Davison was granted his recall, and he left Edinburgh on the 15th. 
Less than a month after his return from Scotland, Davison was sent on the most important embassy of his career. Following the assassination of Orange in July, Elizabeth had rejected a Dutch request for unilateral aid in favour of joint action with France. The Dutch had then agreed to accept Henri III as their sovereign, but he showed little interest either in co-operation with England or in the Dutch cause in general. On 10 October the privy council formally debated Netherlands policy and advised Elizabeth that she could not allow them to be reconquered. As a preliminary measure a 'man of skill' was to be sent to assess the situation, and on the 11th Walsingham informed Davison that he had been chosen. As it turned out he did not leave for a month, possibly owing to the queen's illness at the end of October. His letters of credence were signed on the 31st, but his instructions were not ready until 13 November. His main task was to discover the state of the Franco-Dutch negotiations. If Henri 'hath undertaken the action for their defence ether as protector or possessioner', Elizabeth would proceed no further. If he had not, then Davison was to assure them of her assistance upon reasonable conditions. If asked about the 'particularities of the cautions [security] desired by us' he was to let them know off the record that she would expect at least the occupation of Flushing and the Brill (TNA: PRO, SP 83/23/115-7). 
Davison left London about 13 or 14 November, but owing to bad weather did not reach Middelburg until the 21st. When he had his audience with the states general on the 28th he was greeted with suspicion in the belief that he had been sent to disrupt the French negotiations. At a later private meeting with some of the leading deputies, he told them he was not ordered to 'brouiller' the French treaty, but Elizabeth had reason to believe that Henri was not serious (Algemeen Rijksarchief, The Hague, 1.01.01.01.90A, art. 4). On 27 December, Walsingham instructed him to wait in The Hague until the Franco-Dutch negotiations were concluded. The states of Holland (who were not very enthusiastic about the French treaty) provided him with generous accommodation in the Wassenaar Hof on the Kneuterdijk. In the absence of his personal papers the composition of his household in The Hague is unknown, with one very interesting exception -- William Brewster, the future leader of the Pilgrim Fathers of Plymouth, Massachusetts. Brewster was a protege of Davison; he was the 'young Bruster' for whom he sought to obtain the postmastership at Scroby, Nottinghamshire, in 1590 ('CSP dom.', '1581-90', 686). 
The Dutch embassy to France had left just before Davison arrived, but they had a difficult journey and did not reach Paris until 1 February 1585. On the 18th the privy council informed him that the Dutch were not making any headway, and 'as of yourself' he was to encourage them to look to England ('CSP for.', '1584-5', 287-8). News that Henri had rejected the proposed treaty reached London on 6 March. Walsingham informed Davison on the following day, and two days later (9 March) he sent Edward Burnham with an outline of the terms of Elizabeth's assistance. Burnham reached Davison on the 17th, and on the 30th the terms were presented to the states general. By 10 May most of the provinces had agreed to send an embassy to England but Zeeland proved awkward, and it was only on the 21st that it was brought round. Davison had intended returning with the Dutch embassy, but in view of the delays the states suggested he go first, and he left about 27 May. The Dutch embassy received its instructions only then; it had a difficult passage and did not reach Margate until 24 June. 
When the Dutch arrived Davison was summoned to court, and during July he played an important subordinate role in the negotiations as translator, escort, and resident expert. His translating appears to have been purely into French -- how much Dutch he knew remains a mystery. The negotiations launched him into the most complicated of his embassies. There was a large gap on both military and political levels between what the Dutch wanted and what Elizabeth would give. The Dutch held an advantage because they would not cede Flushing -- the main town Elizabeth wanted as a caution -- for an army of fewer than 5000 foot and 1000 horse. The stalemate was broken by an initial compromise, a provisional treaty for the relief of Antwerp, signed on 2 August. Under this treaty, Elizabeth would supply 4000 foot for three months to help to break the siege of Antwerp. She was to be repaid six months after Antwerp was relieved, or within a year if it was not. Immediately afterwards there was a panic that Antwerp had surrendered, and Zeeland let it be known that it was prepared to cede Flushing for less than its original demand. This inspired a second provisional treaty (10 August) for aid during the war. Under this the 4000 English were to serve for the duration of the war. The treaty for Antwerp was still in force, but repayment of English expenditure subsequent to the initial three months was to be postponed until a year after the end of the war. Flushing and Brill were to be ceded as cautions a month after the treaty was ratified. The treaty also outlined the political and military role of the governor-general, the assumed commander of the English force. 
There was considerable doubt whether the states general would ratify this treaty, but on 20 August it was learned that Antwerp had actually surrendered. Two days later Walsingham invited Davison to discuss the Netherlands with him in advance of a meeting with the Dutch deputies the following day. The Dutch reported on the 23rd that Elizabeth had decided to increase her troops to the desired 1000 horse and 5000 foot and Leicester had been invited to serve as the 'heere van qualiteyt en respect' ('nobleman of rank and reputation'), if Flushing and Brill were handed over immediately (Algemeen Rijksarchief, 1.01.01.01.92). On the 25th it was decided to send an English envoy to The Hague. The initial choice was William Waad, but Davison replaced him. Davison's instructions (over which he was allowed considerable discretion) stated that out of concern over the possible moral effects of the surrender of Antwerp, Elizabeth had decided to concede what the Dutch wanted, but Flushing and Brill were to be handed over first. Once they were in English hands, he could return. 
Davison reached Flushing on 3 September and made his way quickly to The Hague. However, just after he left, London had a new idea: an 'instrument' signed by the commissioners for the 10 August treaty that would include both a ratification of the treaty and Elizabeth's recent concessions. This became known as the 'Act of Ampliation'. A copy was sent to Davison on the 3rd, but the Dutch deputies in England then obtained a further concession that the garrisons of the cautionary towns would be supplementary to the 5000 infantry -- a point which had not been clear in the 10 August treaty. The 'Act of Ampliation' was redrafted and the new version sent to Davison on the 18th. 
Davison had only received the first version of the act when he had his initial audience with the states general on the 11th. On the 20th the states general decided to draft its own act of ratification, to which he agreed in order to save time. On the recommendation of Holland two revisions were introduced. The first was the exclusion of the garrisons of the cautionary towns from the 5000 (to which, they had heard from London, Elizabeth had agreed), and the second the absorption of the 2 August treaty into the 10 August treaty. The result of this was that the repayment of all the costs of the English troops was delayed until the end of the war. Davison was shown a draft on the 22nd; he noted that there were problems, but to save time he was prepared to sign it. As he informed London, his primary concern was the quick and peaceful surrender of the cautionary towns. He considered that the concession over their garrisons fell within his discretion, but curiously he did not comment on the amalgamation of the treaties. 
Davison then moved speedily to obtain possession of Brill (1 October) and Flushing (19 October). To provide their garrisons he requested the English military commander, John Norris, to supply the best of the English companies. Norris wished to use them on a short campaign near Arnhem. Davison publicly stated that this was a mistake given the season, and their relations suffered. He now intended to delay his return until Sir Philip Sidney arrived in Flushing, but on 19 October he was instructed to wait for Leicester and help him settle in; he could return a month after the earl arrived. On the 23rd Elizabeth finally received the Dutch 'Act of Ratification'. She was outraged by what she regarded as sharp practice in the revisions, but Davison was informed that no blame was attached to him. 
Leicester did not arrive until 10 December. Davison was among the reception party that greeted him in Flushing, and he then accompanied him into Holland. On the 27th Walsingham informed him that Elizabeth had agreed to his recall for she 'meaneth to use your service otherwise', rumours Davison had already heard over a month before ('CSP for.', '1585-6', 155, 241). Before he left, however, he became involved in one of the more controversial episodes in his career. The treaty of 10 August had set out the political and military role of the governor-general in some detail, and Davison was aware during November and December that the Dutch were discussing what form this should take. How much he knew about the debates in England is not clear, although Leicester later claimed he had shown him all his commissions and instructions. It would be a key point in his own future defence that he had received no formal instruction that Leicester was not to hold any office other than command of the queen's troops. 
On 31 December the states general agreed on a proposal for the governor-generalship to offer Leicester, and this was delivered to him verbally in his bedchamber at The Hague on the following day. Leicester then had Davison answer for him in French. Davison and Sidney were Leicester's main representatives in the debates with the states general over the terms of the offer between 7 and 16 January 1586. Agreement was reached on the 16th, and Leicester was formally sworn in as governor-general on the 25th. Leicester, Davison, and numerous others informed London that negotiations over the governor-generalship were in train from mid-January, though Leicester did not write to Elizabeth directly. Instead on 14 January he informed Walsingham that Davison would be returning shortly and would explain all. He wrote fulsomely in Davison's praise, urged that the queen give him 'countenance', and despite the rumours of a promotion at home requested that he be returned to the Netherlands where his experience was invaluable ('Correspondence', ed. Bruce, art. 26). 
For reasons that are not entirely clear, Davison did not leave The Hague until 5 February; he was then caught at Brill by adverse winds and did not arrive at the court at Greenwich Palace until the 12th. Leicester's letter of 14 January had reached the court by 26 January, when the privy council sent him a strong expression of Elizabeth's displeasure at the offer of the governor-generalship and ordered him not to accept the office. This letter reached him by 8 February while Davison was trapped at Brill. Leicester wrote to inform Davison on the 10th, but he left for England on that very day. Davison arrived at court apparently unaware that Elizabeth had been fuming over the subject for well over a fortnight and that on learning by the 10th that Leicester had actually assumed office she had prepared Sir Thomas Heneage to go and demand that he resign it. 
Davison brought with him a (now missing) letter from Leicester to Elizabeth and a prepared defence on grounds of necessity; if Leicester had rejected the Dutch offer they might have sought a peace with Spain. Elizabeth retorted that Leicester had disobeyed her express command. Having heard that Davison 'of whom she had conceaved better opinion and towardes whom she had intended more good then now she found me woorthy of' and Sidney were 'perswadors thereof', she also attacked him for not having opposed Leicester ('Correspondence', ed. Bruce, art. 43; BL, Cotton MS Galba C. viii, fol. 30'r'). Davison's personal defence was the absence of any instruction on the subject, but he considered Leicester's action politically justified anyway. 
Thereafter Davison retired from court with a cold he had picked up on his return and spent most of the next few months in bed. However, there was an unpleasant sequel. Leicester does not appear to have learned of Davison's interview until he met Heneage in Harlem on 8 March. On one level he then took the blame 'that I dyd not first acquaint her highness before I dyd accept this office', but he then claimed that he was dissuaded from doing so by Davison 'and others'. Davison had argued 'the extremity of the cace to be such as he thought himself full hable to satysfie her majesty'. He also stood to Davison's defence: 'I say not this to worke any blame to Mr Davyson, whose most sincere honest minde toward hir servyce I must acknowledge'. Yet Leicester also sent him a savage private letter on the 10th, basically blaming him for the whole business, which Davison equally furiously annotated ('Correspondence', ed. Bruce, arts. 59, 61). 
Several months later Leicester and Davison cautiously began corresponding again, but the warmth had left their relations. On 2 July, Davison wrote to deny rumours that he had told Elizabeth that Leicester had proceeded against his objections, and that he was the author of the 'hard procedinges offered to your excellency' ('Correspondence', ed. Bruce, art. 125). Davison's defence of Leicester to Elizabeth was in some senses not the real issue, for by the time he arrived at court the damage had been done. The mystery lies in the responsibility for the way of proceeding. Why Leicester, who knew better than anyone else how to handle Elizabeth, failed to write to her directly and gambled all on Davison's providing his defence is still to be explained. 
Davison had intended going to Bath 'for an ache that hath continued in my knees' since he returned from Scotland in 1584, but his cold meant that he did not leave until July ('CSP for.', '1585-6', 592). It was in Bath in August, after all the hints, that he was finally informed that Elizabeth intended to appoint him a principal secretary of state. When he returned in February 'it is objected against Mr Davison's being Secretary that he is very poure, as in trewth he is not rych and also that Mr Secretary [Walsingham] is now in perfaict health so there nedeth no haste' ('Rutland MSS', 1.190). In his letter to Leicester of 2 July, Davison hinted at a concern that he might see any promotion as a reward for having undercut him. However, although Walsingham informed him in July that Elizabeth 'seemethe to be dysposed to make Mr Davison my assystaunt' there is no evidence Leicester had any involvement in the appointment one way or the other ('Correspondence', ed. Bruce, art. 129). 
Davison was formally sworn secretary and a member of the privy council on 30 September, though his letters patent did not pass the great seal until 12 December. His four months' service was dominated by major events. Once appointed a privy councillor he was added to the commissioners for the trial of Mary, queen of Scots, and (for the first time) elected an MP for the duchy of Lancaster borough of Knaresborough in Yorkshire in the parliament that met in October. However, he took no part in either. In October, while Walsingham and Burghley went to Fotheringhay Castle in Northamptonshire, and in November, while they were involved in the parliament, he was in attendance on Elizabeth at Windsor Castle and then Richmond Palace. The correspondence between the three during these months reveals him as an active messenger and co-ordinator, but very much a junior. In December the proroguing of the parliament and the remove of the court to Greenwich brought the council together again, but by the middle of the month Walsingham retired ill, and he did not return until the middle of February 1587. On 10 December, Davison asked him to send him the signet and the privy seal. Burghley remained at Greenwich but a riding accident in mid-January kept him in bed well into February. 
Davison's attendance on Elizabeth in these months (he was present at almost every recorded privy council meeting) is the key to his prominence in Mary's last days. Most of what is known of the events surrounding the dispatch of the warrant for Mary's execution comes from the three accounts he drafted later. Two of them, a discourse and a relation of the events of 1 to 14 February 1587, he prepared for Walsingham in the Tower on 20 February. They agree on most of the circumstances, but the relation omits some important issues ('CSP Scot.', '1586-8', arts. 284-5). The third is an undated paper defending his innocence that appears to have been drafted after his trial on 28 March 1587 (ibid., art. 360). The last paper reflects the resentment Davison shared with Robert Beale at being singled out as the instruments of Mary's death and the possible targets of James's revenge when he succeeded Elizabeth. He emphasized that he played no role in either her trial or the parliamentary proceedings. He was responsible only for the custody of the warrant for her execution after Burghley drafted it about 10 December 1586, so that it would be on hand when Elizabeth wanted it. He had no particular interest in Mary's death. In this context he made some interesting claims: he had refused to sign the bond of association despite pressure from Elizabeth (presumably just before he left for the Netherlands in 1584), he had gone to Bath deliberately to avoid involvement in the investigation of the Babington plotters, and he had been instrumental in preventing the sentence being pronounced at Fotheringhay. With regard to the last, he was not entirely honest. When he forwarded to Walsingham the queen's instruction to delay pronouncing sentence until the commissioners had returned to London on 14 October 1586, he had expressed the hope that his letter would arrive too late. 
Davison's narrative of the events between 1 and 14 February is straightforward and very detailed. He had retained the warrant for six weeks because he would not present it to Elizabeth until 'she sent a greater councillor to him for the same'. This took place at Greenwich on 1 February when the lord admiral, Charles Howard, second Baron Howard of Effingham, told him Elizabeth was ready to sign. Elizabeth signed the warrant having specifically asked for it; it was then to go to the lord chancellor, Sir Thomas Bromley, to pass the great seal. Davison attended to this later that day, telling Burghley (who had Leicester with him at the time) and Walsingham (who was at home) on the way. On the 2nd Elizabeth told him to delay the sealing of the warrant, but he replied that it had already passed. This was a key point, for according to Davison she said nothing further. He then went to see Sir Christopher Hatton to tell him it was signed, that he feared Elizabeth would behave as she had done over the execution of Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, and that he was unwilling to proceed on his own. Together they saw Burghley, who then decided to summon the privy council for the following day. On the 3rd the privy council met and Burghley proposed that they take the burden from Elizabeth by sending the warrant under their authority, and to appoint Beale to carry it. Nine privy councillors (presumably all those present), including Davison, signed the letter accompanying the warrant, together with Walsingham, to whom it was sent for signature in his sickbed. From then until news of the execution arrived from Fotheringhay on the 9th Davison saw Elizabeth on several occasions about other business, but did not mention the dispatch of the warrant, on the assumption (so he claimed in the discourse) that she knew about it from more senior privy councillors. 
The relation differs from the discourse in two key areas. First, it greatly abbreviates Elizabeth's discussions with Davison over the assassination rather than execution of Mary. Second, it omits a long denial by Davison that the queen had ever told him on the 2nd to retain the sealed warrant in confidence until she ordered him otherwise and not to inform the rest of the privy council. The latter was to be another crucial point. Burghley told Elizabeth about the execution in the evening of the 9th, and after brooding on it overnight she announced to Hatton the next morning in 'some heat and passion' that Davison had abused her trust by allowing the sealed warrant to leave his possession ('CSP Scot.', '1586-8', 293). Davison himself was told at a privy council meeting later that morning and advised to make himself scarce for a day or two. He was not in good health anyway and returned home. There he learned on the 11th that Elizabeth had decided to send him to the Tower. Owing to his illness this was put off until the evening of 14 February. 
The course of events between 14 February and Davison's trial on 28 March is more confusing. He was tried before an 'ad hoc' court in the star chamber composed of three privy councillors (John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Walter Mildmay, and Sir James Croft), who had not signed the letter of 3 February, and a miscellany of bishops, peers, and judges, under the presidency of the lord chief justice, Sir Christopher Wray, who was appointed lord privy seal for the occasion. The trial lasted for four hours between ten in the morning and two in the afternoon. The main charge against Davison was that he had disobeyed Elizabeth's command to retain the warrant and had then misled the privy council by not informing them of this. If Davison was being honest in the discourse, then it was his word against Elizabeth's. This, however, was not the defence he put forward. He specifically stated he was not going to contest the facts, and did not wish 'to utter the private speeches that passed between the queen and him'. He had put the warrant in execution out of concern for Elizabeth's safety and may have mistaken what she told him 'not having been long acquainted with her manner of speech' (despite being in attendance for nearly four months). On the lesser issue of concealing the dispatch of the warrant from Elizabeth after the 3rd, he stated that the privy council had agreed together not to 'let the Queen understand until it [the execution of Mary] was despatched' ('CSP Scot.', '1586-8', art. 328). 
Although Davison received a fairly rough handling by the crown's lawyers, the judgment was delivered in a different tone. The first commissioner to pronounce was Mildmay, whose verdict was that Davison had abused Elizabeth's trust by making the warrant known to the privy council, but that he did it with a good intent. He was to be fined $6666 13's'. 4died -- admittedly too much for him to afford -- and imprisoned at pleasure, though Mildmay considered that Elizabeth 'might be moved upon humble submission to remitt the extremitie of them both' ('CSP Scot.', '1586-8', 350). The other commissioners, although expressing greater or lesser condemnation of Davison's actions, fell into line with the punishment. According to an unfortunately anonymous eyewitness, after the trial, when they all dined in the star chamber, Davison dined apart 'thanking Sir W. Mildmay by Swanne his man for his good chere but not the sharpe sauce that he had mixed therewith' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/199, fol. 138'v'-139'r'). 
Davison was quietly released from the Tower -- where he spent some of the time writing a description of Ireland -- on 23 October 1588. It was shown nearly a century ago that he continued to be paid his salary as secretary of state until the end of his life and the various other emoluments and profits of office until the death of Walsingham in 1590. In 1594 Elizabeth granted him lands worth $200 per annum, possibly in compensation for the loss of the profits; these he sold for $5000. There is no evidence that any part of his fine was ever paid. He was never formally dismissed and he continued to be addressed as Mr Secretary -- he was simply suspended from office. 
There is a definitely orchestrated tone to Davison's trial. Elizabeth at least was consistent. For all her anger with the ten privy councillors involved, Burghley in particular, Davison was a special case for disobeying her order on 2 February not to reveal the sealed warrant. The trial judgment was thus a vindication of her technical innocence. How Davison was brought to co-operate is an interesting question. Immediately after the execution Burghley had stood up for Davison and offered to resign his own offices. On 11 March, Thomas Randolph visited Davison in the Tower, where he found him ill and depressed, yet determined to maintain his innocence and deny any fault or error, expecting that the other privy councillors would stand with him. On 12, 14, and 16 March, Hatton and Sir John Woolley interviewed him, specifically about what Elizabeth had or had not said to him on 2 February. On the day before the trial the other privy councillors involved were also interviewed and a written statement taken from Burghley -- which was mentioned in the trial (and may be BL, Add. MS 48027, fol. 702) -- along the lines that Davison had misled him about the queen's intentions. 
A story circulated later that Elizabeth had considered imprisoning Burghley as well, but decided against it because she was afraid it would kill him. On 25 February, Burghley became very worried that the lord chief justice of the common pleas, Sir Edmund Anderson, had told Elizabeth she had the power to hang Davison under the royal prerogative. He considered this illegal and warned the other judges against concurring. Davison later said that Mildmay had told him that the attorney-general, Sir John Popham, and the solicitor-general, Thomas Egerton, had threatened to resign if he was tried other than in star chamber (which could not pass capital sentences) and in such a way as would both satisfy Elizabeth yet make it possible for her to remit any punishment. Lastly, the anonymous witness (who wrote from Leicester House) gave Leicester credit for having engineered a successful compromise. It looks very much as though Davison was persuaded to forgo his innocence, justify Elizabeth at his trial, and suffer only nominally. Unfortunately the agreement was a bit too neat, and Davison was rapidly seen as an unconvincing scapegoat, either for the queen or for Burghley. 
Yet Davison may have been more of an actor than he claimed. He expressed his conviction that Elizabeth would behave as she had done over Norfolk to Walsingham as early as 10 October 1586, several months before he mentioned it to Hatton. There is also his role in the des Trappes affair or Stafford plot of early January 1587, in which William Stafford and Leonard des Trappes, a gentleman servant of the French ambassador, were accused of plotting to assassinate Elizabeth. It was widely believed at the time that it was a put-up job to discredit the French ambassador, Guillaume de d'Aubespeine, baron de Chateauneuf, or to frighten Elizabeth into action. After Davison's arrest Walsingham admitted to Chateauneuf that the accusation was a mistake, which he attributed to Davison's inexperience. This has been seen as another example of Davison's being used as a scapegoat, but Walsingham may have been right. Davison was deeply involved in the investigation of the 'plot' and may have believed that assassination to prevent Mary's execution was a very real threat. 
Yet if Davison was to be rewarded for co-operating, the issue of his restoration to office remained. Amid the considerable sympathy for him, one champion in particular emerged, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, who from spring 1587 made his restoration a matter of principle. Walsingham's death in April 1590 initiated a flurry of speculation on the subject. Essex worked hard on Davison's behalf with both Elizabeth and James, and Davison himself petitioned the queen on 7 December 1590. Elizabeth hesitated, but in 1593 she finally informed Essex that, while she appreciated Davison's qualities, restoring him was out of the question. Some years later, in a very bitter paper written after Burghley's death, Davison blamed him for deliberately preventing his 'restitution to his place' in the interests of his son Robert Cecil ('CSP Scot.', '1586-8', art. 426). He said nothing about the events of 1587, but whether he considered that Burghley had reneged on an understanding made then is an interesting point. 
Davison's last years were spent in possibly deliberate obscurity. Whatever fears he may have had about James's revenge were unfounded, and his secretary's salary continued to be paid to him after 1603. On 25 July 1607 he was granted the reversion of his office of treasurer of king's bench and allowed to assign it to trustees in the interests of his children. He was then living in Stepney, Middlesex, where he died on 21 December 1608. He was buried in St Dunstan's Church, Stepney, on 24 December but no monument was erected. He drew up his last will on 18 December. It contains a predestinarian preamble, but is chiefly concerned with the sharing of the income from his office between his two daughters (referred to only by their married names Duncombe and Townley) and three surviving sons. 
By the time of his death Davison had become a Tacitean hero, the honest man destroyed by the deviousness of the court. William Camden even insinuated that he was appointed secretary with the intent of using him as a scapegoat over Mary. The very obscurity of his background and his openly puritan allegiances have given him an attractively homespun image. The comparison of his fate with that of Edmund Grindal, archbishop of Canterbury, first made by R. B. Wernham seventy years ago, is still valid. Yet if he was thrust into some of the trickiest episodes of mid-Elizabethan diplomacy and politics, he also lived dangerously. He held strong views, expressed them publicly, and did not suffer those he considered fools gladly. Throughout his career he urged the seizing of opportunities by decisive action. His behaviour in February 1587 was very much in character, however much he may have wished in retrospect to portray himself as a mere unfortunate instrument. 


@@@@@


doc= 7307


Davisson, William (c.1593-1669), chemist and physician, was born in Aberdeen, the youngest of the three sons of Duncan Davissone of Ardmakrone (died 'c'.1600) and Jonet Forbes. Shortly after the death of his father, his mother's holdings were seized by relatives, and after her early death suits for restitution continued for many years. In connection with these proceedings, Davisson obtained a patent of nobility from Charles I in 1629. Davisson entered Marischal College in 1614, obtained an MA in 1617, and, owing to his family's difficulties, declared it better 'to live industriously and honestly among foreigners, than to live in poverty and degradation amongst my own countrymen and illustrious relatives' ('Prodromus', 1660, 407), and emigrated to France. There he married a fellow Scot, Charlotte de Thynny (Thegny), with whom he had one child, Charles. 
During his first years in France, Davisson may have become qualified as a doctor of medicine at Montpellier. He was befriended by Jean Bapiste Morin, succeeding him as physician to Bishop Claude Dormy, a devotee of chemistry with a laboratory at Beauchamps, near Bourbon-Lancy. After the bishop's death in 1626, Davisson began lecturing on chemistry at Paris, and published his most important work, 'Philosophia pyrotechnica' (1633-5), a wide-ranging textbook on chemistry incorporating classical authors, sacred scripture, alchemical authorities, neoplatonic ideas, and experimental data, into a grand Paracelsian chemical system. (In all his publications he used the Gallicized form of his name, D'Avissone, and his descendants used this form exclusively.) He also wrote a curious work on salt, dedicated to Cardinal Richelieu, and entitled 'Oblatio salis, sive, Gallia lege salis condita' (1641), which treated the properties of common salt alongside its metaphorical meanings and its (supposed) relation to Salic law. In 1644, through the patronage of Henrietta Maria and Francois Vautier, first physician to Louis XIII, Davisson became physician to the king, circumventing a recent parliamentary decree forbidding the Parisian practice of physicians who did not belong to the Paris faculty. In 1647, a chair of chemistry was created at the Jardin du Roi, which at Vautier's recommendation was offered to Davisson; this was the first chair of chemistry in France. Davisson became intendant of the Jardin du Roi in 1647, and began lecturing there on 23 July 1648. 
In 1651 Davisson resigned his posts, possibly owing to the intrigues of Bouvard, whom he had displaced as intendant. It seems equally possible he resigned because of the controversy about his 1651 tract 'Observations sur l'antimoine' which upheld the pharmaceutical use of antimony and sharply criticized physicians who rejected chemical medicine, thus siding with Paracelsian protestants of Montpellier against Galenist Catholics of Paris in their long-waged 'antimony wars'. None the less, in the same year, helped by the Polish Queen Marie-Louise and his friend Morin, Davisson took up similar posts in Warsaw as first physician to King Jan Kazimierz and keeper of the royal garden. In 1663 he completed a lengthy commentary on 'Idea medicinae philosophicae' of the Paracelsian physician Peter Severinus (he had published a prodromus in 1660 with Severinus's text). After Marie-Louise's death in 1667 Davisson left Poland, returning briefly to his native Aberdeen where he had a tract on scalp disease printed under the pseudonym Theophrastus Scotus; this work, entitled 'Plicomastix' (1668), was sold in Danzig. In 1669 he returned to Paris, where Louis XIV ratified his patent of nobility, guaranteeing nobility to his descendants. 
Davisson enjoyed a high reputation in courtly circles. Lord Scudamore, the English ambassador at Paris, wrote of Charles I's 'gracious favour' towards Davisson, and noted that the king 'has been rightly informed concerning the worth of this man, and the benefit his Majesty's subjects receive by him' ('CSP dom.', '1635-6', 321). His lectures in Paris were well attended; Evelyn visited on 21 October 1649, and Aubrey asserted that Hobbes 'went through a Course of Chymistrie with him' (Read, 77). Sir Thomas Urquhart wrote that Davisson's 'excellency... in alchemy is above all the men now living in the world' (Small, 265). Davisson died at Paris in 1669. 


@@@@@


doc= 7308


Davy, Adam (fl. early 14th cent.), poet, was the author of a verse account of five prophetic dreams (in Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 622, of the fourteenth century), and describes himself as 'Adam, the marshal', 'of Stratford-atte-bowe' (London) twice, and once as 'Adam Davy'. He claims that he is widely known, but no evidence of this fame has survived, and he is not otherwise known. Perhaps he was the marshal of a household. He says that he dreamt of a great knight, whose name is 'sir Edward pe kyng, Prince of Wales'. It is usually assumed that this is Edward II, the only King Edward of the century to have actually been created prince of Wales (in 1301). If, however, the phrase is not meant as a precise title, the reference could be to Edward I or the young Edward III. In the vision, the king stands in front of the shrine of St Edward, with two knights on either side. They strike him fiercely with their swords, and he suffers the attack in silence, but is not wounded. When they are gone, four beams of light come from his ears, 'off diuers colours, red and white als [also?] hij were' (Davy, 12, l.32), and they spread far and wide in the country. This first dream took place on the Wednesday before the Decollation of John the Baptist (29 August). The second, on the Tuesday before All Saints' day (November 1), promises that the day will come when Edward will be chosen emperor of Christendom. He rides on an ass to Rome as a pilgrim, without hose and shoes; his shanks seem all blood red. In the third dream, on the Wednesday night before St Lucy's day (13 December), the pope crowns Edward emperor in Christendom -- May God give him victory over his enemies and the wicked Saracens. In the fourth, on 'worping-ni'3'th' (probably Sunday night), the dreamer goes into a chapel of Our Lady and sees Christ on the cross 'un-nail' his hands and say that he wishes to go with the knight; he asks leave of his mother to accompany their loyal knight: '
in pilerinage he wil gon, 

To bien awreke [avenged] of oure fon [foes]. 
(ibid., 14, ll.103-4)' The Virgin grants her son's request, and a voice urges Adam to make his dream known to the king. He sets off eastwards aided by light from heaven. In the final dream, on the Thursday before the feast of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary (8 September), the king stands before the high altar at Canterbury, all clothed in red, and the king is merry 'of pat blee [colour] red as blood' (ibid., 15, l.140). Adam is again urged to make the dream known to King Edward, and he says that he is doing this, not for reward but for fear of almighty God. Perhaps the description of Adam as 'a fanatical rhymer' ('DNB') is a little harsh. His prophetic visions have the combination of vividness and a tantalizingly enigmatic quality that is characteristic of the genre. On the face of it they might be urging the king to go on crusade, but their context and purpose remain mysterious. Adam was previously supposed to be the author of the other poems in the manuscript, but there is no evidence for this whatsoever. 


@@@@@


doc= 7309


Davy, Charles (1722/3-1797), Church of England clergyman and writer on music, was born in Norwich, the son of Charles Davy of Hatton Garden, London; his mother may have been Sarah Davy. He was educated at Mr Haslehurst's school at Market Rasen, Lincolnshire, Mr Pigge's school at Watton, Hertfordshire, and Mr Brett's school at Scarning in Norfolk. On 3 May 1739 he matriculated aged sixteen at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA (1742) and MA (1748). In 1764 he was instituted to the rectory of Topcroft, Norfolk, to the rectory of Benacre, Suffolk, two years later, and to that of Onehouse in the same county in 1776. 
In 1772 Davy published his 'Conjectural Observations on the Origin and Progress of Alphabetical Writing' followed by 'Letters Addressed Chiefly to a Young Gentleman' (1787), which included a discussion of Ptolemy's doctrine on music. This work came after his and Christopher Smear's proposed, but unpublished, 'Essay upon the principles and powers of vocal and instrumental music'. 
Davy was married to Mary, daughter of Thomas Sheppard; they had two sons, Charles and Frederick. Charles became a fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, vicar of Wickham Market, Suffolk (1803), rector of Barking and of Combs, in the same county (1818), and died on 7 March 1836 aged seventy-nine. With Frederick he published a translation of M. T. Bourrit's 'A Relation of a Journey to the Glaciers in the Dutchy of Savoy' (1775). The elder Charles Davy died at Onehouse on 8 April 1797 and was buried in the chancel of the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 7310


Davy, David Elisha (1769-1851), antiquary, was born on 16 June 1769, son of David Davy (1709-1799), farmer of Rumburgh, near Bungay, Suffolk, and his second wife, Susanna Foyster ('c'.1743-1800). His uncle Eleazar Davy, of The Grove, Yoxford, high sheriff of Suffolk in 1770, who had no son, educated him to be his heir. After boarding at Bungay grammar school under Thomas Reeve, Davy was sent to Samuel Forster's school at Yoxford about 1782, then moved with him to Norwich when Forster succeeded Samuel Parr at the grammar school there in 1785. From Pembroke College, Cambridge, he matriculated in 1786 and graduated as sixth senior optime in 1790; two years later he was ordained deacon by the bishop of Norwich. He served curacies at Theberton and Yoxford, but abandoned clerical duties in June 1795 on becoming receiver-general of transferred duties for east Suffolk on Sir John Rous's application to Pitt (Rous, later first earl of Stradbroke, had married Eleazar Davy's stepdaughter). When Eleazar Davy died in 1803, David Elisha had to borrow from Gurney's Bank to pay his uncle's debts and legacies without selling property at a time when land values had slumped. Established at The Grove as a magistrate and deputy lieutenant, he took command of the Blything Hundred Volunteers with the rank of lieutenant-colonel; his friend Henry Jermyn of Sibton (1767-1820) was second in command. 
With Jermyn in 1805 Davy began his life's work of gathering materials for a history of Suffolk. They toured together, and in 1810 jointly issued to incumbents a questionnaire as Francis Blomefield did in Norfolk in the 1730s. When in 1820 Jermyn died, Davy feared that his friend's notes might go to a publisher, for each had copied from the other, and Davy still had publication in mind. With mounting debts, he had no alternative but to put The Grove into Gurney's hands, and he resigned his receivership, and retired to a friend's house at Ufford, near Woodbridge. Antiquities now filled his time, and the tours continued, usually with the Revd John Wareyn Darby as companion: his journal records excursions made between 1823 and 1844. With a small circle of like-minded friends including George Bitton Jermyn (Henry's nephew), John Mitford, and Joseph Hunter, he was a regular correspondent, always generous to serious enquirers, but some letters betray the bitterness he felt at having lost the position in society which his uncle intended. He was reluctant to join the many societies that would have welcomed him. He borrowed and transcribed such collections as those of Hervy, Blois, Candler, Martin, and Cullum, but Craven Ord made a cautious response when asked for help, and Davy long mistook this for a rebuff. Eventually he came to realize that publication was less desirable than the amassing of well-ordered collected materials, and his 131 manuscript volumes, mostly folios, are more useful than any printed history. 
Davy was the anonymous author of several Suffolk works, and revised Frederic Shoberl's 'Beauties of England and Wales' volume for Grieg and Higham's 'Excursions' in 1818. He admitted to providing the text for John Sell Cotman's 'Suffolk Brasses' (1819), the etchings of which were made from Davy's own rubbings, and for Henry Davy's 'Beccles Church and other Suffolk Antiquities' (1818), 'Architectural Antiquities of Suffolk' (1827), and 'Views of the Seats of the Noblemen and Gentlemen in Suffolk' (1827), as well as writing thirty-five articles in 'Gentleman's Magazine' over D.A.Y., the terminals of his names. Carlyle and Edward FitzGerald called him 'Dryasdust', but Davy knew that his collections were invaluable and irreplaceable to those who would later study Suffolk. He died unmarried and intestate at Ufford on 15 August 1851 (having recently recovered The Grove) and was buried at Yoxford on 21 August. Lucy Elizabeth Davy, widow of William Barlee, rector of Wrentham, through John Mitford, offered her brother's Suffolk collections, brass rubbings, and many rare pamphlets to Frederic Madden, keeper of the manuscripts at the British Museum, for $500, but only $200 was forthcoming. 


