@@@@@


doc= 63518


Crookenden, Isaac (b. 1777), writer, was born on 19 October 1777, the youngest of nine children of Caleb ('b'. 1730) and Mary Crookenden; his father was perhaps the shipbuilder of Itchenor, Sussex, whose bankruptcy was recorded in 1789 ('GM', 186). Isaac Crookenden married Elizabeth Pelham Fillary on 25 December 1798 at Arundel; they had one son, Adolphus Pelham (1800-1870). In 1802 Crookenden published 'Berthinia, or, The Fair Spaniard', a chapbook of forty-eight pages which also included a second tale. Nine further titles of a similar type are known; one of them, 'The Skeleton' (1805), describes Crookenden as 'Late assistant at Mr Adams' Academy in Chichester'. Frederick Frank identifies Crookenden as 'probably the most notorious counterfeiter of legitimate Gothic novels' (Frank, 59). Thus Crookenden's 'The Skeleton' was a 'refabrication' of the anonymous 'Animated Skeleton' (1798) and his 'Horrible Revenge, or, The Monster of Italy!!' (1808) was 'another shilling shocker based loosely upon [Edward] Montague's 'The Demon of Sicily' of 1807' (ibid., 59). Crookenden also derived materials from Ann Radcliffe, Matthew ('Monk') Lewis, and Charlotte Dacre to produce his series of 'gothic novels in miniature' (Neuburg, 165). His only deviation from the Gothic mode is 'Venus on Earth' (1808), an 'examination' of the 'passion of love'. He worked for four publishers successively: S. Fisher, A. Neil, J. Lee, and R. Harrild. It is difficult to date the end of his career as the later chapbooks are undated: 'The Spectre of the Turret' is conjecturally dated between 1810 and 1820. None of his work was reviewed, but 'The Mysterious Murder' (1806) was reprinted in New York in 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 63519


Byrne, Charlotte (1782?-1825), writer, was the daughter of John King, born Jacob Rey (c.1753-1823), a moneylender and radical writer well known in London society. Her father divorced her mother, Sara, 'nee' Lara, under Jewish law in 1784 before setting up home with the dowager countess of Lanesborough. In 1798 Charlotte King published with her sister Sophia ['see 'Fortnum, Sophia (b. 1781/, d. in or after 1805)] a volume of Gothic verses, 'Trifles of Helicon', and dedicated it to her bankrupt father to show 'the education you have afforded us has not been totally lost'. The reappearance of poems from this volume in 'Hours of Solitude' (1805), published under the pseudonym Charlotte Dacre, confirms the identity between Dacre and King; the pen-name was probably designed to suggest aristocratic connections. She also wrote verses for the 'Morning Post' and 'Morning Herald' under the name Rosa Matilda, perhaps after the demonic lover in Matthew Lewis's 'The Monk' (1796); 'Hours of Solitude' had for a frontispiece a darkly glamorous portrait of herself as Rosa Matilda. The poems, full of Gothic passions and imagery, briefly influenced Byron ('Hours of Idleness', 1807) though in 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers' (1809, ll. 755-62) he would scorn 'the lovely ROSA's prose in masquerade'. Also in 1805 she published 'The Confessions of the Nun of St. Omer', a Gothic tale of sexual repression and misbehaviour. In the preface Dacre claims the book was written at the age of eighteen and left untouched for three years during journeys abroad. The 'British Critic' for December 1805 (p. 671) called it 'a very fine, sentimental, and improbable story written in turgid and affected language... The moral, however, is good, for it teaches the mischief which arises from the neglect and violation of social duties.' 
In the following year Dacre published 'Zofloya, or, The Moor'. The corruption of the strong and sexually ruthless heroine Victoria, and her gradual enslavement to the charismatic Moorish servant Zofloya (later revealed to be Satan), is set against a sublime landscape of extreme and irrational forces. Ostensibly didactic in purpose, its evident taste for murderous horror shocked reviewers: the 'Literary Journal' (June 1806, 631) thought the author had 'maggots in the brain'; the 'Monthly Literary Recreations' (July 1806, 80) deplored the 'odious and indecent performance'. Its poetic character, psychological acuteness, and moral status were, however, praised voluminously in the 'Morning Post' (17 May), the paper for which Dacre mostly wrote (she also bore the first of three children by its editor in this year). The book's influence on Shelley's perfervid Gothic fantasies 'Zastrozzi' and 'St. Irvyne' is well documented. 
In 1807 Dacre continued her series of sexual case studies with 'The Libertine'. Again the 'Morning Post' defended its 'liberality of sentiment' and 'utmost purity of moral' against those (like the 'Monthly Magazine') who thought it 'prurient trash' (Jones, 245). Her last novel, 'The Passions' (1811), tried, according to its preface, to expose 'the danger... of yielding to the guilty violence of the Passions, or of swerving, even in 'thought', from the sacred line of virtue'. Her sporadic newspaper verse of the next decade indicates a reactionary turn, and in 1822, she published the naively royalist 'George the Fourth, a Poem'. 
Charlotte's children with Nicholas Byrne (died 1833), married owner and editor of the 'Morning Post', although born in 1806, 1807, and 1809, were not baptized until 8 June 1811 (at St Paul's, Covent Garden). On 1 July 1815 Byrne, now a widower, married 'Charlotte King spinster' at St James's, Westminster. She died on 7 November 1825, 'in Lancaster Place, after a long and painful illness, which her purity of heart and sublime greatness of soul enabled her patiently and piously to endure' ('The Times', 9 Nov 1825). She was buried at St Mary's, Paddington, on 11 November. The register records her age as fifty-three, which would put her date of birth about 1772; this is probably a mistake, but if true then her statement about her age in the preface to 'Hours of Solitude' underestimates it by a decade. 


@@@@@


doc= 63521


Fortnum, Sophia (b. 1781/2, d. in or after 1805), writer, was the daughter of John King (c.1753-1824), moneylender and radical writer known in London society as Jew King, and his wife, Sara, 'nee' Lara. In 1798 Sophia, with her sister Charlotte ['see 'Byrne, Charlotte (1782?-1825)], dedicated to him 'Trifles of Helicon', to show 'the education you have afforded us has not been totally lost'. Later in the year she published a melodramatic novel, 'Waldorf, or, The Dangers of Philosophy', in which sceptical doctrines propel all the main characters through unauthorized sexual behaviour to madness and death. 
In 1799 'Cordelia, or, A Romance of Real Life' was published at the Minerva Press; 'The Victim of Friendship', 'a German romance', followed in 1800. 'The Fatal Secret, or, Unknown Warrior' (1801) again links sex and death in the figure of a destructive demon lover. In the preface Sophia King describes herself as a 'weak sapling of nineteen years growth' and complains about the 'extortionate' mechanics of the book trade (the book was printed 'for the author'). She also mocks her own love of the Gothic formulae developed by Ann Radcliffe. On 19 July 1801 she married Charles Fortnum. As Sappho she wrote newspaper verse, some of which was republished in 'Poems, Legendary, Pathetic and Descriptive' (1804) alongside pieces from 'Trifles of Helicon'. In the preface she celebrates Matthew Lewis's 'Tales of Wonder' and espouses 'the fairy world of ghosts, and of magic' where 'the fantastic imagination roves unshackled'. The volume was dedicated to a Miss Sawbridge. There were sixty-five subscribers, including many aristocrats; John Penn, the MP to whom her sister dedicated her 'Hours of Solitude' (1805), subscribed $20. Sophia Fortnum's last known work was 'The Adventures of Victor Allen' (1805). Nothing is known of her after this date. 


@@@@@


doc= 63522


Milne, Christian (bap. 1772, d. in or after 1816), poet, was baptized on 19 May 1772 in Inverness, the daughter of Thomas Ross (died in or before 1797), a cartwright, and his first wife, Mary Gordon, the daughter of a schoolmaster in Forres. Mary Gordon died while her daughter was very young, and about a year later, Ross married Mary Denton, formerly a gentleman's housekeeper, and moved with his family to Auchentaul, to be near his new wife's relatives. Christian Ross learned to read and write during the six months she was able to attend a dame-school in Auchentaul; she quickly developed a love for writing and read whatever literature she could find in her father's house, including 'The Spectator', 'The Gentle Shepherd', and 'Paradise Lost'. At fourteen, she went out to service and began writing poetry, destroying most of it; a later mistress, the wife of Dr Jack of King's College, Aberdeen, accidentally found one of the poems and encouraged her to begin saving her work. On 16 August 1797 Christian married Peter Milne, then a journeyman ship-carpenter, but she continued to engage the interest of Aberdeen intellectuals, and, with their patronage and encouragement, she published a volume of poetry in 1805, which included an autobiographical sketch followed by a list of clergymen and academics prepared to testify to the truth of her story. Prefatory verses (not by Milne) describe her as 'the mean/Unletter'd -- female Bard of Aberdeen' who has, quite extraordinarily, managed to write poetry even though she lives 'quite estranged from Nature's 'witching smile'' (Milne, 8). She earned $100 from the volume, which she used, years later, to purchase a sixteenth share in a boat built by her husband's employer. The subjects of the poems vary widely, from an affectionate anniversary poem addressed to her husband to patriotic exhortations to ship-carpenters to join the militia. Her political poems are topical and vehemently anti-Napoleonic; in one, she calls for the French to 'Set virtuous LOUIS on his throne' in place of 'the vile Corsican' (ibid., 117). In both her autobiographical statement and her poetry, Milne presents herself as accepting the existing social order, but nevertheless she makes some sharp comments about the miseries suffered by her father during his attempts to escape poverty by honest labour; she is even sharper in her dismissal of allegations that she plagiarized her poems or that she neglected her household duties to write them. 'Spite and Ignorance', she proclaimed, are 'quite unfit to judge... the gift that Nature only can bestow' (ibid., 35). Milne's reputation seems to have been short-lived and mainly local, but her work was still well enough known in 1816 for the travel writer Elizabeth Isabella Spence to visit her during a trip to Aberdeen. Spence printed another autobiographical sketch of Milne's life, in which Milne describes years of ill health and the financial difficulties she has encountered in supporting eight children. While Spence describes Milne as being 'gentle in adversity' (1.56), Milne herself complains bitterly about 'the ridicule and contempt' she has encountered from her peers (ibid., 1.62) and strongly defends her decision to invest her literary income in a business venture rather than using it for day-to-day expenses. According to Milne, illness had prevented her from doing much writing since 1810, and apparently none of her work except the 1805 volume survives. Nor does she seem to have received much critical attention. 'Blackwood's', with a casual disregard for accuracy, dismissed her as 'a fisherman's wife, who writes poetry and sells oysters' (ibid., 3.429) in its mocking review of Spence's travelogue -- the closest it came to noticing Milne's work. 


@@@@@


doc= 63526


Martin, Claude (1735-1800), army officer in the East India Company and philanthropist, was born in the rue de la Palme, Lyons, France, on 4 January 1735, son of Fleury Martin (1708-1755), vinegar maker, and his wife, Anne Vaginay (1702-1735), butcher's daughter. At his parish school he excelled in mathematics and physics. Although apprenticed in 1749 to a local silk weaver, Martin chose to seek his fortune abroad and signed up for the army of the French Compagnie des Indes in 1751. He arrived in Pondicherry as a 'common soldier' and rose to become bodyguard to Comte de Lally, commander-in-chief in 1758. But French influence in India was waning, and on 9 May 1760 Martin, in a pragmatic move, deserted to the British East India Company's army. In August 1761, while escorting other French deserters to augment British troops at Calcutta, his ship, the 'Fateh-i-Islam' sank off the Coromandel coast. Martin was among the few survivors who eventually reached Calcutta on foot. 
Commissioned ensign in 1763, Martin was promoted lieutenant in the following year, after refusing to join a body of soldiers intent on deserting. But his rapid rise received a check when he sided against the commander-in-chief, Lord Clive, during the 'white mutiny' of 1766. Officers, including Martin, who had protested about the reduction in field allowances, faced deportation from India. It was Martin's skills as a surveyor and map maker that saved him, and for the next seven years he worked in north-east India with the company's geographer James Rennell, contributing to the resulting 'Bengal Atlas'. As a soldier, he took part in punitive raids into Bhutan, looting temples of books, pictures, relics, and wooden statues, which formed the basis of his own extraordinary collection of antiquities and curiosities. 
Martin had already visited Oudh, the north Indian state which, under its rulers, the nawabs, had loosened itself from the Mughal empire. In 1775 he got himself appointed as superintendent of the nawab's arsenal in the new capital, Lucknow. He was adept at finding influential people who could promote his career, aided by flattery and gifts. In this case he solicited the help of John Bristow, the corrupt resident to the Lucknow court, who in turn went to his patron, Philip Francis, the most powerful man in British India after the governor-general, Warren Hastings. It was probably now that Martin became a freemason, allowing him to move with confidence among fellow masons occupying the highest East India Company positions. Lucknow became his permanent home, and in 1781 he completed his first house, strongly fortified and moated, on the Gumti River. During the summer he lived underground, in basements built into the river bank, moving up as the river rose during the annual monsoon. When it fell, the basements were cleared of silt for the next summer's occupation. In the rooms above, Martin established 'a perfect Musaeum' that reflected the enquiring mind of an eighteenth-century Enlightenment man. He collected natural curiosities, and commissioned paintings of birds and flowers from Indian artists. He possessed works by the Daniells, William Hodges, Johann Zoffany, and Francesco Renaldi, and appears in paintings by the last two. He bought telescopes from the astronomer royal, William Herschel, and steam engines from the Birmingham factory of Matthew Boulton and James Watt, which he used for raising water. His library contained nearly 1000 volumes, showing his scientific, architectural, botanical, and antiquarian interests, with some erotica. He never married but kept several young Indian women, including his favourite mistress, Boulone ('c'.1766-1844), whom he had bought when she was nine years old. 
Never afraid of experimentation, in 1782 Martin successfully operated on himself for bladderstones, using an unorthodox form of lithotriptor, details of which he sent to the Company of Surgeons in London. In 1785 he built and flew the first hot air balloons in India, to the astonishment of the nawab, Asaf ud-Daula. In the arsenal he cast bells and cannon, and made fine pistols. Martin's huge fortune, which made him the richest European in eighteenth-century India, was accumulated in various ways. He owned and rented property, some of which he designed and had built himself. He traded successfully in indigo and cloth, exporting it to Europe in exchange for Spanish dollars. He lent money at 12 per cent (the company rate of interest), the largest loan being $250,000 to the nawab in 1794, which he retrieved with difficulty. He also sold European artefacts to the nawab at highly inflated prices, though his influence at the Lucknow court has been overrated. 
Although retired from military duty, he volunteered to accompany Lord Cornwallis as aide-de-camp at Seringapatam, during the Third Anglo-Mysore War of 1792. His last active service was leading the nawab's army, under General Sir Robert Abercromby, against the Rohillas in 1794; he was rewarded with the rank of major-general. In the following year he began building his extraordinary palace-tomb of Constantia, south-east of Lucknow, the largest European funerary monument in India. A baroque folly, it incorporates fantastic statuary, ingenious water-cooled air-conditioning, and locally produced 'Wedgwood' decorations. News of the French Revolution influenced Martin's decision to remain in India, and he lavished money on the building. His permanent memorials are the schools he endowed, at Lucknow, Calcutta, and Lyons, each called La Martiniere, and each of which celebrates as founder's day, the anniversary of his death, which occurred on 13 September 1800 at the Town House, Lucknow. His small charitable bequests are still distributed regularly to the poor at Constantia on the outskirts of Lucknow. 


@@@@@


doc= 63530


Wynne, Arthur (1871-1945), crossword puzzle deviser, was born on 22 June 1871 at 2 Everton Village, Everton, Liverpool, the son of George Wynne, editor of the 'Liverpool Courier', and his wife, Delicia Eliza Ann Sheldon. He had one brother and one sister. As a young man Wynne emigrated to the United States in the mid-1890s and, according to his family tradition, he first worked for an onion farmer in Texas. He soon, however, like his father, became a newspaperman, with his first job as a society editor of a paper in east Liverpool, Ohio. He then gravitated to Pennsylvania, where he was appointed sports editor of the local newspaper at McKeesport. His versatility was demonstrated when he was appointed as the music editor and critic of the 'Pittsburgh Despatch'. He even played second violin in the Pittsburgh Philharmonic Orchestra. 
Wynne's two passions in life had always been music and puzzles. He was able to fulfil this latter calling when he accepted the editorship of the fun section of the Sunday newspaper 'New York World'. It was on 21 December 1913, when he was pressed to fill a space on a page that printers were in a hurry to lock up, that he thought of using the space to revive the acrostic word game which dated from at least Roman times. He constructed a hollow, diamond-shaped grid of interlocking words and dubbed his creation a 'word-cross'. 
It was clear from the start, from the volume of letters sent in by readers, that Wynne's word-crosses were popular. However it was not for ten years -- until two young, would-be publishers, M. Lincoln Schuster and R. L. Simon, brought out the first ever crossword puzzle book -- that a national fad was clearly in the making. Simon and Schuster had sought out Wynne's successor, Margaret Petheridge, and sold more than 2 million copies in the first twenty-four months. 
The crossword puzzle craze spread to Britain when the London 'Sunday Express' began publishing puzzles on 2 November 1924. The newspaper established that during the war years, with its long hours in air-raid shelters, barracks, and mess decks, one in twenty-five of the population did a crossword every day. 
Latterly Wynne became an employee of King Features Syndicate. He did not directly benefit from the many newspapers who used the syndication service. He had never attempted to patent the concept which brought so much pleasure and frustration to so many. He was a contemplative man, with a wide circle of friends. He married twice, first Thelma Sacensen and then Lillian Webb. There was a daughter from the first marriage, and a son and a daughter by the second. He died at the Morton Plant Hospital, Clearwater, Florida, on 14 January 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 63531


Thomas Bowler (1826-1893), who was baptized on 10 December 1826 at Denton. 


@@@@@


doc= 63532


Bowler, William (1808-1878), hatter and feltmaker, was born on 25 January 1808 in Denton, Lancashire, and baptized there on 20 March, one of nine children of William Bowler, hatter, and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Catlow, who had married in Manchester Cathedral in 1798. The family descended from a long line of hatters in the Manchester area, dating back to 1331, when land was registered in the name of a Thomas Bowler. William Bowler's unmarried sister Nancy Bowler (1804/5-1884) had a son 
Having left strike-troubled Stockport, where the hat industry was in serious crisis, William, who had married Nancy Cook (died 1850) on 23 December 1832, and his nephew Thomas made their way south to seek work at one of the hatting factories in Southwark, London. William joined John Bowler & Son, and probably took over his cousin's premises at 1 Crescent, Southwark Bridge Road in 1853, trading under the name of William Bowler. 
Thomas Bowler, having been released from his seven-year indenture with his widowed aunt Dinah Bowler of Denton, joined the business of a French hatter established in London. He became foreman and later took over the company, which prospered under its original name, Victor Jay, and later Jay Hats, managed by consecutive generations of Bowlers. On 3 September 1848 he married Elizabeth Park, daughter of a hatter, at St Mary's Church, Lambeth, London. They had at least five daughters and two sons. 
The hat which subsequently became known as a bowler was conceived north of the Thames at 6 St James Street, the premises of James Lock & Co., distinguished hatters to royalty and gentry since 1667, and still trading at the same address in the twenty-first century. According to meticulously kept handwritten ledgers, 'stiff round crowned hats' were very much in demand during the late 1840s. A new, more practical hat for young and active gentlemen was required during this period, which prompted the evolution of a round hard hat, which looked smart, was protective on the hunting field, and able to stand up to the smoke and soot of nineteenth-century railway journeys. 
James Lock & Co. ledgers record an order placed by the Hon. Edward Coke, son of the first earl of Leicester, dated 25 August 1849, for a shooting hat, giving specific measurements of the brim. Consequent entries of orders by young gentlemen and friends of Edward Coke suggest that he might have started a new trend. The ledger refers to each order as 'a brown Coke hat', leading to the assumption that the first bowler was not black, but made of highly stiffened brown fur felt. To this day, Lock & Co. refer to the hat as a 'Coke hat', named after the first customer who ordered it. 
According to the industrial legend recorded by Frank Whitbourn in his history of James Lock & Co., published in 1971, William Bowler was summoned from south London, given Edward Coke's requirements for a new hat, and set about work in his factory at Southwark. After the prototype was delivered to Locks, Edward Coke jumped on it, testing its hardness and durability, and, pleased with the result, ordered the new style of hat for the gamekeepers on his estate. Locks' supplier's book reveals, however, that the Bowler factories never supplied Lock & Co. with felt hats. The established manufacturer was J. Ellwood & Sons of Blackfriars Road, which happened to be very close to the Bowlers in Southwark. The link between the supplier, the manufacturer, and the Bowlers, whose name became synonymous with this style of hat, may lie in the secret recipe for the stiffening of the raw material, the felt hoods, from which the hats were made. 
The stiffening of the bowler hat, which is essential to its shape and silhouette, is the result of an arduous manual procedure. Shellac, a dark, treacle-like substance extracted from the secretion of an insect parasite living on trees in south-east Asia, is chipped, heated, and diluted in methylated spirit. The felt hoods are manually rolled in the mixture, with the spirit evaporating, leaving the shellac in the matted felt fibres. The recipe for felt stiffening, which Thomas Bowler used at his factory, is alleged to have come from a village in France. It is likely that a French migrant worker, possibly one working for Victor Jay, knew the recipe and that William and Thomas Bowler perfected it for the prolific production of bowler hats, thus making their immortal mark on the development of the English gentleman's dress. 
After his first wife's death, William Bowler returned to Denton, Lancashire, and married second, on 10 September 1860, Mary ('b'. 1807/8), daughter of Thomas Hulme. He died at West Street, Denton, on 9 February 1878. Thomas Bowler, who continued to run the business in London, was in 1881 living in Camberwell and employing 65 men, 60 women, and 14 boys. By 1891 he headed a household of eleven, residing at 14 Highbury New Park. He served as upper warden of the Worshipful Company of Feltmakers of the City of London and was due to become master when he died of jaundice during a holiday in Guernsey on 5 September 1893, aged sixty-seven. The Bowler dynasty of hat makers continued to thrive at 34 Southwark Bridge Road, and managed a work force of 600 by 1939. Disaster struck in 1940, when the factory was destroyed by two consecutive German air raids during the blitz. The business moved to Great Marlborough Street, London, and manufactured ladies' hats until 1962. 
In the twentieth century the bowler hat took on many roles and became a British cultural icon. It became essential for Charlie Chaplin's satirical image, and personified the character John Steed, played by Patrick Mcgee, in the television series 'The Avengers' in the 1960s, when it was a symbol not only of probity but also of swinging London. In the 1970s the hat became, on the head of John Cleese, in the television comedy series 'Monty Python's Flying Circus', a lightly satirical symbol of the British upper class. Worn by Alex (Malcolm McDowell) in Stanley Kubrick's film version of Anthony Burgess's novel 'A Clockwork Orange' (published 1962, filmed 1971), it became an attribute of gang violence and brutality. 
Though the exact nature of the Bowlers' connection remains elusive, with perhaps the formula for stiffening felt forming their part in its creation, the 'Oxford English Dictionary' records that, at least from 1861, a low-crowned stiff felt hat had become known as a bowler. 


@@@@@


doc= 63533


Polier, Antoine Louis Henri (bap. 1741, d. 1795), military engineer and collector of oriental manuscripts, was baptized on 28 February 1741 at Lausanne, Switzerland, the younger son of Jacques Henri Polier ('bap'. 1700, died 1781), of a French protestant family which had settled in Switzerland in the sixteenth century, and his wife, Jeanne Francoise Moreau de Brosses, who was French. Polier was the nephew of Paul Philippe Polier ('bap'. 1711, died 1759), sometime commandant of Fort St George in Madras, and he sailed for Madras on the 'Hardwicke' in 1757, intending to join his uncle in that city, but instead joined the British East India Company service, as a cadet in the Madras army, and sought active service under Robert Clive against the French. He was transferred to Bengal in 1761, and was appointed lieutenant. In 1763 he attained the rank of captain, and acted as engineer in the construction of a new fort in Calcutta. He remained in this position until 1764 when he was superseded by Captain Fleming Martin, and himself became field engineer to the army under Major Hector Munro. In 1765 the court of directors permitted him to succeed Captain Martin as chief engineer and he acted in that capacity for two years. In 1766 he was promoted major, but could rise no higher because of a military order of that year which prohibited the promotion of foreigners to ranks higher than major. 
In 1773, in response to a request from the nawab-wazir of Oudh, Shuja ud-Daula, Polier was asked to go to Oudh as engineer, surveyor, and architect. The following year he incurred the displeasure of a majority of the council for assisting Najaf Khan, the ambitious Mughal general who besieged the fort at Agra, which had fallen into the hands of the Jats. The council was incensed to find that Polier had exceeded his brief by accepting the command of a contingent of the nawab's troops which had been dispatched to assist Najaf Khan at Agra. Polier was subsequently recalled to the Bengal presidency, and the court of directors ordered him to resign in 1775. He returned to Oudh to settle his commercial affairs, through which he had amassed considerable wealth, and in 1776 took up service with the Mughal emperor Shah Alam, raising a contingent of troopers and receiving a 'jagir' (an assignment of land revenue) in the district of Agra. In May 1780 Polier informed the governor-general that he had been appointed by the nawab-wazir to his former position of architect and engineer. The court of directors agreed to this appointment, and in 1782 he was readmitted to the service of the East India Company with the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
Polier maintained a fully-fledged household in Fyzabad, under the care of his trusted servant Lal Khan. It contained his two Indian wives, identified in his Persian correspondence as the 'senior' and 'junior' wives, and his sons by them. In addition, Colonel Claude Martin's will identified two other Indian women as 'women of Polier', Johquenow Begam and Zinnet Begam, and left them each a pension of 10 'sicca' rupees per month. During his time at Oudh, Polier collected oriental manuscripts and miniatures, and maintained a fascinatingly rich library of oriental manuscripts in Lucknow. More than 550 of these manuscripts were bought by the British civil servant E. E. Pote, who donated them to King's College, Cambridge, and to Eton College. Other parts of Polier's collections eventually found their way into the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris and the British Library in London. The Bibliotheque Cantonale, Lausanne, has a manuscript catalogue of 120 oriental works with annotations by Polier. 
In 1789 Polier returned to Europe, and on 20 January 1791 he married Anne Rose Louis Bertthoudt, daughter of Jacob, Baron Van Berchem, in France. They had two sons, Georges Maximin Jacques Henri (1793-1842) and Pierre Amedee Charles Guillaume, who became comte de Polier. Antoine Polier bought property near Avignon, and settled there. He was pensioned on Lord Clive's fund on 14 March 1792. He was killed by robbers at his home near Avignon. 
The life of Antoine Polier adds new dimensions to the understanding of the making of early colonial India. His activities highlight the extent to which the British relied on the co-operation of the French, even in an era of heightened Anglo-French conflict. Polier supervised the East India Company's survey and commercial operations, supplied his friend Warren Hastings with information on the political plans of indigenous rulers, and wrote the histories of the Sikhs and the Jats. Thus he actively aided the company's project of understanding the people and politics of India, which was vital to the stability of early British rule. Finally, Polier's collections and writings, and his Persian and English correspondence, enable the reader to view the Orient through the eyes of an eighteenth-century Frenchman, bringing a different perspective to understanding and interpretation of India. 


@@@@@


doc= 63536


Price, Joseph (c.1727-1796), merchant and pamphleteer, described himself as 'Having been born in Wales, suckled with Welch blood' and having 'the Welch devil' in him (Price, 38). It seems that his family came from Monmouth, but other indications of his parentage or upbringing are lacking. He evidently went to India for the first time in 1750, to make his living by the sea as what was known as a 'free merchant', that is, a person not in the service of the East India Company who was permitted to sail ships in Asian waters and trade on his own behalf in the 'country trade' between Asian ports. His first base seems to have been Bombay, but from 1767 he resided in Calcutta, where he became a prominent member of the European community, always known as Captain Price and attracting epithets such as 'honest' or 'a man of spirit'. 
In his early years in Bengal, Price's commercial activities were very extensive. He evidently took over the business of Robert Gregory, another free merchant, who returned to Britain with a great fortune. Price wrote that he had once had twenty-four ships 'navigating the seas on my own credit'. He made nine voyages as captain or managing agent from India to the Red Sea or the Persian Gulf (Price, 50-51, 71). The extent of his involvement in the China trade is revealed by transactions with Warren Hastings, on whose behalf he shipped cargoes insured for $36,000 to Canton (Guangzhou) in 1774. By then, however, Price's affairs had begun to deteriorate to the point where he could not pay his creditors either in India or in Britain. 
In 1778 Hastings gave Price command of two armed merchant ships to support the navy in operations against the French. In 1780 Price left India to try to settle with his British creditors and to gain an office from the East India Company for his return. While in Britain he found a new vocation as a pamphleteer. Fourteen tracts have been attributed to him, nearly all published in 1782 or 1783. They were for the most part highly polemical, extolling his friends, above all Hastings, and mercilessly lampooning his enemies, as when he dismissed the pious Charles Grant as 'the most canting, Presbyterian, methodistical, sniveling Oliverian, Scotland ever produced' (Price, 114). Polemic aside, his tracts contain some vivid vignettes of British society in Bengal and his 'Letters from a Free Merchant' provides valuable information about the working of the country trade. Price was not sure that Hastings fully appreciated his zeal on his behalf, writing 'You will lift up your Eyes, and express your wish that this Old Fool would be quiet and mind his Own Affairs' (Grier, 351). For a time Price's creditors confined him for debt, but he was able to return to India in 1784 with the promise that he would succeed to the office of marine storekeeper in Bengal. In 1786 he duly assumed that office and also became marine paymaster. Although creditors such as Hastings were never to be paid off, Price's affairs seem to have prospered a little, until he was suspended from office in 1792 and found insane. In 1793 his nephew, also called Joseph Price, was given permission to have him sent to Britain. Price's last years in London were such that his death there 'without a Pang or Struggle' on 3 June 1796 was regarded by his friends as 'a consummation devoutly to be wished' (E. Baber to W. Hastings, 4 June 1796, BL, Add. MS 29174, fol. 317). There is no record of Price's either marrying or having any children. His nephew was his sole heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 63537


Scott, David (1746-1805), merchant and director of the East India Company, was born in 'the early weeks' of 1746 at the family residence, Dunninald House in Craig, Forfarshire, and was baptized on 27 February 1746 (Philips, 1.x n. 1; Anderson, 3.411). He was the tenth of thirteen children of Robert Scott (1705-1780), the progressive laird of Dunninald, and his wife, Ann, daughter of General John Middleton of Seton. David attended both school and university at St Andrews where he matriculated in 1759. At the age of seventeen, like many well-educated but impecunious Scots, he sought his fortune in India. Lacking a nomination in the East India Company service, he engaged in private trade as a ship's officer, entered into partnerships with Parsi businessmen and servants of the company, and founded the agency house of Scott, Tate, and Adamson at Bombay. Some of his capital came from his happy marriage to a rich widow, Louisa Jervis, 'nee' Delagard (died 1803), with whom he had three daughters and a son. 
It was the enterprise of private merchants like Scott, often in partnership with East India Company servants, which had slowly built up the trading connections of the British in western India. But the expansion of Bombay's trade was repeatedly threatened by the military power of Mysore and the Marathas, and by the oppressive government of local rulers. Scott and his associates concluded that Bombay had to control the ports and territory which were vital to its trade, and he helped to finance Bombay's military attempts to do this in the 1770s, which ended in defeat. In 1784 the Bombay government owed him nearly $200,000. 
In 1786 Scott moved to London, where he directed the English business of his agency house and kept up close connections with his partners and friends in Bombay. Convinced that radical new policies were needed if Britain (and his fellow merchants) were to benefit fully from the company's new position in India, his aim was to expand its territorial power as a shield for the expansion of private British trade. He quickly won the confidence of Pitt, and the friendship of Henry Dundas, the head of the India Board of Control. Dundas helped Scott to become a director of the company in 1788, and to be elected MP for Forfarshire from 1790 until he was defeated in 1796. He was then elected for the Forfar burghs, a seat which he held until his death. 
In the court of directors Scott was opposed by the shipping interest, which controlled the company's ships and was hostile to private traders who threatened their monopoly. In 1793 the shipping interest attacked Scott by banning directors from trading with India. Scott responded by vesting his son David, aged eleven, with control of his agency house. As deputy chairman he succeeded in 1795 in reforming the shipping system. In 1798 he proved how India-built ships could reduce the company's shipping costs, but his open support of private British traders alienated his fellow directors and this measure was defeated. The following year his enemies accused him of trading illicitly with the French. 
Their hostility was sharpened by Scott's and Dundas's encouragement of the aggressive policy pursued by Wellesley in India, which had increased the company's territory while increasing its debt and threatening its financial survival. Scott had worked closely with Wellesley between 1795 and 1797, when the latter was a member of Dundas's India board, and he used this connection to support the independent expansionist policy of the Bombay government in which his own trading partners were influential. He persuaded Wellesley not to disband the presidency and to retain the pliant Jonathan Duncan as governor. But, with the fall of Pitt's government in 1801, Scott lost the crucial political support which Dundas had given him. Although he defended Wellesley loyally, he was unable to prevent the directors from recalling him in 1804. Fighting ill health and pain since 1796, Scott died exhausted in London on 4 October 1805, two years after his beloved wife, and was buried in St Marylebone burial-ground. He had spent much of his money as well as his health in fighting the monopolies which he saw as the enemies of the private enterprise which had built up British power in India. 


@@@@@


doc= 63538


Scrafton, Luke (1732-1770?), East India Company servant, was born on 22 March 1732 in the City of London, the son of Richard Scrafton, surgeon, and his wife Susannah (died 1771/2). He was appointed a writer in the East India Company's Bengal service in March 1746 and was made an assistant at the Dacca factory on 20 October 1749. In 1751 he was promoted to the rank of factor and joined the council at Dacca, where he remained until 1756 when the nawab of Bengal, Siraj ud-Daula, turned against the company. The factory surrendered to his forces and Scrafton and other company servants were held for a period as prisoners. The nawab's capture of Calcutta was reversed by Robert Clive in January 1757, and in the following month Scrafton acted as one of two emissaries to the nawab; two months later he was, at Clive's request, sent to the durbar, the nawab's court, at Murshidabad, to assist William Watts (who was later briefly president of the council in Bengal). Scrafton's knowledge of Persian and his diplomatic skills were put to good use in the conspiracy against Siraj ud-Daula, and he was present when Siraj ud-Daula was defeated by Clive at Plassey in June 1757. After Plassey, Scrafton succeeded Watts at the durbar and found himself at the heart of the changed political environment in which the new nawab, Mir Jafar, and the British found themselves. In addition to his official activities (and having reaped a substantial financial reward from the change of nawab), he became involved in revenue farming under fictitious names and made loans to 'zamindars' at high rates. His departure from the durbar in August 1758 coincided with a particularly demanding visit to Calcutta by the nawab, during which Scrafton acted as interpreter; in the months that followed, however, he ceased to be involved in mainstream affairs and was critical of Clive. In 1759 he left Calcutta for Madras on account of ill health, and eventually returned to England. 
In England, Scrafton engaged in intellectual pursuits and corresponded with the historian Robert Orme, from whom he sought advice. In 1763 he published 'Reflections on the government, etc of Indostan; with a short sketch of the history of Bengal, from the year 1739 to 1756; and an account of the English affairs to 1758'. This work, praised by Voltaire, was one of several such works which appeared in this period and which served to bring events in India to the attention of a wider audience than hitherto. In the same year Scrafton toured Europe, but the politics of the East India Company increasingly occupied him. Although he was not on close personal terms with Clive he supported Clive's cause, and served as a director of the company between 1765 and 1768; for most of this period Clive was in Bengal and Scrafton was an important representative of his interest within the court of directors. He also defended Clive against accusations made by Henry Vansittart -- a former governor of Bengal with whom Scrafton apparently once almost fought a duel -- in 'Observations on Mr Vansittart's Narrative', published in 1766. His skills as a propagandist seem also to have been utilized by the directors in the periodical the 'East India Observer', in the same year. 
In September 1769 Scrafton sailed for India as Clive's representative on a supervisory commission designed to improve the administration of the company's affairs. The 'Aurora', which carried the supervisors (among them Henry Vansittart), was not heard from again after it left the Cape of Good Hope on 27 December, and it would appear that the ship foundered in heavy seas following a decision by the captain to navigate the Mozambique Channel in bad weather. 


@@@@@


doc= 63539


Smith, Richard (bap. 1734, d. 1803), army officer in the East India Company and politician, was baptized on 15 May 1734 at St Mary's, Marlborough, Wiltshire, the eldest son of John Smith, a cheesemonger, of Jermyn Street, London. His social origins and allegedly poor education were sometimes to be held against him in later life. He arrived in India as a purser's mate on an East Indiaman in 1752, and on 9 December 1752 was commissioned ensign in the East India Company's Madras army, at a time when the council was desperate for 'gentlemen' to officer its rapidly growing army. He was made lieutenant a year later (2 November 1753), captain on 2 June 1756, and major in 1760, following the seniority principle which governed promotion in the company's armed forces. On 25 September 1756 Smith had married Amelia, daughter of Captain Charles Hopkins, a master mariner and later Madras civil servant. They had a son and a daughter. The Carnatic, in south-eastern India, was in a state of discontinuous warfare during these years, largely due to competition between the British and French for the dominance of the province. Smith saw active service throughout, obviously recommending himself to his military superiors, for he was given independent commands of forts and detachments, and in 1758 acted as aide-de-camp to Colonel Stringer Lawrence, the commander-in-chief. 
Smith was quick-tempered and haughty, but his disarming candour got him out of a number of scrapes. His experience as a purser's mate and his marriage alliance to a merchant family might also have reflected business talents (certainly they suggest business connections); unusually for a Carnatic officer, he amassed a fortune in the 1750s, perhaps by trade but also through the favourite financial method of many Madras Europeans, who lent money to Muhammad Ali, the nawab of Arcot, at 25 per cent per annum. Clearly also, Smith's political skills and forceful personality had impressed his colleagues and fellow creditors, for he was later appointed their unofficial spokesman in London, charged with securing their financial interests. The nawab, bypassing the enraged directors, entrusted Smith with a letter to the king seeking George III's intercession to get him a better deal with the company. 
Smith remained in London until 1764, becoming a prominent member of the company's court of proprietors (shareholders) during the great struggle between Robert Clive and Laurence Sulivan for control of the East India Company (he started in the Clive camp, but ended up a supporter of Sulivan). This, and recognition of his military talents, secured him a royal commission as colonel in the East (11 May 1764) and the appointment to command one of the company's three brigades in the reorganized Bengal army under Clive, the new governor. Smith again fell out with Clive on the voyage out to India, but remained loyal to him during the notorious 1766 'white mutiny' of Bengal officers protesting against the governor's military reforms. None the less, Clive admonished him for his 'great ambition and desire to command those who should command you' (Clive to Smith, 15 Feb 1766, NL Wales, Clive MS 224, fols. 57-60). On Clive's resignation in 1767, his unique appointment combining the roles of governor and active commander-in-chief in Bengal was split between the next senior civil servant, Harry Verelst, a rather weak man, and Smith, now promoted brigadier-general. 
Bengal was quiet during Smith's command of the army (1767-70), though there were some alarms that the Afghans intended invading and various schemes for the further military and political penetration of northern India by the company. Smith was enthusiastic both for fighting the Afghans outside company-controlled territory, and for putting the wandering Mughal emperor Shah Alam II back on the throne in Delhi; he probably received a substantial monetary reward from the grateful emperor for espousal of his cause. Clive, back in Britain, warned a director of the company that Smith 'will project distant Conquests and every thing else which Pride and Ambition like his can suggest' (Clive to Thomas Rous, 20 Oct 1767, NL Wales, Clive MS 58, fols. 47-8). Privately, Smith admitted he was bent on 'transmitting his name to Posterity' (Smith to Robert Orme, April 1767, BL OIOC, Orme MS OV 37, fols. 118-19). The Calcutta council's rejection of both these proposals helped provoke a bitter and prolonged dispute between Smith and Verelst over the respective spheres of their authority. Both men eventually resigned and returned to Britain in 1770. 
Back in London -- allegedly with between $200,000 and $300,000 in his pocket -- Smith plunged into East India Company and parliamentary politics, living in Harley Street and buying a country seat, Chiltern Lodge, near Hungerford, Berkshire, and becoming high sheriff of that county in 1779. He made such a flamboyant and arrogant entry into society that he became one of the most notorious of the 'nabobs', the 'nouveaux riches' East India Company servants who flung their money around to the great resentment and contempt of 'old wealth'. It was said that he was the model for Sir Matthew Mite in Samuel Foote's lampooning play 'The Nabob' (1772); he was also the subject of an attack, complete with the only known likeness of him, in one of the 'Tete a Tete' portraits in the 'Town and Country Magazine', opposite Mrs Elizabeth Armitstead (no. 20, 1776, 34), and, later, of a hostile spoof entitled 'A Vindication of General Richard Smith' (1783) by Joseph Price. Smith became a prominent man of the turf, running racehorses and belonging to the Jockey Club; he also lost a fortune at the gaming table ($180,000, it was said, to Charles James Fox). 
Smith's recklessness extended to his parliamentary career. He provoked rage by trying to buy his way into the Shoreham constituency in November 1770, and in 1774 he was disqualified, fined, and gaoled for six months for buying votes to win the election for the seat of Hindon in Wiltshire. He tried other seats before eventually getting into parliament for Wendover in 1780, by purchasing the borough's two seats from Lord Verney (the other went to his son). Speaking ably on Indian issues, Smith made enough noise from the opposition benches to be made chair of the commons select committee on East India affairs in 1781. Burke commented that its seventh report 'owed the greatest part of its merit to the General... and did him infinite honour' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 450). Smith lost his seat in 1784 as one of 'Fox's Martyrs', and, deprived of parliamentary immunity, he had to sell his estate and flee abroad to escape his creditors. He returned to England in 1786, and to parliament, as MP for Wareham, Dorset, in 1790. He contributed regularly to debates on India, on which he supported government policy, although he was otherwise in opposition. He became a prominent critic of the ministry's war policy against France after 1794, and of its measures to cope with corn price fluctuations at home. He spoke, among other issues, on the abuse of child labour in factories, but supported the slave trade. Smith did not seek re-election in 1796 and, with his finances partly restored to health, died seven years later, on 3 July 1803. 


@@@@@


doc= 63540


Sullivan, John (1749-1839), East India Company servant and politician, was born on 7 April 1749 in Cork, co. Cork, the second of three sons of Benjamin Sullivan (1720-1767), clerk of the crown for the counties of Cork and Waterford, and Bridget (died 1802), daughter of the Revd Paul Limric DD, of Scull, co. Cork. His brother Richard Joseph Sullivan achieved note as a writer. Though of ancient Irish stock, Sullivan's family were members of the established church and supporters of the dominant protestant ascendancy. 
After an early education in Ireland and England, Sullivan joined the East India Company at Madras as a writer in 1765, at the age of sixteen. This and later appointments came through the patronage of his powerful kinsman Laurence Sulivan, who was then deputy chairman of the company. Sullivan's progress through the company's merchant ranks was rapid and profitable at a time when British interests in south India were threatened by French forces and the military rulers of Mysore, Haidar Ali and his son Tipu Sultan. In 1774, as a junior merchant on the council of Masulipatam, Sullivan produced a study of local revenue systems entitled 'Observations respecting the Circar of Mazulipatam' (BL OIOC, Home Miscellaneous series, file 335 (1)) which established his claim for political service with the court of directors in London. The claim was recognized in 1781 with his appointment as resident at the court of Tanjore with responsibility for all the southern provinces of the Madras presidency. Sullivan's ambitious plan to subvert the threat from Mysore by a secret treaty with the deposed Hindu dynasty was pre-empted by an armistice with the French in 1783. In addition to his official duties at Tanjore, he acted privately to accumulate substantial profits from supplying grain to the Madras army: when he returned to England on leave in 1785 he had a considerable fortune, with which he purchased a country estate, Richings Lodge, near Iver, Buckinghamshire. 
The key to Sullivan's future political success lay in his marriage on 23 May 1789 to Henrietta Anne Barbara ('bap'. 1762, died 1828), second daughter of George Hobart (1731-1804) of Nocton and Blyborough, Lincolnshire, who in 1793 succeeded his half-brother as third earl of Buckinghamshire; Henrietta's twin sister, Maria ('bap'. 1762, died 1794), married George Augustus North, later third earl of Guilford ['see under 'North, Frederick, second earl of Guilford]. The couple had one son, John, before they were married and three further sons and five daughters. Through his marriage Sullivan was now closely linked to the fortunes of the Hobart family, who had their own considerable aspirations for power in India. Now resident in England, his role was to provide support at home for his brother-in-law Robert, Lord Hobart (later fourth earl of Buckinghamshire), who became governor of Madras in 1793 and sought the position of governor-general in India. William Pitt, the prime minister, recommended Sullivan, as a 'nabob of good fortune' and 'good character' (HoP, 'Commons, 1790-1820'), to Lord Camelford for the parliamentary seat of Old Sarum in 1790, and he held it until standing down to become high sheriff of Buckinghamshire in 1797. About 1791 he spoke in the Commons in support of the former governor-general of Bengal, Warren Hastings, urging that Hastings's trial be stopped in view of the defendant's merits; Sullivan was one of twenty-two guests invited by Hastings to a celebration dinner following his acquittal in 1795. He argued his brother-in-law's case for compensation when Hobart was prematurely withdrawn from the governorship of Madras in 1798, and in 1795 published a volume entitled 'Tracts upon India: Written in the Years 1779, 1780, and 1788 with Subsequent Observations', which established his own political credentials as a specialist in Indian affairs. In January 1799 he persuaded Henry Dundas, the president of the Board of Control, to support Lord Wellesley's campaign against Tipu Sultan in Mysore. 
Reward for supporting Hobart came with Sullivan's return to parliament as the member for Aldburgh, and his appointment as under-secretary for war and the colonies from May 1801 to 1804, when his brother-in-law was secretary of state. Sullivan became a privy councillor in 1805 and, after a brief period as commissioner on the Board of Control for Indian affairs (February 1806 to April 1807), rejoined the board in April 1812 to serve Hobart, now earl of Buckinghamshire, who was the president. There followed a marked deterioration in the relationship between the East India Company and the board, as Buckinghamshire, for the government, tried to impose his authority over the court of directors. Surprisingly, Sullivan survived as a commissioner when George Canning succeeded to the presidency after Buckinghamshire's death in a riding accident in 1816. Once again, Sullivan's experience and advocacy were decisive in persuading the board to accept the marquess of Hastings in his military action in 1818 against the dissident Maratha states and their associated bands of organized marauders, known as Pindaris. He also persuaded the board to support Sir Thomas Munro's individual and annual revenue assessment in the Madras presidency, known as ryotwar, in the debate over taxation (the company's principal source of income following the granting of a new charter in 1813). 
Sullivan retired from the Board of Control in 1828, after seventeen years as a commissioner, just before his eightieth birthday. He died on 1 November 1839 at Richings Lodge and was survived by his son, John Augustus, principal-marshal of Jamaica. 


@@@@@


doc= 63541


Weston, Charles (1731/2-1809), merchant and philanthropist, was born in Calcutta, the son of William Weston, register (chief clerk) of the mayor's court, Calcutta, until the mid-1740s. His mother was possibly Mrs Mary Ballantine, who married a William Weston in October 1731. Weston spent his life in or near Calcutta. As a youth he was apprenticed to the surgeon John Zachariah Holwell (1711-1798), later a member of the council at Fort William, Calcutta, in whose service he was when Siraj ud-Daula attacked the fort in 1756. Weston escaped imprisonment in the Black Hole, since he was on the River Hooghly looking after Holwell's baggage boats when the fort fell. He was listed among the European sufferers who received compensation in 1759 for financial loss. 
Holwell helped Weston with capital to start his career, a debt returned when Weston supported Holwell in his old age and left bequests to his grandchildren. Weston built his fortune through commerce, judicious purchase of Calcutta property, and the provision of mortgages. As determined in business as he was compassionate in private life, he pursued his interests through the civil court in the 1760s, and in 1778 foreclosed on the Revd J. Z. Kiernander, the founder of the Old Mission Church, Calcutta, with which Weston and his family had a close association. But, when Kiernander's house was put up for public auction, Weston used his son-in-law, Philip Leal, to buy the house back for himself. In that year Weston was among a group of Calcutta merchants and agents who asked for, and received, naval protection of their trade returning from China and the Malay coast at the start of war with France. By then he owned several Calcutta properties and held mortgages on others. His wealth was much augmented when, also in 1778, he drew the first prize in the Calcutta lottery, Tiretta's Bazar, which stood opposite the site of his childhood home, worth Rs 196,000 with a monthly income of Rs 3500. 
As a prominent Calcutta citizen, Weston served, despite his being Eurasian, on the jury which tried the notorious case of Maharaja Nandakumar in 1775. He acted too as parish clerk to St John's, Calcutta. His charitable work among the poor of Calcutta during his lifetime was munificent. He is said to have distributed each month 100 gold 'mohurs' (approximately $150 at contemporary value) to the poor, and provided many with pensions. At his death this charitable work was crowned by his trust of Rs 100,000 to be administered by St John's vestry for those whom Weston had supported in his lifetime and for the general relief of poverty. 
On 9 November 1758 Weston married Amelia de Rozario (1736?-1774x7), and, after her death, Constantia ('b'. 1735/6, died in or before 1801). Of his nine known children, only his eldest son Charles, who was mentally and physically handicapped, survived him. Portraits of Weston in old age depict him as slender and of medium height, well but simply dressed, dark of hair and countenance, with an air of dignity, sagacity, and kindliness. 
When Charles Weston died, at Chinsura on 25 December 1809, he owned four houses and considerable personal effects, including a gold snuff-box which bore a portrait of his patron Holwell. A large library attested to his erudition, and two pianos and scores -- bequeathed to granddaughters -- to his musical interests. Many legacies, large and small, went to relatives and friends. Rs 230,000 remained in bonds from those to whom he had lent money in his life with little expectation of repayment. He was buried on 25 December at South Park Street cemetery, Calcutta, after a lifetime 'of benevolence and charity, seldom equalled, and never yet exceeded in British India' ('Bengal Obituary', 94). Weston's personality and generosity with his wealth overcame the prejudice which existed against those of mixed parentage in the European community. He was indeed 'a striking and existing example, that chaste and refined sentiments are not confined to complexion and climate' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 63542


Harwood, Francis (1726/7-1783), sculptor, worked primarily in Italy. Of his place of birth and his parents, nothing is known. At Easter 1752, when he was twenty-five, he was living at the Palazzo Zuccari, Rome. In Rome he shared accommodation with Sir Joshua Reynolds and Simon Vierpyl. In the following year he was working with the sculptor Joseph Wilton in Florence. He was admitted to the Florentine Academy on 12 January 1755 as a 'pittore Inglese' but he matriculated as a 'scultore'. There is evidence that soon afterwards Harwood worked with Giovanni Battista Piamontini ('b'. 'c'.1690) in a studio near Santissima Annunziata. In 1758 both sculptors were among those contracted to decorate Porta San Gallo, where Harwood's statue 'Equity' was installed the following year. After Piamontini's death Harwood acquired his studio. Before long his stock in trade was to provide the grand tourist market with copies after the antique; Lord Northampton was among the first to buy a selection. Using more imagination, Harwood sculpted a bust of Cromwell (1759) and a black person (1758; Getty Museum, Malibu, California), which shows exceptional ability. In 1767 he carved an elaborate monument showing Virtue pointing to heaven and to a cherub holding a portrait medallion of William, second Earl Cowper (Hertingfordbury church, Hertfordshire). 
In 1768 Thomas Patch made an etching of Harwood which endorses his reputation as 'a drunken Englishman' and in the following year, writing to Thomas Banks, Joseph Nollekens described him as 'knocking the marbil about like feway & belive he has got more work to do than any One Sculptor in England' (Whitley, 41). He was able to meet the growing demand for his work by employing Pietro Pisani (whom he also taught), Pietro Bastianelli, and Niccolo Kindermann as assistants, and his work shows a consequent reduction in quality. From the late 1760s his output began to include garnitures and chimney-pieces. There are records of Harwood providing vases and other items for Charles Townley (1768), Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (1768), the earl of Shelburne (1772), and Sir John Griffin Griffin (1772; Audley End, Essex). He also provided chimney-pieces for Pietro Leopold II (Salone Celesti, Palazzo Pitti, Florence), Catherine the Great (Tsarskoye Selo, near St Petersburg), and Patrick Home (1774-5; Wedderburn Castle, Berwickshire). Others were made after designs by George Dance for Sir William Mainwaring ('c'.1761; Peover Hall, Cheshire) and, after a design by Sir William Chambers, for the earl of Charlemont (1768; Casino, Dublin). Sir Lawrence Dundas commissioned both fireplaces and other objects (1768-9; Aske Hall, Yorkshire). In 1776 Harwood contributed one of the copies of a Harpy after Giambologna for the Isolotto in the Boboli Gardens, Florence. By 1779 Harwood's success was envied by the young Canova, who remarked on the large number of assistants in his studio and his extensive stock of plaster models, materials, and sculpture. Harwood converted to Catholicism shortly before his death in Florence in December 1783. 


@@@@@


doc= 63543


Gent, Sir (Gerard) Edward James (1895-1948), civil servant and colonial governor, was born at 8 Crescent Road, Kingston upon Thames, on 28 October 1895, the fourth and youngest son (there were also two daughters) of John Gent (1844-1927), barrister and later county court judge, and his wife, Harriet Frankland, daughter of Edward Randall, of Loders, Dorset. Gerard (he preferred his second name, Edward, on being knighted in 1946) attended Gate House School in Surbiton before proceeding in 1909 to King's School, Canterbury, where he was an outstanding all-rounder. He captained rugby and cricket, was cadet officer in the officers' training corps, and in 1914 won the Ford studentship at Trinity College, Oxford, but deferred entry on account of the outbreak of the First World War. All four Gent brothers fought in the war and one, Thomas, died in action. Gent himself enlisted with the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry on 5 August 1914 and served in Flanders and briefly in Italy. He was wounded twice, gassed once, mentioned in dispatches twice, decorated for valour (winning the MC and DSO), and commanded a regular battalion by the time he was demobilized in 1919. 
On his return to civilian life Gent initially took up his place at Oxford but left after a year to enter the Colonial Office as an assistant principal. Once established in the civil service, he married Guendolen Mary Wyeth at St Paul's, Kingston Hill, on 5 April 1923. The daughter of James Napoleon Wyeth, she was also aged twenty-seven at the time of their marriage. They settled in Esher where they brought up a family of two sons and two daughters. 
Gent's contemporaries in the Colonial Office included Gerald Creasy, Charles Jefferies, and Thomas Lloyd. During the next twenty years they rose more or less together, participating in an administrative revolution that reached a climax in the 1940s. Gent contributed to these changes as secretary to major committees and conferences: the Stevenson committee on the restriction of world rubber prices (1922); Leo Amery's Colonial Office conference (1927); the committee on Colonial Office organization chaired by Sir Samuel Wilson, the permanent under-secretary (1927-8); and Sir Warren Fisher's review of the colonial service, which reformed the appointments process (1929-30). He also served as private secretary to the parliamentary under-secretary, W. G. Ormsby-Gore, in 1924-6. He spent much of the 1930s in the Far Eastern (later Eastern) department and was its head from 1939 to 1942. He was seconded to the first Indian round table conference (November 1930-January 1931) and accompanied Sir Samuel Wilson on a tour of Malaya, Ceylon, and Hong Kong (October 1932-February 1933). As he encountered, albeit at arm's length, political agitation, economic depression, and communal tension in Asian dependencies, he grew impatient with hidebound attitudes and archaic regimes, and, notwithstanding his retiring disposition, pressed for progressive and, above all, efficient policies. His appetite for work and incisive approach to colonial issues brought recognition and ensured advancement. He was appointed OBE in 1935 and CMG in 1941, and was promoted to principal (1927), assistant secretary (1939), and assistant under-secretary (1942). 
As assistant under-secretary, Gent held one of the most demanding positions within the Colonial Office. He was responsible for several departments and was preoccupied with military defeat and post-war reconstruction in the Far East. The fall of Singapore had increased Ceylon's value as a naval base and source of raw materials; it also heightened the demands of local politicians. The island's wartime importance worked to the nationalists' advantage and Gent played a key role in deliberations leading to the Soulbury commission (1944-5), which recommended self-government short of dominion status. As regards the future of the lost lands of south-east Asia, Gent resisted subservience to 'the supposed American policy of preventing the restoration of British sovereignty' (Stockwell, 'British Documents', doc. 3), and advised his secretary of state to prepare for the re-establishment of British rule on lines that would forward economic rehabilitation, nation-building, and regional co-ordination. In 1943-5 crown colony government was designed for North Borneo and Sarawak (in place of the chartered company and the Brooke regimes) and a scheme was devised for the union of Malaya in which the autonomy of the sultans would be curtailed and citizenship opened to non-Malays. Although Sir Arthur Richards had at one time been identified for the governorship of the Malayan Union, in November 1945 the secretary of state informed Attlee that Gent was 'the best available candidate' because he had been 'responsible for all the planning for our re-entry into the Far Eastern Colonies' (TNA:PRO, CO 850/206/8). He was fifty and it was his first overseas appointment. He was knighted KCMG in 1946. 
The post-war British military administration in Malaya gave way to colonial rule on 1 April 1946, but the Malay rulers boycotted Gent's installation. In addition, Dato Onn bin Jaafar mobilized an unprecedented mass movement in opposition to the new constitution. While Malays regarded it as an attack on their birthright, non-Malays were slow to welcome its inclusive provisions. Notwithstanding his commitment to the Malayan Union, Gent immediately accepted the need to compromise. Months of arduous negotiations resulted in the Federation of Malaya, inaugurated on 1 February 1948 with Gent as high commissioner. Although the climbdown did Gent's reputation little harm in London, his authority never recovered in Malaya, where Malays remained suspicious of him and Europeans resented his Whitehall manner and liberal imperialism. No sooner had the Malayan Union crisis been resolved than labour unrest and rural violence, fomented by the Chinese-dominated Malayan Communist Party, came to a head. An increasingly isolated figure, Gent appeared to dither, and his decision to declare a state of emergency in mid-June 1948 came too late to save his career. On the advice of Malcolm MacDonald (commissioner-general in south-east Asia) he was recalled, but, as his aircraft approached Northolt on 4 July, it collided with another. All thirty-nine people on board the two aircraft were killed. 
Had he lived, Gent would have put his case before the secretary of state. As it was, a gifted and gallant public servant became the scapegoat for British set-backs in a Malaya turned upside down by the war. Gent's widow maintained links with Malaya, serving as a governor of Malaya Hall (the students' base in London) and attending the independence celebrations in 1957. Their elder son, Mark, joined Guthries and was chairman of its Malaysian subsidiary in the 1970s. 


@@@@@


doc= 63544


Ibach, Josias (fl. 1679-1696), brass founder, is thought to be the son of Constantin Ibach, the organist at St Pankratius at Stade, on the River Elbe. (Stade was then the capital of the Swedish duchy of Bremen and Verden.) Constantin Ibach had married there in 1640; his family came from Meissen and were organ builders, which is probably how Josias -- named after his grandfather -- learned brass founding and pipe making. The young Josias Ibach emigrated to London, obviously attracted by work opportunities after the great fire in 1666; he was subsequently naturalized in 1694. Christ Church, Newgate Street, records the burials of two members of an 'Ibeck' family, Hester on 2 January 1677 and John on 4 November 1679, who may well be related to him. 
In 1679 Ibach cast the bronze statue of Charles II on horseback that Tobias Rustat commissioned from Grinling Gibbons to stand in the courtyard of Windsor Castle. Christopher Wren noted that 'the horse at Windsor was first cut in wood by a German and then cast by one Ibeck a founder in London' (Bolton and Hendry, 22, letter no. 7, 9 Sept 1682). Clearly at that time he still regarded himself as a citizen of Stade, since on one of the horse's hoofs he inscribed 'Josias Ibach Stada Bramensis 1679 Fundit'. In 1689 Ibach recast and repaired the original brass shells on the fountain in the privy garden at Hampton Court, for which he was paid $121. At Chatsworth House he assisted Jean Tijou and was paid $17 for seventeen 'brass vauses gilt' in 1692 with another $60 the following year in part payment for an 'artificial tree of brass for a fountain' (Thompson, 36, 124) -- which was a copper willow tree designed to surprise visitors with a sudden shower -- together with further payments for minor repairs in 1696. His place and date of death are not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 63545


Muhammad Ali Khan Walahjah (c.1717-1795), nawab of Arcot, was born the third of five sons of 
Mughal imperial power had come late to the Deccan and peninsular India, following the conquests by the emperor Aurangzeb of the Bijapur and Golconda sultanates in 1685 and 1687 respectively. It rested uncomfortably on top of the locally constituted authority of a myriad of Hindu kings and chieftains, who continued to resist it. In addition, it faced rivalry from the expansion of the Maratha empire to the west, whose military forces regularly ravaged the region and, in 1689, conquered the Hindu kingdom of Tanjore to the south. A further problem arose after the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, when the Mughal empire went into decline and many provincial governors asserted their autonomy from imperial control. Asaf Jah himself followed this course and attempted to establish Hyderabad as an independent regional state. But so, too, did the family of the original nawabs of Arcot. In 1710 Saadatullah Khan had been appointed nawab, and he subsequently struggled against the Marathas and local chieftains until his death in battle in 1732. Thereafter his extended family repudiated the Hyderabad connection and squabbled among themselves for succession to his office. In 1743 Asaf Jah marched south with a large army to restore order. He dismissed the various claimants from Saadatullah's line and appointed instead Anwar ud-Din Khan, who had distinguished himself previously in the nizam's service as a soldier and administrator and as nawab of Chicacole. 
However, after Asaf Jah and his army returned north, Anwar ud-Din encountered serious difficulties in securing his authority. Saadatullah had been a Dakhni-speaking Muslim, drawn from the local Navaiyat community which had Shi'i leanings and had long served the courts of Bijapur and Golconda. His relatives continued to hold many key military and civil positions. Anwar ud-Din, by contrast, was an Urdu-speaking Sunni Muslim from north India, whose strong connections among the pan-Indian Mughal elite belied his isolation in the south. Revolt stirred quickly and came to centre on the person of Saadatullah's son-in-law Shams ud-Daula Husain Dost Khan, otherwise known as Chanda Sahib. Widely regarded as the most able general of his times, in 1749 Chanda Sahib put together an army of 40,000 men and laid claim to Arcot. During the resultant battle of Ambur, Chander received the support of the French under the governor of their East India Company at Pondicherry, Joseph-Francois, marquis de Dupleix. In opposition, the British -- albeit somewhat reluctantly -- found themselves supporting Anwar ud-Din. For the two contenders to the nawabi, the attraction of a European connection lay in the access which it provided to new military technologies, particularly those of disciplined musketry and rapid-fire field cannon, which initially proved devastating against Indian cavalry formations. Anwar ud-Din himself was killed in the battle on 3 August, leaving his son Muhammad Ali a very doubtful inheritance. 
At first it scarcely seemed as if Anwar ud-Din and his lineage had chosen the right side. After their victory at Ambur, Chanda Sahib and the French were in the ascendant. In 1751 Muhammad Ali, who now laid claim to his father's title, was besieged at Trichinopoly and in imminent danger of defeat. However, in a manoeuvre of fateful import, the British then launched a diversionary expedition from Madras under the then little-known captain Robert Clive to attack Chander's capital at Arcot and force him to lift the Trichinopoly siege. Clive further proceeded to hold Arcot against Chander's counter-attack for sufficiently long both to establish his own military reputation and to allow the British time to recruit a broad compact of Indian allies against Chander. From that point the tide of war turned and Chanda Sahib was eventually run to ground and murdered at Trichinopoly in 1752. 
So far as rival claimants from Saadatullah's line were concerned, Nawab Muhammad Ali was now secure in his occupation of Arcot. However, this scarcely put an end to his troubles. Two of his four brothers launched their own claims to the succession. More seriously, the authority of his regime continued to be resisted by the numerous petty Hindu chiefs (known to the British as 'poligars') who dominated the interior districts. Progress in bringing them to heel was slow and sometimes produced unforeseen consequences. From 1756 Muhammad Ali's leading general Yusuf Khan -- himself a convert to Islam from a poligar clan -- appeared to have gained the upper hand. But in 1760 Yusuf proclaimed himself independent of Arcot and attempted to set up his own kingdom centred on the ancient Hindu capital of Madura. This necessitated the sending of a second nawabi army to defeat Yusuf's first. It was not until after Muhammad Ali's death that the southern poligars were finally subjugated. 
Externally, periodic threats continued to come from the Marathas and from Hyderabad. But greater and more persistent dangers were posed by the French and by the expansive claims of a revitalized Mysore state. Although French influence on the Coromandel coast was substantially reduced after the victory of Sir Eyre Coote at Wandiwash in 1760, it remained significant to the west, whence it was felt through the emergence of Mysore as an expansionary power. In 1758 the Hindu Wodeyar dynastic rulers of Mysore were displaced by their principal military commander, Haidar Ali Khan, who proclaimed himself sultan. Haidar and his son and successor Tipu Sultan, with great energy and ability, set about modernizing the Mysore regime and establishing it as a rising force in south India. From the first they looked to the Europeans for help, and initially turned towards the British. But the British company's servants at Madras were by now strongly committed to Muhammad Ali. Having been spurned, Haidar turned to the French. Mysore, with its French connections, now became the deadly rival of Arcot, with its British foundations. In Muhammad Ali's time the two states fought three major wars (1767-9, 1780-83, 1790-92), in the first two of which Arcot came off very much the worse. 
In the face of these vicissitudes, Muhammad Ali's simple expedient was to rely ever more heavily on the support of the British for arms and cash. The company supplied him with the bulk of his army, which consisted of British-trained mercenaries, and the company servants advanced him loans. However, these services came at a high price, which bore heavily on his revenues, themselves depleted by the political turmoil. He was also obliged to grant the company and its servants extensive trading privileges. Inevitably he fell into arrears, leading to the company's taking over direct administration of his domains. In 1763 he was obliged to grant the company a 'jagir' (revenue assignment) for the Chingleput district surrounding Madras. After the disaster of the Second Anglo-Mysore War the revenues of other and larger stretches of territory were assigned, albeit supposedly on a temporary basis. In effect, the Arcot state became a puppet regime, notionally under the authority of its nawab but 'de facto' administered by company officials. This situation lasted throughout the later stages of Muhammad Ali's reign, which ended with his death at Madras on 13 October 1795, and even the reign of his son and successor, Umdat al-Umara (died 1801). 
Muhammad Ali's bid to succeed his father as nawab of Arcot concluded in the establishment of the rule of the English East India Company in south India. In consequence he has frequently been portrayed as the victim of European imperialism -- which undoubtedly, in many ways, he was. However, a historical status merely as victim might obscure his own achievements both as a politician and as a practitioner of Indian statecraft. Given his alien origins and the turbulence of the times, it was remarkable that he should have established a state in south India at all, still less one which survived for fifty years and imprinted itself on cultural memory for very much longer. The nawabs of Bengal, who found themselves in a very similar political situation, were consigned to history as early as 1765. And the Walahjah family name continues to convey royal prestige in south Indian society today. 
Muhammad Ali's rare survival owed much to his shrewd manipulation of the English company's administration, where he helped to create one of the greatest British political scandals of the later eighteenth century and for a long time to paralyse the ability of the nascent British imperial state to dispose of him. Beginning in the 1750s, in order to finance the heavy demands on him for cash, he took to borrowing money -- albeit at exorbitant rates of interest -- from the company's own servants in their 'private' trading capacities. This created among company officials a network of interest in his own preservation, if only to ensure that they might get their money back, and revealed a major contradiction in the organization of the company's government between private and public policy. 
The network also provided means by which Muhammad Ali was able to influence politics in London. Between 1771 and 1773 his agents among the company's servants in Madras were active in gaining initial support for a conquest of the neighbouring friendly state of Tanjore, simply to lay hand on its revenues and, in 1776, for arresting and imprisoning the Madras governor, Lord Pigot, who was charged by the directors with rescinding the conquest. Later still they entrapped Governor Sir Thomas Rumbold in a web of corruption and rendered the reform policies of Governor Lord Macartney largely ineffective. While the eventual rescinding of the Tanjore conquest perhaps shows the limits of Muhammad Ali's influence, the case also suggested the breadth of his connections. He was said to have had at least six members of parliament, associated with his creditors, firmly in his camp. The scandal of the Arcot debts was finally resolved only in 1805 when a parliamentary inquiry committee knocked down the creditors' claims from $30 million to $2.5 million. The inquiry followed the dynasty's eclipse, which itself reflected a stronger assertion of metropolitan authority in the context of the French revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. But Muhammad Ali was by then dead, having used the pressure of the debts to preserve his patrimony for nearly half a century, and, at his demise, still leaving his creditors largely unpaid. This might be regarded as a considerable triumph, albeit of a curious kind. 
Less curious, however, was the way in which Muhammad Ali pursued the strategy of a post-Mughal state builder and fulfilled the aims of every founder of an Indian dynasty to establish the glory and prestige of his family name. Much of the cash, which he gleaned from his creditors, was used not to pay the company's demands, but to invest in cultural projects. At both Arcot and Madras he demonstrated his association with the new power of the Europeans by building magnificent palaces in the European style, drawing especially on the skills of Paul Benfield, who was a military architect and merchant -- and also his principal creditor. Muhammad Ali further employed a range of celebrated European artists resident in India, including George Willison. His address to local Muslim and Hindu audiences was more traditional. He distributed a lavish patronage to found mosques and attract Islamic scholars and he resolved the tensions with the Navaiyat community by (possibly in 1747) taking as his principal wife Khadija Begum, a Shi'i from a highly respected Bijapur family. Their son Umdat al-Umara, who also professed Shi'ism, was his anointed heir. With regard to his Hindu subjects, he followed the long-established conventions of south Indian kingship in protecting and endowing Hindu temples. His name became closely associated with the great temples of Tirupati and Rameswaram and with that of Sri Parthasarathi at Madras. In terms of Indian statecraft, he was supremely successful at securing the honour of his dynasty, which continued long after 1801 and even 1855, when, according to the British, the family lost its claim to all government revenues and to a royal title. As late as 1996 his descendants continued to open major religious festivals at the Sri Parthasarathi temple. Far from being merely a victim of European imperialism, Muhammad Ali used his European connections to gain immortality for his family name. 


@@@@@


doc= 63546


Muhammad Reza Khan (c.1717-1791), administrator of Bengal, was probably born at Shiraz in Persia. He was the third of the four sons of Hadi Ali Khan, a physician. When the Khan was about ten years old, his father took his family from Persia to India, where he practised medicine, first at the court of the Mughal emperor in Delhi and then at Murshidabad, the capital of the nawabs of Bengal. Muhammad Reza Khan established himself at the court of the nawabs, marrying the daughter of Rabia Begam, a niece of the nawab, and seeking employment in his government. His service began in the troubled times after the battle of Plassey, when contenders for power in the administration of the province had to seek support from factions among the servants of the British East India Company as well as from the nawabs. Muhammad Reza Khan won his first major success when he became the nawab's 'naib' or deputy in the important eastern districts of Dacca. From Dacca he was able in 1765 to win the highest office in the government of Bengal. 
The Khan's chance came with the death in February 1765 of Mir Jafar Ali Khan, made nawab of Bengal by the British after Plassey. The new nawab, Najm ud-Daula, was a young boy and so the company's servants were looking for a minister to take control of the government who would be amenable to their influence. They chose the Khan over what they regarded as more dangerous rivals. He reinforced his claims by promising presents to individuals worth more than $50,000. Robert Clive later confirmed the Khan in office under the 1765 settlement with the Mughal emperor which gave the company direct responsibility for the 'diwani', or revenue administration, of Bengal. Muhammad Reza Khan was to be the company's deputy in managing the assessment and collection of revenue under the 'diwani' and he was to be the young nawab's deputy in administering what was left to him, mainly the supervision of the criminal courts. The Khan was referred to in British records as 'the minister' or sometimes 'the prime minister' (A. M. Khan, 103). 
Muhammad Reza Khan kept his great powers from 1765 until 1772. Clive held him in high esteem, especially in view of the satisfactory revenue yield that he was able to ensure for the company. Clive awarded him a generous salary amounting to some $90,000 a year. In administering for the British the Khan seems to have been inspired by the ideals of Mughal government and by his view of what conditions had been like in pre-Plassey Bengal. 'The Prince is to receive the revenues of the state, to make such laws and regulations only as are consistent with justice; to study the general good of the country and to cherish all his subjects' (A. M. Khan, 15). He was, however, subject to increasing pressures from his British masters, who were beginning to aspire to take a more active role in the administration of Bengal, and who also hoped for a higher return from the province than the Khan was able to produce. In 1770 British company servants were posted into districts to supervise administration. Two years later a new governor, Warren Hastings, took the central administration of the province out of the Khan's hands and transferred it from Murshidabad to the company's own city of Calcutta. In the contemporary phrase, the company was 'standing forth as 'diwan''; there were to be no more Indian 'ministers'. 
The removal of Muhammad Reza Khan from office was sudden and brutal. On 27 April 1772 a body of British troops arrested him and carried him off to Calcutta, where he was kept in confinement to answer charges. He had been struck down by a combination of his Indian enemies and the British opponents of his erstwhile friend, Robert Clive. Material against him had been passed to the directors of the East India Company, who ordered his dismissal and trial. The main allegations were that the Khan had been responsible for misappropriating very large sums collected out of the revenues of Bengal, and that he had profiteered from trading in grain during the terrible famine that had devastated parts of Bengal in 1769-70. The investigation dragged on for two years and ended in acquittal. This was the outcome that Warren Hastings, who conducted the prosecution, had intended. He wanted the Khan's power broken but feared that too much probing would reveal that many Europeans had also made illegal profits. The Khan himself had clearly not made a great personal fortune out of his seven years of power. In spite of his high salary, he left office in debt, and he was to remain financially embarrassed for the rest of his life. Others, both British and Indian, no doubt had profited from the collection of revenue under him, but the company's fond hopes that the system could be made to yield much more once supposedly corrupt Indian management had been broken was to be shown to be a delusion. 
Political change among the British enabled the Khan to recover some ground. During 1775 and 1776 Hastings lost control of the Bengal council and his opponents patronized Muhammad Reza Khan, restoring him in October 1775 to the office of the nawab of Bengal's deputy for those judicial functions that remained to him. In return the Khan conveyed his ideals of Mughal governance to Hastings's enemy Philip Francis, who was strongly influenced by them in his plans for the future of British government in India. Hastings saw such contacts as hostility and in 1778 took the opportunity of removing Muhammad Reza Khan from office yet again. In 1780 he was restored on orders from Britain; he was to hold his post as deputy to the nawab, with a salary of some $25,000, until shortly before his death. 
In the last years of his career Muhammad Reza Khan continued to play an active and respected role. He was recognized to have an unsurpassed knowledge of the Islamic criminal law and supervised its administration conscientiously in appointing judges and presiding over the appeal court. He made a striking impression with his chest 'so broad, his body so erect, his tone of voice so very loud, and his eyes so very full of fire' (Majumdar, 228). He lived in a grand style that, as his critics pointed out, he could not afford, dispensing wisdom 'which he has picked up in ancient times and books, without once minding the ignorance or unadequateness ['sic'] of his audience' (Ghulam Husain Khan, 3.148-9). To the end of his life he complained that the importunities of his creditors 'made sleep and food tasteless to me' (Majumdar, 282). His second wife, Banni Begam, the widow of his brother, died some time in 1786 or 1787 (Bengal year 1193). 
On 1 January 1791 the last governmental responsibilities of the nawab of Bengal, hitherto discharged for him by Muhammad Reza Khan, came to an end. The courts of criminal justice were placed under the direct management of the East India Company. Muhammad Reza Khan duly handed over his records. On 1 October 1791 he died. The company paid tribute to his 'honourable character, his regard to the English for a long period of time, and the services he had rendered in Bengal' (A. M. Khan, 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 63547


Nabakrishna, maharaja (c.1718-1797), political agent and adventurer, rendered major services to the British in their rise to power in Bengal and reaped rich rewards as a consequence. His father was a minor official in the government of the nawabs, the Mughal rulers of Bengal, and lived in a village in the district of Murshidabad; he is believed to have taught Persian to Warren Hastings, who arrived in Calcutta in 1750, and to other servants of the East India Company. 
Nabakrishna was appointed a 'munshi', or Persian writer, by Governor Drake in 1756. Stories abound of how he supplied the company's servants with food and information at Falta, after the sack of Calcutta by the nawab of Bengal in June of that year. He followed Colonel Robert Clive and saw the recovery of Calcutta, the capture by the British of the French settlement at Chandernagore, and the defeat and overthrow of the nawab at the battle of Plassey in 1757. After the battle the victors, led by Clive, moved to loot the nawab's treasury for the British. A Persian history records, however, that gold, silver, and jewels worth, it was rumoured, Rs 80 million (about $8 million) were hidden in the harem. Nabakrishna got a substantial share of this. He was able to buy land in and around Calcutta and to win influence with the East India Company so as to become a most important citizen, building his beautiful palace at Sobha Bazar in the north of the city. 
Nabakrishna impressed Clive with his ability and became 'political banian', that is Indian political agent, during Clive's second administration from 1765 to 1767 and during the administration of Harry Verelst that followed. In 1765 he obtained the title of raja and in 1766 that of maharaja from the Mughal emperor Shah Alam. He appeared as part of Clive's entourage in 1767 in the list of those whom the East India Company honoured by awarding 'khelats' (ceremonial dresses). He realized that distributing patronage was necessary if he was to assume the headship of the Indian community in Bengal, and gave grants of land to important pandits and to Brahman legal scholars, who left their native places in return for lucrative stipends and grants of land which enabled them to reside close to the city. One such luminary who received Nabakrishna's patronage was the great pandit Mahamahopadhyaya Baneswar Vidyalankar. 
Maharaja Nandakumar was Maharaja Nabakrishna's competitor for the leadership of the Indian community. Their rivalry was both bitter and all pervasive. Nandakumar was discredited after being exposed for trying unsuccessfully to induce a Brahman's wife to accuse Nabakrishna of raping her. When Nandakumar was being tried for his life in 1775 on a charge of forgery, he had the misfortune of having Nabakrishna appointed as the expert to give his opinion about the signature on a Persian document alleged to be forged. 
Through acquiring land Nabakrishna became the 'zamindar', loosely translatable as the lord of the manor, of the Sutanati domain, which comprised the larger part of Calcutta. This brought him even closer to the British. He regularly entertained company officials at his house and gave a large piece of land for the founding of the new St John's Church in 1786. His relations with Hastings ended in a dispute about a sum of over $30,000 which he claimed was a loan due for repayment, but which Hastings insisted had been a free gift. Much was made of this at Hastings's impeachment, and Nabakrishna later filed a bill in the English court of chancery, which was dismissed in 1804. 
Adventurers like Nabakrishna made their fortunes not by trade but by taking presents, by perquisites, and by commissions on the collection of the revenue. In Nabakrishna's case, the plunder after Plassey helped to make him the richest Indian who made money out of associating with the East India Company. Like others, he spent his money on building up his position in society. He is supposed to have spent Rs 900,000 (about $90,000) on his mother's funeral rites. Little is known about his personal life and character. Not having a son in spite of several marriages, he adopted his immediate brother's son, who later became Raja Gopee Mohan Deb Bahadur. Then, in the last years of his life, a son, Rajakrisna, was born to him. He died at Sobha Bazar on 22 November 1797 and was cremated. After his death a long-drawn-out lawsuit about his succession ensued. 


@@@@@


doc= 63548


Krishna Kanta Nandy (c.1720-1794), banian, came to prominence in the service of Warren Hastings, the first British governor-general of Bengal. On 18 February 1788 Edmund Burke said: 'Whoever has heard of Mr Hastings's name with any knowledge of Indian connection, has heard of his Banyan, Cantoo Baboo' ('Writings and Speeches', 6.384). Kantababu, the eldest of five brothers, was born in Cossimbazar, in the district of Murshidabad in Bengal, in one of three huts built by his father, Radhakrisna Nandy (died 1754), that were being transformed into a house. Radhakrisna's grandfather migrated from the village of Sijna in the 'taluk' of Manteswar in the Bengal district of Burdwan with his eldest son, Sitaram. The family traded in silk, betel-nut, areca-nut, and cotton fibres and were able to buy a small piece of land near the factory of the British East India Company, to which Radhakrisna supplied silk and cotton piece goods until his death in 1754. Kantababu, as he is known to posterity, as the head of the family, took charge of the business and trade, finding patronage and friendship with the young Warren Hastings posted there, and becoming his banian, or steward and business agent, from 1754 to 1763. On Hastings's departure from India, Francis Sykes, newly appointed as the company's resident at the court of the nawabs of Bengal at Murshidabad and chief of the Cossimbazar factory, chose Kantababu to serve as his banian until 1769. Hastings returned as governor of Bengal in 1772 and became governor-general in 1774. Kantababu again served him as his trusted banian from 1772 to 1785. On the death of his first wife in 1760, Kantababu had married a second time, to Anangamanjari from the village of Kurumba in Burdwan. Their only son, Lokenath, was born in 1764. 
Francis Sykes became directly involved in the salt business from October 1768. Kantababu took a lease of the coastal salt-producing areas and ran the salt business in the name of his son, Lokenath, who became salt merchant for some of them, while Kantababu used his own name in others. He organized his trade well. At the behest of Hastings, however, he ceased to be a manufacturer or contractor of salt under the East India Company's monopoly. Instead, he conducted a wholesale business in salt from 1774 to 1776, sending salt in boatloads to different parts of Bengal. Kantababu's family business in silk was much larger. His silk account with the East India Company was successfully closed in 1780. From 1787 to 1789 he manufactured silk by the new filature factory methods. The family had depended on the silk trade for 100 years. Their fortunes rose with the importance of silk. When the business was no longer profitable, it was wound up. 
Kantababu started buying property -- land, houses, orchards, and rights to collect revenue -- when the Maratha invasions overran western Bengal in 1742-51 and the value of property dropped. Between 1752 and 1756 he bought eight properties, and after the battle of Plassey (1757) established the supremacy of the British he bought more, purchasing as many as twenty-three properties between 1758 and 1763. After the British victory at the battle of Buxar (1764) he bought property without reservation all over Bengal. He was in the list of revenue 'farmers' recorded on 4 November 1766, when the company leased out large blocks of land to contractors for the taxation collected from it. He appears under the name of his nephew Baisnabcharan (or Busunchurn). The names of Kantababu and his son appear in April 1777 as the holders of revenue farms that yielded nearly Rs 600,000 ($60,000). At Hastings's request Kantababu eventually relinquished farms worth Rs 80,000. 
In 1781 Kantababu travelled to northern India with Hastings and was caught up with him in the revolt of the raja of Benares against Hastings's attempt to exact a heavy fine from him. He was present at the siege and capture of Bijaigarh, the last of the raja's forts, where he escorted to safety the raja's mother and the women of her household. An English version of his narrative of these events, 'Narrative of Bijaygarh', survives in the British Library (Add. MS 29205, fols. 118-21). During Hastings's impeachment in 1791 Kantababu sent his old master a draft for $1000. 
Kantababu died between the noons of 9 and 10 January 1794 at Cossimbazar and was cremated there. The Cossimbazar raj family he founded has been an important influence on the social, religious, cultural, and industrial development of Bengal into modern times. 


@@@@@


doc= 63549


Ganga Govind Singh (fl. 1750-1795), revenue administrator in Bengal, wielded great power and influence under Warren Hastings, accumulating in the process a huge fortune which enabled his descendants to become one of the most notable families in nineteenth-century Bengal. He was one of four sons of Bihari Singh, a silk merchant and descendant of a Kayastha family, settled at Kandi near Murshidabad, the capital of Mughal Bengal. Members of his family were engaged in trade and revenue administration under the nawabs of Bengal. Ganga Govind Singh was adopted by his uncle Gouranga Singh, and he and his elder brother Radhakanta were brought up as 'kanungos', keepers of revenue records. 
When the East India Company took control of the Bengal revenues in 1765, they urgently needed the expertise of men like Ganga Govind Singh. By 1771 he was being employed in the company's central treasury, and in 1773 became 'diwan', or agent, to a committee managing the revenues of the Calcutta area. By then he had attracted the notice of Warren Hastings, who appointed him in 1778 to a commission to survey the revenue resources of Bengal and in 1781 made him 'diwan' to a committee responsible for the revenue of the whole province. The next four years, until Hastings left Bengal in 1785, were the apogee of Ganga Govind Singh's career. Hastings paid both public and private tributes to his 'fidelity, diligence, and ability' and to his faithful support of the governor-general ('Writings and Speeches', 440). Hastings's enemy Philip Francis called Ganga Govind Singh 'prime minister to Mr Hastings and I believe the only man he really trusts' (MS Eur. G5, p. 431). It was said that he 'was looked upon by the natives as the second person in the government, if not the first' (Marshall, 112). All the great 'zamindars' (revenue payers) in Bengal felt obliged to deal with the government through him and it is clear that they had to pay heavily for his favour. There was said to be 'hardly a Native family of credit... whom he has not some time or other distressed or afflicted', or a 'zamindar''s estate 'that he has not dismembered and plundered' ('Writings and Speeches', 442). He built up an enormous fortune, estimated at over $3 million by 1785 (Marshall, 112), and acquired much land. 
There were, however, dangers in being the governor-general's protege, since Hastings's enemies also became Ganga Govind Singh's enemies. As soon as Hastings had left India, charges were laid against Ganga Govind Singh, which he fought off, but he felt obliged to resign in 1786. At Hastings's impeachment Edmund Burke excoriated Ganga Govind Singh for his 'wickedness, barbarity and corruption' ('Writings and Speeches', 443). Ganga Govind Singh appealed to the new governor-general, Lord Cornwallis, for further employment: 'From the first establishment of the Company I have been in their Service and expended my Life' (Cornwallis MSS, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/11/12, fol. 352). The climate of opinion among the British had, however, turned irrevocably against men like him. He retired to his family lands at Kandi, where he lived the life of a devout Vaishnavite Hindu, distributing his wealth in acts of piety, founding temples, giving alms to Brahmans and pilgrims, and performing a spectacular 'sraddha' (memorial festival) for his mother, said to have cost $200,000. Hastings in retirement received occasional reports about Ganga Govind Singh, the last apparently being a message of congratulation in 1795 on the ending of Hastings's impeachment. The date and manner of his death are unknown. His son Santiram Singh, also active in revenue business and as the personal agent of prominent Europeans, predeceased him. Ganga Govind Singh then adopted Santiram's son Prankrishna Singh, who also became a 'kanungo' and acted as his adopted father's deputy. Ganga Govind Singh's descendants came to be known as the Paikpara family, the name of their great house in Calcutta. 


@@@@@


doc= 63550


Radhakanta Sarman (d. 1803), pandit, was born in the early eighteenth century in a Bengali Brahman family of modest means. His father died at the age of 100, his mother at eighty on the funeral pyre of her husband. Radhakanta received a traditional Sanskrit education as a student of the famed Jagannatha Tarkapancanana, who conferred upon him the title Tarkavagisa ('master of dialectics'). His first apparent work was an undated 'Vastutattva', a Vaisnava text part of which was already lost by 1805. Although he may have been first patronized by traditional rulers such as the raja of Krishnagar, as his teacher and his father were, his career flourished under new forms of patronage in the new town of Calcutta. Along with Jagannatha and others, he was patronized by, and helped legitimize, the 'nouveau riche' friend of the British, Maharaja Nabakrishna (Nobkissen) of Sobha Bazar, Calcutta, who gave him a grant of land and had the Mughal emperor confer upon him the title panditapradhana ('foremost among pandits'). 
Radhakanta became involved with the British in 1783 when, at the request of Governor-General Warren Hastings, he composed and supervised a Persian translation of the 'Puranarthaprakasa', a digest of Indian antiquities (BL, Or. MS 1124; Add. MS 5655) which was Sir William Jones's primary source on ancient Indian chronology. An English translation by N. B. Halhed was published in 1809 (Hindley, 109-17). Although he accepted a traditional reward of land, Radhakanta declined an offer to join the civil service as a pandit assistant to the supreme court in 1785. He personally guided John Shore in collecting Persian translations of Sanskrit texts in 1783-5, and again after Shore's return to India in 1787, and, in financial straits, became Jones's primary mentor in Sanskrit literature and antiquities. He first made Jones aware of Sanskrit theatre and pointed to 'Sakuntala', which Jones translated in 1789, as the best play. Among other contributions to Jones's enquiries, he interpreted the inscriptions on the Delhi-Topra pillar which Jones presented to the Asiatic Society, and was his primary source of information on Indian chess. In 1788 he accepted becoming a household pandit to Krishna Kanta Nandy (Cantoo Babu), Hastings's erstwhile banian, and formal employment with the British regime when Jones chose him as 'a Brahmen of distinguished abilities, and, highly revered by the Hindus in Bengal for his erudition and virtue' to direct the project which he viewed as his foremost legacy, a digest of Hindu law on the model of Justinian's pandects ('Letters of Sir William Jones', 802). Although his teacher, the venerable Jagannatha, was also recruited and made the eponymous author of the 'Vivadabhangarnava', Radhakanta effectively headed the group of pandits who worked on the project for the law of Bengal, which was still incomplete at Jones's death in March 1794, while Sarvoru Tiwari, as the lone pandit for Bihar, produced the 'Vivadasararnava' (1789). All the while, Radhakanta and Sarvoru were recurrently called upon to give opinions on Hindu law for the superior court, the 'sadr diwani adalat', when the pandit assistants to the court rendered contradictory opinions or were distrusted, which was increasingly the case. This culminated in their formal appointment in 1794 when Governor-General Sir John Shore and the council wished 'to render the digest the book of authority for determining legal questions and consequently to attain the desirable object of introducing uniformity in the Decisions of the Court' (BL OIOC, P/28/15, 10 Oct 1794, civil nos. 15-16). Although 'old and infirm' ('Letters of Sir William Jones', 928), Radhakanta was concurrently retained to supervise the preparation, for the use of the court, of a copy of the digest which, in Henry Thomas Colebrooke's translation (1797-8), became the standard source for administering law to Hindus in Bengal. Radhakanta died, still in British employ, on 8 March 1803. Pursuing what had become a family tradition of British employment, his son Srikanta sought in vain to succeed him in his position with the 'sadr' court; Ghanasyama, another pandit who had worked on the law digest and a grandson of Radhakanta's teacher Jagannatha, was appointed his successor. 


@@@@@


doc= 63551


Amir Chand (d. 1758), merchant, was a major trading partner of the British in Bengal and deeply involved in the events that gave them political power there. Very little is known about his origins. He appears to have been a Nanakpanthi Sikh who came to Bengal early in the eighteenth century from Agra in north India with his brother Deep Chand, to seek his fortune. Both men prospered. Amir Chand seems to have begun business under a great Calcutta merchant, Bostom Das Sett, who supplied the East India Company with cotton cloth. By the 1730s Amir Chand had himself become the leading supplier of the company, undertaking to procure up to one-third of what they required to ship to Britain in any one year. He lived in Calcutta in great state, owning a number of houses and employing a huge retinue. He was described as 'the most opulent inhabitant of the colony', whose way of life 'resembled more the state of a prince than the condition of a merchant' (Orme, 2, pt 1, 50). As well as trading with the British, Amir Chand dealt with the nawabs, the rulers of Bengal, from whom he received grants to control certain trades in return for his services. He and his brother were particularly concerned with the province of Bihar, where they dominated the trade in saltpetre and opium. 
In 1756 Bengal was thrown into crisis when the British provoked the nawabs to attack and take their settlement of Calcutta. Amir Chand had to make hard choices between the two sources of his wealth and influence and he played his cards badly. The British governor believed that he was at first siding with the nawab and confined him for a time. In 1757 the British under Robert Clive recaptured Calcutta and Amir Chand successfully sought a reconciliation. He is described as 'going up and embracing each member of the Council among whom Colonel Clive was sitting' (Sinha, 1.244). He involved himself in the plots to overthrow the nawab which followed the British recovery of Calcutta, backing a candidate who appeared to have far less chance than the one whom the British eventually chose to support. Nevertheless, he did his best to exploit the situation and to gain a huge reward for himself. He insisted that any agreement with the future nawab should contain clauses guaranteeing him 5 per cent of the Bengal nawabs' accumulated treasure and a quarter of their jewels. Since British estimates of the treasure put it at some $40 million, this meant that he was claiming at least $2 million. Clive had no intention of giving him what he wanted, but believed that he had kept in communication with the reigning nawab and might betray the conspiracy to him prematurely. He and his colleagues therefore decided to trick Amir Chand. A false treaty was drawn up to be shown to Amir Chand which included a generous provision for him. Because the British admiral Charles Watson, whose signature was essential, had scruples about this piece of skulduggery, his name was added by somebody else. After the British victory at Plassey, in a scene immortalized in Macaulay's essay 'Lord Clive', 'Clive then turned to Mr Scrafton one of the servants of the Company, and said in English, 'It is now time to undeceive Omichund.' 'Omichund', said Mr Scrafton in Hindostanee, 'the red treaty is a trick. You are to have nothing.' Omichund fell back insensible into the arms of his attendants. He revived; but his mind was irreparably ruined.' Whatever the truth of the rest of the story, there is no evidence that disappointment drove Amir Chand insane. He continued to do business with the company for the short remainder of his life. He died in December 1758, apparently away from Calcutta, leaving a fortune estimated at some $450,000, the bulk of which, presumably since he died without issue, was bequeathed to a Sikh shrine. Much of his wealth was used up in litigation brought by his brother-in-law Huzuri Mal, who contested the management of the estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 63552


Bengal, nawabs of (act. 1756-1793), rulers in India, were formally the 'subahdars', or governors, of a Mughal province. In reality they were rulers of what since the early eighteenth century had been an effectively autonomous Bengal. That autonomy was to be lost to the British during their lifetimes. 
Estimates of the date of birth of 
Within a few months of his accession Siraj ud-Daula decided to bring pressure on the British at Calcutta. He evidently wished to curb the immunities which they enjoyed and to force them to make a fiscal contribution commensurate with their wealth. The British prevaricated, and the nawab forced the issue with an attack on the city, which he captured in June 1756. A number of British prisoners subsequently perished in the dungeon called the 'black hole', an episode for which the nawab seems to have been in no way responsible. 
The victory at Calcutta was to be a short-lived one. British troops and warships were dispatched from Madras under the command of Robert Clive to recover the settlement, which they duly did in February 1757. This reverse left Siraj ud-Daula vulnerable to a coalition of enemies within Bengal, who began to intrigue against him. The opposition which nawabs of Bengal habitually faced at the beginning of their reigns seems to have been exacerbated by fear and dislike for a headstrong, violent young ruler, whose 'quarrel and enmity with all the people, whether high or low, nobles or lords, exceeded all limits' ('Tarikh-i-Bangala', 131). The plotters were aided and abetted by the British army. Most of the nawab's commanders deserted him on the field of Plassey on 23 June 1757, leaving the victory to Clive. Siraj ud-Daula fled, but was killed by his enemies on 2 July. He left a widow, Lutfunessa, and a young daughter. He had a fine 'imambara', or hall, for celebrating Muharram built at his capital at Murshidabad. 


In return for British help in the plot that brought him the throne, Mir Jafar was obliged to cede some territory around Calcutta, to confirm and strengthen British commercial privileges, and to make huge public and private payments as rewards and indemnities to his British allies. In other respects, he evidently assumed that he would rule his dominions as his predecessors had done. This was not to be. Although Clive had a personal regard for him, his authority was quickly eroded. Parts of his revenues were claimed by the British to clear his debts to them, the British army took over the defence of Bengal against incursions from northern India, and a British resident posted to the nawab's capital at Murshidabad actively intervened in court politics. 
Relations between the nawab and his British protectors broke down completely. He resented their interference and they regarded him as incompetent to govern, a view shared by Indian contemporaries, one of whom reported that he talked of matters of state 'with the incoherence and insensibility of a man loitering his time in a tippling shop' ('Seir mutaqherin', 2.272). In October 1760 Henry Vansittart, the British governor who had replaced Clive, insisted that Mir Jafar must cede territory to the East India Company and hand over his government to a minister of their choice. Mir Jafar preferred to give up his throne and went to live in Calcutta. 
The man chosen by the British to be the effective minister became the new nawab. He was called 
Mir Kasim's hopes of an effective independence from the British were to prove vain. Supporters of Clive who were still in India were never reconciled to his promotion and worked against him. Trade was, however, the issue on which relations with the British broke down. With the crippling of the nawabs' power after Plassey, private British merchants from Calcutta and their Indian partners and subordinates extended their trade throughout Bengal. This was a serious challenge to the nawabs' authority, since British merchants refused to pay their duties or to accept the jurisdiction of local officials and intruded into trades reserved for the government. Vansittart was willing to reach a settlement with the nawab, but his council overruled him. Local conflicts about trade and jurisdiction developed into a full-scale war in 1763. As British troops moved against him, Mir Kasim withdrew into northern India, killing numbers of British personnel and Indian notables who had fallen into his hands, acts of revenge which left him with a reputation for brutality. Mir Kasim was given support by the wazir of Oudh and by the Mughal emperor, but their combined army was defeated by the British at the battle of Buxar on 23 October 1764. The last challenge to British control of Bengal had been beaten off, and Mir Kasim was to spend the rest of his life in exile until his death from dropsy at Delhi on 7 June 1777. 
When the British formally declared war on Mir Kasim on 7 July 1763, they proclaimed that Mir Jafar was again nawab of Bengal. The office had lost most of its credit and was to become of even less account on Mir Jafar's death from leprosy at Murshidabad on 5 February 1765, when he was succeeded by his eldest surviving son, Najm ud-Daula. The succession was formally confirmed by the East India Company, who took on themselves the appointment of the ministers to manage the government for the young nawab. On 12 August 1765, by a direct grant from the Mughal emperor, the company took over the major part of the nawabs' functions. The company became 'diwans', or administrators, of the finances of Bengal. The revenues of the province now belonged to them. The nawabs were to be guaranteed a fixed tribute and were to retain the remainder of their functions, the 'nizamat', or responsibility for defence and criminal justice. 
Najm ud-Daula reigned for little more than a year. On his death on 8 May 1766 another young son of Mir Jafar, Saif ud-Daula, succeeded, again for a short period. He died on 10 March 1770, to be succeeded by the even younger 
Mubarak ud-Daula's reign was to last for more than twenty years, during which the office of nawab lost all its significance. The nawabs had long since been deprived of their military functions with the disbanding of their army; when Warren Hastings became governor of Bengal in 1772, he began to regulate their judicial responsibilities and he greatly reduced the nawab's tribute. In 1791 the company's courts took over complete responsibility for the criminal law from the nawab. Mubarak ud-Daula lived out his life in his palace at Murshidabad, until 1787 under the close supervision of a British resident. In addition to his principal wife, Fais-un-Nisa, he had a number of other wives, with whom he had twelve sons and thirteen daughters. Like his predecessors, Mubarak ud-Daula was a generous patron of religious festivals, Hindu as well as Muslim. He died in Murshidabad on 6 September 1793, heavily in debt. 


@@@@@


doc= 63553


Siraj ud-Daula (d. 1757) vary from 1729 to 1738. He was the son of Zain al-Din Ahmad Khan (died 1748) and of his wife, Amina Begam (died 1760), daughter of Alivardi Khan, nawab of Bengal since 1740, who in 1752 or 1753 had declared Siraj ud-Daula to be his heir. On Alivardi's death on 10 April 1756 Siraj ud-Daula succeeded to a territory, including Bihar as well as the historic area of Bengal, which had been brought by his predecessors under a relatively centralized administration, owing only a nominal allegiance to the Mughal emperors, the formal source of the nawabs' authority. Bengal was a prosperous province, yielding a high return in taxation and with a vigorous commerce. By 1756 its external trade by sea was largely in the hands of European merchants operating out of privileged coastal enclaves. The East India Company and its servants were the dominant European merchants and the British town of Calcutta was the major foreign enclave. 


@@@@@


doc= 63554


Mir Jafar Ali Khan (c.1691-1765), the leading conspirator against Siraj ud-Daula, succeeded him. Symbolically for the future, he was placed on his throne by Robert Clive. Son of an Arab, Sayid Ahmad Najafi, he was a recent immigrant into Bengal, of good birth but 'an almost uneducated soldier' (Khan, 8). He had married Shah Kanum (died 1766), half-sister of the nawab Alivardi Khan, whom he served as military commander, and had two other wives, Babbu Begam (died 1808) and Munni Begam (1723?-1813). 


@@@@@


doc= 63555


Mir Kasim Ali Khan (d. 1777), probably the son of Mir Razi Khan and son-in-law of Mir Jafar through his marriage to his daughter Fatima Begam. Mir Kasim had already proved himself to be an effective administrator before his succession. His strategy as nawab seems to have been to accept the domination of the British in the coastal regions of lower Bengal, including the outright cession of territory to them, but to try to restrict their interference elsewhere and to be ruler in the fullest sense over the rest of Bengal and Bihar. To reduce British influence, he moved his capital to Monghyr in Bihar. There he enforced his own will on the administration, dismissing most of those who had held office under his predecessors, greatly enhancing the revenue that remained under his control, and reforming his army. 


@@@@@


doc= 63556


Gopal Das (d. 1787), along with a second son, Bhavani Das, began to figure prominently in the East India Company records when, after 1769, the British received the grant of the revenues of Benares from the nawab of Oudh, Asaf ud-Daula. In succession to his father, Gopal Das became the principal of the firm, now renamed Bhaiaram Gopal Das, during the period when the East India Company was consolidating its power in the post-Mughal kingdom of Oudh. 
The Benares bankers, and the Naupatti in particular, became intermediaries in the remittance of the Benares revenue to the East India Company's treasury in Calcutta. They also helped move company funds from Lucknow to Calcutta and from Calcutta to Bombay via the city of Surat. These funds provided the financial muscle behind the military power of the East India Company. Despite this, Bhaiaram and the other bankers appear initially to have been regarded as impediments to the growth of British influence in Benares. After the revolt and expulsion of Maharaja Chet Singh in 1781, when the commercial wealth of the city generally rallied behind the company, the firm fully came to terms with the British presence. Gopal Das died in 1787 and the business passed to his son 


@@@@@


doc= 63557


Das family (per. c.1750-c.1820), bankers in India, known in the later days of its influence as the Shah family, were Purbiya or eastern Agarwals. Agarwals were one of the main communities of commercial castes indigenous to northern India. With the decline of the Mughal central government after 1707, Agarwal and Khattri financiers became more important, and the previously dominant Gujaratis declined. The family firm appears to have originated in the small town of Amroha, near Delhi, and to have moved to the pilgrimage and commercial centre of Benares in northern India in the seventeenth century. According to one tradition the family rose to importance as a member of the Naupatti (or group of 'nine sharers') who helped the city of Benares pay off a large forced loan to the nawab of Oudh. 
This cross-caste association of families hereafter played an important role in financing and advising Balwant Singh and Chet Singh, rajas of Benares. They took farms of land revenue from the rulers, moved specie from Benares to Lucknow (and later Calcutta), and financed the burgeoning pilgrim traffic. At some point in the later eighteenth century the Bhaiaram family settled in a large 'haveli', or mansion, in the Chaukhamba district of Benares, close to the holiest of the sites for ritual bathing on the banks of the Ganges. They also played an important part in the patronage of the Vallabhacharya Hindu temples of the locality. 
In the mid-eighteenth century the firm's principal was Bhaiaram Das (fl. 1750-1770), banker (mahajan) and money dealer (sarraff, or shroff). Despite directing some fifty-two branches of his house throughout northern India, Bhaiaram Das remains a shadowy figure. His son Gopal Das (d. 1787), along with a second son, Bhavani Das, began to figure prominently in the East India Company records when, after 1769, the British received the grant of the revenues of Benares from the nawab of Oudh, Asaf ud-Daula. In succession to his father, Gopal Das became the principal of the firm, now renamed Bhaiaram Gopal Das, during the period when the East India Company was consolidating its power in the post-Mughal kingdom of Oudh. 
The Benares bankers, and the Naupatti in particular, became intermediaries in the remittance of the Benares revenue to the East India Company's treasury in Calcutta. They also helped move company funds from Lucknow to Calcutta and from Calcutta to Bombay via the city of Surat. These funds provided the financial muscle behind the military power of the East India Company. Despite this, Bhaiaram and the other bankers appear initially to have been regarded as impediments to the growth of British influence in Benares. After the revolt and expulsion of Maharaja Chet Singh in 1781, when the commercial wealth of the city generally rallied behind the company, the firm fully came to terms with the British presence. Gopal Das died in 1787 and the business passed to his son Manohar Das (fl. 1780-1800); Gopal Das was survived by his wife, of whom further details are unknown. 
During the period when Jonathan Duncan was resident at the Benares court (1787-95), Manohar Das was regularly interviewed on the movements of money markets across India and on political developments bearing on the company's finances. These reports were sent on to Calcutta and London. Gopal Das Manohar Das (as the firm was now titled) purchased large quantities of company paper in 1787-90 and aided it during the Second Anglo-Mysore War. It had opened further 'kothis', or branches, at Cuttack, in central eastern India, and latterly at Madras, thus contributing to the creation of a network of indigenous financial support for the British across the whole subcontinent. Manohar Das was succeeded by his son Mukund Lal, under whom the firm's fortunes began to falter. During the opening decades of the nineteenth century the family declined in importance as a commercial interest, edged aside by newcomers and by British banks. By mid-century some family members had secured 'zamindaris', or landholdings, in the Benares region, and a few had entered the new professions, though others had fallen into poverty. Their history reveals, nevertheless, the extent to which the rise of the East India Company depended on Indian occupational elites through to the time of the later Indian middle class. 


@@@@@


doc= 63559


Truefitt, George (1824-1902), architect, was born in Manchester and articled in London from 1839 to 1844 to the scholarly Gothic revivalist L. N. Cottingham (1787-1847). He worked briefly in the offices of Sancton Wood (1815-1886) and Harvey Eginton (1809-1849) of Worcester before establishing himself in independent practice in London 'c'.1846. After a walking tour in France and Germany he published 'Architectural Sketches on the Continent' (1847), which both responded to a growing interest in European Gothic and urged the development of the revival beyond medieval precedents. Shrewdly, it was dedicated to A. J. Beresford Hope (1820-1887), chairman of the Ecclesiological Society, which Truefitt joined in 1848. His Gothic design for London's Army and Navy Club, though unsuccessful in competition, was well publicized and particularly impressed the banker William Cunliffe Brooks (1819-1900), who became his principal patron. Pursuing ecclesiastical Gothic, Truefitt's 'Designs for Country Churches' (1850) welcomed the revival's emergence from antiquarian 'copyism' into 'original conception' ('Preface'), and provided twenty imaginary designs, the geometrical simplification and compositional boldness of which -- praised by 'The Ecclesiologist' for their 'vigour and spirit' (vol. 11, 1850, 48) -- anticipated much of the aesthetic of high Victorian Gothic. 
However, Truefitt, an evangelical, was unsympathetic to the high-church arrangements demanded by ecclesiology's leaders, and his career developed on secular rather than ecclesiastical lines. His first major job, the now demolished Newbury Savings Bank (1848-9), was followed by various commissions: Bridgnorth cemetery (1854), a school in Neath (1857), estate buildings for Cunliffe Brooks, and -- probably -- work on Brooks's Manchester house, Barlow Hall. On 15 January 1856 his son George Haywood Truefitt was baptized at the Old Church, St Pancras, London; his mother's name was there recorded as Mary. When he was elected FRIBA in 1860, Truefitt was engaged in developing the suburban Tufnell Park estate, London, to which he was surveyor from 1865. Here he designed robust, stylistically eclectic villas, including his own house in Middleton Road, and his most important church, St George's (1866-8), where bare Gothic detailing consorts with a circular nave and terracotta-clad iron columns. Its aesthetic toughness recurs in the evangelical citadel of St George's, Worthing (1868), and his later churches at Bromley, Kent (1879), and Davyhulme, Lancashire (1889). Truefitt's stylistic inventiveness and resourceful use of materials are most evident in the three banks he designed in 1869-70 for Cunliffe, Brooks & Co.: a classical and Gothic mix for Manchester, a Romanesque-Renaissance medley at Blackburn, and elaborate timber-framed revival in Altrincham, Cheshire -- all strikingly composed and idiosyncratically ornamented. In 1890 Truefitt's London practice was taken over by his son, though he continued as architect to Brooks's Glen Tana estate in Aberdeenshire. 
Truefitt's output never rivalled those of the great Victorian architects, but he contributed significantly to high Victorian eclecticism, and his artistic independence resulted in designs of considerable individuality across a wide range of building types. He died at his home, the Old House, Worthing, on 11 August 1902, leaving a widow, Constance, a son, Lieutenant-Colonel Lewis Haywood, and two daughters, Mary Louisa Warleigh and Connie Georgie Truefitt. 


@@@@@


doc= 63560


Fowke, Joseph (1716-1800), East India Company servant and free merchant, was born in Madras and baptized there on 22 October 1716, one of the four children of Randall Fowke (1673-1745) of the Madras council, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' May (1680-1734). Joseph probably travelled to England in 1728 with his father, who was making a short visit. He went back to Madras as a writer about 1736, rising to third in council. He returned to England in 1752. A year later he wrote of his fortune, partly acquired through trading in diamonds, as standing at $18,000 (J. Fowke to J. Walsh, 12 Jan 1753, BL OIOC, MS Eur. D546). Although nominated governor of Madras in 1754, he never took up the appointment, having failed to agree a salary with the company. 
Joseph's marriage on 7 May 1750 to Elizabeth (1731-1760), the daughter of Joseph Walsh (1694-1731), a company official, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Maskelyne (died 1734), whose cousin Margaret became Lady Clive, forged an important family link for the Fowkes. Their three children, Francis, Arthur, and Margaret, were born after they had returned to England. As a widower, Joseph married Kitty Lavinia Treacher in London on 1 September 1770. She died at St Helena in 1774. They had three children, Sophia ('b'. 1769), Louisa ('b'. 1770), and William, who was born in India. Joseph also had a natural daughter, Elizabeth ('b'. 1768), whose mother was Grace Croftes. There appears to have been another natural daughter, born in India of an unknown mother, 'who cannot be publickly acknowledged' (J. Fowke to F. Fowke, [1786], BL OIOC, MS Eur. E6, item 108). 
Joseph again departed for India in 1771 with his second wife and set up as a free merchant trading in diamonds, hoping to recoup the modest fortune that he had gambled away after his first wife's death. Family and political links with Clive drew him towards Warren Hastings's opponents, particularly to General Clavering and Philip Francis. In April 1775 he was found not guilty on a charge of conspiracy against Hastings although convicted of conspiracy against Hastings's associate Richard Barwell. Joseph moved to Benares to carry on his diamond trading. In 1780 Francis obtained a sinecure in Calcutta for him, but they quickly fell out, although they were later reconciled. Joseph's appointment was terminated in 1783. On his return to England in 1788 he was worth no more than $1400. He engaged in a bitter dispute with the company over his claim to a pension. Edmund Burke raised the matter in parliament, but Joseph refused the company's only offer of $700 of arrears. He died in Bath on 16 May 1800, bequeathing to the sole beneficiary of his will 'a debt due to me from the East India Company of which I have been unjustly deprived'. 
Old Fowke, as he was widely known to contemporaries, was a complicated man. Hastings complained of his undeniably violent and morose temperament, yet Burke saw him as 'a man of honour even romantick; and of very great natural abilities' (Burke to Dundas, 22 April 1791, 'Correspondence', 6.251). Both were right. He was a reckless gambler, querulous with friends and relations, negligent of his children when young and a trial to their patience thereafter, but talented enough to be considered more than once for a governorship, a valued friend of Samuel Johnson, and a discerning lover of music. 


In between residencies at Benares, Francis lived in Chinsura and Calcutta. He amassed a fortune of at least $70,000 founded on trade in diamonds and opium, and on government contracts. He returned to England in 1786. His natural son William, baptized in Calcutta on 17 October 1781, came back to England with him. By 1788 Francis had entered into a liaison with Mary Lowe ('c'.1769-1847), said to have been an actress. They had fifteen children but remained unmarried until 19 July 1813, when, apparently in some secrecy, they went through a ceremony at St Olave's, Southwark. This belated marriage took place twelve days after Francis had written a will, which, after securing an annuity of $500 to his wife, declared that all his children were born previous to his marriage but that all should share equally in his estate. 
Francis lived in Wimbledon in the 1790s and commanded the Wimbledon light horse volunteers. He later lived at 41 Hertford Street, Mayfair, Westminster, commenced the building of Boughrood Castle in Radnorshire in 1817, and rented property in Worthing and near Torquay. Francis was a more equable man than his father, whom he roundly castigated for improvidence but, none the less, assisted financially. However, they seem to have shared a love of music and a taste for creating bewildering family networks. Francis died at Bochrwyd (Boughrood) on 20 October 1819. 


Margaret was among the first British women to take an informed interest in Indian music. She was a pioneer of the genre which was termed 'the Hindostannie air', a piece derived from an Indian original arranged in an English idiom. By 1784 she had made a collection of songs and delighted Hastings with her performance. Margaret not only organized musicians and linguists to make transcriptions and to perform the airs but she also took down the airs herself and attempted to play along with Indian musicians. She was also interested in mathematics, excelled as an equestrienne, and, by all accounts, had a compelling manner and presence. 
Margaret returned to England with her brother in 1786. The following year she married John Benn (1759-1825), who had been assistant resident at Benares, where he made an estimated $80,000 trading in diamonds and opium. On the death of John Walsh in 1795 Margaret inherited all his property in trust for her as yet unborn son. After four stillborn children, a daughter was born in 1794 and a son, John Benn-Walsh, eventually first Baron Ormathwaite, in 1798. The Benns assumed the additional name Walsh in 1795. John Benn-Walsh senior was elected to parliament in 1802 and created a baronet in 1804. He died at Cheltenham in 1825. Margaret died at Binfield Park, Berkshire, on 29 September 1836. The careers of Joseph Fowke and his eldest son and daughter not only illustrate the opportunities for acquiring wealth in eighteenth-century British India, in spite of the hazards of its volatile politics, but also show how individuals responded to Indian culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 63561


Harris, Thomas (1829/30-1900), architect, was the son of William Harris, baker, and his wife, Charlotte. He was established in independent practice in London by 1851, when he was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects. In 1860, however, he published the pamphlet 'Victorian Architecture', which energetically engaged contemporary debate about the need for a modern architectural style rather than the prevailing historicism. Historical examples, Harris argued, should be studied for their spirit and principles, not merely copied; architects should seek a style to embody the revolutionary technological progress that typified modernity. The difficulty of achieving this appears in Harris's accompanying design for an apartment block, supposedly in the new 'Victorian' style but actually an undisciplined effort in the eclectic Gothic of the period. In 1862 Harris edited, and largely wrote, 'Examples of the Architecture of the Victorian Age', which similarly advocated a distinctive 'Victorian' style, and enthused about the iron and glass construction of railway stations and the Crystal Palace. Illustrations included two central London shops by Harris in a forceful, highly simplified Gothic that made some structural use of iron. Even more functionalist was a warehouse on Lisson Grove he designed in 1873, its rectilinear brick and girder construction given vestigial Renaissance styling. 
Away from commercial buildings, Harris's career, and his style, developed more conventionally. His 1869 competition design for Bradford town hall, though unsuccessful, led to important contacts in the town, where he may have had family connections: Bradford's largest bankers, closely involved in architectural development, had the same surname. Harris's first two major houses were for local magnate families: the dramatically composed Gothic pile of Milner Field, Bingley (1871-3; dem.) for a son of Sir Titus Salt, founder of Saltaire; and the many-gabled timber-framed Belstone Court, Shropshire (1884), for the Ripleys, woollen manufacturers and dyers. This latter commission probably led to his third great house, the nearby Jacobean-style mansion of Stokesay Court (1889), designed for a glove maker. Similar stylistic historicism characterizes the commissions Harris undertook in London, including the remodelling of Marylebone parish church (1883), houses in Shaftesbury Avenue and Wardour Street (1889), and the Holborn shop of the publisher Batsford ('c'.1889). 
Yet Harris remained ideologically committed to the need for a new style. Returning to print with 'Three Periods of English Architecture' (1894), he argued that the structural inheritance of Gothic represented indigenous tradition, and its revival was the prelude to an architectural awakening through a future style based on metal construction. His ideas were little regarded, and passed over in the brief obituaries following his death aged seventy-one at his home, 54 Carlton Hill, St John's Wood, London, on 10 July 1900. He was unmarried. Since then, however, his writings have been seen as anticipating the modernist movement, even as his career exemplified the Victorian dilemma of style. 


@@@@@


doc= 63562


Francis Fowke (1753-1819), eldest son of Joseph, was born on 22 October 1753 and baptized at St George's, Hanover Square, London, on 22 December 1753. He was sent to school at Dr Gilpin's in Cheam, Surrey, and went to Bengal as a writer in 1773. In August 1775 he was appointed resident at Benares to implement the provisions of the treaty of Fyzabad, which had been negotiated by Clavering, Colonel Monson, and Philip Francis against Hastings's opposition. After Monson's death in September 1776 Hastings regained control of the Bengal council and was able to use his casting vote to recall Francis Fowke from Benares in December 1776. Hastings was censured by the company and ordered to reinstate Fowke in 1777, orders which were ignored. A motion in council for Fowke's restoration moved by Philip Francis on 5 April 1779 failed. However, Fowke regained Benares in February 1780 as part of a short-lived truce agreed between Hastings and Philip Francis. In January 1781, a month after Philip Francis had sailed for England, Hastings again recalled Fowke and once more the company ordered his reinstatement, which was finally effected in April 1783. 


@@@@@


doc= 63563


Margaret Benn-Walsh (1758-1836), the youngest child of Joseph and Elizabeth, was born on 13 July 1758 and baptized at St George's, Hanover Square, London, on 16 August 1758. She was a goddaughter of Lady Clive. Left motherless at an early age and forsaken by an impecunious father, she came under the guardianship of John Walsh (1726-1795), her maternal uncle, who had been a councillor in Madras and private secretary to Lord Clive. Member of parliament for Worcester from 1761 until 1780 and a fellow of the Royal Society, he was unmarried, brusque in manner, but a benefactor to all his sister's children. As a young girl Margaret was boarded out. Her carers were not always well chosen and at one time she became quite seriously mentally disturbed. She briefly attended a school in Queen Square, London, but between the ages of seven and seventeen her education was acquired in the library of John Walsh and those of the Clives and the Stracheys. At seventeen Margaret was 'a tall and large woman' (Walsh to F. Fowke, 20 April 1775, BL OIOC, MS Eur. E3, item 38), and in 1776 she embarked for Bengal, 'I suppose to get her a husband, which, she has not beauty or fortune enough to get here' (F. Fowke, sen. [uncle] to F. Fowke, 22 Nov 1775, BL OIOC, MS Eur. E3, item 44). At first she lived in Calcutta but later joined her father and brother in Benares and Chinsura. Independently minded, she was not intimidated by her domineering father, defying him, for example, over an excursion up the Ganges with friends that he considered unsuitable. 


@@@@@


doc= 63564


Palmer, William (1740-1816), army officer in the East India Company and diplomatist, was the son of Samuel Palmer of Holborn Yard, London, and his wife, Frances. He joined the British army, serving in the West Indies where in St Kitts in 1761 he married Sarah Hazell. In 1765 he left the army for the East India Company service, being posted to Bengal as a cadet. In 1774 he became aide-de-camp to the governor-general, Warren Hastings, who made him his military secretary in 1776. Hastings came to have great confidence in Palmer's ability to act as his agent with Indian rulers, and Palmer in return became a devoted admirer of the governor-general. As he put it, 'I love, I revere Mr Hastings' (Palmer to D. Anderson, 12 Feb 1782, BL, Add. MS 45427, fol. 86). Hastings sent him on missions to the court of the wazir of Oudh at Lucknow. 
When Hastings left India in 1785 Palmer's career became more chequered. He spent ten years (1787-97) as the company's agent with the Maratha leader Sindhia, and in 1798 took up his most important diplomatic post, as resident at Poona with the peshwa, the titular head of the Maratha confederacy. He despised the peshwa's politics but refused to deviate from a policy of 'argument, persuasion and conciliation' with him (Palmer to W. Hastings, 10 July 1801, BL, Add. MS 29178, fol. 63), which he knew was unacceptable to the forceful governor-general, the Marquess Wellesley, who recalled Palmer from Poona in 1801. 
Palmer's wife had borne three sons, Samuel (1762-1814), William George (1764-1814), and John ['see below'], and two daughters, before he went to India. She remained at home, never to see her husband again, but after their schooling the boys were sent to join their father in India, where he had started a new family with a Muslim lady of distinguished lineage, Faizh Baksh (died 1828), granted the title of begam in 1796. In his will Palmer was to describe her as 'my affectionate friend and companion during a period of more than 35 years' (BL OIOC, L/AG/34/29/28). With Faizh Baksh he had four illegitimate sons, William ['see below'], Hastings (1785-1860), Charles and John (both born in 1791), and two daughters, Mary ('b'. 1783) and Frances ('b'. 1792). Palmer and the begam and three of the children were strikingly depicted by Johan Zoffany in a group portrait of 1785. Palmer seems to have made no distinction between his legitimate and his illegitimate children, sending the sons to be educated in Britain. 
The Poona residency was the last of Palmer's diplomatic postings. He stayed in India in the army, rising to the rank of lieutenant-general by the time of his death at Berhampore in Bengal on 20 May 1816. He was buried at Berhampore. 


In the years of his prosperity John Palmer had an honoured place in Calcutta society. He married Mary, daughter of Colonel Samuel Hampton, in 1791; they had five sons and seven daughters. As befitted a man dubbed 'the prince of merchants', he lived in a great house, where he dispensed extravagant hospitality and a range of charitable giving which contemporaries feared went beyond even his extensive means. He was public-spirited and liberal in his opinions, supporting the freedom of the press and the rights of people of mixed race as well as forming close friendships with Indian businessmen. 
In the late 1820s the house of Palmer was beset with difficulties that were to force it into insolvency on 4 January 1830, inflicting losses on a large body of investors and starting the slide that was to drag down the rest of the great agency houses. Palmer later reflected that his 'Hopes of Utility and Distinction' had 'seduced me into Gigantic Engagements, I wanted moral, phisical ['sic'] and financial Force to sustain' (J. Palmer to M. Palmer, 5 April 1833, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. d 107, fol. 52). In particular, the house was over-committed to indigo on a falling market. Palmer resumed a limited agency business in 1833, dying of 'quinzy' on 21 January 1836. 'The Friend of the Poor' was inscribed on his tomb in North Park Street cemetery, Calcutta. 


The Palmer Company's outstanding loans were paid off by the East India Company, but interest was reduced and various claims were disallowed. As a result the business was declared bankrupt in 1824. Some money was recovered through pressure on the nizam's government and this, together with a pension from the nizam, enabled William Palmer to continue to live in Hyderabad in some prosperity. He had a number of children, apparently by more than one Muslim lady, most of the sons being commissioned into the company's army. One of his sons-in-law described him as having 'a fascination about him quite irresistible to me, his knowledge was so varied, classical, historical and political' (Taylor, 1.97). Even Metcalfe paid tribute to his amiability. In 1848 he married Hester Desormeaux (1811-1877), widow of a surgeon at Hyderabad, who supported him in the 'difficulties and distress' that afflicted his old age (Crofton, 18-19). He died on 20 May 1867 at Hyderabad, where he had lived for some seventy years, and was buried in St George's cemetery, Chandraghat, Hyderabad. 


@@@@@


doc= 63565


John Palmer (1767-1836), merchant, was born in Britain on 8 October 1767, just before his father left for India. He joined the navy, fighting in Indian waters in the American War of Independence. In 1784 he went to Bengal and was employed in one of the new private concerns called agency houses. With the decline of the East India Company's commercial activities, these businesses enjoyed a spectacular if febrile prosperity, managing funds entrusted to them by British and Indian clients and investing them in shipping and new export crops, above all in indigo. Palmer entered the house of Burgh and Barber, becoming a partner in 1793. In 1803 he became a partner in the well-established business of Cockerell, Trail, which was known as Palmer & Co. from 1810. For nearly twenty years the Palmer house was to hold a dominant position in the Calcutta business world. 


@@@@@


doc= 63566


William Palmer (1780-1867), banker, was John Palmer's half-brother. He was born in Calcutta, and baptized there on 20 March 1780. Although as a person of mixed race he was officially classified as a 'native of India', he insisted that his 'feelings, his education, his habits, his descent from his father are all peculiarly English' ('Memorial of William Palmer', 32). He sought his fortune in Hyderabad, the largest of all the nominally independent Indian states tied to the East India Company by treaty. In the early nineteenth century, states where the British exercised influence without formal control were happy hunting grounds for enterprising individuals. In 1799 William Palmer became an officer in the nizam's army, fought in several campaigns, and was ultimately granted the rank of brigadier. In 1810 he established a trading and banking business. To meet his commitments, including heavy obligations to the British, the nizam was obliged to borrow extensively. With the encouragement of his half-brother John in Calcutta, William Palmer's company advanced money to the nizam, sometimes at 25 per cent or more, in return for assignments on the Hyderabad revenues. To protect these transactions Palmer made the resident at Hyderabad a beneficiary of them, and even succeeded in involving the governor-general, the marquess of Hastings, through making a protege of his a partner. In 1820, however, a new resident, Charles Metcalfe, began a campaign to reform the nizam's government, which, in his view, required an end to William Palmer's profiteering and to his influence at Hyderabad. 


@@@@@


doc= 63567


Oudh, nawab wazirs of (act. 1754-1814), were Nishapuri Saiyids who ruled the major political system of north India (Oudh, or more correctly Awadh) from 1754 to 1814, during the era of its most robust influence. They were the third to the sixth in a dynasty of eleven that lasted from 1720 to 1856. 
A major historical region from classical times until Indian independence in 1947, Oudh occupied a riverine plain defined by the Jumna River to the south-west, the Himalayas on the north, the Gandak River to the east, and Benares to the south-east. By 1775 it had grown to 90,000 square miles, bigger than England, Scotland, and Wales combined, and almost as large as the modern Indian state of Uttar Pradesh; it contained a population of some 21 million. Named for the city of Ayudhya ('Unconquerable') near modern Fyzabad, the land of Lord Rama and the setting for the Sanskrit epic 'Ramayana', this realm inherited much of the fading authority and prestige of Mughal Delhi after 1724. It was targeted by the English East India Company for greater control, until being annexed to the British empire in two stages, in 1801 and 1856, the latter being the immediate cause of the 1857 mutiny. 
The nawabs of Oudh were Shi'i Muslims whose ancestors came from Persia. In the process of consolidating and expanding their political presence in the north, they invited a steady stream of scholars, poets, jurists, architects, and painters from Persia and other Indian cities. Throughout the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries Oudh thus joined other regional political systems of India such as Hyderabad, Bengal, Bhopal, Bahawalpur, Arcot, Poona, Sind, and Mysore as fertile arenas for the development of a composite, pragmatic, and secular south Asian culture, the medium for which was increasingly Urdu, which gradually replaced Indo-Persian, the official language of the Mughals. 


(known as Safdar Jang; died 1754)
and Sadr un-Nisa Begam (died 1796). Because he was primarily a general -- enlarging his realm dramatically, and losing only narrowly to British-led forces at Buxar in 1764 -- Shuja laid personal claim to neither poetry, philosophy, nor the fine arts, yet he and his courtiers supported a wide range of cultural and scholarly activity at his capital in Fyzabad. Realizing his value as an ally, the victorious East India Company reinstated him in 1765, and for the next half-century a process of mutual testing and political experimentation occurred. Through the subsidiary alliance system, under which he had to pay for the upkeep of British-officered Indian troops, the way was opened for increasing company intervention during subsequent reigns. Shuja none the less modernized his army during this period, closed Oudh to the disruptive and monopolistic effects of European trade, secured the treasury in the custody of his main consort, the Bahu Begam (died 1816), realizing that only there would it be safe from British predation, and made large annexations in Etawah and Rampur, the latter with the hired use of company forces. Governor-General Warren Hastings treated him formally as an equal. He died in 1775 at Rohilkhand from blood poisoning. 
Under 
Asaf's proclaimed successor, 




@@@@@


doc= 63568


Shuja ud-Daula (d. 1775), nawab of Oudh, was born Mirza Jalal ud-Din Haidar, the son of Mirza Muhammad Muqim 


@@@@@


doc= 63569


Asaf ud-Daula (d. 1797), nawab of Oudh, born Mirza Amani, the son of Shuja and Bahu Begam, the favourite of Shuja's 700 wives and concubines, Oudh changed from a military patronage state to a mostly demilitarized protectorate under the subsidiary alliance. In contrast to his father, Asaf was neither a soldier nor an administrator. Most British dismissed him as extravagant, ineffectual, and effete. To Warren Hastings he was a 'cheerful, good tempered and pliant creature' with an 'excellent but unapplied understanding' (letter to John Macpherson, 6 Feb 1785, BL, Add. MS 29116, fol. 150). During Asaf's reign there was a marked erosion in the autonomy of the realm. By steadily coming to control Oudh's foreign relations, border security, army, and much of its revenues, the British profited immensely, while guaranteeing the survival of the regime against all external and internal enemies, in effect depriving it of all but cultural and internal administrative activity. Whereas this meant that Oudh's military-administrative aristocracy was now largely unemployed, Lucknow, Asaf's new capital, became the major patronage centre in all of north India, a haven for writers and artists fleeing unsettled conditions elsewhere. By 1800 it presented, via an admittedly eclectic set of architectural styles, an admirable array of mosques, palaces, gardens, inns, ceremonial buildings, and gateways. Shi'i influence grew, the annual mourning of Muharram becoming a lavish sponsored festival for all communities, including non-Muslims, as well as a rite of cultural legitimization for the regime. Asaf died at Lucknow in 1797 from heart failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 63570


Vizir Ali (d. 1817), was an adopted son of the former nawab. In 1780, at the height of pre-annexation British interference, Asaf had solved the problem of an heir (he was impotent, and never consummated his arranged marriage) by adopting Ali from a poor Muslim family and rearing him for the purpose. But he ruled for only four months during 1797 and 1798; his views, nurtured by the secluded but highly influential Begams (dowager widows, mainly of Shuja and his father, Safdar Jang) in Fyzabad, were overtly anti-British. His military preparations to oppose the company were met by Governor-General Sir John Shore, who personally led a military expedition into Oudh, deposed Vizir Ali, and installed Asaf's half-brother, Saadat Ali, in his place. A year later, still bristling at British interference in Oudh and other regional states, Vizir Ali organized a military coalition against them in and near Benares, which, although short-lived, gained the support of Indians from many classes in Benares, Nepal, and eastern Oudh, causing the alarmed British to accelerate the annexationist tendencies already present in their evolving system of indirect rule. Married to Hussaini Begam, Vizir Ali died at Calcutta in 1817 from unknown causes. 


@@@@@


doc= 63571


Saadat Ali (d. 1814), nawab of Oudh, was born Mirza Sa'adat Ali Khan. As Asaf's half-brother, he had hoped to topple Asaf's clearly ineffective rule in 1776, and almost succeeded; but when his plot failed, the British kept him under house arrest in Benares throughout Asaf's entire reign, as a possible successor. Shortly after being installed as nawab, following the fall of Vizir Ali, he came under great pressure from the new governor-general, Lord Wellesley, who suspected the designs of not only the Afghans but also the French, and who, in 'schoolmaster's language', took Saadat's declaration of inability to pay the now vastly increased subsidy as proof of unfitness to rule. Under great coercion from Henry Wellesley, Saadat was forced in 1801 to cede half of his territory, the remaining portion becoming surrounded on three sides by company lands, and on the fourth by the Himalayas. In exchange, the subsidiary alliance system was eliminated; Saadat henceforth retained all revenues from his reduced territory and never again had to rent British-officered troops for protection. He impressed British visitors with his administrative capacity and application. One described him as a 'man of talent and acquirements', which included a fluent and idiomatic mastery of English (R. Heber, 'Narrative of a journey through the upper provinces of India', 3 vols., 1828, 1.395-6). After 1801 the ruler and court of north India's major successor state were exempted from the need for defensive readiness, a situation which prevailed until Saadat's death in Lucknow from poison in 1814. In the protected, isolated situation created under Saadat's reign, Oudh's educated and ruling elites suffered increasing ennui and demoralization. Political and cultural forms arose which sterner British pro-consuls took as effeteness and decadence, justifying annexing the rest in 1856. Oudh's political and military importance had been eclipsed; its more lasting achievements lay in the realms of cultural patronage, social accommodation, literary conservation and renewal, and religious reform. 


@@@@@


doc= 63572


Bligh, Ivo Francis Walter, eighth earl of Darnley (1859-1927), cricketer and bequeather of the 'Ashes', born on 13 March 1859 at Bruton Street, London, was the second son of John Stuart Bligh, the sixth earl (1827-1896), who owned estates in Kent and co. Meath, and his wife, Lady Harriet Mary Pelham (1829-1905), daughter of Henry Thomas Pelham, the third earl of Chichester. He was educated at Cheam preparatory school and Eton College, where he was in the eleven (1876-7). He was in residence at Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1877 to 1881 (BA 1882), and represented the university at racquets and tennis as well as winning four cricket blues (1878-81). In 1881, however, his health broke down and despite being captain, he made only three appearances. His best year proved to be 1880, when he appeared for the Gentlemen against the Players and scored 1013 runs (average 30.69). 
Bligh is indelibly associated with the origin of the 'Ashes' in 1882. Australia's victory over England led to an 'obituary' in the 'Sporting Times' 'in affectionate remembrance of English cricket which died at the Oval on 29 August 1882... the body will be cremated and the Ashes taken to Australia' ('Sporting Times', 2 Sept 1882). Bligh 'thought it would be very good fun' ('Cricket Field', 30 June 1894, 233) to take a side to Australia and by September his party was at sea. The passengers included Florence Rose Morphy (died 1944), companion to the wife of Sir William Clarke, Australia's first baronet and president of Melbourne Cricket Club. Bligh returned to Australia in 1884 and married Florence on 10 February that year. Their first married home was in Melbourne, where (in 1886) the future ninth earl was born. They would have another son and a daughter. 
In welcoming the tourists at Melbourne, W. L. Murdoch hoped they would not take home 'those revered ashes' ('Melbourne Herald', 28 Nov 1882). But, at the end of three matches, the 'Sydney Morning Herald' (31 January 1883) reported they were in Mr Bligh's 'custody' though 'Wisden' (1884) made no such reference. Nevertheless, the mythical 'Ashes' became a reality. At a 'social' match on Christmas eve 1882, at the Clarkes' home at Rupertswood, near Melbourne, Lady Clarke had a bail burnt and put in an urn as a personal gift to Bligh. He told the story in the 'Cricket Field' in 1894 and bequeathed the urn to Lord's on his death. At a reception for the 1930 Australian tourists in London, the dowager Countess Darnley recounted the events at Rupertswood in detail ('The Times', 27 June 1930). 
While the 'Ashes' would be a lodestar for Anglo-Australian cricket in the future, Bligh's own star was only briefly in the ascendant and after the tour of Australia he played very little. Expectations of him had always been greater than fulfilment, yet 'Cricket' could write 'it would be difficult to name any English sportsman of any kind more deservedly popular... a very dangerous batsman if allowed to get set' (16 March 1883). But ill health continued to prevail and he began 'to despair of ever getting well' until taking up golf in 1889 ('Cricket Field', 30 June 1894, 233). 
Bligh was president of Kent County Cricket Club (1892 and 1902) and of the MCC in the year he inherited the earldom from his elder brother (1900). In 1905 he was elected a representative peer for Ireland and he was a deputy lieutenant and alderman for Kent. He died in his sleep at his home, Puckle Hill, Cobham, near Gravesend, Kent, on 10 April 1927 and was buried four days later in Cobham churchyard. Florence Darnley, who was made a DBE (1919) for her work for the arts, died on 30 August 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 63573


Shrubb, Alfred (1879-1964), athlete, was born at Battle's, Slinfold, near Horsham, Sussex, on 12 December 1879, the son of William Shrubb, an agricultural labourer, and his wife, Harriett, 'nee' Dench. He had three elder brothers and three elder sisters. The family settled in Horsham, where his father worked in the building trade and where after leaving school he became apprenticed to a carpenter. His first indication of athletic talent came in 1899, when he ran 3 miles across country to help fight a fire in a neighbouring village. Shortly afterwards he joined the local athletic club, Horsham Blue Star Harriers, and at Easter 1900, at Bexhill, won the Sussex championships for 1, 3, and 4 miles. Later in 1900, having competed in his first national Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) championships and still employed as a carpenter's labourer in Horsham, he joined the South London Harriers. This affiliation brought him coaching by the professional trainer Harry Andrews. Between 1901 and 1904 Shrubb won ten AAA championships at distances between 1 and 10 miles. As well as southern and national cross-country titles, he won the first two international cross-country championships in 1903 and 1904. By 1904 it was obvious that he was the outstanding distance runner of his generation; in one race, on 5 November 1904 in Glasgow, he set world records at every distance from 2 to 10 miles. When the International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) produced its first list of official world records in 1921, Shrubb held the records for all distances between 2 and 10 miles; no subsequent British athlete was to break a record for a distance event until Gordon Pirie in 1953. 
In 1902 Shrubb opened a tobacconist shop in Horsham, but it was clear that this income could not be sufficient to fund his expenses as an athlete training and competing across the country. There were rumours that Shrubb would request a piano as a prize at races, which would later be sold by a relation who owned a piano shop. Travelling expenses to athletes were forbidden unless competing in inter-club or AAA championship meetings. In December 1904 the AAA agreed to a request from the New Zealand AAA for Shrubb to make an expenses-paid tour. In the following year the AAA rules on payment of amateur expenses were further tightened and a similar request from the South African AAA was refused. In August 1905 Shrubb was suspended by the AAA for 'irregularities' surrounding the purchase of a ticket to travel to Canada; the AAA southern committee had refused permission for him to make a tour, but he had continued negotiations. Shrubb appealed in January 1906, but his suspension was upheld, and the South London Harriers club was also suspended. The athletic press dubbed the scandal the 'Shrubb sensation', and it coincided with wider debates in the sporting world about who should be considered an 'amateur'. The National Cycling Union was openly challenging the AAA definition of amateurism and promoting athletic meetings under its own code, which allowed amateurs and professionals to compete against each other. Shrubb made his professional debut at a Southern Counties Cycling Union meeting on Good Friday 1906, but despite this high-profile support the new style of meetings failed to win popular support. 
Shrubb made his first appearance as a professional at London's Olympia on 22 January 1906, shortly after his AAA suspension. On 1 February 1906 he married Ada (''d. 1946), daughter of John Brown, publican; they had a son and two daughters. He was never as dominant in his professional career as he had been as an amateur, and his best times were set as an amateur. In May 1907 he went to North America, where he competed as a touring professional, returning to England early in 1908. In June 1908 he set out again for the USA, where he competed widely, including racing against Johnny Hayes and Dorando Pietri, stars of the 1908 Olympic marathon, who had also turned professional. He wrote 'Running and Cross-Country Running' (1908), in which he described himself as the 'world's greatest pedestrian' and urged athletes to 'train consistently and constantly, and always to bear in mind that they could always do better'. In January 1909 he competed in an indoor marathon at Madison Square Garden against Tom Longboat, but broke down after twenty-four miles. Later in 1909 he settled in Toronto, joined by his wife, and became manager of a cereal mill at Bowmanville. He also occasionally coached athletics at Harvard. 
Known in his prime as the Little Wonder and the Irrepressible, Shrubb continued to compete into his forties. He returned to Britain and was the professional coach to Oxford University athletics club between 1920 and 1926, before emigrating to Canada in 1928. He ran a tourist park at Bowmanville and became co-proprietor of the cereal mill. He visited Britain in 1952, when he met his fellow South London Harrier and successor as a world record holder, Gordon Pirie, and was reinstated as an amateur by the AAA. He died in Bowmanville, Ontario, on 23 April 1964 and was buried at Bowmanville. 


@@@@@


doc= 63575


Darton, William (1755-1819), publisher and writer, was born at the Coach and Six Horses, Tottenham, Middlesex, where he was baptized at the parish church on 14 November 1755. He was the second of three children (two boys and one girl) of John Darton (died 1774), an innkeeper, and of Ann Bramton (1717-1804), who had been a widow when John Darton married her in 1750/1751. He was apprenticed for seven years to Thomas Dent, a London engraver, and following the death of his father in 1774 returned to Tottenham, where he ran a village store. In 1777 he joined the Society of Friends, and on 2 July 1778 he married Hannah Pace (1755-1822) of Spitalfields, herself a Quaker; they were to have eleven children (five girls and six boys). In 1787 he moved to London and set up as engraver, stationer, and printer in White Lion Alley, Birchin Lane. In this year he published what seems to be his first book, 'Little Truths Better than Great Fables', which blends information with moral teaching in the then approved style for children. He moved to 55 Gracechurch Street, London, in the next year, and in 1791 formed a partnership with Joseph Harvey (1764-1841). Harvey, also a Quaker, was primarily a printer, while Darton saw to the publishing side, and in some thirty years, starting from nothing, a flourishing business had been built up with a distinctive house style. The firm's adult publications were mostly of Quaker origin, and included anti-slavery literature, but it was best known for juvenile books, several of which, like 'Little Truths', were written and probably illustrated by Darton himself. Among the firm's more famous authors were Maria Hack, Priscilla Wakefield, the grammarian Lindley Murray, and Jane and Ann Taylor, whose two volumes of 'Original Poems, for Infant Minds' were published in 1804 and 1805. In 1810 William Darton's son Samuel Darton (1785-1840) became a partner in the firm, and Darton sen., though still a partner, went to live in Plaistow, Essex, where he died on 13 August 1819. 




@@@@@


doc= 63576


William Darton (1781-1854), publisher, the eldest son and second child (of eleven) of William and Hannah Darton, was born at Tottenham on 2 February 1781. He was educated at the Friends' school, Clerkenwell, London, and at Ackworth (Quaker) school, Yorkshire, and from 1795 was apprenticed to his father. In 1804 he set up his own business in Holborn Hill, London, and like his father specialized in children's books. He also published jigsaw puzzles and table games notable for their decorative detail. Among the firm's authors were the unidentified Arabella Argus, Mary Belson Elliott, and Mary Robson Hughs. He was a skilled engraver, and finished the work on 'A Complete Atlas of the English Counties', begun by Thomas Dix and published from Holborn Hill under their joint names in 1822. On 3 May 1808 he married Phoebe Harvey (1777-1860) of Maldon, Essex. There were five children of whom the eldest, John Maw Darton (1809-1881), became a partner in the Holborn Hill firm. William Darton retired in 1836 and died on 28 July 1854 at 47 Hemingford Terrace, Islington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 63579


Newbery, Elizabeth (1745/6-1821), bookseller and publisher, is of obscure origins. Family correspondence describes her father as 'Bryant the trunk merchant' -- probably the James Bryant at the corner of St Paul's 'facing Cheapside' -- but nothing else is known of her background or early life. She was later married to Francis Newbery (d. 1780) ['see under 'Newbery, Francis], the nephew of John Newbery. Francis had worked for his uncle and inherited the publishing business with John's son Francis and his stepson Thomas Carnan, but they quarrelled, and Francis set up his own premises at 20 Ludgate Street. On her husband's death, Elizabeth inherited his business in January 1780; his will appointed her sole executor. In 1786 fire destroyed a large part of the stock, and for part of 1787 Elizabeth lived at 37 Ludgate Street. 
Beginning with Charles Welsh, the first biographer of John Newbery, scholars have tended to assume Elizabeth had a merely caretaking role in the history of the prestigious Newbery firm. Evidence to support this position is tenuous, derived largely from the surviving account books of Richard Johnson, a hack writer and compiler who provided the Newberys with a substantial number of manuscripts between 1770 and 1792. These records show payments and records of orders from Elizabeth in 1780 and 1785; after that date they refer only to Abraham Badcock, her manager. Contemporary accounts of Badcock make clear his talents, but this is as much an argument for Elizabeth's business acumen as for her secondary role. During her twenty-two-year tenure Elizabeth published over 300 juvenile titles, three out of four under her sole imprint. The moral and didactic writing which dominated her list in comparison with that of John Newbery reflected the contemporary market rather than any inherent lack of his light-hearted touch. As John Newbery and then her husband had done, Elizabeth used internal publisher's 'puffs' to sell her wares, and she expanded the bookselling business, maintaining stock from other publishers for sale in her catalogues and shop. Her control spanned the decades in which children's books became an established branch of the publishing industry, and her list included abridgements of Richardson and Fielding, English writers such as Sarah Trimmer and Priscilla Wakefield, and versions of traditional tales including the 'Cries of London' and the 'Arabian Nights'. She employed the engraver Thomas Bewick, most notably to illustrate Arnaud Berquin's 'Looking-Glass for the Mind' (1792) and J. H. Wynne's 'Tales for Youth' (1794). She published the geographical games of the Abbe Gaultier and commissioned a historical game which she published jointly with John Wallis. She collaborated with other publishers including Vernor and Hood, and Francis's cousin Thomas Carnan, and after Carnan's death she reprinted titles from the Carnan-Newbery list as well as her own. She also published over 200 adult titles, but these were often joint ventures and her participation may have been merely financial. The only appearance of Elizabeth's imprint before 1780 was the 'Middlesex Journal' for 1772-3 but her name appeared on the January issue of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' immediately following Francis's death. A few books with her imprint appeared after the sale to Harris, suggesting she retained an interest in publishing, and her obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' describes her as adding 'many an useful and engaging work to the stock of juvenile literature' built up by John and Francis Newbery. 
In 1802 Elizabeth sold the business to John Harris (who had succeeded Abraham Badcock as her manager after Badcock's death in 1797). She died in Clapham on 21 October 1821, aged seventy-five, 'after an illness of 16 years, endured with uncommon fortitude and resignation' ('GM', 377). According to an 1830 letter by a Newbery descendant, Elizabeth had remarried, but throughout her career had 'continued the business and retained on the shop and title pages, the name that had been to her so prosperous'. However, her will, drawn up in 1820, was also in the name of Newbery, and her obituary makes no reference to a second marriage. Elizabeth also continued to receive dividends from an inherited share in the Stationers' Company English stock which she would have lost had she remarried. Given the value of her estate -- some $20,000 in specific bequests -- dividends of approximately $5 a year would not seem worth the hiding of a second marriage. Her will is interesting for the careful provision of money for female relatives and dependants. The money designated for her surviving sister, Susanna, who received the bulk of the estate, and that for Susanna's daughter, was to be held in trust in such a fashion that it could not be used by their husbands. Among the smaller bequests are those to young Newbery and Bryant relations, to the daughters of John Harris the younger, and to her servants. The executors, John Harris the elder, George Royde, William Bryant, and John Harris the younger were given $50 each for their trouble but Royde also received a separate legacy of $3000. John Harris or, failing him, his son, was granted the right to purchase the one-twelfth share in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' that Elizabeth had inherited from Francis. 


@@@@@


doc= 63584


Kerans, John Simon (1915-1985), naval officer, was born on 30 June 1915 at Birr, King's county, Ireland, the son of Major Edward Thomas John Kerans DSO, of the Royal Tank Corps and his wife, Eva Wills Hale. 
Kerans began his formal education in a preparatory school in Gloucester and went on from there to the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth, where he excelled in individual sports, winning caps for both fencing and sprinting and being notable for his exploits at the shooting range, in the swimming pool, and on both the squash and tennis courts. At 5 feet 11 inches in height, fit and blessed with explosive speed, Kerans was an ideal rugby wing three-quarter and represented his college in that position in its competitive fixtures. A lover of classical music and country pursuits, he was a maverick who possessed a strong streak of independence and self-assurance that led him, on occasion, to go to excess socially and bring him almost inevitably into collision with authority. His periodic brushes with the conservative establishment of the Royal Navy hindered his career. There was some consternation in Admiralty circles about how best to exploit his undoubted talents within the service. 
After passing out of Dartmouth, Kerans served as both cadet and midshipman on board the battleship HMS 'Rodney' in the Home Fleet (1932-3). His next post was as midshipman on the Kent class cruiser HMS 'Cornwall' (1933-5), on which he was promoted sub-lieutenant. This led to his spending the next two years at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, where he did not cover himself with glory in the classroom. Denied promotion and a seagoing appointment, he was sent to serve on the intelligence staff of the China station in Hong Kong and Singapore at a time of increasing Japanese belligerence in the Far East (1937-9). Once the Second World War had begun, however, he was sent as sub-lieutenant to the cruiser HMS 'Naiad', which was being used in the Home Fleet for trade protection duties. In May 1941 'Naiad' was deployed to join force H and become the flagship of 15th cruiser squadron on Malta convoy operations. On 11 March 1942, on return passage to Alexandria from an abortive attempt to intercept a supposedly damaged Italian cruiser in the eastern Mediterranean, 'Naiad' was torpedoed and sunk off Mersa Matruh by 'U-565'. Kerans was rescued and was rewarded with a shore appointment as staff officer (intelligence) on the staff of the tough, authoritative commander-in-chief Mediterranean and Levant, Admiral Sir John Henry Dacres Cunningham. After being belatedly promoted Kerans was sent to the destroyer minelayer HMS 'Icarus' to act as its first lieutenant while it served on the Atlantic convoy route (1943-4). 
Brought ashore before operation Overlord to serve on the staff of the commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, Kerans chanced to meet Stephanie Campbell Shires ('b'. 1917/18), at that time a member of the WRNS serving on the staff of combined operations headquarters and someone who helped to plot the D-day invasion. They met once again in Ceylon in 1945 while both were still in the service and decided to get married shortly afterwards, which they did in the parish of Charles, Plymouth, on 7 January 1946. They were married for thirty-nine years and had two daughters. 
Making up for lost time Kerans was promoted lieutenant-commander in 1944 and placed in charge of the Hunt type 2 class destroyer HMS 'Blackmore'. Remaining with this ship until 1947, he was then transferred by the Admiralty to Hong Kong to serve on the staff of security intelligence. Once the drama of the Malayan emergency began to unfold in the following year, Kerans embarked on a three-month attachment to the Selangor police in Kuala Lumpur. At this point his naval career appeared to be going nowhere and Sir Patrick Brind, the commander-in-chief of the Far East station in Singapore, was evidently almost at a loss to know what to do with him. None the less, just when it appeared that the Royal Navy was giving up on Kerans, an unlikely opportunity presented itself for the mercurial lieutenant-commander to redeem himself. It came in the shape of an appeal for a competent assistant requested by Captain Vernon Donaldson, the naval attache at the British embassy in China; he needed help in dealing with the extra workload generated after the British had stationed a warship on the Yangtze (Yangzi) River at Nanking (Nanjing) in November 1948. Brind indicated that Kerans was almost immediately available but that he would be 'under report' status for an indefinite period. Donaldson -- a sound, hard-working individual from the Scottish borders -- decided to risk having the occasionally disruptive Kerans on his staff. On 3 February 1949 the newly appointed assistant naval attache arrived in the Chinese nationalist capital to take up his duties just as the government was preparing to withdraw further south to Canton (Guangzhou) in Kwangtung (Guangdong) province. In these tense and fluid circumstances, when a studied calmness was at a premium and much work remained to be done, Kerans's rather brash personality and undisciplined work methods grated on Donaldson's nerves and made him inclined to regret giving his assistant a last chance to save his naval career. 
If the Admiralty's policy was to keep Kerans out of harm's way while it decided what to do with him, transferring him from Malaya to China singularly failed to serve this purpose. Instead he was pitched into an extraordinarily controversial situation. Churchill's wartime coalition government had already signed a treaty with the Chinese government of Chiang Kai-shek on 11 January 1943 renouncing all British extraterritorial rights in the country, and Attlee's Labour administration had consolidated this policy by joining with the other major world powers gathered in Moscow in December 1945 in adopting a policy of non-intervention in the civil war that had broken out in China between forces of the nationalist Kuomintang (KMT) and the communist People's Liberation Army (PLA). Yet, contrary to both the spirit and the letter of these two crucial diplomatic accords, the British business community in China and a few leading members of the Commonwealth diplomatic corps in Nanking sought to preserve their economic interests in the country by reviving a British naval presence on the Yangtze. It was a shallow and absurd decision that managed to alienate both communists and nationalists alike and suggests that the British had scant regard for either the tenets of international law or Chinese sovereignty and independence. By February 1949 the Yangtze had become a no man's land between the front lines of the ebullient PLA troops drawn up on the northern bank of the river and the battered KMT forces whose grip on the territory south of the river looked anything but secure. A temporary ceasefire was in place but few expected it to last indefinitely. In the circumstances, therefore, one might have hoped for a suspension of the British guardship scheme until the highly charged political and military situation had settled down. No such enlightened decision was reached in Whitehall and British warships continued to make their scheduled journeys up and down the 200-mile stretch of the lower Yangtze from Shanghai to Nanking as the two armed factions in the Chinese civil war looked on from opposite sides of the river. By mid-April the PLA high command, frustrated by the inconclusive peace negotiations with the KMT, dramatically gave the nationalists a four-day deadline to accept its extremely harsh ultimatum or face the consequences of a resumption of the war. 
Three days later on 19 April 1949 the frigate HMS 'Amethyst' began her latest journey upriver from Shanghai. She was planned to arrive in Nanking to relieve the destroyer HMS 'Consort' nine hours before the expiry of the PLA ultimatum at midnight on 20 April. She did not make it. At 9.30 a.m. on 20 April, at a point in the river some 60 miles north-east of Nanking, 'Amethyst' came under accurate and withering fire from a communist battery situated at the mouth of the tributary leading to the Kao-yu lakes at San-chiang-ying (Sanjiangying). Within five minutes the frigate had sustained a number of grievous hits that wrecked her bridge, wheelhouse, and low power room, rendered her gyrocompass useless, damaged her electrical, gunnery, lighting, and navigational circuits, and jammed her steering hard to port so that she had driven herself up onto a mudbank just off the western shore of Rose Island. She was stuck, unable to extricate herself and virtually defenceless against the persistent shelling and small arms fire that rained down on her for roughly 90 minutes. Apart from her captain, Lieutenant-Commander B. M. Skinner, who was mortally wounded, the 'Amethyst' suffered twenty-two other losses and had thirty-one of its crew wounded in the attack and its immediate aftermath. 
When the news of the 'Amethyst''s plight reached the British naval authorities on the Far East station, arrangements were swiftly made for HMS 'Consort' to leave Nanking and come to the frigate's assistance. Unfortunately, the British destroyer's arrival on the scene in the early afternoon and her willingness to bombard the shoreline did not overawe the PLA battery crews operating from well-hidden nests of guns along the northern bank of the river. 'Consort' was engaged and struck by a number of shells -- killing ten of her company and wounding twenty-three others -- as she steamed past the forlorn and trapped figure of the 'Amethyst'. Later that evening, after a series of running repairs to her engines and steering equipment, the 'Amethyst' managed to extricate herself from the mudbank and move to a more sheltered location a short distance upstream of Rose Island. Another abortive attempt to rescue her was mounted on the following day when the 10,000 ton cruiser HMS 'London' and the frigate HMS 'Black Swan' tried to go to her assistance. Further mayhem resulted with thirteen killed and thirty-two wounded on board the leading ship 'London' and seven wounded on her supporting vessel 'Black Swan'. In the light of these further incidents no other rescue bids were made or planned by the British naval authorities. As direct action was now ruled out, a resolution of the 'Amethyst' crisis would have to be through some form of negotiation with the PLA, but even this possibility was fraught with serious problems since the British government did not have any contact -- official or otherwise -- with the communist hierarchy and the 'Amethyst' had lost her captain and two of her senior officers were known to be seriously wounded and in urgent need of hospitalization. 
In these unfavourable circumstances, Donaldson sent Kerans off to try and establish personal contact with the stricken frigate and her crew. This was easier said than done but eventually, after a number of mishaps, he was able to get on board the 'Amethyst' in the mid-afternoon of 22 April. Once he did so he received a call from Vice-Admiral Sir Alexander Madden, the flag officer and second in charge of the Far East station, ordering him to assume acting command of the ship. From then onwards over the next ninety-nine days Kerans became, 'de facto', the Royal Navy's leading figure on the Yangtze and therefore, by extension, the one official seen by the PLA as representing the British government in this crisis. Within a day the communists had crossed the river in force and had established themselves on both banks of the Yangtze. Kerans and the 'Amethyst' were trapped. They had become hostages to fortune. 
While a political inquest into the background of this crisis opened in the United Kingdom and the British press devoted many column inches to the initial attack on the 'Amethyst' and the subsequent rescue attempts, those on board the frigate at the centre of the controversy could only wait with growing impatience upon future developments. Well aware that it might take some time to arrange the release of the 'Amethyst' and her crew, Kerans knew that time was not on his side. Every day spent in the fetid heat and humidity of the Yangtze used up precious fuel in the 'Amethyst''s tanks. While shutting down the generators for lengthy periods of the day certainly saved some fuel, it made the business of living on board the frigate more uncomfortable by the hour. In an effort to combat lethargy and restlessness he ensured that everyone on board had a set routine of daily duties to conduct. 
Whatever his past misdemeanours may have been, Kerans was a most resourceful and dashing figure and one who brought an air of self-confidence and individual flair to these proceedings. In fact, the old adage -- 'cometh the hour, cometh the man' -- definitely applies in this instance. Kerans was to perform quite superbly in his new role of acting captain: working closely with the remaining officers and specialists on board and becoming well liked and trusted by the crew who much appreciated both his charismatic personality and his common touch. 
Once the PLA had eventually established contact with the 'Amethyst' it became obvious that negotiations between the two sides were going to be long and arduous. Clearly, the PLA's case was based on the fact that the British frigate had flagrantly violated Chinese sovereignty by entering the Yangtze in the first place and that it had compounded this grave error by opening fire on the communist battery positions drawn up on the northern bank of the river in the early morning of 20 April. According to the communists' version of the events, the 'Amethyst' was engaged by the PLA only in self-defence and that further damage to Chinese property and considerable loss of life on shore among the civilian population was caused by the actions of 'Consort', 'London', and 'Black Swan' in their unsuccessful attempts to rescue the beleaguered frigate which had created the incident initially. Kerans's defence tactics rested on saying little about the sovereignty issue and vigorously rejecting the charge that the British warship had been responsible for her own demise by opening fire on the Chinese. Instead he counter-accused the PLA of unleashing a completely unprovoked attack on the 'Amethyst'. 
Despite the occasional sign of optimism that a breakthrough was imminent, the dreary and contentious negotiations careered on for another three months without resolution. Kerans was instructed by the British government to make some concession on the violation of sovereignty charge, but he had little difficulty in steadfastly refusing to admit any complicity on the question of who fired first on 20 April. Kerans was to demonstrate uncommon tact, patience, and discipline (qualities that he was not especially known for previously) in his role as the Royal Navy's personal intermediary with the PLA in the months to come. His fortitude in adversity and his adroit handling of the often tortuous series of negotiations that ensued could hardly be faulted and were to prove deeply inspirational to the men of the 'Amethyst' as the days of their confinement on the Yangtze grew. 
By 30 July 1949, however, despairing of an early release of his ship and crew and acutely conscious that the 'Amethyst''s fuel stocks were barely sufficient for her to reach Shanghai under her own steam, Kerans decided to try and escape down the fortified Yangtze at night, without the use of either lights or river pilots, on one of the most difficult stretches of water in the world. After reaching his decision, he informed the officers and crew of the dangers they faced in pursuing this option but the ship's company, cooped up for more than a hundred days in foul conditions, were prepared for anything and enthusiastically supported their captain's bold plan of action. Kerans did not need reminding that if anything went wrong and the 'Amethyst' was further disabled and / or sunk by the PLA defence forces on the passage downriver, the Admiralty in London was hardly likely to view his escape bid in a favourable light. None the less, he had sailed metaphorically close to the wind before and he felt he had little choice but to do so again. It was an inspired decision. 
Luck was also on Kerans's side. As he debated when to launch his ship's bid for freedom, a fully lit merchant ship, the 'Kiang Ling Liberation', appeared on the scene at 10 p.m. steaming downriver in the direction of Shanghai. Kerans seized the opportunity, gave the order to cut the 'Amethyst''s heavily lagged anchor cable and execute a 180 degree turn in the middle of the river and follow close behind the Chinese ship for as long as possible. Shortly afterwards the ruse was discovered by a PLA battery crew and an intense shelling of the ships began. Unfortunately for the 'Kiang Ling Liberation' the PLA inexplicably concentrated its fire on her, reducing the Chinese vessel to a smoking hulk in a few minutes and the 'Amethyst', bearing a charmed life and with only one inconsequential hit, steamed on past the luckless passenger cargo ship downstream as fast as she could go. In the course of the next seven and a half hours 'Amethyst' defied the odds -- passing PLA forts and gun posts, going successfully through a defensive boom -- and emerged triumphantly to meet the destroyer HMS 'Concord' at the mouth of the river estuary. Kerans signalled Brind at the Far East station with a message that would soon be emblazoned across much of the world's press. It read simply: 'Have rejoined the fleet south of Woosung, no damage or casualties. God save the king.' Kerans and the crew of the 'Amethyst' now became the toast of a United Kingdom starved of success in the immediate post-war world. Their exploits on the Yangtze made them into instant celebrities at every port of call on their homeward voyage to Plymouth, but no one was accorded more praise than the quintessential 'Boy's Own' hero John Simon Kerans. 
Awarded the DSO by George VI in a special ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 17 November 1949 and promoted commander in December, Kerans's fame presented the Board of Admiralty with a problem: what was it to do with the new folk hero? Had Kerans really changed or was he still the anti-establishment rebel he had been in the past? In the interim period while the Admiralty waited to see whether Kerans had matured and become totally reliable, he was invited to go on the Royal Navy staff course at Greenwich in the new year. Later in 1950 he was appointed head of the Far East section of the naval intelligence division at the Admiralty in London. He remained in this position for two years before he was sent to take charge of the minesweeper HMS 'Rinaldo', which was serving with NATO forces in Europe (1953-4). Thereafter, he became British naval attache to Burma, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam in 1954. This posting ended abruptly in the following year, when he was recalled to London, putting paid to any faint hopes he may have entertained of achieving flag rank before his retirement. Once again the Admiralty was bereft of ideas about what to do with him and so after a year spent essentially marking time he was enlisted on the sea officers' technical course at Portsmouth in 1957. This served as a prelude to his retirement from the service later in the same year at the comparatively young age of forty-two. 
Whatever the scale of his misdeeds may have been, Kerans remained a swashbuckling hero for many British people -- an individual who had shown great skill, resourcefulness, and tremendous courage in defying both the Yangtze and the communists in order to regain freedom for the 'Amethyst' and her crew. A popular version of events was filmed as 'Yangtse Incident' (1957), starring Richard Todd. As such, he remained much in demand in the public arena for some years to come. Approached by the Conservative Party, he was adopted as its candidate for the north-eastern constituency of the Hartlepools, which he unexpectedly won for the tories by 182 votes in the general election of 1959. Kerans's tenuous hold over this highly marginal constituency faltered as the Conservatives weakened in the early 1960s, and this contributed to his decision not to stand for re-election to parliament in October 1964. Only forty-nine, Kerans still had something to offer the country, but some of the lustre attached to his name had by then worn off -- the Yangtze incident had become but a pale memory for many, and the world had moved on. He eventually joined the civil service and served for eleven years on the Pensions Appeal Tribunal until he retired at sixty-five in 1980. He and his wife, Stephanie, continued to live at Oxted, Surrey, but his health steadily deteriorated and he died in the local hospital of cancer on 12 September 1985. 
Although John Simon Kerans was a reckless character with an unfortunate tendency to undermine his true potential, he was also an individual who turned his undoubted gifts to great advantage in the most perilous of circumstances. In doing so he achieved a heroic status and gave the British people something to cheer about amid the unrelieved dreariness and austerity of the cold war. 


@@@@@


doc= 63590


Syrett, Janet (1865-1943), writer and playwright, was born at 23 Harbour Street, Ramsgate, Kent, on 17 March 1865, the eldest of approximately eleven children born to Ernest Syrett (died 1906), linen draper, and Mary Ann, 'nee' Stembridge (died 1923). She was niece to the writer Grant Allen (1848-1899). Baptized Janet, she was always known as Netta. Until the age of eleven Netta Syrett was educated at home, but in 1877 she was sent to the North London Collegiate School for Girls with her sister Dora, where they boarded with the headmistress Frances Buss. Dora died of tuberculosis in 1881, and Netta left the school at the same time. She was not happy during her time there, and later in her memoir criticized Miss Buss for lacking sympathy with adolescents, and partially blamed her for her sister's death. Over the next few years Syrett learned German, completed the syllabus for the Cambridge higher local examination in one year, and in 1885 attended the Training College for Women Teachers at Cambridge. The family was comfortably off financially and her parents supported their daughters' choice of higher education and careers. When Syrett and four of her sisters were working or studying in London in the 1880s their father acquired a flat for them. Later, when Syrett was suffering from exhaustion and nerves, he funded an extended trip to Italy for her and her sister Nell. (After her father's death in 1906 the family's income was substantially reduced.) 
In 1886 Syrett accepted a post as English mistress at Swansea high school, where she stayed for two years. Grant Allen, who influenced her thinking for many years, introduced her to many prominent writers during this period. Her first published story appeared in 'Longman's' magazine (at Allen's instigation) while she was at Swansea. By 1890 she was the second mistress at the London Polytechnic School for Girls. Here she met Mabel Beardsley, who also taught at the school, and who introduced her to her brother Aubrey Beardsley's circle. Through these connections she contributed to the 'Yellow Book'. She also started writing plays for children. Written in the 'new realist' style, her first novel, 'Nobody's Fault' (1896), with a book jacket designed by Aubrey Beardsley, was published by John Lane in his 'Keynote' series. She brought out a children's book, 'Garden of Delight', illustrated by her sister Nell (also a contributor to the 'Yellow Book') in 1898. 
In 1902 Syrett's play 'The Finding of Nancy' won a national competition organized by the Playgoers' Club, and was performed as a charity matinee for the Actors' Benevolent Fund. The critics' response was enthusiastic, but the subject matter of the play -- a respectable single woman enters into a sexual relationship with a married man, whose wife is a dipsomaniac in an asylum -- cost Syrett not only a commercial run, but also her job as a private schoolmistress. In the same year she published the novel 'Roseanne', in which the heroine destroys a friend's marriage. In 1905 she edited the single volume of a putative juvenile periodical, the 'Dream Garden'. Contributors included fellow 'Yellow Book' authors and artists. Her subsequent novels, 'Women and Circumstance' (1906) and 'Olivia L. Carew' (1910), continued to explore women's concerns. Syrett's children's books included several collections of plays, such as 'Old Miracle Plays of England' (1911), also illustrated by her sister Nell. She had long been interested in establishing a children's theatre that would play during all the school holidays and offer a range of plays, not just the popular Christmas pantomimes. With her friend and fellow author Mabel Dearmer, she rented a theatre over the Christmas season of 1913. Unfortunately the expenses consumed any profit and the venture seems to have put the final seal on Syrett's bitterness about the theatre. 
Syrett wrote thirty-eight novels in all, twenty books for young people, and numerous plays and short stories. Other than the 'Yellow Book' she also contributed to many periodicals, including Charlotte M. Yonge's children's magazine, the 'Monthly Packet'. Her later novels reflect many of her own experiences: her attendance at North London Collegiate School for Girls in 'The Victorians' (1915), her career as a teacher in 'The God of Chance' (1920), her years in the 'Yellow Book' circle in 'Strange Marriage' (1930), and her travels in Italy and France. One of her most popular novels was 'Portrait of a Rebel' (1929), whose heroine was a leader in the women's suffrage movement (it was made into a film, 'A Woman Rebels', starring Katharine Hepburn, in 1936). Like other feminist authors of the New Woman fiction, Syrett rejected prescribed Victorian gender roles. Her heroines seek financial, psychological, and social independence, striving to combine personal aspirations with romance and domesticity. Her writing also addresses class issues, socialism and the labour movement, and educational reform. Having settled in Surrey, Netta Syrett died on 15 December 1943 of heart failure brought on by pneumonia at Roseacre Nursing Home, Priorsfield Road, Compton, Guildford; she was cremated at Woking on 20 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 63594


Lockhart, Sir James Haldane Stewart (1858-1937), colonial official and art collector, was born on 25 May 1858 in the ancestral home of Ardsheal in Argyll, Scotland, the sixth of the nine children of Miles Lockhart and his wife, Anna Rebecca Charlotte Stewart (died 1902), niece and heir of the last laird of Ardsheal. He was educated at home and then at a dame-school in the Isle of Man, before entering King William's College, Isle of Man (1868-72), and then George Watson's College, Edinburgh, where he distinguished himself as captain of both cricket and rugby, as well as becoming joint dux (the senior scholar) in 1874. He studied English and Greek at the University of Edinburgh, winning the gold medal for Greek in 1876. He left the university without graduating to join the Colonial Office as a Hong Kong cadet in 1878. 
Throughout 1879 Stewart Lockhart studied Chinese in London before beginning his duties in 1880 with two years language training undertaken in Canton (Guangzhou) and Hong Kong. In 1882 he took up his first official appointment in Hong Kong as clerk of councils and chief clerk in the colonial secretariat. After a few months he was moved to the registrar-general's office. In 1883 he was appointed superintendent of opium revenue, and five months later became assistant colonial secretary and assistant auditor-general. He also acted as registrar-general at times during 1884, 1885, and 1886, being appointed to the full post in 1887. 
The post allowed Stewart Lockhart to work directly with the Chinese community in the colony. Most Europeans in China did not mix with the Chinese socially but Stewart Lockhart had several important Chinese friends. He was fascinated by all things Chinese, made great efforts to become fluent in the language, and was quickly recognized as a Sinologist of ability. His interests extended to Chinese society and folklore, poetry, art, and numismatics. The longer he remained in the East, the more Confucianist he became in outlook. As registrar-general he promoted the Chinese power base in Hong Kong whenever he could, strengthening the authority of important Chinese societies such as the Tung Wah Hospital Group, the district watch committee, and the Po Leung Kuk. 
On 25 February 1889 Stewart Lockhart married Edith Louise Rider Hancock (1870-1950), the daughter of a Hong Kong bullion broker. Happily married for almost fifty years, they had three children: Charles (1889-1962), Mary (1894-1985) ['see 'Joel, Betty], and Margaret (1903-1936). It was at the time of his marriage that he formally adopted the double surname Stewart Lockhart. Edith was a loyal supporter, encouraging her husband to follow not only his scholarly pursuits but also to indulge in his love of sport. 
Having served successfully for eight years as registrar-general, Stewart Lockhart combined the post with that of colonial secretary from 1895. This made him the most important permanent official in the colony. He worked as tirelessly as ever and when in 1898 the colony was extended with the lease of the New Territories from China, it fell to Stewart Lockhart to organize the administration of the area and to delineate its boundaries. His belief that the territories would one day be returned to China and that existing Chinese systems should therefore be preserved whenever possible ensured that the New Territories retained their Chinese character and were never completely subsumed by British colonial traits. His work in the colony was rewarded in 1898 when he was appointed CMG. He also wrote articles on Chinese language and poetry and between 1895 and 1898 published three volumes on 'The Currency of the Farther East'. 
In 1902 Stewart Lockhart was appointed to be the first civil commissioner of Weihaiwei, a leased territory in Shandong province in north-east China. He was to remain there until he retired, despite the expectation by many that he would one day be appointed governor of Hong Kong. Weihaiwei was an economic and cultural backwater and Stewart Lockhart gradually became disillusioned with this post, despite his advancement to KCMG in 1908. He was rarely overworked during these years and spent much of his time researching aspects of Chinese culture, an interest he shared with his colleague Sir Reginald Johnston. He also amassed a considerable collection of Chinese coins and paintings. By 1915 his coin collection was of sufficient significance to merit a further publication by him, 'The Stewart Lockhart Collection of Chinese Copper Coins', which catalogued some of the thousands of coins he owned. His scholarship was acknowledged with an honorary LLD degree from the University of Hong Kong in 1918. 
In 1921 Stewart Lockhart retired to London where he served on several committees. He became a governor of the School of Oriental Studies at the University of London in 1925, was president of the London Highland Club in 1926-7, a member of the Universities China Committee from 1932, and a member of the honorary committee for the 1935 exhibition of Chinese art held in London. He continued to write book reviews and scholarly articles on a variety of Chinese-related subjects. He died at home, 6 Cresswell Gardens, London, on 26 February 1937. His remains were cremated in London and interred at St Adamnan's, Appin, Argyll. 
Before his death Stewart Lockhart gave his daughter Mary his collection of 600 Chinese paintings. In 1950 Mary also inherited her father's collection of coins, photographs, and papers. She gifted these to George Watson's College, Edinburgh, in 1967. The preservation of his collection has ensured that his historical importance in maintaining traditional Chinese values in Hong Kong and, most importantly, in the New Territories has not been forgotten. 


@@@@@


doc= 63595


Hollis, Thomas Brand (c.1719-1804), radical, was born Thomas Brand at The Hyde, near Ingatestone, Essex, the only son among three children of Timothy Brand (died 1734), who had retired from his mercer's business in London, and Sarah (died 1744), daughter of Thomas Michell of Rickling, Hertfordshire. He attended Brentwood and Felsted schools and, excluded from the English universities as a protestant dissenter, matriculated at Glasgow University, where Richard Baron was a friend; both were greatly influenced by Francis Hutcheson. His admission to the freedom of Glasgow in 1741 probably ended his academic career. Finding law uncongenial he declined a place at the Inner Temple in London the same year. He toured continental Europe in 1748-9 with Thomas Hollis, whom he had met at the inns of court, and largely alone in 1750-53. Thereafter he divided his time between London and The Hyde, which Sir William Chambers remodelled in 1761. He inherited almost all Hollis's property in 1774, adding his benefactor's surname to his own. The inheritance strengthened Brand Hollis's already comfortable patrimony. 
Brand Hollis's connections, principally among dissenters, political radicals, and in the intellectual and charitable world, steadily expanded after returning to London. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1756 and of the Society of Antiquaries in 1757, became a member of the Academy of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce two years later, and was appointed a governor of Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals in 1754 and 1755 respectively. Partly through friendships with liberal Anglicans such as Francis Blackburne and John Jebb he became a Unitarian. He supported Theophilus Lindsey's Essex Street Chapel and contributed to the dissenters' college at Hackney from its foundation in 1786 to its demise ten years later. Brand Hollis was especially concerned for religious liberty and supported the 1787, 1789, and 1790 campaigns against the 'Test and Corporation Acts', but was strongly anti-Catholic; contrary to Caroline Robbins he published nothing. 
Above all, Brand Hollis advocated political reform. His first foray ended in humiliating disaster. Hoping to promote the cause in parliament he purchased the rotten borough of Hindon, Wiltshire, at the 1774 general election, but the election was challenged. He was convicted of corruption, unseated, fined 1000 marks, and gaoled for six months. Undeterred, he joined the parliamentary reform movement precipitated by the American War of Independence. He was a founder member of the Society for Constitutional Information in 1780, and as a member of the Essex and Dorset county associations collaborated with Christopher Wyvill of Yorkshire, whose modest programme of reform at the St Alban's tavern conference in March 1780 he supported without success. Brand Hollis was especially influential on the Westminster Committee, which appointed him and Jebb to a subcommittee authorized to consider general electoral matters. Using arguments drawn from James Burgh and other Commonwealthsmen, they persuaded it to recommend a complete recasting of the representative system, including annual parliaments, equal electoral districts, universal male suffrage, and the ballot. Such advanced proposals also came to nothing and possibly damaged the cause of moderate reform. Somewhat eccentrically he considered the City of London as the epitome of the English constitution, insisting that its officers were ultimately dependent on popular choice and declaring that its frequent elections provided a balance against usurpation and tyranny. 
In 1788 Brand Hollis was a founder member of the Revolution Society and a steward at its commemoration of the revolution of 1688, arguing that another revolution in Britain could be averted by following its principles. Initially Brand Hollis approved of the French Revolution, but was horrified by its later course and feared a similar catastrophe in England. He denied assisting publication of Thomas Paine's 'Rights of Man' in 1791 and giving him money the following year. Withdrawing from the Society for Constitutional Information in 1791 after its capture by more extreme reformers, but alarmed by ministerial attacks on free expression, he joined the moderate Society of the Friends of the People, and the Society of Friends to the Liberty of the Press in 1792-3. 
Brand Hollis deeply admired America. Deploring government policy towards the colonies before the revolution, he condemned the use of force and feared that both English and American liberty were at risk. He named trees at The Hyde after George Washington and other Americans and welcomed independence. Afterwards he became a close friend of John Adams, the first American minister in London, and his family. He also met and corresponded with several other Americans, including Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson, whose Virginia statute for religious freedom he printed in the 'Chelmsford Gazette' during the repeal campaign. A benefactor to New England institutions, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1783 and awarded an honorary doctorate by Harvard College in 1787. He greatly admired the United States constitution, which he reprinted. 
Brand Hollis was said to possess every characteristic of a gentleman. Mild in disposition, amiable in temper but somewhat naive, he was averse to business of any kind, including the minutiae of his own affairs; his knowledge of virtu and antiquities was considered particularly chaste and correct. His health deteriorated from 1800 onward, and he left London the following year. He died on 9 September 1804 at The Hyde, and was buried at Ingatestone parish church, leaving the bulk of his property to John Disney, his friend since the 1780s. His sister Elizabeth kept house for him; he never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 63596


Barlow, Joel (1754-1812), poet and diplomatist, was born on 24 March 1754 at Redding, Connecticut, the fourth child of Samuel Barlow, farmer, and his second wife, Esther Hull. For several generations the Barlow family maintained a reputation as respectable farmers in America, and Joel was to benefit from a good education which progressed from Moor's Indian Charity School at Hanover, New Hampshire, and Dartmouth College in 1773, to Yale University the following year. Within twelve months he had published his first poem, though a copy does not exist, and in 1776 he joined the Connecticut militia to take part in the battle of Long Island. Following his graduation on 9 September 1778 Barlow was employed briefly as a schoolteacher, but he returned to Yale to complete a master's degree before becoming a chaplain in 1780 of the 3rd Massachusetts brigade. Preaching, too, was only temporary and, following his marriage to Ruth Baldwin (died 1818) on 26 January 1781, with whom he remained until his death, Barlow moved to Hartford, Connecticut, to pursue his literary ambitions. The result was the publication of 'A Poem, Spoken at the Public Commencement of Yale College' (1781) and 'An Elegy on the Late Honorable Titus Hosmer, Esq.' (1782). 
In 1784 Barlow joined Elisha Babcock in editing the 'American Mercury', an association which gave Barlow the chance to publish an edition of 'Doctor Watts' Imitation of the Psalms of David' (1785). This partnership, however, was to dissolve by December 1785 and Barlow began studying law, leading to his admission to the bar in April 1786. With his career momentarily settled, Barlow's literary reputation began to flourish with his satirical 'Anarchiad' (published in twelve instalments between October 1786 and September 1787 in the 'New Haven Gazette and Connecticut Magazine') and the publication of 'An Oration, Delivered at the North Church of Hartford' (1787). It was, however, the release of his long-awaited poem 'The Vision of Columbus' (1787) which seemed to justify a reference in 1788 to Barlow as 'the Poet Laureate of all America' (Ford, 26). 
In spite of his rising reputation as a poet, Barlow was less successful as a lawyer, and on 25 May 1788 he departed for France as an agent selling land for a group known as Scioto Associates. Following a brief trip to England, Barlow returned to Paris in time to witness the fall of the Bastille and to establish a company in partnership with William Playfair, a Scottish scientist, called La Compagnie du Scioto. This venture soon came to an end and Barlow was left debt-ridden and seeking refuge in England in 1790. One month before joining the London Society for Constitutional Information in March 1792, Barlow contributed to the prevailing pamphlet debate on the French Revolution through the first part of his radical 'Advice to the Privileged Orders' (1792). He followed this with a satirical attack on English conservatism in a poem called 'The Conspiracy of Kings' (1792) and compiled 'A Letter to the National Convention of France' (1792), which eventually saw him bestowed the dubious honour of French citizenship in February 1793. 
With the spurious growth of his radical reputation came the real threat of prosecution in late 1792, at which time Barlow decided to move to France, from where he completed the second part of his 'Advice to the Privileged Orders' (1793). As a delegate of the Society for Constitutional Information, he travelled with John Frost to deliver a congratulatory address to the National Convention on 28 November 1792. Barlow then involved himself in French politics, unsuccessfully campaigning for election to the convention from Savoy and urging the inhabitants in the nearby Italian region of Piedmont, through a pamphlet originally published in French and Italian and translated as 'A Letter, Addressed to the People of Piedmont' (1793), to welcome French forces. From politics Barlow turned his attention to personal ventures and left for Hamburg in the spring of 1794, where he stayed for a year amassing a fortune as an importer. On his return to Paris, Barlow was appointed consul to Algiers, and until 1805 he remained in Europe pursuing his business and political interests and compiling such works as the poem 'Hasty Puddy' (1796), 'The Political Writings of Joel Barlow' (1796), and 'Letters from Paris, to the Citizens of the United States of America' (1800), and translating Brissot's 'Nouveau voyage' as 'The Commerce of America with Europe' (1794) and Volney's original work as 'Ruins' (1802). 
By August 1805 Barlow had returned to America, settling first in Washington and then, in 1807, moving to a mansion situated on the banks of Rock Creek between Georgetown and Washington. His arrival in the United States coincided with his ideas for establishing an institute of education that emphasized both research and teaching, set out in a 'Prospectus of a National Institution to be Established in the United States' (1805). It was, however, the publication of 'The Columbiad' (1807), a revised edition of his earlier epic poem 'The Vision of Columbus', which was the highlight of Barlow's literary efforts in his final years. Indeed, following the release of this work he spent most of his time between 1807 and 1811 working unofficially as an adviser to Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, his sporadic attention to prose and verse in these years exemplified by such productions as 'Letter to Henry Gregoire' (1809) and 'A Review of Robert Smith's Address to the People of the United States' (1811). Barlow also had intentions of publishing a two-volume collection of his writings in 1811, but he was appointed as an envoy to France to negotiate trade relations with Napoleon. For over twelve months the French showed little interest in American offers, but in October 1812 Barlow was invited to Vilna, Poland, to finalize a treaty arrangement. As a result he was caught in Napoleon's retreat from Russia, and despite reaching Warsaw safely Barlow died on 24 December 1812 of pneumonia in the village of Zarnowiec, near Cracow. His body remains buried in an obscure grave in Poland. 


@@@@@


doc= 63597


O'Coigly, James (1761-1798), Irish nationalist and Roman Catholic priest, was born in August 1761 at Castleraw, Kilmore, co. Armagh, the second son of James Coigley, farmer, and Louisa, 'nee' Donnelly. His maternal ancestors, the O'Donnellys of co. Tyrone, were a landed Jacobite family who suffered grievous losses at the battle of the Boyne (July 1690). His father's family had also been heavily engaged in the Williamite wars, but afterwards recovered their economic stability and were engaged in farming and weaving in the 1760s. James O'Coigly was educated in Dundalk's grammar school, co. Louth, and ordained in the Roman Catholic church in January 1785. He travelled in June of that year to Paris for further studies at the College des Lombards, where his leadership talents were displayed at the head of a student body agitating for better conditions. Although reputedly involved in the storming of the Bastille in July 1789 with fellow Irish student James Blackwell, the anti-clerical character of the French Revolution obliged him to flee to Ireland from Dieppe in October. On returning to Armagh, O'Coigly found himself in the middle of worsening civil strife between the Ulster Presbyterian Peep o' Day Boys and the Catholic defenders. He is believed to have written the anonymous pamphlet 'An Impartial Account of the Late Disturbances in the County of Armagh' which was published in Dublin in 1792. 
During the early 1790s, while based in a Louth parish and chaplain to Dundalk prison, O'Coigly became deeply engaged in radical politics and an influential supporter of the defenders. He was probably a leading member of the group and was also associated with the United Irishmen. In 1791-3 he was one of several activists who attempted to harness the paramilitary manpower of the defenders to the more sophisticated revolutionary politics of the United Irishmen. He visited Randalstown, Dungiven, Newtownlimavady, Magilligan, Maghera, and other Ulster centres during this time and liaised with radical Belfast Presbyterians who formed the backbone of the United Irishmen in the north. O'Coigly allegedly introduced Dublin radical James Napper Tandy to the Louth defenders, a meeting which obliged Napper Tandy to flee to Philadelphia. More certain is that O'Coigly's cousin led the defenders at the battle of the Diamond in September 1795 which presaged the formation of the Orange order. Other close family members were prominent in Armagh, co. Tyrone, and Louth defenderism, and the homes of his father and brother were singled out for attack by loyalists. 
O'Coigly's stature in the United Irishmen rose in 1796 owing to arrests, the society's incorporation of the defender movement, and the emergence of the Lord Edward Fitzgerald clique to which he was attached. In June 1797 O'Coigly travelled to Manchester and London to help arrange co-operation between French-backed English, Scottish, and Irish revolutionaries. Having conferred with Colonel Edward Despard and Thomas Evans of the London Corresponding Society, he went from Hamburg to Paris with fellow United Irish delegate the Revd Arthur McMahon, where they fell in with Tandy's circle. On reporting to Valentine Lawless and other London contacts in December 1797 and to Fitzgerald in Dublin in January 1798, O'Coigly prepared to return to France in company with Arthur O'Connor, John Binns, John Allen, and John O'Leary. 
The party were arrested on 28 February 1798 at Margate when seeking passage to France and high treason proceedings commenced. O'Coigly completed a defiant pamphlet when in Maidstone gaol on 30 April and contemptuously ate an orange when his trial began on 21 May. O'Coigly, variously referred to as Coigly, O'Coigley, and Quigley, was the most incriminated of all the defendants owing to documents recovered on his person. He was convicted of high treason and hanged at Pennenden Heath, near Maidstone, Kent, on 7 June 1798. In July 1900 Coigly was commemorated by a window in the Roman Catholic church of St Francis of Assisi in Maidstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 63598


Gales, Joseph (1761-1841), newspaper proprietor and radical, was born at Eckington in north Derbyshire on 4 February 1761, the eldest son of Thomas Gales, a village school teacher. His early years were spent assisting his father, after which he was apprenticed to a printer in Manchester. He absconded after he was attacked by his master's wife and returned to Eckington. In the early 1780s he completed his apprenticeship with James Tomlinson, a printer of Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire. On 4 May 1784 he married Winifred Marshall (1761-1839), novelist and political writer, who was a daughter of John Marshall, an innkeeper of Newark and a cousin of Lord Melbourne. His lifelong companion, Winifred was a woman of considerable ability and learning who studied Latin as a child and by the age of fourteen had read the works of Shakespeare, Milton, and Adam Smith. In adult life she contributed passages of political analysis to her husband's newspaper, together with commentaries for Gales's edition of the 'Bible' and a novel, 'Lady Emma Melcombe'. The marriage produced eight children, five daughters and three sons. 
Following his apprenticeship Gales moved to Sheffield, where in 1787 he established a reformist weekly, the 'Sheffield Register' (first number 8 June), in partnership with David Martin. Like many publishers of that era, Gales was also a printer, stationer, auctioneer, and insurance agent. The valuation on his own property in the Hartshead area of the town shows that he possessed buildings and equipment worth $500 in 1787. 
As an editor Gales pursued a reformist agenda for the abolition of slavery, educational improvements, canal building, and, especially, the removal of legal constraints on religious dissenters. Gales was himself a Unitarian and, in line with his religious beliefs, regularly condemned the 'evils' of popular recreations such as bull-baiting, cock-fighting, and boxing. Under his editorship the 'Register' became the voice of the Sheffield Society for Constitutional Information, an artisan-based political club founded in late 1791 and comprising up to 2000 members. Gales held no office in the organization but was a founder member who once chaired one of its larger public meetings in 1793. Like many similar radical clubs, the Sheffield society advocated a radical extension of the franchise as a means to secure political reform. Such was the support for reform in Sheffield that demonstrations organized by the society could attract 5000-10,000 supporters, while the 'Register', with its innovative coverage of local news and reprints of the writings of liberal thinkers, often sold 2000 copies of individual issues during the early 1790s. Gales also published the first cheap edition of Thomas Paine's 'Rights of Man' (6 died) and a short-lived fortnightly periodical, 'The Patriot' (1792-4), which included political essays, extracts from reformers such as Paine, Joseph Priestley, and James Mackintosh, and correspondence with and the addresses of other reform societies. Gales himself had links to these wider circles of dissenters and political radicals including Priestley and Thomas Walker of Manchester. He may also have met Paine during the latter's visit to Yorkshire in the late 1780s. In March 1792 Gales, along with several other members of the Sheffield society, was elected an associate member of the London-based Society for Constitutional Information. 
Gales's profile also brought him to the attention of Pitt's government, especially during the period of state trials in 1794. At the start of that year he was accused of writing an anonymous letter to Thomas Hardy, secretary of the London Corresponding Society, which discussed the possibility of distributing arms (pikes) to supporters of political reform. Facing arrest, Gales left Sheffield for Derby and thereafter left the country. Winifred Gales was left behind to arrange the sale of the 'Sheffield Register' to his former assistant, James Montgomery, before joining her husband in exile. 
The family went first to Hamburg in Germany before sailing for America. While in Europe, Gales studied several languages and learned shorthand, a skill he used to good effect in later political journalism. After arriving in Philadelphia in 1795, he worked first as a printer, reporter, and bookkeeper before starting his own paper, the 'Independent Gazetteer'. Following advice from members of the Republican Party, he re-established himself in North Carolina and in October 1799 started the 'Raleigh Register'. Through this publication he continued his political career as a liberal reformer in the Jeffersonian mould. He served as the mayor of Raleigh for nineteen years and was state printer for several decades. An abolitionist who owned slaves, Gales also promoted the cause of Unitarianism as well as publishing his newspaper until retirement in 1832. His son Weston continued as editor and maintained the family's publishing interest in the 'Congressional Record'. 
Gales lived for several years in Washington with his eldest son, also Joseph, who was a journalist and was mayor of Washington between 1827 and 1830. The elder Joseph Gales died in Raleigh, North Carolina, on 21 July 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 63599


Margarot, Maurice (1745-1815), radical, was born of foreign parentage in Devon. His father, normally resident in London, was a merchant dealing principally in wine from France and Portugal. Educated at the University of Geneva, Margarot entered the family business, travelling in the West Indies and Portugal, where he owned some property. It is possible that he had developed some sympathy for radical politics through his father, who is reported to have made his home a centre for radical Wilkites during the 1760s and 1770s. At the beginning of the French Revolution, Margarot was resident in France; when he returned to England early in 1792 he joined the London Corresponding Society (LCS). Margarot's education and undoubted ability ensured his prominence, and, although he expressed some initial nervousness that too public an involvement with the society might damage his business with London merchants, on 3 May 1792 he was elected chairman of the society's general committee. As chairman he shared the administrative load with Thomas Hardy, the secretary, and while Margarot appears to have been the author of some of the significant addresses, the two signed jointly the more important correspondence, addresses, and proclamations. At a general meeting held in the open air at Chalk Farm on 24 October 1793, Margarot was chosen, together with Joseph Gerrald, to represent the society at the Edinburgh convention. The United Political Societies of Norwich also selected Margarot as their representative and agreed to share his expenses with the LCS. 
The radicals in Scotland were reeling from the severe sentences imposed on two of their principal spokesmen, Thomas Muir and the Revd Thomas Fyshe Palmer. The Edinburgh convention had already met, briefly, before Margarot and Gerrald arrived, accompanied by another two delegates from different English societies. It reconvened to discuss proposals for constitutional and parliamentary reform, and the proceedings were dominated by Margarot, Gerrald, and the Scot William Skirving, who acted as secretary. On 6 December 1793 the Edinburgh authorities decided to close the proceedings; Margarot, Gerrald, and Skirving were charged with sedition. Recognizing that there was little chance of acquittal Margarot and Gerrald used their trials, in the following January and March, to express their political ideology. They were duly sentenced to fourteen years' transportation. 
Awaiting transportation in Portsmouth, Margarot sought to settle business matters and arrange his wife's passage to New South Wales as a free settler. He also continued to correspond with popular radicals. One particular letter, to the societies in Norwich, speaking of a possible French landing, urged his readers not to relax 'in the Cause of Freedom'. It was subsequently reprinted, with emphasis, in the second report from the House of Commons committee of secrecy investigating treasonable activity later in the year. 
The 'Surprize', the transport taking Margarot and the other 'Scottish Martyrs' (Muir, Palmer, Gerrald, and Skirving) to New South Wales, set sail on 2 May 1794. While at sea there was trouble on board; a group of convicts, including Palmer and Skirving, allegedly sought to kill the captain and crew and take over the ship. Palmer's account, 'A Narrative of the Sufferings of T. F. Palmer and W. Skirving' (1797), accused Margarot of exposing the plot to the captain and thus being the cause of the brutal punishment inflicted on Palmer and Skirving. Many contemporaries accepted this version, though Francis Place, investigating the charges after Margarot's death, concluded that the events were not as Palmer described; more recent research, which has highlighted Margarot's continuing radicalism, tends to confirm Place's opinion. He may have been vain and financially lax, but there seems little reason to doubt his genuine passion for reform and social justice. 
As a political prisoner in New South Wales, Margarot was allowed considerable liberty. He and his wife took a small cottage with a garden, and from here he commenced a campaign against the profiteering in the colony by military officers and certain privileged individuals, notably Palmer, who had invested in a stock of rum before his transportation. Margarot began a lengthy correspondence with the colonial authorities in London outlining various proposals for reform, but no action was taken. Possibly he was involved in the convict rebellion of 1804. The following year he was moved from Botany Bay to Norfolk Island, thence to Van Diemen's Land, and then in 1806 to Newcastle. He eventually returned to England in mid-1810, protesting that his criticism of the corruption in the colony had led to his period of transportation being extended by two years. 
Back in England, and in financial difficulties, Margarot demanded that the Home Office return money bills left in the care of Thomas Hardy which had been impounded when the latter was arrested for treason in 1794. This demand was successful, but his claims for compensation for the additional two years' exile, for the fact that his wife had not been treated as a free settler, and for the seizure of his private papers in Australia were dismissed. In 1812 he gave evidence on corruption to the House of Commons inquiry into the transportation system. At the same time he continued his enthusiasm for reform, urging a restoration of the Saxon constitution, the curtailing of commerce, and a redistribution of land with a plot for every family. He spent the summers of 1813 and 1814 in France endeavouring to re-establish his old business. He died in London on 11 November 1815 and was buried in St Pancras's churchyard. Thomas Hardy and other members of the defunct LCS organized a subscription for his widow which grew to nearly $200. 


@@@@@


doc= 63600


Mealmaker, George (1768-1808), weaver and radical, was born on 10 February 1768, the son of John Mealmaker, weaver, of the Seagate, Dundee, and Alison Auchinleck. Of Mealmaker's early life and education there is no direct information. Similarly, it is possible only to speculate about the sources of his political radicalism. A description of him from 1793 as 'a common unlettered weaver' reflects more the patronizing assumptions of the writer than reality. Dundee was an important centre for the linen trade in Scotland by the later eighteenth century, and the weavers were an increasingly prosperous, literate, and culturally aware part of the Scottish labouring classes. That Mealmaker was reasonably successful and competent as a weaver is suggested by his later important contribution to an attempt to establish a weaving industry in New South Wales. (He was also described as a 'manufacturer' in the local parish register, OPR S3 282/9, p. 214.) The other roots of his radicalism may have been religious. Dundee and its environs were relatively unusual in Scotland in this period in that their radicalism was fed by strong religious currents. Local ministers who made an important contribution to radicalism included Thomas Fysshe Palmer, the Unitarian. Mealmaker was himself a member of the Relief congregation, and was almost certainly the author of a radical sermon from Dundee published in London in 1795. This sermon drew on, and gave violent expression to, a radical and apocalyptic tradition in Presbyterianism which resurfaced under the impact of the French Revolution among some (but far from all) Secessionist and Independent congregations. In addition, in November 1793, as the Dundee delegate to the third Edinburgh convention of Scottish radicals, he strongly supported an unsuccessful motion for a general fast and day of humiliation. His speech was lengthy and described by one observer as in the style of a 'Tent Sermon' (Brims, 58). 
Mealmaker's role in radical politics in Scotland in the 1790s was that of a committed and articulate activist. He joined the local Friends of Liberty society at its inception in early 1791. In 1793 he was the author of a broadsheet entitled 'Appeal to their Fellow Citizens', issued by the society, which sought to exploit the hardship and downturn in trade caused by the outbreak of war against revolutionary France to draw support to the radicals. This broadsheet, which came very close to accusing the government of tyrannical intentions and advocated democratic elections, was the tool which the ministry used to convict and transport Palmer, as a leading radical of some social standing, for sedition in September 1793. Mealmaker also became caught up in the aftermath of the exposure of the Watt plot to seize Edinburgh Castle of the following spring, having his house raided and papers seized, and, after fleeing to Arbroath, being arrested and taken to the Scottish capital for examination. On this occasion he was fortunate, the authorities believing his story that he knew nothing of Watt's plans for an armed rebellion. 
Mealmaker's career thereafter mirrors the course described by Scottish radicalism in the mid- to later 1790s. In 1795 he was responsible for the re-establishment of the Dundee Friends of Liberty, which had ceased to meet following the severe repression of 1793-4. He was also, from 1796, an early member of the clandestine Society of United Scotsmen. Mealmaker's role in this society was an important one, especially among the Fife and Forfarshire weaving villages. Henry Dundas was to describe him as one of the 'Ringleaders' of the society (NA Scot., RH 2/4/83, fols. 21-2). He was also the United Scotsmen's principal ideologue, writing and causing to be published and circulated 'The Moral and Political Catechism of Man'. It was also under his direction that the 'Resolutions and Constitution of the Society of Scotsmen', which followed closely those of the more numerous and menacing United Irishmen, were printed and distributed in the counties of Forfar, Perth, and Fife. A meeting of four delegates of the society from Cupar, Kirriemuir, Brechin, and Coupar Angus was held in his house in 1797, and Mealmaker was appointed to represent them on a national committee. From the fragmentary and unilluminating sources which survive, it appears that he also played an important strategic role in a network of radical printers, booksellers, and activists which kept the flame of radicalism and radical political argument alive in Scotland in difficult and often dispiriting conditions in the later 1790s. 
Arrested in November 1797, Mealmaker was the principal victim of the inevitable wave of repression which followed the authorities' growing concern, fuelled by fears that the violence and disorders in Ireland would spread to Scotland, over the activities and threat posed by the United Scotsmen. Refusing to reveal anything significant to the authorities, protesting his innocence of any ambition other than the pursuit of parliamentary reform, and before a hostile court, Mealmaker was found guilty in 1798 of sedition and administering illegal oaths under legislation passed in 1797. He was sentenced to fourteen years' transportation. The conviction brought to an end Mealmaker's brief married life with Marjory Thoms (died 1843?), a Dundee woman whom he had married on 23 November 1795 and with whom he had two daughters. 
In New South Wales, Mealmaker may have made contact with fellow radical 'martyrs', including Palmer. On two occasions in the eighteen months after his arrival, he clashed with the authorities. In 1803, however, he received a conditional pardon, and became involved, as manager, of an attempt to develop a weaving industry in the colony at Parramatta. The attempt ended in failure when the factory was burnt down in 1807. Mealmaker died at Parramatta on 30 March the following year in poverty -- he did not leave any property or money to pay his funeral expenses. His end was a sad one, caused, apparently, by him suffocating by 'drinking spirits'. From 1805 communication between Mealmaker and his wife appears to have lapsed. She was to learn of her husband's death only in 1811. 
Mealmaker's committed and principled radicalism was forged through a lively tradition of discussion and self-education which flourished among some skilled sections of the labouring classes in the 1790s. His political commitment started amid his books and papers -- he described these on one occasion as the 'labour of years, which I accounted more valuable than their weight in gold' (Roe, 286) -- and he looked to political education as the best means of effecting reform. His political ideology and outlook, which were formed from an amalgam of Paineite republicanism, radical Presbyterianism, and a commitment to religious freedom and democratic parliamentary reform, distanced him from the mainstream of Scottish radicalism of this period, which was more moderate in tone and aims. What changed during the 1790s, and what shaped his political activities, was not so much his stance but the political conditions and possibilities confronting radicals. 


@@@@@


doc= 63601


Preston, Thomas (1774-1850), radical, was born in London, the son of unknown parents. His father died when he was in his infancy, and when his mother remarried the baby was given to a nurse to look after; at the age of six months an accident left him with a limp for the rest of his life. After a limited education he was apprenticed in turn to a silversmith and a shoemaker, and then spent years tramping around England and Ireland, in Cork leading a successful shoemakers' strike. On returning to London, probably in 1794, he joined the London Corresponding Society, but during Pitt's repression in the mid-1790s he went to Chatham to avoid imprisonment. After a trip to the West Indies he settled again in London and married a widow with three children, details of whom are unknown; they had four children, at least three girls reaching adulthood. The couple ran three shoemaker's shops, employing forty people, and prospered. But in 1807 Preston's wife left him for another man, his business soon failed, and he fell into poverty. A supporter of Sir Francis Burdett in 1810, he was active in several literary and debating clubs, and in 1811 became a supporter of Thomas Spence and his advocacy of common ownership of land. After Spence's death in 1814 his followers formed a regular society of Spencean Philanthropists, with Preston a leading member and known as the Bishop because of his use of the 'Bible' in support of Spenceanism. In 1816 the Spenceans tried to capitalize on the widespread poverty and unemployment in London. Preston joined a society of artisans campaigning for limitations on the use of machinery, not from any agreement with their aims but in the hope of raising an agitation, and as their secretary it was he who called the famous meeting at Spa Fields to petition parliament and the prince regent for relief. The Spenceans James Watson and Arthur Thistlewood played the leading role in organizing this meeting, and Preston organized support among the unemployed silk-weavers of Spitalfields. At the second Spa Fields meeting on 2 December 1816, Thistlewood, Preston, and Watson's son, also James, tried to start an armed rising and led a section of the crowd into the City, where they were soon dispersed. Preston was among those arrested and one of the four charged with high treason, but the acquittal of Watson after the unmasking of an agent provocateur, John Castles, led to the dropping of the charges against the rest. 
For the next three years Watson, Thistlewood, and Preston were the leaders of the London group of ultra-radicals and revolutionaries, with Preston the most committed Spencean, although while Watson favoured open mass action the other two preferred secret conspiracies. Late in 1819 they were the leaders of what became known as the Cato Street conspiracy to assassinate members of the government, the inner circle meeting at Preston's house, but he avoided prosecution when the attempt failed in February 1820 ['see 'Cato Street conspirators (act. 1820)]. 
Preston was not very active in the 1820s, but remained a member of a radical group in the East End of London, and in the early 1830s became a leading figure in the ultra-radical National Union of the Working Classes. At some point he also remarried and had a son. In 1834, in distressed circumstances and embittered, he published a plan, drawing on proposals by Spence and Thomas Paine, for state pensions for the aged, widows, the sick, and orphans, funded by a special tax and death duties (including appropriation of land as the means to ultimate national ownership of all land). In the later 1830s he was an associate of veteran Spenceans and new radical figures such as Julian Harney, and in the 1840s was an occasional lecturer at Chartist meetings. He also published further pamphlets on his plan for state pensions, but none of these have survived. He benefited from relief funds raised by radicals, but died in London on 1 June 1850 in extreme poverty. A collection financed his burial at Bunhill Fields cemetery; the funeral, attended by over 400 people, was led by Harney and Luke Hansard. He was survived by his second wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 63602


Richter, John (1769?-1830), radical and businessman, was probably the John Richter born on 22 July 1769 (perhaps at 40 Great Newport Street, Soho) and baptized on 27 August at St Anne's, Soho, the eldest son of John Augustus Richter, artist and engraver, originally from Dresden, Saxony, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Haig. If so, Henry James Richter (1772-1857) was a younger brother, as was Thomas Richter ('b'. 1777), later a director of the Phoenix Life Insurance Company; the identification is complicated by the existence of another brother, also named John ('b'. 1775). 
The radical John Richter's first indisputable appearance in documentary records is as a 21-year-old clerk in a London banking house in 1790. His is one of several tantalizingly shadowy careers in the radical politics of London in the decades between the French Revolution and the 'Great Reform Act' of 1832. Like many of his associates, Richter lacked the means to give his political activities the time he might have wished, or to achieve the public prominence won by those more aristocratic scions who dabbled in metropolitan reform politics. He joined the London Corresponding Society (LCS) in 1792 and became an associate member of the Society for Constitutional Information. Both organizations were dedicated to the principles of an extended suffrage and an incorruptible constitution. In May 1794 he was arrested for high treason along with other leading members of the LCS, but was released without trial after Thomas Hardy and John Horne Tooke were acquitted. 
At a public meeting of the LCS on 7 December 1795 Richter proposed a petition to the king for the defence of popular liberties. During the period of repression that followed, when most radicals retreated from open political activity, he presumably continued to make his living as an accountant or bank clerk, re-emerging onto the political scene as a member of the Westminster election committee in 1807. He and Francis Place together wrote an account of the 1807 election in which Sir Francis Burdett was returned as radical MP for Westminster. In 1808 he was a speaker at the Crown and Anchor tavern where the radicals celebrated the anniversary of their victory, and later in the same year he drafted public resolutions in support of Spanish independence: 'a people who will fight for their liberties are alone worthy of the friendship of a free nation' (Hone, 167). 
Consistently involved in the organizing committee of Westminster radicals chaired by the glass manufacturer Samuel Brooks, Richter took a stern line with Burdett's fellow MP Lord Cochrane, exacting pledges on his radical principles in return for the committee's support at the election of 1812. In addition to fighting for constitutional freedoms at home and abroad, Richter's own practical version of radicalism led him to support two models of self-help and 'laissez-faire' in which the Westminster election committee worked with others to achieve advancement for working people. One of these was the West London Lancasterian Association, which promoted schooling for artisans' children on the principles of Joseph Lancaster, and with which Jeremy Bentham was briefly associated. The association foundered on the issue, among other things, of whether or not to charge fees; the radicals' line being (as recounted by Francis Place) that any form of charity was demeaning, and therefore parents, however poor, ought to pay moderate fees. Richter also acted as secretary to the Association of Master Manufacturers, chaired by a fellow member of the Westminster committee who had also belonged to the LCS, Alexander Galloway. In 1814 they won abolition of the Elizabethan 'Statute of Artificers', which had perpetuated protection for skilled artisans in a period when industrial change was making such restrictions onerous to manufacturers. There is no evidence to show that Richter later became involved in the campaign of the mid-1820s to repeal the 'Combination Acts', which bore much more oppressively on workers' freedoms, but the principles he espoused in the earlier campaign were consistent with an overall guiding rule among his closest associates: to seek legislative freedoms in the workplace as much as in the political and constitutional arena. 
By 1816 Richter appears to have been working as company secretary to a sugar refining company: a calling which left him little time for politics, but apparently was not remunerative. At his death in 1830 he left his widow, details of whom are unknown, in distressed circumstances, and Place and Galloway opened a subscription on her behalf. 


@@@@@


doc= 63603


Walker, Thomas (1749-1817), cotton merchant and political reformer, was born on 3 April 1749 in Manchester, the eldest son of a local merchant who originally lived in Bristol. Although very little is known of Walker's childhood, it was during these formative years that he became acquainted with the writings of Rousseau, Hume, Locke, and Voltaire. It was, however, James Burgh, the radical schoolmaster, and in particular his treatise 'Political Disquisitions', that was to have the most important influence on Walker's mind during these early years. Indeed, Walker recalled in 1794 that Burgh was 'an able writer, endeared to me, as the instructor of my youth' (Walker, 5). In 1775 Walker married Hannah Shore, with whom he had three daughters and three sons, including Thomas Walker (1784-1836), police magistrate and author. 
Through his marriage, Walker came to know the Unitarian gentleman of Derbyshire Samuel Shore, his wife's brother, who, as an associate of Christopher Wyvill and a member of the Society of the Friends of the People, perhaps first aroused Walker's interest in reform politics. Walker quickly became a prominent figure in Manchester's community and politics, serving as an adviser on numerous local boards during the 1770s and 1780s, including that of the Manchester Infirmary, where the dissenter Dr Thomas Percival was a physician. As an outspoken protectionist, Walker earned national fame in 1785 when he successfully led a local campaign to oppose the government's introduction a year earlier of a fustian tax. That same year he founded the General Chamber of Manufactures, incorporated to fight William Pitt's Irish trade arrangements, and in 1786 he was a vocal opponent of the Eden-Vergennes treaty. By the end of 1787 Walker had become chairman of a Manchester anti-slavery committee, holding the post for several years. These efforts endeared him to many leading Foxite whigs, especially the earl of Derby, who became godfather to one of Walker's sons and who sponsored Walker's election to the Whig Club in 1788. Walker was also associated with the Manchester Revolution Society and on 1 February 1788 he became a member of the Society for Constitutional Information. 
Following the outbreak of the French Revolution Walker was elected a steward of the London Revolution Society, and on 22 January 1790 he joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, founded by Thomas Percival, but resigned at the end of 1791 after the society refused to offer their sympathies to Priestley following the riots of July. In October 1790 Walker became borough reeve of Manchester, a position he found beneficial in the early days of the Manchester Constitutional Society, which he helped organize on 5 October 1790. With Walker as president of the society moderate parliamentary reform was its primary objective, and, despite the Anglican persuasion of its founder, the society advocated equality for dissenters in the light of ongoing and increasing repression and intimidation. 
Walker's political activities attracted conservative attention and loyalist reprisal. In November 1790 at a dinner meeting of the Manchester Revolution Society, Walker clashed with William Roberts, a tory lawyer and American emigre, who subsequently published a handbill that led to charges of libel being laid, albeit unsuccessfully, against Walker. Within a year he had helped establish the 'Manchester Herald' and his house became a rendezvous for reformers after they were excluded from local taverns and public houses. On 11 December 1792, however, Walker's house on South Parade and the offices of the 'Manchester Herald' were besieged by a 'church and king' mob. By June 1793 the Manchester Constitutional Society was dissolved when legal action commenced against him. Manchester authorities and loyalists had bribed an Irish weaver and local radical named Thomas Dunn to give false evidence against Walker and, despite failing to indict him of high treason, he and nine other Manchester reformers were charged with conspiring to overthrow the king, constitution, and government. Walker, who employed the defence of Thomas Erskine and Felix Vaughan, was tried at Lancaster assizes on 2 April 1794, but he was acquitted largely on account of Dunn's perjury. He was similarly exonerated on the same day on a separate charge of damning the king. 
Despite writing and publishing 'A review of some of the political events which have occurred in Manchester during the last five years' (1794) soon after his trials, Walker remained aloof from active reform politics, emerging only briefly in 1795 to oppose the ''Gagging Acts''. By 1799 his business enterprise had collapsed and in 1806 he was twice unsuccessful in obtaining positions in the public service. By this time he was living on a small farm at Longford, Lancashire, surviving on a legacy bequeathed by Felix Vaughan. Walker died on 2 February 1817 at Longford and his body was interred at Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Lancashire. 


@@@@@


doc= 63604


Watt, Robert (1761x8-1794), wine merchant and conspirator, was the illegitimate son of a 'respectable gentleman', and was brought up by a succession of guardians. He was educated at the Perth Academy, and moved about 1785 to Edinburgh to seek his fortune. Following a period as a clerk, and a failed attempt to forge a literary career, Watt settled on the wine trade as his source of income. It was probably the failure of his hopes for this business which led him to offer his services as a political informer in April 1792 to the lord advocate, Robert Dundas. July 1792 saw the establishment in Edinburgh of the first society of the Friends of the People in Scotland. 
Watt's motives for informing appear to have been principally financial. His reports concerned radical activities not just in the capital but in Perth, Dundee, and Glasgow. Written in a small, spidery hand, they tended to the alarmism typical of opportunist informers of this period. In the spring of 1793 Watt offered Dundas information from two unnamed individuals who supposedly wanted payment of at least $100. Watt was reimbursed the sum of $30, which he claimed he had given to his sources. No helpful information was forthcoming, and from the late summer of 1793 contact between Watt and the authorities in Edinburgh lapsed. 
Watt resurfaced in the following year as one of two men -- the other was David Downie, an Edinburgh goldsmith -- prosecuted for high treason for involvement in a murky plot to seize Edinburgh Castle, the post office, and banks, raise the manufacturing districts in Scotland, and establish a provisional government in Edinburgh. Watt appears to have been the main architect of the plan; in fact, it probably fully existed only in his imagination. He was one of seven individuals who comprised the permanent secret Committee of Ways and Means, formed in March 1794, following the suppression of the famous convention of British radicals in Edinburgh in the previous December and the subsequent crackdown on radical activities, from delegates of the remaining radical societies in Edinburgh and the neighbourhood. The plot had come to light only because of an unconnected search of Watt's house on 15 May for property belonging to a bankrupt. This unearthed a small number of pikes and the type for a handbill which was designed to suborn the loyalties of the soldiery. A subsequent search of a blacksmith's, a certain Orrock, produced further pikes. 
The extent of support for the plot, as well as Watt's motivation -- and indeed the motivations and degree of understanding of others involved -- remain unclear. The period from late 1793 to early 1794 was one of ambiguity and confusion with respect to radical intentions as they struggled to formulate a response to government repression and the imposition of restraints on 'liberty'. Watt's counsel at his trial claimed that he was acting as an unofficial 'agent provocateur', although Watt also declared in a confession composed when his execution was certain that he had become a convert to the radical cause through attendance at their meetings. At the trial, at which he pleaded not guilty, his fellow conspirators turned king's evidence, with the exception of Downie. Although Lord Braxfield, whose extreme hostility to the radicals had been manifest in earlier political trials, did not preside -- Watt was tried under a special commission of oyer and terminer under the terms of the 1709 'Treason Act' -- a guilty verdict was a foregone conclusion. The jury did, nevertheless, recommend mercy. 
Downie was to receive a pardon; Watt was not so fortunate. His execution, on 15 October 1794, was used by the authorities to demonstrate the supposedly bloody and revolutionary intent of popular radicals and the heavy penalty to be paid for such activity. Watt was drawn, backwards, from the castle in Edinburgh to the Tolbooth, his place of execution, in a procession composed of the sheriff depute and his substitutes attired in black and wearing white gloves, constables, and 200 Argyllshire fencibles, all walking at a dead pace. At Watt's feet were placed several of the pikes found in his house. After being hanged for fifteen minutes, his body was cut down and beheaded, and the severed head presented to the reportedly silent crowd who witnessed his grisly end. One account of his life, published shortly after his execution, claimed that the roots of his misfortune and villainy were a secretive, unstable, and corrupt personality, which for much of his life he had struggled against, to no avail, through excessive religious devotion. 
The trials of Watt and Downie have wider significance in that they foreshadowed the treason trials of leading English radicals in the same year in the emphasis which was placed by the authorities on the supposedly sinister intent of the plans for an emergency convention under discussion among British radicals in late 1793 and early 1794. The 'Watt plot' also furnished a crucial element in the Pitt ministry's efforts, by means of two reports by a Commons committee of secrecy appointed in 1794, to demonstrate the supposed revolutionary goals of the radicals, goals which it was claimed had been deliberately disguised by the radicals' continual professions of a preference for parliamentary reform achieved through peaceful, constitutional means. 


@@@@@


doc= 63605


John Baxter (fl. 1794-1816), silversmith and radical, also assumed some prominence within the LCS when he succeeded Margarot as chairman in 1794. He was arrested but not charged during the treason trials of the same year. Baxter was also a founder member, along with the bookseller Joseph Burks, of the Friends of Liberty, formerly division 16 of the LCS, which separated from the society in 1795. His 'New and impartial history of England from the most early period of genuine historical evidence to the present important and alarming crisis' (1796) exhibited a politically articulate intellect. Details of his later career remain unclear: he was a known member of the United Irish movement, and in 1816 a satirical broadsheet, William Snow's 'The Polemic Fleet', listed him as a prominent member of the radical Spencean circle. Other sources suggest that the 'Impregnable' Baxter ('Polemics') may by this date have been practising as a surgeon. 
Like their middle-class counterparts, some of the working-class members of the LCS provided the group with strategic advantages through their occupations. With society meetings often held in taverns, publicans like John Barnes and Robert Boyd were particularly valuable associates. Of even greater use to the society's cause were the numerous booksellers and printers who joined the organization. In its campaign for parliamentary reform the LCS looked to use 'moral force' and to educate the people in their political rights through the publication of cheap democratic literature. The extensive publishing programme of the LCS consisted of about eighty separate pamphlets and broadsides between 1792 and 1798 as well as two periodicals, 'The Politician' (1794-5) and the 'Moral and Political Magazine' (1796-7). Booksellers and printers often subsidized and distributed these works for their society, and with the government's focus on the spread of seditious literature during the 1790s they were often faced with imprisonment. In the face of such adversity LCS members, such as Daniel Isaac Eaton, who worked in the book trades, required amazing fortitude and endurance to remain loyal to the cause. Thomas Spence, another bookseller who joined the LCS, showed similar tenacity and dexterity, and, like Eaton, composed radical propaganda of his own despite repeated intimidation. In 1794 he was one of the members imprisoned for six months without trial in the prelude to the infamous treason trials of that year. 



@@@@@


doc= 63606


Day, Joseph (bap. 1758?, d. 1832), lawyer and proposer of reforms, was probably baptized on 19 April 1758 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, the son of Joseph Day, attorney, and his wife, Mary. He was articled at the age of about fourteen to his father who then resided in the parish of St Mary-le-Bow in the City of London. Admitted an attorney of the king's bench in 1781, Day was living in Great Bath Street in 1784, but moved during the 1790s and early 1800s, first to Hatton Street, then to Kirby Street, and later still to 66 Lamb's Conduit Street, London. 
Little is known of Day's legal practice except that it was secondary to a lifelong, but unsuccessful, devotion to the invention for profit of minor reforms in government. Starting in 1788, when he communicated to the Treasury a scheme for raising revenue by levying stamp duties on probate records, Day tirelessly sought audiences with important people, including the king and the prince of Wales, and on several occasions advertised his ideas by printing pamphlets at his own expense. 
Day's most notable project, a plan canvassed during the mid-1790s for reforming the qualifying process for attorneys and solicitors, was in broad outline, and in many of its particulars, an anticipation by more than twenty-five years of the Incorporated Law Society. Arguing that the low reputation of the profession was caused by the failure of the existing system of articled clerkship to guarantee that men of bad character and inadequate training were being excluded from practice, Day proposed that a college of attorneys, under the supervision of the judges, should be established by statute and given the power to examine candidates for admission while serving as a selective society of elite practitioners. Some sixty London attorneys subscribed to the project, and Day was encouraged by interviews he had with the judges and government officials. Although not himself a member, he also consulted with the governing body of the Society of Gentlemen Practisers, the leading club of London attorneys; but, while Day had probably exaggerated from the outset the support he enjoyed, the plan was killed in 1795 when the society turned against it without putting it before its full membership. Fears that the new society would lead to higher taxation, and concern over the role Day saw himself playing in it, were the likely causes of failure, and indeed Day did turn again in 1797 to the creation of new levies on the profession (probably connected with 37 Geo. III c. 90). Then, during the food crisis at the end of the century, he worked on a plan for creating a national inspectorate to survey the available grain stock. His point was that government regulation of the corn trade should be based on accurate information about supply, rather than on the dubious evidence of reported prices, but, although he spoke to government ministers and was invited in early 1802 to appear before London's committee on the high price of provisions, he gained nothing. 
Day's last known project, which originated in 1807, was a scheme for improving public access to the information recorded in parish registers by setting up offices in London and York where the records would be made available for consultation and, though it was somewhat more limited in scope than Day's proposal, George Rose steered a bill along these lines through parliament in 1812 (52 Geo. III c. 146). By then suffering severe financial difficulties, Day hoped that a government post arising from the scheme would save him from ruin. Having at some earlier point moved his family from London to Macclesfield, in 1811 he gave up his practice in Cheshire and took accommodation in Frith Street, Soho, London, but his expectations were bitterly disappointed when Rose informed him that no office would be forthcoming. Something of a visionary, and always proud of his service to government and the public, Day's projects evidently left him a broken man. He is last heard from in 1825, when he wrote to Sir Robert Peel from Maldon, Essex, once again begging some reward for all of his past services. He died in 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 63608


Hague, William (c.1840-1899), architect, was probably born in Cavan Town, co. Cavan, the son of a local builder, also called William Hague, who is otherwise little known, though described in the 'Dublin Builder' as 'an old established and highly respectable builder who has executed most of the principal works in his neighbourhood' (1 Sept 1863, 146). The young Hague opened his own offices in Dublin in 1861, though his practice was still based on Roman Catholic commissions from his home county, such as the interesting and quirky church at Butlersbridge of 1861. His ambitions registered in his competition entries, including one for the new Church of Ireland cathedral in Cork, of 1862, eventually won by William Burges. While Hague's early training was probably undertaken with his father, he was quickly accepted by the professional establishment, and was elected as a fellow of the Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland in 1863; he later acted as auditor to the society. He was elected also to the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland in 1864. 
In the same year Hague's burgeoning practice gained prestigious success with the award of the first premium in the open competition, against some thirty other entrants, for the new town hall in Sligo, the foundation-stone of which was laid in 1865. Hague's designs displayed a competent understanding of the Ruskinian inspiration found in Deane and Woodward's work of a decade earlier, though much of the decorative carving originally intended remained unexecuted. The building affirmed his command of this type of civic design, but his forte remained church design, almost wholly for Roman Catholic patrons. Hague worked in a competent Gothic style, much indebted, especially in later years, to the work of Pugin and Ashlin. His reliable professionalism, alongside a dry orthodoxy, secured him wide respect in the Roman Catholic establishment, a position assisted no doubt by his marriage to the daughter of the solicitor Vesey Daly (died 1880), and his service from 1885 as justice of the peace for co. Cavan. Hague's recognition by the Roman Catholic establishment was confirmed with his commission for the design of the new cathedral at Letterkenny, co. Donegal, in 1891. Here he produced an impressive but conventional design, completed after his death with uncommonly good and extensive finishings. His own completion of a number of works by other major Catholic architectural practices, including Pugin and Ashlin, in the years from 'c'.1890, reflected further his authoritative position. A number of notable architects were associated with Hague's office, including Harry Allberry (1872-1952), and after his death on 22 March 1899 his wife established with his managing assistant, T. F. McNamara (1867-1947), a partnership that survived as Hague and McNamara until at least 1907. William Hague is buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin, where he is commemorated by a memorial dedicated also to his daughter Kathleen (died 1919) and sister Anne (died 1843). 


@@@@@


doc= 63609


Lynn, William Henry (1829-1915), architect, was born on 27 December 1829 at St John's Point, co. Down, the elder son of Lieutenant Henry Johnston Lynn of the Irish coastguard service and his wife, Margaretta, daughter of Samuel Ferris MD of Larne, co. Antrim. He was the brother of the sculptor Samuel Ferris Lynn. He was educated at Dr Newland's private grammar school at Bannow, co. Wexford, before being articled at the age of seventeen to the architect and engineer Charles Lanyon (1813-1889) in Belfast, and serving as clerk of works on the Queen's College (now the Queen's University), Belfast (1846-9), and the county court house, Belfast (1848-50). He was taken into partnership by Lanyon in 1854 and remained with him until 1872, when the firm of Lanyon, Lynn, and Lanyon (as it had become with the addition of Lanyon's son John in 1860) was dissolved. Thereafter, Lynn practised on his own until his death. 
Lynn was a prolific designer who worked in a wide range of historic styles and normally displayed an eclectic taste. His work was at first mainly medieval revivalist but later was also classical in inspiration. Early works include the Belfast (now Northern) banks at Newtownards, co. Down (1854), and Dungannon, co. Tyrone (1855), which are among the earliest examples of Venetian Gothic detailing in Ireland. He designed a number of linen warehouses in Belfast, his most conspicuous being that built for Richardson, Sons, and Owden (1865-9), and he also designed many churches throughout Ireland for various protestant denominations. Among his most notable churches are the former St Andrew's Church of Ireland Church of 1860 in Dublin and Carlisle Memorial Methodist Church of 1874-5 in Belfast. 
Lynn was very successful in competitions both at home and abroad, although some of his prize-winning designs were not built. The most important competition successes in his time with Lanyon were the unexecuted design for the New South Wales parliament building in Sydney, Australia (1861), a multi-towered Gothic composition, followed by his Italian Gothic design for Chester town hall (1863), which was built and opened in 1869. Competition successes in his later independent practice included Paisley town hall (1875-82), designed in a classical manner, and Barrow in Furness town hall (1877-87), designed in a Gothic style. He was also considered to have supplied the best design in the competition for Birmingham council house (1871), but was disqualified for a minor infringement of the rules. 
Lynn was recognized in his time for his planning abilities, and Alfred Waterhouse, the assessor for both the Birmingham and Barrow in Furness competitions and himself a great planner, once told Aston Webb that 'there was nothing he would better like to do than to sit behind Lynn and look over his shoulder while he pinned an antiquarian sheet to his board and laid out a large plan' (Webb, 91). 
Most of Lynn's important later work is in Belfast, where he designed the public library (1883-8), the harbour office extension (1891-5), and Campbell College (1891-4). From 1910 to 1915 he was architect of St Anne's Church of Ireland Cathedral in Belfast, begun by his former pupil Thomas Drew (1838-1910), where he provided the design for the baptistery in 1915 (erected in 1922-4). Beyond the British Isles Lynn was responsible for civic improvements at Quebec, and the chapel at the British embassy in Constantinople, both commissioned by the marquess of Dufferin and Ava. 
Lynn's honours included the gold medal for architectural drawing at the Paris Universal Exhibition in 1867, presidency of the Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland in 1885-9, and nomination for the royal gold medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1911. Unlike his long-time partner Charles Lanyon he had no interest in public life but was entirely devoted to his career, and in the opinion of Aston Webb he was 'the greatest Irish architect of his century' (Webb, 91). 
Lynn died of pneumonia on 12 September 1915 at his home, Ardavon, 250 Antrim Road, Belfast, and was buried in the city cemetery. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 63610


McCarthy, James Joseph (1817-1882), architect, was born in Dublin on 6 January 1817, the son of Charles McCarthy ('fl'. 'c'.1800-1831), who came of a Kerry family. He was educated from 1831 at the Christian Brothers' O'Connell School in Dublin. He was trained in the Royal Dublin Society Schools (1834-7) and the office of William Farrell. He seems to have spent the years 1843-6 in England, absorbing the latest developments in church architecture then being vigorously pursued by Augustus Welby Pugin and the Cambridge Camden Society. By 1846 he was back in Dublin, and a church to his design, which he claimed as the first uncompromisingly true church of the old type erected in the archdiocese of Dublin, was begun at Glendalough, co. Wicklow. A parish church at Kilskyre, co. Meath (begun 1847), and a chapel for All Hallows Missionary College, Dublin (1848), soon followed. 
James McCarthy was a talented architect. He took to heart Puginian principles of truth to materials, honesty of construction, and fitness of purpose, and he followed Pugin in believing that medieval styles were the only ones possible for a Christian country, particularly in Ireland, where they would be a revival of the venerable architecture of our Catholic forefathers. He could build a simple country church, giving a strong sense of solidity and permanence, but he was also good at grand buildings in Decorated Gothic that fitted the increasingly triumphalist mood of the Catholic church. 
McCarthy's success is attributable not just to his talent as an architect, but to his remarkable gift for publicizing that talent. By the late 1840s notices of his work were appearing in the Irish Catholic press, and, from the 1850s, in 'The Builder' and the 'Building News'. He wrote on architecture in 'Duffy's Irish Catholic Magazine'. His biggest coup, however, was his involvement with the Irish Ecclesiological Society, founded in 1849, which gave him access to a network of senior clergy. The only publication of the society, 'Suggestions on the Arrangement and Characteristics of Parish Churches' (1851), was written by McCarthy. He sent a copy to Pugin, who told him that he was a man raised up to do great things in Ireland, and offered him the supervision of his Irish work. This came to nothing as Pugin died in 1852, though McCarthy succeeded Pugin as architect at Killarney and Enniscorthy cathedrals, and at Maynooth College, where he designed the infirmary (1862) and chapel (1875). 
It was McCarthy's good fortune to be a Catholic architect at a time when increased prosperity after the famine, and tightening-up of church organization following the Synod of Thurles in 1850, gave rise to a boom in church building. His practice was almost exclusively religious. He attracted the attention of Archbishop Paul Cullen, and got several commissions that were virtually in Cullen's gift -- the completion of Armagh Cathedral in 1851, and the design of the new Catholic university buildings in Dublin in 1862. By the time of his death McCarthy had eighty or so major commissions to his credit, including two more cathedrals, Monaghan (1861) and Thurles (1865). He had become a member of the architectural establishment, and penetrated institutions not readily accessible to Catholics of humble origin: the Royal Irish Academy (1853) and the Royal Hibernian Academy (1861). 
Although J. J. McCarthy's public life is fairly well documented, little is known about his private life. From 1851 he lived at various addresses in Rathmines. He and his wife, Agnes (1819-1885), had four children: twins Charles and Emily ('b'. 9 Dec 1858), Frances, and Agnes, who became a nun. Their son, Charles J. McCarthy (1858-1947), was city architect of Dublin from 1893 to 1920. J. J. McCarthy died, after a long illness, at his house, Charleston House, Leinster Road, Rathmines, on 6 February 1882 and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. Sometimes known as 'the Irish Pugin', McCarthy's importance lies in the large number of churches he designed, and in the fact that he established ecclesiologically correct Gothic as the style for Catholic church building in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 63613


Brooks, James (1825-1901), architect, was born at Hatford, Berkshire, on 30 March 1825, the son of John Brooks, a farmer from Hatford who later moved to Wantage, and his wife, 'nee' Tyrrell. He was educated at Abingdon School, where he showed a precocious interest in agricultural technology, inventing a threshing machine and a new type of ploughshare which became commercially successful. In 1847 he went into the London office of the architect Lewis Stride. He attended T. L. Donaldson's lectures at University College, and in 1849 he enrolled in the Royal Academy Schools. In 1853 he opened his own office at 5 Bloomsbury Square and over the ensuing years he designed several houses and schools in Berkshire and Oxfordshire. He married Emma (1821/2-1892), daughter of J. Martin of Sandford House, Sandford-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, probably in 1858, and his first son was born in the following year; two more sons and a daughter followed. In 1862 he and his family settled at The Grange, Clissold Crescent, Stoke Newington, London, a red-brick Gothic house built to his own designs. 
Brooks's place in the history of architecture derives largely from his London churches. He was a zealous high-churchman and obtained his most significant commissions from like-minded Anglicans, some of whom were fellow worshippers at St Matthias's, Stoke Newington, where he served as churchwarden from 1868 to 1879. His first important church, St Michael's, Mark Street (1863-5), was in the desperately poor parish of Shoreditch in the East End, and he went on to design two more churches in the neighbouring district of Haggerston: St Columba's, Kingsland Road (1868-9), and St Chad's, Nichols Square (1868-9). Other commissions soon followed: St Saviour's, Hoxton (1865-6; dem.), St Andrew's, Plaistow (1867-70), and The Annunciation, Chislehurst (1868-70). With their wide, lofty naves, narrow aisles, raised chancels, and lancet or plate-traceried windows, these noble and beautifully proportioned buildings epitomize the mid-Victorian ideal of the Anglican town church. They were built relatively cheaply, usually of brick, and their unembellished interiors and bulky exteriors have something of the gravity of early Cistercian architecture. Brooks also designed the parsonages and elementary schools which clustered around most of the churches, and in 1870-73 he designed a convent for Anglican nuns next to St Michael's, Shoreditch; its daughter house of St Mary of Nazareth, Edgware, was begun to his designs in 1875, though, like many of his buildings, it was never finished. 
There was something of a hiatus in Brooks's career in the 1870s, but in the last twenty years of his life he became one of the most prolific of English church architects. At St John's, Holland Road, Kensington (1872-1910), The Ascension, Lavender Hill, Battersea (1876-98), Holy Innocents', Hammersmith (1887-1901), St Peter and St Paul, Dover (1891-3), and All Hallows, Gospel Oak (1892-1901; completed by Giles Gilbert Scott, 1913-15), and in his competition designs for Liverpool Cathedral (1887; unexecuted), he developed and refined the French-inspired early Gothic style of his earlier churches long after it had gone out of fashion among his younger contemporaries. Except at St Mary's, Hornsey (1888-9), and one or two other churches, he showed little interest in English late Gothic, and his secular buildings, apart from schools and parsonages, are few in number and of negligible interest. 
Though less well known than some of his contemporaries, Brooks was one of the most accomplished architects of the Gothic revival. He became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1866, honorary consulting architect to the Incorporated Church Building Society in 1880, and diocesan architect for Canterbury in 1888. In 1881 he joined the RIBA council, became vice-president in 1892, and was awarded the RIBA gold medal in 1895. In 1875 he moved his office to 33-5 Wellington Street, Strand, and in 1892 he took his son and pupil James Martin Brooks into partnership. He took only two other pupils, George Godsall and Alfred Mackmurdo, and of these only Mackmurdo -- who set up practice on his own in 1875 -- made a significant impact on architecture. Though living in London all his professional life, Brooks retained an enthusiasm for rural pursuits, riding to hounds until the age of fifty and shooting until he was sixty. His wife died on 31 August 1892 and on 24 January 1894 he married his housekeeper, Mary ('b'. 1866/7), daughter of John Spicer, forester: something which, if his family were to be believed, cost him a knighthood. He died of heart failure at his home, The Grange, Clissold Crescent, Stoke Newington, on 7 October 1901 and was buried three days later in Great Northern London cemetery, Southgate. His son then took over the architectural practice in partnership with George Godsall, and when he died on 24 October 1903 his place was taken by John Standen Adkins, who completed some of Brooks's unfinished buildings. 


@@@@@


doc= 63616


Philip Overton (c.1681-1745) was the third son of John Overton. He was apprenticed to his father in 1695 so it is likely that he was born about 1681. He was made free of the Stationers' Company in 1702. In 1707 his father gave him $200 'toward his advancement and setting up a trade' and lent him two further amounts of $100 in August and October 1711. He had set himself up at the White Horse opposite St Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street, by May 1708 but changed his sign to the Golden Buck by January 1710. Philip Overton's shop set a higher tone than that of Henry Overton. Although the brothers often published in alliance, Philip was involved in the distribution of a number of fine modern prints and helped to publish some, such as William Hogarth's 'Hudibras' set (1726). He also sold imported prints of quality. From 1738 he published a few political satires. Nevertheless, his staple was in interesting and decorative prints for the middle market. Philip Overton's will, signed on 5 February 1745 and proved on 20 February 1745, left his estate to his second wife, Mary ['see below']. He desired to be buried in Aston, Hertfordshire, where he presumably had property. He also had a house in Kentish Town as well as his shop in Fleet Street. 



@@@@@


doc= 63617


Overton family (per. c.1665-c.1765), map and print publishers, dominated print publishing in London for a century. John Overton (1639/40-1713) was the son of Thomas Overton of Covent Garden, tailor. He was apprenticed to Thomas Gould for eight years on 30 June 1655 and made free of the Stationers' Company on 4 July 1663. When London's leading printseller, Peter Stent, died of the plague in 1665, Overton took over his shop: the White Horse, near Pye Corner. This burned down in the great fire of 1666, but by 1669 Overton was established at the White Horse on Snow Hill, opposite St Sepulchre's Church. He built up the most powerful wholesale printselling business in London by publishing widely saleable prints and buying up and republishing successful plates, such as John Speed's maps. He sold maps, topographical views, portraits, and sets of months or stories from scripture for display. Phrases in his will suggest that he married three times. If so, his 'second wife' was a daughter of Benjamin Dunn, and his 'last wife', married in 1677, was Sarah Garrett, sister to a John Garrett ('fl'. 'c'.1665-1722) who was probably the printseller who had a shop in the Royal Exchange. He had seven children, Thomas, Henry ['see below'], Philip ['see below'], James, Anne, Margaret, and Sarah. The eldest, Thomas, had emigrated to America and had not been heard of since 1700. John Overton died in March 1713, and was buried in the church of St Sepulchre on 31 March. He named his second son, Henry, as his executor but left the lease of his house and shop to his unmarried daughter Sarah. Both his portrait (the print of which gives his age as sixty-eight in 1708) and his will give an impression of a stern patriarch but he took great care that all his children should get a share of the small fortune that he had amassed. 
The business of printselling was altogether more lucrative for the next generation. Henry [i] Overton (1675/6-1751) was the second son of John Overton, whose stock he bought by indenture in 1707, having married Sarah Baker in 1706. He ran the shop at the White Horse until his death, extending the network of provincial contacts that John Overton had perhaps already established. The first auctions of prints held in country towns seem often to have consisted chiefly of prints supplied by Henry Overton. He steadily expanded his range of plates along the lines established by his father, responding rapidly to new fashions and demands -- for prints of hunting and horseracing, for instance. Although occasionally involved with prestigious publications such as the prints after Louis Laguerre of the 'Battles of the Duke of Marlborough' (1717), many of Henry Overton's designs were plagiarized from fine prints published by others. Until the 'Copyright Act' of 1735 William Hogarth was a notable victim of such piracy. His 'Harlot's Progress', for instance, was copied cheaply by their employees in a wide range of sizes at different prices, down to the crudest woodcut royal and pot sheets distributed by rural salesmen. Some of the firm's oldest plates remained valuable: Henry Overton reprinted Wenceslaus Hollar's plates in April 1743. He died at his house in Charterhouse Square on 27 June 1751; his death 'in the 76th Year of his Age' was reported next day in the 'General Advertiser', which noted that 'He was married a few Days since to a young Lady of about Thirty, to whom he has left 10,000 'l'.' The marriage to Mary Green had taken place on 8 April 1751 at St Michael Cornhill. To his 'dear wife Mary' he left his sizeable share in the New River, his freehold house in Charterhouse Square, his house and garden in Middlesex, and $500 bank stock. The lease of his house, shop, and premises and all his copperplates, wood blocks, maps, prints, paper, and other stock went to his nephew Henry ['see below']. He left a house in Ormonde Street and two more off Fetter Lane to his niece Henrietta and further property to his niece Catherine Skynner. 

Philip Overton (c.1681-1745) was the third son of John Overton. He was apprenticed to his father in 1695 so it is likely that he was born about 1681. He was made free of the Stationers' Company in 1702. In 1707 his father gave him $200 'toward his advancement and setting up a trade' and lent him two further amounts of $100 in August and October 1711. He had set himself up at the White Horse opposite St Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street, by May 1708 but changed his sign to the Golden Buck by January 1710. Philip Overton's shop set a higher tone than that of Henry Overton. Although the brothers often published in alliance, Philip was involved in the distribution of a number of fine modern prints and helped to publish some, such as William Hogarth's 'Hudibras' set (1726). He also sold imported prints of quality. From 1738 he published a few political satires. Nevertheless, his staple was in interesting and decorative prints for the middle market. Philip Overton's will, signed on 5 February 1745 and proved on 20 February 1745, left his estate to his second wife, Mary ['see below']. He desired to be buried in Aston, Hertfordshire, where he presumably had property. He also had a house in Kentish Town as well as his shop in Fleet Street. 

Mary Overton (fl. 1745-1748), widow and successor of Philip Overton, briefly ran the Golden Buck in Fleet Street after her husband's death in February 1745. On 6 January 1747 she married James Sayer at Christ Church, Spitalfields. It would seem that at about this time James's younger brother Robert Sayer became her assistant. In the art dealer Arthur Pond's account books there are a number of references to her buying prints from him. The shop was run by Mary until December 1748 when in newspaper advertisements Robert Sayer was first named as manager. 

Henry [ii] Overton (fl. 1751-1764), nephew and successor of Henry [i] Overton, was presumably the son of John Overton's fourth son, James. Taking over the business in 1751 he moved vigorously into the market for engraved views, usually publishing in partnership with Robert Sayer. He maintained the White Horse at Snow Hill until at least November 1764. On 29 February 1752 an announcement appeared in the 'London Evening-Post', 'On Thursday last Mr. Overton, an eminent Printseller without Newgate, was married to Miss Dawson, of Gilt-Spur Street, an agreeable young Lady with a considerable Fortune.' Sadly, a correction appeared in the next issue to the effect that the announcement had been 'premature'. A printed catalogue of his stock of 'Common and Fine Prints', issued in 1754, extended to seventy-nine pages. At that time his latest innovation was wallpaper, designed by John Baptist Jackson, 'printed in oil' with special designs 'in chiaro oscuro and in chints colours' to have the effect of prints displayed on the wall. He advertised a new edition of George Bickham's 'Universal Penman' in November 1764 but after that date he disappeared from view. 


@@@@@


doc= 63620


Hussey, Eric Robert James (1885-1958), educationist, was born at White Cliff, Mill Street, Blandford, in Dorset, on 26 April 1885, the eldest son of the Revd James Hussey (1846-1920) and his wife, Martha Ellen Hewett. He won scholarships to Repton School (1899-1904) and then to Hertford College, Oxford, from where he graduated BA in 'literae humaniores' with third-class honours in 1908 (MA 1923). At both Repton and Oxford he was an outstanding athlete, specializing in the 110 yards hurdles, and competed for the United Kingdom in the Olympic games held in London in the summer of 1908. In the same year he joined the Sudan educational service as a tutor at Gordon College, Khartoum. After four years he was seconded to the administration for a period as a district officer and later as district commissioner at Sennar. By then he had acquired a spoken knowledge of Arabic. During the First World War he was retained at his post. Thereafter he became senior inspector in the education department in Khartoum. In November 1920 he went on a special mission to Somaliland to advise on education, and made similar visits to Uganda and Kenya in 1924. On 19 July 1922 Hussey married Christine Elizabeth Justice Morley (1892-1977). They had a son, Marmaduke, and a daughter. Marmaduke Hussey subsequently became a prominent figure in the newspaper industry and later chairman of the BBC (1986-96); in 1996 he was created a life peer as Lord Hussey of North Bradley. 
In 1925 Hussey became Uganda's first director of education. He successfully established a department of education and drafted the first education ordinance in a colony in which rival Anglican and Roman Catholic churches exercised a monopoly over schooling. He subsequently won the support of both churches and also formed a lasting friendship with J. H. Oldham, the highly influential secretary of the International Missionary Council. Hussey was a firm advocate of the 'adaptation' theory of African education as espoused in the 1925 memorandum 'Education Policy in British Tropical Africa' and sought to avoid at all costs a policy of reckless Westernization accomplished through the medium of education. He also worked hard to consolidate the recently established Makerere College. 
In 1929 Hussey was transferred to west Africa as the first overall director of education in Nigeria. The task awaiting him was no less challenging. A new education ordinance and a new grants-in-aid scheme had to be drafted and major changes made to the structure of schooling while simultaneously reassuring long established and powerfully entrenched missions that their educational interests would be respected. Unfortunately, much of his work, including the establishment of Yaba College, which he hoped would ultimately achieve the status of a university college, and his equally enthusiastic efforts to expand the education of girls, was adversely affected by the prolonged economic recession of the early 1930s which resulted in severe financial and staff retrenchments. In 1932 Hussey was a member of the commission which inspected the Prince of Wales College at Achimota in the Gold Coast Colony. A year later he was made a CMG for his services to colonial education. His term of office in Nigeria ended in February 1936 and with it his career in the colonial education service. 
Thereafter Hussey found employment first as assistant secretary (March 1936) and subsequently as secretary (December 1936) of the National Society, which was responsible for the administration of numerous Anglican schools throughout England and Wales. He served with distinction as the Anglican church's 'Minister for Education' until June 1942 when he was asked by the British government to go to Ethiopia for two years to act as the emperor's educational adviser. The 1943 annual report of the National Society claimed that he achieved 'an administrative triumph' in reshaping the affairs of the society to meet new demands under the 1934 charter, and that he steered it safely through the difficult period of transition with unostentatious ability and faithfulness. Between 1940 and April 1942 he also served with distinction on the Colonial Office's advisory committee on education in the colonies. 
In 1944 Hussey returned to London to a position with the British Council as director of the Middle East section which he retained until his retirement in 1949. Between 1945 and 1947 he also served a second term on the Colonial Office's advisory committee on education. In 1940 he began a long association with the London School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS) as the Nigerian representative on the governing board, a position he retained until his death. His last overseas mission was to Eritrea in 1953 to advise on education in the territory's first year of independence. In the immediate post-war years Hussey was active in the Royal African Society as both a council member and vice-president, and represented the society at the Solway Conference on Education in Africa held in Brussels in 1950. In July 1948 he became a fellow of the Woodard Corporation and in 1951 chairman of the governing board of Hurstpierpoint School. Between 1950 and 1956 he also served on the Africa committee of the Conference of British Missionary Societies. 
In 1935 Hussey delivered one of the three Joseph Paine lectures at the London Institute of Education ('Some aspects of education in Nigeria'), and in 1939 the sixth of the Heath Clark lectures at SOAS, entitled 'The role of education in assisting the people of west Africa to adjust themselves to the changing conditions due to European contacts'. He was also a frequent contributor to 'African Affairs' and 'African World', especially in the post-war years, and recorded several radio talks for the BBC in 1954 on Ethiopian affairs. In 1959 Christine Hussey arranged for publication and private circulation of his memoirs of service in Africa. 
As a young man Hussey acquired a reputation for outstanding athletic prowess and his quiet demeanour and genial disposition won him friends wherever he went. They were qualities that endured throughout his life. Sir Christopher Cox visited him in Ethiopia in early 1944 when he was in his sixtieth year and commented that he quite thrived on a 16 mile walk over the mountains (Hussey, 129); Michael E. Okorodudu, a Nigerian chief, claimed that Hussey was the first director of education who wore shorts and an open-neck shirt and sat to eat Nigerian meals with Nigerian boys and girls in Nigerian schools (Hussey, 155). Finally, it was James A. Gray, the editor of 'African World', who referred to him as 'an educationist of distinction' but who was quick to add that it was the man himself who made the fullest impact, the big, unruffled man with the quick smile, eager approach, and quiet chuckle who was courteous and friendly to everyone. He was, Gray suggested, a living example of the truth of how much a man can accomplish if he does not care who gets the credit ('African World', 10 July 1958). Hussey died of heart disease at his home, Painswold, Broad Street, Cuckfield, Sussex, on 19 May 1958, aged seventy-three years. He was cremated, and his ashes scattered in the churchyard of Cuckfield parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 63621


Griffiths, Vincent Llewellyn (1902-1984), educationist, was born on 18 January 1902 at the rectory in the village of Bix, Oxfordshire, the first of three children of James David Griffiths, rector of Bix, and his wife, Olive Arnold Chataway. He was educated at Denstone College (1916-20) and at Keble College, Oxford (1920-23), where he took a degree in history. From 1924 to 1928 he taught at St Andrew's College, Gorakhpur, India. Here he began to assimilate Gandhi's ideas about a practical, village-based education. In 1926 he made an adventurous journey into Tibet, walking with a cook-companion for 200 miles on the 'forbidden' Lhasa road. 
Back in England, Griffiths took a diploma in education at the London Day Training College, and in 1929 was appointed an education officer in the service of the Sudan government. He started as a teacher in the old Gordon College, Khartoum, still the country's main secondary school. It was an effective but stuffy institution, though twenty years later it blossomed into a fine university. At that time the Sudan government was unenterprising in its educational plans, which were adequate only to serve the general policy of indirect rule. This built on existing traditional tribal structures and was effectively supervised by district commissioners. It was a cheap, conservative system requiring only a few educated Sudanese officials to serve in it. When the 1929 slump came belts were tightened but there were still voices calling for more and better education. 
Griffiths and one or two others -- notably G. C. Scott, Arabist and former district commissioner, and later 'Abdel Rahman 'Ali Taha -- saw that the policy of devolving power to tribal chiefs could be turned to advantage. Many chiefs had young relatives who needed more than limited local schooling. Griffiths saw that if a rural college could be created to meet this need it could also be used to spearhead a much wider reform: to free education from the domination of rote learning and from a discipline of fear. Teachers would be needed whose competence derived from integrity, understanding, and active skills, as well as from book learning. 
In 1934 Griffiths and colleagues started their new educational centre in a few thatched huts and classrooms near Ed Dueim, a market town by the White Nile, 130 miles south of Khartoum. From this small beginning grew the famous educational village of Bakht al-Ruda, eventually Sudan's Institute of Education. For fifteen years Griffiths was principal. He had qualities of vision and pragmatism, spiced with a certain humorous guile, which enabled him to make small opportunistic gains but which also earned him a reputation for being favoured by the authorities. He recalled that it all took longer than they had hoped: 'We came to the task thinking of it mainly as a matter of improving a teacher's general education and... methods of teaching... It was only gradually that our eyes were opened and we began to realise the implications of a fact that had been staring us in the face. 'There were no books'. It was useless to urge anything better than rote learning if the bare facts could not be clothed in enlivening detail. (Griffiths, 'Teacher Centred', 9)' Griffiths's understanding of what was involved in becoming a teacher in a poor country came more and more to be shaped by the insight that a teacher's competence grows in and around the 'tools' and materials of the craft. He worked from an understanding of apprenticeship, equipping both teacher and pupils with a basic tool kit of books, visual aids, and materials -- all experimentally and frugally designed. The first book produced at Bakht al-Ruda was a well-illustrated, witty, thoroughly tested Arabic reader for children. Many of the younger teachers soon realized just how much they needed this kind of teaching aid. Traditionalists remained sceptical. Griffiths was also making converts at a higher level. Douglas Newbold, soon to be head of the civil service, and Christopher Cox, the new, enterprising director of education, began to back him strongly. 
Taffy Griffiths, as he was called by his colleagues, was a dedicated bachelor. He would sit at dawn in the tiny office of his mud brick house, thinking about plans, writing memoranda, or talking with Sudanese and British colleagues. Then a working breakfast and hours to be spent with a young farmers' club committee, visiting schools, organizing a team of textbook writers, or speaking at an in-service course for conservative headmasters on new methods. In the evening the lamp would be lit, the mosquitoes shut out, and the consolations of Mozart or Gracie Fields would be sought from a vast gramophone, visitors and colleagues crowding the narrow room. 
By 1950 over 250 books and booklets had been written (mainly in Arabic). The experiments and the writing were the joint work of British and Sudanese teams. A teachers' postal library and a publications bureau to provide popular literature for school leavers ran successfully for many years. Before Griffiths retired two branch training colleges under the umbrella of the institute were started: one at Dilling in the Nuba Mountains and the other to serve the northern provinces. The effect of this enhancement of teachers' competence and resources was phenomenal; but it was not a mass system. Only about 25 per cent of the boy population could experience the reformed education. Before Sudan's independence such controlled, qualitative reform was possible; but after independence in 1956 the political pressures for vastly more education at all levels was irresistible and quality rapidly declined. When Griffiths revisited Sudan in 1970 his survey showed that good morale and openness to ideas endured, patchily, in the orbit of a few exceptional head teachers but that the supply of good young teachers and of books and materials had become seriously depleted. 
On retirement from Sudan in 1950 Griffiths became a research fellow at Keble College, Oxford, and continued to do advisory work for the Colonial Office. He wrote an influential monograph for UNESCO, 'The Problem of Rural Education' (1968). He also taught at Oxford University's department of education, where he created a course for teachers from developing countries. He was made an OBE in 1949 and a CBE in 1967. Griffiths lived in the village of Noke, near Oxford, where he taught himself to play the guitar, founded a local folk group, and created a garden. Between 1970 and 1973 he joined his brother Dr James Griffiths in the president's lodgings at Magdalen College, and while there, as at Keble, he redesigned corners of the college gardens with sensitivity and skill. The capacity to get things growing never quite left him. Griffiths died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 31 July 1984. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 63622


Temple, Olive Susan Miranda (1880-1936), traveller and author, was born on 18 February 1880, the second of the two daughters of Sir Reginald MacLeod of MacLeod (1847-1935), twenty-seventh chief of clan and 'rentier', and his wife, Lady Agnes Mary Cecilia (died 1921), eldest daughter of Stafford Henry Northcote, first earl of Iddesleigh (1818-1887), politician and author. Her elder sister was Dame Flora MacLeod (1878-1976). The twenty-fifth chief had encumbered his estates, giving aid during times of famine, and consequently the land-based fortune of the MacLeods had dwindled to the point where poverty had driven them from their seat of 800 years, Dunvegan Castle, on the island of Skye. Olive's father was therefore faced with the task of building his own fortune if the MacLeods were to retain their historic pre-eminence. Sir Reginald achieved this through his investments in the City of London, the great success of which eventually returned the family to Dunvegan. These early lessons in social responsibility and the realities of economic survival may well have helped to forge Olive's remarkable character which was to fascinate all who met her. 
Olive MacLeod grew up in a warm and intellectually stimulating atmosphere, but her heart was always set on adventure. At first this was by proxy through her relationship with Boyd Alexander (1873-1910), the African traveller and ornithologist whom she met in 1908. Olive, who had many admirers, was uncertain about Alexander's proposal of marriage, and he, a shy and lonely man, took her procrastination very badly. In his frustration Alexander began to plan a further trip to Africa, and it was only shortly before he was due to leave on 12 December 1908 that she finally agreed to marry him. At this point it was too late for Alexander to change his plans, and he proceeded to Africa, hoping to marry Olive on his return. Sadly, however, he was killed on the shores of Lake Chad on 3 May 1910 by hostile local inhabitants. Olive could not help but feel that if she had agreed to the marriage earlier, Alexander would not have died so tragically. Her friend Violet Asquith, who had also recently lost a fiance, added to Olive's turmoil by persuading her that she was, to all intents and purposes, a widow. She consequently adopted the dress and demeanour of a bereaved wife -- much to the fascination of the sensationalist publications of the period. Her family detested Violet Asquith's influence, feeling that such hysteria was alien to Olive's real nature. Therefore, they fell with relief on Olive's plan to travel to Africa to place a stone on Alexander's grave, and her doting father arranged for her to be escorted by Captain and Mrs Amaury-Talbot (he had experience of Southern Nigeria as a district commissioner, later becoming an official anthropologist, and his wife published 'Women's Mysteries of a Primitive People: the Ibidios of Southern Nigeria' in 1915). However, the romance of this journey only fuelled the interest of sensation-hungry journalists who covered the story in lurid detail -- with at one point Olive's death being incorrectly announced in most papers. In fact she travelled over 3700 miles through Africa, passing many places previously unvisited by a white woman. She also made useful recordings of many matters of botanical, ethnological, and zoological interest, publishing them later in her first book, 'Chiefs and Cities of Central Africa' (1912). 
During that journey Olive MacLeod met Charles Lindsay Temple (1871-1929), then chief secretary and acting governor of Northern Nigeria. Though Temple entertained Olive and her party at his residence, he refused her permission to travel up-country thinking the area too unsettled to be traversed by a white woman. Undeterred, Olive planned her own journey in secret, ignoring Temple's instructions. When he found out he was furious, but also fascinated by this enigmatic Scotswoman. Olive must have been equally intrigued for when, back in London, she heard that Temple was home on leave she went to some effort to contrive a meeting. Their marriage followed shortly afterwards, on 28 April 1912. Olive lived with Temple in Nigeria during the remainder of his service as well as travelling throughout Africa with him during his periods of leave. She continued to develop her interests in all aspects of African life, learned Hausa (the lingua franca of Northern Nigeria), and, during her visits to London, presented several serious papers, including one to the anthropological section of the British Association. She also published the data which she had gathered on Northern Nigeria between May 1912 and October 1916, taking full advantage of her privileged access to official documents, in her encyclopaedic compilation 'Notes on the Tribes, Provinces, Emirates and States of the Northern Provinces of Nigeria' (1919). In addition, her private papers reveal a detailed knowledge and understanding of administrative life as well as an amused contempt for the first governor-general of Nigeria, Sir Frederick Lugard. 
In 1917 Olive Temple travelled with her husband to South Africa, and from there to Granada where they lived until Charles's death on 9 January 1929. The anthropologist and travel writer Gerald Brenan (1894-1987), who knew the Temples during their time in Spain, was struck by the gravity and weight of Olive's character, by her liberal broad-mindedness and painful honesty, but above all by her strong sense of responsibility. However, Brenan is probably incorrect in his suggestion that Olive totally subsumed her nature and ambitions under those of her husband -- such was the coincidence of their intellectual and artistic interests, to say nothing of the distinctly patrician outlook that they both unconsciously possessed. Following her husband's death, Olive returned to Britain, spending much of her time in Kent. She died on 16 May 1936 at Carmen de los Fosos, Granada, only a year after her much loved father, and was buried beside her husband in the cemetery near their house. Olive Temple was survived by an adopted daughter, Mary Edith Northcote. 


@@@@@


doc= 63629


Cleghorn, William (1718-1754), moral philosopher and university teacher, was probably born in Edinburgh, the son of Hugh Cleghorn (died 1734), a brewer and burgess of Edinburgh, and his wife, Jean Hamilton. He entered Edinburgh University in 1731 and graduated MA in 1739. He was probably intended for the ministry, and must have also studied divinity. It appears that he was licensed to preach, but never held charge of a parish. In 1739 and 1740 he was tutor to Sir Henry Nisbet of Dean, who died while still a minor. 
In 1742 the continued absence of the Edinburgh professor of moral philosophy, John Pringle, on war service in Flanders, led the senatus of the university to appoint Cleghorn among others to conduct his classes while he was away. Pringle finally resigned from his post on 27 March 1745, and Cleghorn was appointed to the position on 5 June, after the Edinburgh clergy exercised their right to block a rival candidate, David Hume. Family connections may have played a part in the appointment. Cleghorn's grandfather William Hamilton had been principal of the university from 1730 to 1732, and one of his uncles, Gavin Hamilton, was a member of Edinburgh town council, which controlled university appointments. Cleghorn's appointment was also a victory for the squadrone political faction over the Argathelians in their ongoing battle for control of Scotland. In addition, it is probable that Cleghorn, a Presbyterian and whig, was considered a more appropriate candidate for the post than Hume, whose religious views had already attracted suspicion, and whose political position sometimes caused him to be suspected of Jacobitism (Sher, 106, 108). Cleghorn's commitment to the whig and Presbyterian cause was amply evident in his conduct during the Jacobite rising of 1745-6. He was a member of the college company of Edinburgh, volunteers formed to defend the city, and undertook to call upon the volunteers to join Sir John Cope's forces if the defence of Edinburgh were abandoned. Soon after the conflict he is said to have published a pamphlet entitled 'Address to some Gentlemen Immediately after the Rebellion', but no copies appear to be extant. He was also a member of the Revolution Club, which was dedicated to the protestant and anti-absolutist principles of the revolution of 1688. 
Cleghorn held the moral philosophy chair for the remainder of his short life. He seems to have spent all his time in Edinburgh, apart from a brief visit to Huntingdon in 1750 and a possible tour of the highlands with Adam Ferguson. He never made any published contribution to moral philosophy, but a large collection of student lecture notes is preserved in Edinburgh University Library. Examination of these notes by modern scholars suggests that his political opinions inclined to classical republicanism and the views of Machiavelli, Harrington, and Algernon Sidney. He was a confirmed opponent of monarchical absolutism and despotism, and may have preferred republicanism to monarchy as a form of government (Nobbs, 584, 586). His general view of moral philosophy also appears to have been heavily influenced by the thought of Cicero, particularly as expressed in 'De officiis' (Stewart-Robertson, 33-4). Although not a major figure in eighteenth-century Scottish political and philosophical thought, Cleghorn apparently influenced no less a figure than Ferguson, who was commended by Cleghorn on his deathbed and who later held the moral philosophy chair. In 1754 Cleghorn's declining health led him to visit Lisbon, but he was soon back in Scotland. His condition led him to resign his chair on 21 August 1754, and he died at Edinburgh, apparently unmarried, two days later, at the age of thirty-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 63630


Mackie, Charles (1688-1770), historian and university teacher, was born at Limekilns, near Dunfermline, Fife, on 31 March 1688, the son of William Mackie (died 1699), then minister at Portmoak, Kinross-shire, and his wife, Christine (died 1688), daughter of Magnus Aytoun, clerk at Burntisland. Mackie's mother died when he was six months old, and his father subsequently married Margaret, sister of William Carstares, principal of the University of Edinburgh. Following his father's death in 1699 Mackie is said to have become an intimate in the Carstares household, and his uncle may have overseen his university education, at Edinburgh, where he matriculated in 1702 and graduated in 1705; at Groeningen, from 1707 to 1708; and at Leiden, in 1715 and later. On 3 February 1726 Mackie married Ann (died 1770), daughter of Henry Hamilton, an Edinburgh surgeon, and reputed to be the Hamilla of the song 'To Mistress A. H.' in the 'Tea Table Miscellany'. They had thirteen children, all of whom died in childhood, the last in 1747. 
On 28 August 1719 Edinburgh town council appointed Mackie the first professor of universal history in the university, at a salary of $50 per annum. Initially the appointment was to last only until 1723, but it was permanently extended in 1722. Mackie's duties were extensive and included responsibility for Western history as well as for the history of Scotland, and for Greek, Roman, and British antiquities. Manuscript copies of some of his courses survive. Despite his continuing to lecture in Latin at a time when some others in Scotland were beginning to use English his courses were popular, his annual salary and fees averaging a comfortable $185 during his best years. Mackie taught until 1753, when because of his bad state of health he requested that the town council appoint John Gordon to be his colleague. Within a year, however, Gordon himself resigned, but he was soon replaced by William Wallace, which finally allowed Mackie at least to retire from teaching. In 1765 Wallace became professor of Scots law and Mackie retired completely, leaving sole possession of the chair to his friend John Pringle. 
Mackie left no published works that can be certainly identified as his, though there is evidence that he may have written 'Antiquitatum romanarum brevis descriptio'. This work possibly was published in the early 1740s, but the only surviving copies are from 1759. A basic set of notes intended for antiquities students, it covers in factual outline Roman religious, civil, and military antiquities, and its topics generally parallel those of a surviving manuscript of Mackie's antiquities lectures ('On Roman antiquities', Edinburgh University Library, MS La.III.758). Throughout his career Mackie was fascinated by chronology. His surviving papers contain numerous chronological notes and schemes, ranging from meticulous lists of the dates of death of public figures (for example, his 'Commonplace book and obituary, 1737-1749', ibid., MS La.III.537), to summaries of Newton's thinking on the subject ('Miscellaneous manuscripts', Edinburgh University Library, MS La.II.37), to his own 'Chronological whim', in which he speculates that important historical events occur in complementary pairs that are equidistant from a central point in time, the birth of Christ ('Miscellaneous notes', MS La.III.253, fol. 2). He seriously considered publishing for his students a table of chronology to supplement N. Lenglet du Fresnoy's 'Tablettes chronologiques de l'histoire universelle' (1729), but the project was abandoned in the 1740s. As a working historian Mackie laid greatest emphasis on accuracy, fidelity, and impartiality; 'Truth', he declared in one of his commonplace books, 'is the very soul of history' ('Commonplace books kept', MS Dc.5.242). His notes suggest that his approach to history involved the critical examination of sources, the careful evaluation of evidence, and wariness about subjective bias. Perhaps his most typical discussion is 'On the sources of vulgar errors in history' ('Miscellaneous manuscripts', MS La.II.37, fols. 92-104), a paper delivered in 1741 in which he analyses historical prejudices and distortions in light of Francis Bacon's 'idols of the mind'. Mackie does not seem to have given much attention to the construction of historical narrative or to the graces of style, matters that would be left to the next generation, particularly one of his most famous students, William Robertson. 
Yet despite this somewhat traditional approach to history Mackie contributed to the more liberal educational atmosphere that emerged in Edinburgh during the 1730s and 1740s. He was a mason of the Canongate-Kilwinning lodge, a member of the Old Revolution Club, and, perhaps most importantly, a member of the Rankenian Club (indeed a copy of William Wishart's inaugural address as principal of the University of Edinburgh survives in Mackie's 'Miscellaneous manuscripts'). Here he joined others besides Wishart -- such as Robert Wallace, Colin MacLaurin, and John Stevenson -- to help to create a programme of study that would appeal to landed gentlemen, not just clergymen, and emphasize polite learning, civil history, and civic virtue. His long and intimate friendship with Alexander Melville, fourth earl of Leven (which is documented in a large collection of letters), his extensive correspondence with travellers and residents on the continent, plus a list of students that included John Home, Sir Gilbert Eliot, George Dempster, John Erskine of Carnock, Sir Robert Murray Keith, and Sir Andrew Mitchell -- all demonstrate Mackie's participation in the evolution occurring in Edinburgh intellectual life. 
Mackie died in Edinburgh on 11 September 1770, following his wife, who had died on 1 January. His rather unorganized papers went primarily to Edinburgh University Library, although he also left some money, books, and manuscripts to Joseph Maccormick, 'whom he had patronized and assisted' (Mackie, 'Notebook'). 


@@@@@


doc= 63631


Stevenson, John (1695-1775), rhetorician and university teacher, few details survive concerning his origins, schooling, or personal life. Alexander Bower asserts only that he was educated at Edinburgh, that at the time of his appointment he was tutor to the family of Hamilton of Bargany, and that he never married (Bower, 2.269-70, 281). Upon his appointment at the University of Edinburgh he took over the chair in logic and rhetoric when its possessor, Colin Drummond, one of the old regents, transferred to the Greek chair. Stevenson later commented that he and Drummond soon faced 'broils and contention' over the rights and proper methods to teach Greek poetry (Sharp, 41). But despite this early conflict, Stevenson established himself as a prominent teacher, who was reasonably well paid, earning nearly $150 per year ('Letters of David Hume', 1.280). 
Stevenson's teaching innovations included being among the first in Scotland to lecture in English on rhetoric, to replace scholastic logic with the epistemology of Locke, and to introduce into the rhetoric curriculum the study of 'belles-lettres' and literary style. Alexander Carlyle described Stevenson's class structure as it was in the 1730s. In the morning Stevenson read selections from French and English literary critics, as well as Aristotle's 'Poetics' and Longinus's 'On the Sublime'. These readings were followed at midday with an abridgement of Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' and the Aristotelian logic of Heineccius, which Stevenson would explain and correct. In the afternoon he took up the history of philosophy, using Heinnecius's 'Historia philosophica' as his textbook. In later years Stevenson appears to have discarded the history of philosophy as part of the course. Among his few surviving papers is an interesting and important collection of essays written by his students for presentation to the class between 1737 and 1750. The authors represent a good cross-section of the future educated elite in Scotland, and they illustrate the topics he treated, including philosophical subjects, taste and literary criticism, and education. There also survives a brief set of notes taken by John Campbell on Stevenson's logic lectures (conducted in Latin, not English), in which he noted particularly the role of probability and the limitations of the understanding. 
Despite these innovations Stevenson's academic career, in many respects, was very modest: he left no published works, and he was a relatively uninspiring presence in the classroom. The brief obituary in the 'Edinburgh Magazine' observed: 'His lectures were solid rather than brilliant, formal rather than penetrating. But, if he wanted the boldness of invention and genius, he possessed amply the advantages which flow from study and knowledge' ('Edinburgh Magazine and Review', 4.560). In Carlyle's astute analysis the secret of Stevenson's success was his affability: 'By civility to his Students who began to think themselves men, as he treated them as Gentlemen, he drew their respect & attention, & as their minds were just ripening for science & belles-lettres, his Lectures on Aristotle's poetics & Longinus on the sublime, captivated our opening taste & made us ascribe to them what was chiefly due to our own ripening understandings. (Carlyle, 'Recollections', 57)' Accordingly, though he left no important book or original idea, Stevenson made a huge impact on his students. The moderate literati, including William Robertson, Hugh Blair, Thomas Somerville, and Alexander Carlyle; adherents of the popular party, such as John Erskine; and even occasional sceptics, such as James Boswell, all left powerful testimonies to the important place Stevenson had in their lives and intellectual outlooks. 
On 19 January 1774 Stevenson submitted his resignation, and he and John Bruce were elected conjunct professors a week later (Edinburgh town council records, 91.102, 107-8). Stevenson retired at the end of the academic year, with Bruce superseding him (Robertson to Wordie, 10 Oct 1775, Edinburgh City Archives). According to Bower, at the beginning of his tenure as principal, Robertson made a moving commendation of Stevenson before the logic class, in which he declared the class to be the foundation of all philosophy and a lifelong source of ideas. Stevenson's impact also extended beyond the classroom. As a member of the Rankenian Club, he associated with like-minded intellectuals such as Charles Mackie, Colin MacLaurin, Robert Wallace, and William Wishart, all of whom were engaged in an effort to liberalize Scottish cultural life and to create an educational environment appropriate for landed gentlemen. Stevenson gave his library to Edinburgh University, and died, in Edinburgh, in early September 1775. 


@@@@@


doc= 63632


Gee, Joshua (1667-1730), writer on trade and merchant, was the son of John Gee (1635-1704) of Moyvoughley, co. Westmeath. His father was a Quaker, originally from Yorkshire. Nothing is known of Joshua Gee's education. By 1694 Gee was in London, where he became a master of the Grocers' Company by purchase (therefore not having served an apprenticeship) and hence a freeman of the City of London. That same year he married Sarah Hart (1673/4-1704), daughter of a tailor, at the Peel Quaker meeting. They had five children, William ('b'. and died 1696), Joshua (1697-1777), John (1699-1719?), Mary (1701-1702), and Sarah (1703-1740). Following his first wife's death, in 1706 he married Anna Osgood (died 1730), widow of Salem Osgood and daughter-in-law of John Osgood, a Quaker silk and linen merchant. It is possible that it was this marriage which enabled Gee to buy Fenton House, Hampstead, Middlesex, in 1707. Anna was already the mother of two daughters, Rebecca (1695-1783) and Anne ('b'. 1699); she and Gee had four children, Samuel (1707-1746), Elizabeth ('b'. 1708), Osgood ('b'. 1710), and Mary ('b'. 1713). 
Gee seems to have shared the business interests of the Osgoods, as he was identified as a silkman when he acted as one of the mortgagees of William Penn's proprietary rights in Pennsylvania in 1708. He was also an adviser to the Board of Trade and Plantations. His interests in the American colonies included iron ore. He was the leading force in a partnership that by 1723 owned or controlled more than 12,000 acres in North America that contained or were hoped to contain iron ore deposits; by 1726 his partners included Augustine Washington, father of the first president of the United States, George Washington. He published the work that made him famous, 'The Trade and Navigation of Great Britain Consider'd', in London in 1729. It went through many editions (4th edn, 1738) and was frequently reprinted during the eighteenth century, notably by Robert and Andrew Foulis of Glasgow in 1755 and in a French translation in 1750. Gee's most famous work presented its overview of British trade both historically and by national areas, and commented on specific problems of trade (for example devoting chapter 12 to 'French 'fashions pernicious' to England)'. However, the greater part of the work was concerned with suggesting remedies: in particular solving the colonial labour problem by transporting domestic convicts and the unemployed poor and the creation of free ports at Gibraltar and Port Mahon; and, more generally, the encouragement of foreign import-replacing production in the plantations. 
Gee died at the baths in Hampstead in 1730. He has, possibly wrongly, been identified as the author of two further works, both related to the woollen trade, namely, 'An Impartial Enquiry into the Importance and Present State of the Woollen Manufactures of Great Britain' and 'The Grazier's Advocate, or, Free Thoughts of Wool and the Woollen Trade'. Both were published in 1742, twelve years after his death. 
Gee is widely thought to have been, in 1713-14, an important contributor to the twice-weekly issues of the 'British Merchant', and a collaborator with Henry Martin in arguing the protectionist case against the treaty of commerce with France proposed at Utrecht. The 'British Merchant' was set up in opposition to the 'Mercator, or, Commerce Retrieved', which defended the idea of such a treaty. Gee has been described as a 'staunch protectionist' (Johnson, 145) and (assuming the 1742 works were his) as 'the spokesman for the wool manufacturers as well as a merchant enemy of the India Company' (ibid., 348). David Hume later wrote: 'The writings of Mr. Gee struck the nation with an universal panic, when they saw it plainly demonstrated, by a detail of particulars, that the balance was against them for so considerable a sum as must leave them without a single shilling in five or six years. But luckily, twenty years have since elapsed, with an expensive foreign war [1739-48]; yet it is commonly supposed, that money is still more plentiful among us than in any former period. (Hume, 61-2)' In his 'Lectures on Jurisprudence' Adam Smith cited Hume's opinion approvingly, but in addition poked considerable fun at Gee's balance of trade data showing all the nations of Europe as having a favourable balance with Britain, with the exceptions of Spain, Portugal, and Ireland, as well as the American (but not West Indian) plantations. Gee's works contained much of the protectionist content with which they were charged. 


@@@@@


doc= 63633


Pinto, Isaac de (1717?-1787), writer on economics, was born probably in the Netherlands at Amsterdam (or perhaps in Bordeaux, France, in 1715) to a Portuguese-Jewish merchant family; his father was David de Pinto, a merchant, his mother Lea, 'nee' Ximenes. He married Rachel, the daughter of Benjamin Henriques. The family had prospered and moved to Amsterdam, where Isaac became an important figure in international finance and an adviser on commercial and colonial policy to the stadholder William IV and to the English East India Company, as well as a director of the Dutch West India Company. In 1761 he lent $6.6 million to the British Treasury. He also served as chairman of the board of the Amsterdam synagogue and secretary of the Dutch Academy of Sciences. Enjoying spectacular personal wealth, he owned a palace at Tulpenburg, and an Amsterdam town house, said to have been paved with pieces of gold, in which he entertained the stadholder. Following heavy losses on the collapse of Dutch West Indies Company stock, Pinto headed in 1762 for Paris, where his financial affairs recovered somewhat and his literary career began to flourish. He met and befriended David Hume in 1764, along with other notables of the republic of letters. He also maintained his sumptuous lifestyle despite his reduced circumstances; his dinner parties became the stuff of contemporary legend. Well disposed towards Britain, Pinto gave invaluable advice to the duke of Bedford, Britain's representative at the treaty of Paris in 1763; his advice was based on his inside knowledge of the French negotiating position, and he warned against potentially costly errors in the draft treaty. His counsel led to the terms of the definitive version being reworded to Britain's advantage. For this service the East India Company in 1767, following the advocacy of Hume and other highly placed friends and contacts (the stadholder's widow was a daughter of George II), rewarded Pinto with a lifetime pension of $500 per annum. The following year he was received by the British monarch. 
Pinto became well known for his writings on economics. These were translated into English by Sir Philip Francis (although published under the name of Francis's cousin the Revd S. W. Baggs) and were widely discussed -- although less widely accepted, given that their controversial content challenged current conceptions of wealth and, to some extent, morality. Adam Smith was notably hostile to his views on credit and the stock exchange without ever mentioning him by name. Werner Sombart and Henri See both later described Pinto as a major innovator in economic science for his role in explaining the role of credit and speculation. His writings furnish a detailed and informed account of the practice of stock-jobbing on the Dutch money market as well as Anglo-Dutch and international finance in general. He characterized speculation in the money market as a form of gambling, but defended the operation of credit and debt in the economy as a generally benign factor, and as one prone to foster social dynamism. This led Karl Marx later to describe him, somewhat disdainfully, as 'the Pindar of the Amsterdam stock exchange' (Marx, 251). His best-known economic work was the 'Traite de la circulation et du credit' (Amsterdam, 1771), which emphasized the economically beneficial aspects of the national debt, then a controversial subject. It was, Pinto argued -- against the opinion of David Hume and others -- Britain's superior public credit which accounted for one of the main sources of the country's growing prosperity in Europe and its comparative strategic power in the mid-century wars for empire. He famously argued that the unexpected British victories at Havana in 1762 and in the Seven Years' War generally were underwritten by huge public borrowings. In the same work he also opposed the doctrines of leading physiocrats, particularly Mirabeau and Quesnay, for their agrarian fundamentalism, which he termed 'the frenzy of the soil' (Hertzberg, 74), and their misunderstanding of the role of public credit in modern commercial economies. France's relative decline as a European power, he asserted, was not due to the growth of credit, rather the failure of its maintenance on the part of the state. Too much emphasis on the domestic rural economy could foster a society lacking in dynamism. It was no accident that Dutch investment capital flowed into England rather than France. As anti-Jewish prejudice was widespread across Europe, even in the writings of some Enlightenment figures, aspects of Pinto's economic writings may also have been implicitly intended to defend the role of Jews in Europe's capital markets. 
As a cosmopolitan and well-connected figure, Pinto also kept up a lively interest in the world of letters of his day and wrote a number of works on moral and political questions. His 'Essai sur le luxe' (Amsterdam, 1762) was an investigation and a moderate defence of the expansion of luxury consumption which in some respects prepared the ground for his later economic work. The 'Reflections critiques sur le premier chapitre du VIIe volume des oeuvres de M. de Voltaire' (Amsterdam, 1762), also published in Paris the same year as the 'Apologie pour la nation juive', was a response to the calumnies against the Jews contained in Voltaire's entry 'Juifs' in his 'Dictionnaire philosophique' and other writings. It mounted a defence of Sephardic Jews and their position in Europe rather than the northern European Ashkenazi or of Judaism in general. Pinto was a secular thinker, but a conservative deist opposed to the militant atheism and materialism of some writers of the French Enlightenment. These views were expressed in his 'Precis des arguments contre les materialistes' (The Hague, 1774). With strong Orangeist sympathies intact throughout his life he remained a friend of Britain and criticized the American revolutionaries in their struggle against British rule in a number of pamphlets. Later in life, following a period of residence in Paris and travels to England, he settled in the Jewish community at The Hague, Netherlands, where he died on 13 August 1787; he was buried there in the Jewish cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 63635


Thom, William (1710-1790), author and Church of Scotland minister, was born at New Monkland, near Glasgow. Nothing is known of his parents or his early life. He was educated at Glasgow University, where he studied under the celebrated moral philosophy professor Francis Hutcheson. Thom received his MA in 1732 and was licensed by the presbytery of Hamilton in 1738, but he did not receive a call to the ministry until 1746; during that period he was described by another young minister, Alexander Carlyle, as having had 'great sway' among the other young men of the Literary Society ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 52). In May 1746 Thom was presented to the parish of Govan, Lanarkshire, by the professors of Glasgow University, who held the patronage of the parish. The call was opposed by the parishioners, probably because of their dissatisfaction with the principle of patronage and Thom's association with members of the modernizing or moderate faction within the church, and the ordination was delayed until 25 February 1748. 
During a ministry of more than four decades Thom worked effectively to overcome that opposition. Although his call had been sponsored by the moderate leadership of Glasgow University, in a series of more than twenty controversial sermons and tracts, most published anonymously, he would gradually align himself with their ecclesiastical opponents in the orthodox or popular party. His 1766 'Short History of the Late General Assembly' announced his opposition to ecclesiastical patronage, the principal dividing line between moderate and popular clergyman, despite the fact that he owed his own position to that practice. He also began a lengthy dispute with his patrons at Glasgow University, in part because they refused to augment his stipend; he developed his case in a series of six critical pamphlets, in which he first displayed the sarcastic wit for which he became famous. Yet there were serious issues involved. In 'The Motives which have Determined the University of Glasgow to Desert the Blackfriar Church' (1764), Thom criticized the professors for attending their own chapel rather than hearing a local orthodox preacher, John Gillies. More substantively, his 'Defects of an University Education, and its unsuitableness to a Commercial People' (1761) criticized the classical curriculum at the university for devoting excessive attention to such rarefied subjects as the metaphysics of morals -- implicitly criticizing his former teacher Francis Hutcheson -- instead of a practical education based upon the mechanical arts and history. 
Thom also became a strong advocate of the interests of farmers and weavers, who formed the bulk of the congregants in his parish, reflected in his 1771 'Letter of Advice to the Farmers, Land-Labourers, and Country Tradesmen in Scotland'. In a series of five or more anonymous pamphlets beginning with his 1770 'Seasonable Advice to the Landholders and Farmers in Scotland', he also became Scotland's most prominent promoter of their emigration to America. Like other popular party ministers, he expressed considerable sympathy for the position of the American colonies during their war for independence, about which he published three sermons. He married Grizel Scot on 22 October 1753, and they had four children before her death in 1760. On 17 April 1780 he married Agnes, daughter of John M'Kechnie, merchant in Glasgow. William Thom died at Govan on 8 August 1790; his second wife died in 1817. 
Since his death Thom has been known principally for his eccentricity and wit. Only recently have historians come to appreciate his prominent role as a critic of the classical style of education at Glasgow University, which helped inspire the development of the practically orientated Anderson's Institution, the forerunner of the University of Strathclyde, founded in 1796 by the popular party adherent John Anderson. Because most of his works appeared anonymously, Thom's prominent influence in encouraging emigration from Scotland to America during the 1770s was not recognized for two centuries. Thom's career highlights the developing ties that emerged in eighteenth-century Scotland among popular presbyterianism, the growing artisan class, and a keen interest in America. 


@@@@@


doc= 63636


Alexander, William (bap. 1742?, d. 1788?), physician and author, was probably the son of William Alexander and Elizabeth Allanson of Halifax who was baptized at Halifax on 6 January 1742; much about his life remains obscure. In the 1760s he attended medical classes at the University of Edinburgh including those of William Cullen in chemistry and James Russell in natural philosophy. By then he had already seen service with the Surrey militia, and he appears to have practised in Edinburgh for some years before taking his MD in 1769. On 26 January 1765 he was admitted to the Medical Society of Edinburgh and on 28 December 1766 he married Eliza Thomson in the college kirk, Edinburgh. By 1768 he had moved to London, where in that year he published his 'Experimental Essays', in which he described experiments he had conducted in Edinburgh and London, in a 'free and liberal spirit of enquiry' in opposition to 'blind deference to rules' (W. Alexander, 'Experimental Essays', 1768, vi-vii). His 'Experimental Enquiry concerning the causes which have generally been said to produce putrid diseases' (1771) details experiments conducted with 'the stinking water of the North Loch' and from other marshes and locations around Edinburgh, and in London (W. Alexander, 'An Experimental Enquiry', 1771, 65-73). On 16 October 1771 he married for a second time, at Haughton-le-Skerne, co. Durham; his second wife was the widowed Elizabeth Bendlowes. 
The tone of Alexander's medical writing is of an impatience with inherited wisdom, an urgent preoccupation with experiment, and an insistence on investigation. His range of interests, in natural history, in medical science, and in travel literature, placed him at the heart of new approaches to the 'natural history of man' pioneered by Claude Buffon. His best-known work, the 'History of Women' (1779), draws upon these interests but also deserves to take a place among Enlightenment histories of civil society. Though Alexander clearly knew and was influenced by Montesquieu and the 'encyclopedistes', it was to contemporary Scottish historians such as John Millar, Lord Kames, and Gilbert Stuart that he owed his greatest debts. Like them, he attempted to place the history of women and gender roles firmly within the history of civil society, though he also perpetuated their disagreements and inconsistencies. The 'History' is long, rambling, and inconsistent, and omits any scholarly references. In it, Alexander drew widely and indiscriminately upon biblical history, theological studies, classical and medieval histories, and travel literature to construct narratives of women's employment, marriage, child-rearing patterns, customs and ceremonies, and the status and public power of women. He explored the relative influences of nature, or biology, and education, or environment, in shaping the manners of women; the potential for the moral corruption of nations in the absence of female chastity; the relationship between the progress of 'civilization' and the condition of women; and the distinctive characteristics of both 'northern' and British women. On the whole Alexander was inclined to give little weight to the influence of Christianity in the improvement of the condition of women, and there is an anti-Catholic and anti-clerical tinge to much of his discussion. The work received broadly favourable reviews, although the 'Gentleman's Magazine' criticized his treatment of the women of the 'Bible' and the 'Monthly Review' judged it frivolous, inelegant, and obscene, entirely inappropriate for female readers. Alexander appears to have made some amendments to meet these comments in the third edition of 1782. The work was sufficiently successful to be translated into German in 1780-81, and into French in 1791. 
Very little is known of Alexander's last years. He was admitted as a non-resident fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh on 3 November 1783, when his address was given as London. Obituaries vary on his date of death; it is not clear whether he can be identified with the Dr Alexander who kept an academy in Hampstead and died in Margate on 9 September 1788. 


@@@@@


doc= 63638


Wood, Arthur Henry (1875-1953), conductor and composer, was born on 24 January 1875 in Cemetery Road, Heckmondwike, Yorkshire, the eldest child of George Henry Wood ('b'. 1850), tailor, and his wife, Henrietta Jackson Hepworth ('b'. 'c'.1853/4). His father played in a local amateur orchestra as violinist, on which instrument Arthur initially followed him before settling on the flute and piccolo. In 1882 the family moved to Harrogate, where Wood received lessons from Arthur Brookes, a member of the municipal orchestra. He left school at the age of twelve, and at fourteen was organist of St Paul's Presbyterian Church, Harrogate. More particularly he became flautist, accompanist, and eventually assistant conductor of the municipal orchestra under J. Sidney Jones. He later recalled conducting four times per day, especially rueing the 7.30 a.m. band-calls designed to attract visitors to take the waters. At these he sometimes had to conduct in mittens, while the musicians played with their noses running. Later Wood joined the Bournemouth Municipal Orchestra under Dan Godfrey, and also had a spell in Llandudno. 
It was Sidney Jones, the son of the Harrogate Municipal Orchestra's music director and composer of the musical play 'The Geisha', who brought Wood to London as music director for his comedy opera 'My Lady Molly' at Terry's Theatre in 1903. About this time Wood married, and he and his wife, Ethel Louise, had a son and two daughters. Wood subsequently conducted at the Apollo Theatre in 1904 for Andre Messager's 'Veronique' and in 1906 for the musical 'The Dairymaids' by Paul Rubens and Frank E. Tours. The latter was the start of an association with the producer Robert Courtneidge that included Wood's appointment as the music director of the Shaftesbury Theatre from 1908 to 1916. 
Wood's tenure as conductor at the Shaftesbury was notable especially for Lionel Monckton's and Howard Talbot's musical play 'The Arcadians'. It was Wood who arranged the overture on Monckton's and Talbot's melodies that has often been used as a concert item. During this period he became recognized as one of the most accomplished and reliable of West End music directors, and he went on to fill the same position at the Gaiety (1917-21), the Prince of Wales's (1921-2, 1927-8), Daly's (1922-6, 1929-30), His Majesty's (1928-9), the Cambridge (1930-31), the Savoy (1931), the Coliseum (1932), and the Garrick (1934). During these years he also composed scores for several touring musical comedies and revues, including 'Oh, Caesar!' (1916), 'Petticoat Fair' (1919), 'Fancy Fair' (1919), 'Too Many Girls' (1919), 'Archie' (1924), and 'The Sheik of Shepherd's Bush' (1924). His tenure at Daly's during the 1920s covered the 1923 revival of 'The Merry Widow' with Evelyn Laye, Derek Oldham, Carl Brisson, and George Graves. In 1925 Wood took the entire Daly's Theatre orchestra to the Opera House, Manchester, for the try-out of Oscar Straus's 'Cleopatra', but the orchestra pit flooded, and he conducted in evening dress and gumboots. 
During the 1930s Wood conducted on tour -- notably with Noel Coward's 'Bitter-Sweet' (1931-2) and George Posford's 'The Gay Hussar' (1933-4). In addition he became a frequent guest conductor for the BBC. Throughout his career he composed much finely crafted light orchestral music, of which 'Three Old Dances' (1902) was an early example. As a composer for Boosey and Hawkes he produced works that particularly commemorated his native Yorkshire, as in 'Three Dale Dances' (1917), 'Three More Dale Dances' (1927), 'Yorkshire Moors Suite', 'My Native Heath' (1925), 'Yorkshire Rhapsody', and 'Barnsley Fair'. Besides other suites, such as 'Three Mask Dances' (1927), his compositions ranged from a one-step, 'You Can't Keep Still', to a concertino for flute, published in a reduction for flute and piano in 1948. True to his north-country origins, he also composed marches for brass bands and became a respected adjudicator. 
Of his light orchestral compositions the piece that gave Wood his greatest fame was the suite 'My Native Heath', which comprised four movements -- 'Knaresboro Status', 'Ilkley Tarn', 'Bolton Abbey', and 'Barwick Green'. The final movement, a portrayal of a maypole dance on the village green of Barwick in Elmet, east of Leeds, was adopted as the signature tune for the BBC radio series 'The Archers', a role it went on to fulfil into the twenty-first century. 
Wood was a member of the Green Room and Savage clubs. He lived for many years at 20 Arlington Gardens, Chiswick, London, where he died on 18 January 1953, aged seventy-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 63648


Raffalovich, Marc-Andre (1864-1934), writer, was born in Paris on 11 September 1864, the third child of Hermann Raffalovich (died 1893), a prosperous banker, and his wife, Marie (died 1921). His parents were Jews who migrated from Odessa to Paris in 1863: his mother was a cultivated hostess who presided over a salon at 19 avenue Hoche. Andre Raffalovich, as he was usually known, had an elder brother, Arthur, who became a diplomat and economist in France; their sister, Sophie O'Brien, married William O'Brien, the Irish nationalist politician. After Raffalovich turned eighteen, in 1882, his parents sent him to London with the intention that he should prepare for entrance to an English university. Instead he lived the life of a precocious and privileged amateur. During the 1880s, with the hope of establishing a literary salon at his home in South Audley Street, he sought out Stevenson, Pater, Swinburne, Browning, and Meredith. Later, in the 1890s, he was a tactful and generous benefactor to Aubrey Beardsley in his final illness; his association with Oscar Wilde was, however, mistrustful and mutually ambivalent. In January 1891 he was naturalized as a British subject. 
Raffalovich published five volumes of poetry: 'Cyril and Lionel' (1884), 'Tuberose and Meadowsweet' (1885), 'In Fancy Dress' (1886), 'It is Thyself' (1889), and 'The Thread and the Path' (1895). He also wrote two novels, 'A Willing Exile' (1890) and 'Self Seekers' (1897). After composing two early dramatic sketches, 'Roses of Shadow' and 'Black Sheep', performed in 1893 and 1894, he collaborated with his lover, J. H. Gray, in writing 'The Blackmailers', which (despite the discretion with which it alluded to male homosexuality) had only one matinee performance at the Prince of Wales's Theatre in 1895. These works were neither distinctive nor futile, but Raffalovich's most significant literary efforts were the articles on sexual inversion which he contributed in the mid-1890s to 'Archives d'Anthropologie Criminelle' and two cognate monographs. After the Wilde trials Raffalovich published 'L'affaire Oscar Wilde' (1895) and 'Uranisme et unisexualite' (1896). Both works were written in French and published in Paris: they would have been condemned, if not criminally prosecuted, in Britain. His discussions of male homosexuality were conscientious and well intended, but despite his good insights and wish for fair treatment of a reviled minority they contain pejorative phrases and oppressive sentiments. Whether these passages reflected Raffalovich's beliefs, or were forced on him by prevalent notions of respectability, is unclear. 
Around 1893 Raffalovich began a loving, lifelong relationship with John Henry Gray (1866-1934). It was by Gray's influence that in 1896 Raffalovich was received into the Catholic church by the Jesuit fathers of Mayfair, and assumed the saint's name of Sebastian: he was thereafter known as Andre-Sebastian, or Andre-Sebastien, Raffalovich. After Gray's resignation from the Foreign Office library in 1898 Raffalovich paid for him to study for the priesthood in Rome. When, in 1907, Gray was subsequently appointed to the parish of St Peter, Morningside, Raffalovich moved to Edinburgh to be near him. Their companionate relationship, with its deep mutual devotion and dependence, endured for the rest of their lives. Raffalovich helped to finance the building of several Catholic churches and chapels, notably St Peter's. Apart from a few pseudonymous contributions to the Dominican monthly 'Blackfriars', Raffalovich stopped writing. He preferred to devote himself to good works and to cultivate his gift for friendship. His Edinburgh household was known to a small, fortunate circle for its pleasant hospitability and literate conversation. 
Raffalovich died in his sleep on 14 February 1934 at his home, 9 Whitehouse Terrace, Edinburgh, and was buried in Mount Vernon cemetery, Edinburgh (where Canon Gray was buried four months later). 


@@@@@


doc= 63649


Withers, Henry (1650/51?-1729), army officer, is of unknown parentage. His funeral monument suggests that he came from a military family, although this may refer to his extensive career in the army. Following service in the English regiment in France during the 1670s, Withers received his first commission in the duke of Monmouth's foot regiment in 1678, before serving in the Tangier garrison. By October 1689 he was a captain in a grenadier company and in 1692 he was promoted to major in the Coldstream Guards, the regiment commanded by the politically powerful Henry Sidney, earl of Romney. In 1696 he became lieutenant-colonel of the Coldstream Guards. Ever since 1689 Withers had been a staff officer, serving as adjutant-general in Ireland, and following the renewal of hostilities with France in 1702 he became a brigadier-general. Upon Romney's death in 1704 Withers acquired an even greater patron as the new colonel of the regiment was the duke of Marlborough. Marlborough's original intention was to make Withers the colonel of the Horse Guards 'unless there were some man of quality fitt for itt' ('Marlborough-Godolphin Correspondence', 281), suggesting that Withers came from relatively humble stock. 
Having been promoted to major-general in 1704, Withers served at Blenheim. By 1706 Marlborough had secured for Withers, 'this very brave and good officer' ('Marlborough-Godolphin Correspondence', 574), the governorship of Sheerness in Kent, and in 1707 he became a lieutenant-general. His post at Sheerness allowed Withers to secure the adjacent parliamentary seat of Queenborough in the 1708 election. In the House of Commons, Withers voted with the whigs. Withers distinguished himself at the siege of Tournai in July 1709, being wounded in the chest and receiving the plaudits of Richard Steele in 'The Tatler'. He had recovered to play a leading role in the battle of Malplaquet in September 1709, for which he received a Jacobite medal lauding his bravery under fire. Peter Wentworth described Withers as 'the old soldier' ('Wentworth Papers', 141) when he met him in September 1710 supposedly on a reconnaissance mission for Marlborough following the fall of Godolphin. Certainly Withers was trusted with confidential letters from Marlborough to his duchess. However, Withers maintained good relations with Henry St John, who had served as secretary at war from 1704 to 1708 and who was a leading minister after 1710; in the wake of Marlborough's fall in January 1712 this ensured that Withers continued to be employed, being sent as the commander of the foot in Flanders in the spring of 1712. 
If the Jacobites had harboured hopes of Withers they were to be disappointed. Indeed, he was reported to have been deeply involved in whig plans to seize both St John and Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, in order to preserve the Hanoverian succession. He continued as governor of Sheerness until his death. He died on 11 November 1729; according to his funeral monument, he was seventy-eight. He left $2000 in South Sea annuities to his sister, Elizabeth Lutley, and the remainder of his estate to his 'loving friend', Colonel Henry Disney, with whom he had shared a house in Greenwich since at least 1713. Following his burial in Westminster Abbey on 14 November it was Disney who arranged for the erection of the monument to his memory, complete with verses and prose by Alexander Pope which praised his military valour and social accomplishments: '
For thee the hardy Vet'ran drops a tear 

And the gay courtier feels a sigh sincere. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 63651


Chandler, Raymond Thornton (1888-1959), writer, was born in Chicago, USA, on 23 July 1888, the only child of Maurice Benjamin Chandler ('b'. 1859), a railway engineer of Pennsylvanian Quaker descent, and his wife, Florence Thornton (died 1924), one of five daughters from a respectable Anglo-Irish Quaker family from Waterford, Ireland, who was visiting a sister in Nebraska when she met Maurice. They married in Wyoming in 1887, but divorced seven years later because of Maurice's alcoholism and violent behaviour. Chandler never saw or heard from his father again. Florence and her son returned to Ireland, where they were received so coldly and ungraciously by her conservative family that they almost immediately moved to London, to a house in Upper Norwood, where Florence's elder brother Edward had agreed to look after them. Chandler was enrolled at the prestigious Dulwich College as a day boy in September 1900, and stayed there for the next four years. 
With a view to entering the civil service, Chandler, financed by his uncle, spent 1905 in Paris, Munich, and Freiburg learning languages. In 1907 he came third out of the 800 candidates who sat the civil service examination, and he came top in the classics paper. He began work at the Admiralty but left after six months, disgruntled at being given orders by those he considered his inferiors. For the next five years he scratched a living from part-time teaching at Dulwich College, as a reporter for the 'Daily Express', and as a contributor of sketches, reviews, essays, and poems to the 'Westminster Gazette' and 'The Academy'. 
Disenchanted with his literary progress in England, Chandler returned to America in 1912. In San Francisco he worked stringing tennis rackets, living in a succession of cheap boarding-houses. In all certainty, as his biographer Tom Hiney suggests, 'the character of Philip Marlowe was fleshed out in these resolute, if friendless and moneyless, months in Californian boarding houses' (Hiney, 37). Having been exceptional at mathematics at Dulwich, Chandler attended a bookkeeping course in the evenings, and after only a few months of part-time study he was employable as an accountant. In 1913 he moved to Los Angeles, where he worked as a bookkeeper for the Los Angeles Creamery; his mother joined him a year later. 
Chandler enlisted in the Canadian army in 1917 and was sent to France with the 7th battalion of the Canadian expeditionary force, fighting in the closing campaigns of the First World War. He was wounded in the trenches in June 1918 and returned to England, to the Royal Flying Corps at Waddington, where he learned to fly, but the war ended without his returning to combat. He left the armed forces in 1919 with the rank of sergeant, and went back to America, where he resumed work in the creamery. He also began an affair with Pearl Eugenie Hurlburt (Cissy) Pascal (1870-1954), the wife of Julian Pascal, a classical musician, and the stepmother of one of his friends from the army. Cissy divorced her husband in 1920, but because Florence was bitterly opposed to her son's relationship, not least because Cissy was eighteen years older than Chandler, the couple had to wait until her death in January 1924 before they could marry on 6 February of that year. By this time Chandler was working for the Dabney Oil Syndicate as an extremely successful and wealthy executive. However, like his father, Chandler was an alcoholic (he had begun drinking during the war), and in 1932 he was sacked for drunkenness and chronic absenteeism. Chandler and Cissy lived off his savings while he learned to write crime fiction, a genre, he had noted with his businessman's eye, which was very lucrative. 
Chandler began composing stories for the pulp magazine 'Black Mask', writing twenty-one in the 1930s. But it became obvious to editors and readers that his work was impressively different from the mass of crime fiction written during this 'golden age' of pulp. Chandler's stories, such as 'Trouble is my Business', 'Smart Aleck Kill', 'Red Wind', 'Killer in the Rain', and 'The King in Yellow', showed an extraordinary eye for detail, and his imagery and use of simile were sharp and inventive. He invariably sacrificed plot for atmosphere and character, and grew adept at using a first-person narrator whose mordant meditations and witty observations, often extraneous to events, were considerably more interesting than the plot. 
Although Chandler was well paid for the stories -- $350 per story from 'Black Mask', and $400 from 'Dime Detective Magazine' -- he was struggling financially. In 1938, however, when he was fifty, the publisher Alfred Knopf saw some of his stories and asked to see a novel. 'The Big Sleep', featuring the private eye Philip Marlowe, was published the following year. Unlike most of his peers, Chandler effortlessly managed the transition from the short story to the novel, which drew on several of his 'Black Mask' stories for its plot, but developed Marlowe's complexly insouciant yet dogged character and his downbeat view of contemporary urban life. 
Over a twenty-year period Chandler wrote six more Marlowe novels. In the ingeniously plotted 'Farewell my Lovely' (1940) Chandler explored his detective's fallibility and vulnerability. In 'The High Window' (1942), Marlowe becomes more cynical and world-weary, and in 'The Lady in the Lake' (1943), he is actively misanthropic, projecting his own despair onto the state of California, and onto modern life itself. 'The Little Sister' (1949) is particularly remarkable for Marlowe's cleverly phrased and brutally honest self-evaluations, while throughout the convoluted 'The Long Goodbye' (1953) he seems to have become reconciled to both his own and others' human weaknesses. 'Playback' (1958), set in San Diego, is the most humorous of the novels and depicts Marlowe, now old and, in the eyes of the world, unsuccessful, but with his sense of humour, honour, and integrity intact. 
Marlowe became a twentieth-century icon: honest, stubborn, stoical, witty, perceptive, but, like his creator, by no means perfect. Some commentators think that in Marlowe Chandler had created a combination of his own character and the traditional pulp hero. On the surface Marlowe was as lonely, unsociable, and self-persecuting as Chandler, but beneath that lay a sense of honour, humour, and sensitivity (Hiney, 102). Chandler wrote in an essay: 'Down these mean streets a man must go who is not himself mean, who is neither tarnished nor afraid' ('Atlantic Monthly', 1942). Marlowe was just such a man. Chandler's hold on the world's imagination in the second half of the twentieth century is incontestable: his books have been translated into dozens of languages and sold millions of copies, yet he was and is much admired by intellectuals. The filmed versions of his novels, particularly 'The Big Sleep', 'The Long Goodbye', and 'Farewell my Lovely', carried Marlowe's tough wit to an even larger audience, while for many cineastes they mark a high point in American cinema. 
In 1943, before his novels were as commercially and critically successful, Chandler was recruited as a screenwriter by Paramount Studios in Hollywood, where he worked with Billy Wilder on 'Double Indemnity' (1944), which was nominated for two Oscars. He also scripted 'The Blue Dahlia' (1945) and worked, unsatisfactorily, with Alfred Hitchcock on 'Strangers on a Train' (1950). Despite the considerable amount of money he earned in Hollywood, however, he effectively left in 1946, buying a house in La Jolla, near San Diego, in order to concentrate on the novels for which he is best remembered. 
Chandler was of average height, and although he was handsome and suave in his youth, alcoholism had ravaged his features and his figure by middle age. He enjoyed light classical music but otherwise, apart from Cissy, he had strikingly few interests. After Cissy died in December 1954, Chandler, devastated, drank more desperately than usual, and on 22 February 1955 he attempted to kill himself with a revolver at his home in La Jolla. The police intervened and escorted him to the psychiatric ward of San Diego County Hospital, and on the following day he was taken to the Chula Vista sanatorium, a private clinic, whence he discharged himself after a week. Although his drinking continued unabated, over the next five years Chandler regularly visited England, where he was a celebrity. He enjoyed the attention and became particularly friendly with Ian Fleming, Natasha Spender, and Helga Greene, who became his agent and to whom he proposed marriage in February 1959. Helga accepted, but Chandler's alcoholism was now in an advanced stage and he died of pneumonia, with complications attributable to alcoholism, at Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, on 26 March 1959, before the marriage could take place. He was buried on 30 March 1959 at the Mount Hope state cemetery, San Diego, and in February 2011, in accordance with his wishes, Cissy's ashes were interred in the same plot. Chandler's posthumous reputation was sealed in 1995, when his complete works were published by the 'Library of America', a far cry from the pulp magazines which had launched one of the most remarkable writing careers of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 63652


Agar, Charles, first earl of Normanton (1736-1809), Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin, the third son of Henry Agar, MP for Gowran, co. Kilkenny, Ireland, and Anne Ellis, daughter of Welbore Ellis (1661/2-1734), bishop of Meath, and Diana Briscoe, was born on 22 December 1736 at Gowran Castle, co. Kilkenny. He was educated at Westminster School (1747-1755?) and Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1759, MA in 1762, and DCL in 1765. In 1763 he was appointed chaplain to the duke of Northumberland, lord lieutenant of Ireland. This was a sure path to preferment and Agar became rector of Ballymagarvey and Skryne, in the diocese of Meath, in the same year. He was successively rector of Annagh, in the diocese of Kilmore (1765-6), and dean of Kilmore (1765-8), and was consecrated bishop of Cloyne in 1768. In 1774 he wondered why, in view of his consistent support for the administration, he had not been offered the archbishopric of Tuam, although he candidly admitted that it was not his preference. Four years later he assured the viceroy, Buckinghamshire, of his devotion to his majesty's business in Ireland and clearly hoped to succeed the dying archbishop of Dublin. He was disappointed in this, partly, in his view, because of bad relations with the archbishop of Armagh, and was given the archbishopric of Cashel, to the considerable dissatisfaction of his family and connections. On 22 November 1776 he married Jane Benson (1751/2-1826), eldest daughter of William Benson of co. Down and Frances Macartney-Porteous. They had three sons and one daughter. 
In late eighteenth-century Ireland, when patronage and political connections counted for much, and government management of Irish affairs called for considerable skill, Agar was well placed to receive recognition, and he relentlessly pursued his political and ecclesiastical ambitions. He was described by one contemporary as 'very active in business, a good speaker, and very ambitious of being employed by government as minister in the house of lords' (G. O. Sayles, ed., 'Contemporary sketches of the members of the Irish parliament of 1782', 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy', 56/ 3c, 1954, 273). Through family and other connections (his brother James, Viscount Clifden, alone controlled four borough seats), he was a power to be reckoned with, and when Edmund Sexten Pery, speaker of the Irish Commons and one of his family connections, sought Agar's support in obtaining a bishopric in 1780 (secured in 1781) for his brother William Cecil he was solemnly assured that his and the candidate's dependability as 'the sincere and steady friend of administration' was crucial ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 160-62). Yet Agar himself was forced briefly into opposition during the regency crisis mainly because of the English whig connections of his maternal uncle and mentor Welbore Ellis (later first Lord Mendip). He soon returned to his allegiance, being described by one modern historian as 'one of the fastest movers throughout the crisis' (McDowell, 342). Although never a major political figure such as Boulter or Stone, he was a prominent member of the 'Irish cabinet' of the 1780s and 1790s, and was a formidable draftsman of legislation and parliamentary speaker. His standing in the House of Lords was such that he was able both to carry and defeat measures there, occasionally against the wishes of government, and came nearly top of the ballots for the secret committees of 1793, 1797, and 1798, set up to inquire into the United Irishmen and the causes of the unrest that foreshadowed the rising in 1798. 
Agar's experience of agrarian agitation in the Munster dioceses of Cloyne and Cashel, particularly the Rightboy resistance to the payment of tithes to the established Church of Ireland, convinced him of the vulnerability of that church, which played a vital role in maintaining the constitution, and informed his opposition to Catholic relief, which he believed would undermine the principle of protestant ascendancy. His opposition to concessions to Catholics and dissenters was strongly felt, yet not expressed to the point of defeating government relief measures. In 1780 he protested against the bill to relieve dissenters of the sacramental test as making a material alteration in the constitution, but his most trenchant criticism was reserved for the Catholic relief bills of 1782, 1792, and 1793. The Catholic promoters of relief understandably regarded Agar as adamantly opposed to their cause, given his uncharacteristically tactless and ill-considered reference to Catholicism as 'a religion for knaves and fools' ('Report... on the Roman Catholic Bill', 245), a remark that drew a rebuke from Lord Donoughmore. Despite commenting that the 1793 bill, by extending the parliamentary franchise to Catholics, would concede too much, Agar reluctantly voted for the measure because it had been framed by 'his majesty's ministers in this country' ('A Full and Accurate Report', 384-5). His loyalty was rewarded by his creation in 1795 as Baron Somerton. 
Agar's temperament responded freely to the rebellion of 1798, and in the face of those politicians and others who advocated a degree of leniency towards the insurgents and their leaders -- for example, through their preference for transportation rather than execution -- he pressed for the death penalty as a surer deterrent. In the matter of the proposed union of Ireland with Great Britain in the aftermath of the rebellion he showed himself more open to negotiation, and his behaviour during the immediate pre-union period provides an example of his capacity to extract the maximum reward from government for his services. The distribution of honours that paved the way for the passing of the 'Act of Union' presented him with a fresh opportunity for promotion in the church. He had misgivings about the measure, partly because he believed that the position of the established Church of Ireland was not secured thereby; he was proved right in this, for disestablishment came within seventy years. He also criticized the provision whereby the Irish spiritual peers would be represented at Westminster by one archbishop and three bishops, the archbishops taking their turn. In Agar's view the four archbishops alone would have provided the appropriate representation. He gave way, persuaded by his advancement from baron to Viscount Somerton in 1800, and his election as one of the original twenty-eight Irish representative peers, which secured him a seat for life, as well as by confirmation from government that the archbishopric of Dublin might soon come his way, which it did in the following year. His ambitions for Armagh were not given official encouragement as the crown had since 1701 passed over Irish-born prelates for that office. Nor did his ambitions end there, and in 1806 he received the earldom of Normanton. Not, as his wife explained, that he 'is a flight of stairs above it in his own person already' but 'for his dear son's advantage' (M. MacDonagh, 'The Viceroy's Post-Bag', 1904, 207-8). 
Agar was a friend of the equally career-conscious John Hely-Hutchinson, provost of Trinity College, Dublin, who had strong views on the improvement of Irish education, and some correspondence between them would suggest that Agar held thoughtful views on the subject, such as raising the age of entry to the college, and bringing masters from leading English schools to enhance those in Ireland. He served on a government commission of inquiry into Irish education, established in 1806, but to judge from the minutes he neither attended nor contributed much. More notable was the great wealth that he accumulated, partly, it was incorrectly claimed by his critics, by a tendency to treat episcopal property as his own. His fortune was divided between the English and Irish Funds, and he had cash in the Bank of Ireland (often called the National Bank) and some bank stock. 
Agar died on 14 July 1809 at his home in Great Cumberland Place, London, and was buried on 21 July in Westminster Abbey, where an immodest but accurate inscription on his monument credits him with the building of at least seventeen churches and twenty-two glebe houses, and with the framing of eighteen acts of parliament for regulating and supporting the Church of Ireland. He is also credited with instigating the completion (apart from the spire) of the new cathedral at Cashel which had been founded in the 1750s to replace the medieval edifice on the Rock and had languished ever since. He paid part of the cost of building it out of his own personal resources, and donated to it what was then one of the best organs that money could buy. To him was also attributed the high standard of music at the cathedral and in the metropolitical province of Cashel generally. His widow died on 25 October 1826, aged seventy-four, at 13 Montague Square, and was buried with him in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 63653


Annesley, Arthur, fifth earl of Anglesey (c.1678-1737), politician, was the third son of James Annesley, second earl of Anglesey ('c'.1645-1690), landowner, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Manners (died 1700), daughter of the eighth earl of Rutland. His family's traditions and connections were presbyterian and whiggish, exemplified in his own appointment as a gentleman of the privy chamber to William III in 1689, while still a boy. But after education at Eton College ('c'.1693-7) and Magdalene College, Cambridge (1698-9), he emerged into adulthood as a high-church tory. At Cambridge he had enjoyed a brilliant reputation, publishing an edition of Latin poetry while still an undergraduate, and being elected to a college fellowship in 1700, the year after taking his MA degree. On 6 January 1702 he married his cousin Mary (died 1719), third daughter of John Thompson, first Baron Haversham, politician, and Frances Annesley. They had no children. 
Annesley was returned for the university constituency to the first parliament of Queen Anne's reign; he soon enjoyed a reputation as a fluent and forthright speaker, and was drawn into the orbit of Secretary Nottingham, probably the leading lay high-churchman of his day. In 1703 he went over to secure election to the Irish parliament for the borough of New Ross, not far from his family's estate in co. Wexford. He attended the first session of Queen Anne's Irish parliament, in the winter of 1703-4, and quickly made his presence felt, arguing for the removal of the 'regium donum', the annual pension granted by the crown to Presbyterian ministers, and supporting the imposition of the sacramental test. Following the ministerial reconstruction in England in the spring of 1704, in which Nottingham and other high tories lost office, Annesley became one of the loudest of the ministry's critics at Westminster, and was closely associated with the legislative campaign against occasional conformity. He thus attracted the unwelcome attentions of pro-ministerial writers, who denounced his bullying rhetoric, 'expressed in the style of Billingsgate' (Lord and others, 7.115-16), and even accused him of disloyalty to the protestant succession, on the basis of a misconstruction of remarks he had made in Dublin. The court party also made strenuous efforts to turn him out of his Westminster seat at the general election of 1705. Personal spite, as well as political enmity, lay behind this attack, since in the previous session Annesley had turned his oratory against the lord treasurer himself. But the university electorate reacted in his favour. One college head vehemently denied that Annesley was a 'turbulent' man, declaring that 'he is a scholar, and has been long of my acquaintance as such, and has acquitted himself in all University business entrusted to him with great approbation' ('Portland MSS', 4.179). The result was a popular triumph, and Annesley was returned at the head of the poll. 
In the 1705 parliament Annesley was again one of the most prominent speakers on the tory side, often acting in concert with Sir Thomas Hanmer. In January 1707 he denounced in particularly forthright terms the proposed settlement on the duke of Marlborough but, conscious of the danger of being imputed a Jacobite, he moved promptly at the time of the invasion scare in the spring of 1708 to propose a loyal address to the queen. Re-elected at Cambridge in 1708, he used his friendship with Nottingham to promote a reconciliation between the high tories and those 'moderates', headed by former secretary of state Robert Harley, who had been excluded from the ministry in March of that year. In the Commons he was as fierce as ever in defence of tory interests, speaking against the impeachment of Dr Sacheverell. He also made 'a very warm speech' in January 1710 against a motion for an address to send over the duke of Marlborough to attend the peace negotiations, which he said would be 'exalting that man whose pride was already intolerable, setting him above the crown, which would make us the most abject of slaves' ('Wentworth Papers', 110). Such performances only increased his popularity at Cambridge, where he would doubtless have been re-elected in 1710 had it not been for the sudden death of his brother, upon which he succeeded to the earldom of Anglesey (and the title of Viscount Valentia in the Irish peerage). He also acquired the lucrative post of joint vice-treasurer and paymaster-general in Ireland, which may have satisfied what contemporaries saw as his avaricious streak, but left greater ambitions unfulfilled. 
Undaunted by the atmosphere of the upper house, Anglesey continued to speak his mind. Although anxious to see thoroughly tory policies pursued, and dissenters and whigs harried, he did not at first prove to be a source of embarrassment to the court. Indeed, he seems to have been prepared to give the new chief minister, Harley, the benefit of the doubt, thus marking his emancipation from the influence of Nottingham, who had been excluded from the new ministry and smouldered in resentment. However impatient Anglesey might have been in private, he said nothing in public against Harley (now earl of Oxford), and after spending the autumn of 1711 attending the Irish House of Lords, he returned to Westminster more ostentatiously loyal than ever, possibly as a consequence of observing the duke of Ormond's failures as viceroy in Ireland, which opened the way for Anglesey himself to succeed. This ambition may well have determined his political conduct. During the winter of 1711-12 he consistently supported administration, distancing himself from Nottingham's rebellion over the peace. But he did not receive any further advancement, and Harley's eventual replacement of Ormond by the moderate whig Lord Shrewsbury provoked Anglesey into a rebellion of his own. He joined Hanmer and other 'whimsicals' in June 1713 in opposing parliamentary confirmation of the commercial treaty with France, then attended Shrewsbury's ill-fated Irish parliament in order to undermine the viceroy, exploiting his membership of the Irish privy council to prevent agreement between the council and Dublin corporation over the disputed election of a lord mayor, which precluded any wider political settlement and destroyed the viceroy's 'moderating scheme'. 
Back in England, Anglesey followed an erratic course, driven by his restless ambition to secure the Irish viceroyalty. As Oxford and Bolingbroke struggled for control of the ministry, Anglesey tacked from one to the other. Often he found himself opposing government, and contemporaries identified him as a pro-Hanoverian. But although his commitment to the protestant succession was never in doubt, and was reinforced by his private correspondence with Hanover, it may not have been his first concern. Typically, his most vigorous speech in the 1714 parliament was in favour of the extension to Ireland of the 'Schism Bill', and he was reported as having declared in a coffee house that there was no difference between Presbyterians and papists, who 'jumbled together... would make an excellent salad for the devil' (Alan Brodrick to Thomas Brodrick, 24 June 1714, Midleton MS 1248/3, fol. 187, Surrey RO, Woking). In July he was given a commission to remodel the Irish army, and travelled to Dublin, only to be greeted on his arrival by the news of the queen's death. He returned to London to take up a place on the regency commission, and made every effort to keep the confidence of the king, to the extent of learning French in order to converse at court. Unlike other Hanoverian tories, he made no bones about serving with the whigs, as he held on to his Irish vice-treasurership. But he was not left in peace. The story of the attempted purge of the Irish army was published, and his enemies kept up a constant harassment, which by March 1715 resulted in the loss of his position at court. The Irish parliament of 1715-16 increased the pressure with resolutions condemning his conduct as an Irish privy councillor in 1713. Soon afterwards he was removed from office, proclaiming that he had departed voluntarily but privately expressing his outrage. Anglesey remained a strong voice at the head of the tory minority on the opposition benches at Westminster, and occasionally, though infrequently, reappeared in Dublin, where the tory interest had sunk even lower. But he took little part in 'patriotic' defence of Irish constitutional rights, and gradually distanced himself from Ireland. For a time he re-established a working alliance with Nottingham, in defence of the interests of the Church of England. There was talk that Anglesey might return to office in a ministerial reconstruction in 1722, and he was approached again in 1725. The Jacobites thought that he 'stands fairest to be at the head of the Tories' ([James Hamilton] to [the Old Pretender], 26 Nov 1723, Stuart MS 70/107), but made no effort to recruit him. On the death of George I he made an Olympian, though ineffectual, intervention in Irish politics, by encouraging the remnant of the Irish tory party to come to court. His own appointment as governor of co. Wexford was almost the party's only gain. By now he was a permanent absentee, spending most of his time on his English estates, in Oxfordshire and Hampshire. He was still capable of making an impression in parliament, as in 1736, when he denounced the partisan exclusion of the tory Lord Arran, high steward of Westminster, from the commission to rebuild Westminster Bridge. But years of hard drinking were taking their toll. He suffered increasingly from gout and eventually died from its effects on 31 March 1737, at his hunting lodge, Farnborough Place. He was buried in Farnborough parish church. He bequeathed his considerable personalty to his cousin Francis Annesley, but the entailed estates, worth between $7000 and $10,000 p.a. (and, according to some observers, potentially far more), and his peerages descended to two other cousins, Charles Annesley of Cork, who took the property, and Richard Annesley, Lord Altham, who succeeded to the titles. Annesley had despised both, 'a brute' and 'a rogue' respectively ('Egmont Diary', 2.387-8), but he had done nothing to impair Charles Annesley's inheritance: 'though he might have raised very large sums by renewing leases, he scrupled doing it, and said estates ought fully to go where the law intends them' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 63654


Barnewall, Robert, styled twelfth Baron Trimleston (c.1704-1779), landowner and Roman Catholic activist, was the eldest son of John Barnewall, styled eleventh Baron Trimleston (1672-1746), and his wife, Mary, or Margaret (died 1771), daughter and heir of Sir John Barnewall. Descended from an Anglo-Norman family whose estates in the counties of Meath and Dublin had been extensive, the Barnewalls had by the mid-seventeenth century begun to suffer the consequences of being prominent Roman Catholics. In 1652 the eighth Baron Trimleston was attainted and the family had its lands restored only by the 'Act of Settlement'. The estates were again placed in jeopardy when Robert's uncle, the tenth baron, fought on the side of James II, eventually being killed in 1692. His successor, Robert's father, managed by application to the court of claims to rescue part of the estate. Robert, as a member of a proscribed religion, inherited a title which had no legal recognition; but this seems not to have dampened his aristocratic demeanour or way of life. One of three brothers, Robert was educated privately and spent much of his earlier life travelling abroad, occupying himself with the study of botany and physic. He married three times: first Margaret (died 'c'.1740), daughter of James Rochfort, of Laragh, co. Kildare, and later, in or before 1757, Elizabeth, daughter of John Colt, of Brightlingsea, and Elizabeth Man, of Tooting. His third wife was Anne (died 1831), the fifth daughter of William Hervey, a merchant from London, and Elizabeth Barfoot. 
By the time he returned to Ireland to succeed to the title in 1746, Barnewall was middle-aged. Visitors to the ancestral home, Trimleston Castle, remembered him for his hospitality, his style and superb taste, and for his generosity to the local poor whose ailments he treated without charge. During his time at Trimleston an aviary and a notable greenhouse graced the estate. Much of the anti-Catholic legislation of the period was aimed at excluding Catholics from political power. Consequently such Catholic political activity as prevailed was directed primarily towards securing relief from those legal strictures. Until the mid-eighteenth century most tentative Catholic political gestures had been spearheaded by the remnants of the Roman Catholic gentry, a mantle of leadership which Trimleston believed he had inherited. One effect of the penal legislation, however, was to direct Catholic professional ambitions into commerce, and by the 1750s this had led to the growth of a strong Catholic merchant class -- wealthy, politically ambitious, and rivalling the more traditional landed power base of the gentry class. When in 1759 the Catholic merchants formed a representative committee to advance their aims, Trimleston led a general refusal by the gentry to participate, and proceeded to negotiate with the ruling ascendancy in person and largely without reference to the committee. His proposal to government in 1762 that Catholics be enlisted for military service came to nothing. Within a year he suffered the ultimate embarrassment when his son and heir, Thomas, conformed to the established church. Trimleston retired from politics only to re-emerge in 1775 in a further attempt to wrest control of the committee from its elected leaders. In June of that year he led a body of some sixty eminent merchants and tradesmen in a mass subscription to a contentious oath of allegiance which had already caused divisions in the Catholic community. Trimleston's action helped to resolve the controversy and soon the oath, a matter essential to those who hoped to benefit from future relief legislation, was being widely accepted by the Catholic laity. Trimleston, in all probability to the fury of the merchants who had largely guided the committee since the early 1760s, slid smoothly into the position of leader and principal spokesman. His method had not been altogether dissimilar from that used by him in 1762. 
The committee which had taken place at the outset of the American War of Independence clearly had led to no resolution or agreement as to tactics at this critical juncture. Trimleston had seized the advantage created by the obvious policy vacuum. With a sizeable following, he revived his 1762 suggestion to government that the king's war effort might be swelled by Catholics. By this time, however, the intensity of Catholic pro-establishment fervour (the American revolutionaries had condemned the pro-Catholic 'Quebec Act' of 1774) was such that it had aroused protestant resentment in Dublin, with consequent political difficulties for the government. Trimleston orchestrated the scaling-down of the enthusiasm so skilfully that he won the praise of the government and yet kept the trust of his followers in the committee whose financial support was ever essential. The likelihood that Trimleston was the leading light even among the committee's 'gentry' members is suggested by the fact that when he relinquished the leadership his place was retaken by the merchants he had once displaced. His last apparent act as leader was the placing of his name at the head of the signatories to the Catholic address of loyalty to the new viceroy in 1777. Age and growing infirmity doubtless prevented him from playing a significant part in the agitation for the Catholic relief measure of 1778. He died in Dublin on 6 December 1779, and was buried at Trimleston. Trimleston appears to have had four children, two of whom died very young; the surviving two sons were the heir, Thomas, and Mathias, both of whom conformed to the established church. 


@@@@@


doc= 63655


Barton, Richard (1706-1759), topographer and religious writer, was born in Painstown, co. Meath, Ireland, the third son of the Revd John Barton ('fl'. 1675-1735), dean of Ardagh, and Elinor Jenney, daughter of the Revd Henry Jenney, archdeacon of Dromore diocese, and granddaughter of Sir William Brownlow, a leading protestant in co. Armagh in the 1620s. He was first educated privately by the leading pedagogue Dr Thomas Sheridan, and he matriculated on 9 February 1722 at Trinity College, Dublin. There he became a scholar in 1724 and graduated BA in the spring of 1726, proceeding MA in 1731. Like his two elder brothers, he followed his father into the Church of Ireland; he became a deacon in 1728 and was ordained the following year. He never married, and followed his clerical career with great dedication. He was curate of Donaghcloney, co. Down, in the diocese of Dromore, between 1728 and 1742 and then rector of Shankhill, near Lurgan, co. Armagh, between 1742 and 1759. 
Barton's duties as a Church of Ireland clergyman were taken seriously by him and went hand in hand with his topographical and natural history work. He later recorded his work, in his first curacy in Donaghcloney, of evangelizing among Catholics in the area, though he eschewed the use of the Irish language as it was a sign of barbarity and preferred to use English to erode the 'lairs of the wild beasts'. He also interested himself in the theological controversies of the time and in 1751 published 'The Analogy of Divine Wisdom', an attack on those Arian ideas on the Trinity held not only in England but in the Irish episcopacy by Bishop Clayton of Clogher. He was praised by John Wesley on his tour through co. Armagh in 1756 as a clergyman who had forgone likely preferment to concentrate on his mission around Lurgan and his evangelical preaching in a town described earlier by Jonathan Swift as a pleasant place in which to live 'if it had not been for the Quakers, Presbyterians and Papists then beginning to inhabit it' (Lodge MS, G. IV. 5, fol. 82). 
Wesley also recorded something of Barton's eccentricity on his visit in 1756, pointing out that he lived in a house near Lough Neagh with no doors and few windows. Barton's other source of fame was his concentration for nearly twenty years from the early 1730s on the topography and natural history of Lough Neagh and its hinterland. In 1738 he was already in touch with the noted historian and topographer Walter Harris, who later founded the Physico-Historical Society and recorded Barton's name as the natural history 'inquirer' or collector of information for co. Armagh for the society. Barton joined Harris's society, and there are several letters from him in 1745 recording his work on a dictionary of place names for the county (which has been lost) and his continuing experiments on the petrifying qualities of Lough Neagh, a topic which fascinated many eighteenth-century natural historians. 
In connection with this work Barton published in 1751 'Lectures in Natural Philosophy', which looked at current knowledge in that field and added findings from his local lough on geology and both medicinal and mechanical properties of the waters, and 'A Dialogue Concerning Something of Importance to Ireland, Particularly to the County of Armagh', which was intended to encourage funding and support for a full civil and topographical survey of that county in the wake of the Physico-Historical Society's collapse. Although these appeals proved unsuccessful all of Barton's books were well subscribed, particularly the first, which had more than 550 subscriptions. Barton remained in Lurgan throughout these years; he died and was buried there on 6 August 1759. 


@@@@@


doc= 63656


Bolton, Theophilus (1677/8-1744), Church of Ireland archbishop of Cashel, was born in co. Mayo, Ireland. Nothing is known of his parentage or schooling but by 1695 he was a scholar of Trinity College, Dublin, from where he graduated BA in 1698 and MA in 1701. He was ordained deacon in the diocese of Dublin in 1702 and was priested in the following year. His first known ecclesiastical preferment was to the prebend of Monmahenock in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, in 1707, which he resigned later in the same year for the prebend of Stagonil, and he remained in St Patrick's until 1722, exchanging his prebendal stall in 1714 for that of the chancellor, a position which he held together with the rectory of St Werburgh's, Dublin. 
While in St Patrick's Bolton continued his studies in Trinity College; he obtained the degrees of BD and DD in 1716. His growing reputation as a canon lawyer caused antagonism between him and the dean of St Patrick's, Jonathan Swift, who in 1717 wrote that Bolton 'has taken every opportunity of opposing me, in the most unkind and unnecessary manner' ('Correspondence', 3.393). However, his abilities were recognized by William King, archbishop of Dublin, who made Bolton his vicar-general in 1721, appointed him precentor of Christ Church Cathedral in 1722, and was instrumental in securing for him the bishopric of Clonfert, for which Bolton was consecrated on 30 September 1722 in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. Unusually for the times, Bolton chose to reside in his diocese and while in Clonfert he seems to have made his peace with Swift, who visited him in 1723: the dean's report that 'the Bishop has made, in four months, twelve miles of ditches from his house to the Shannon' (ibid., 3.173) was the first indication of Bolton as an improver. 
Bolton's period in Clonfert, however, was short, for in April 1724 he was translated to Elphin and in January 1730 was appointed archbishop of Cashel, despite the earlier opposition of the primate, Hugh Boulter, who in 1727 had advised that Bolton's translation to Cashel would be against the English interest. Bolton had opposed the government in 1724, when it sought to discover the identity of the author of the 'Drapier's Letters', and he was to do so again in 1728, when he organized opposition to a bill to prevent abuse of the parliamentary privilege of immunity from arrest. He was a protege and long-time friend of William Conolly, the influential speaker of the Irish House of Commons, who favoured the appointment of Irishmen to Irish offices, and was suspected by Boulter of seeking to establish himself as the head of an Irish interest in parliament. His appointment to Cashel was not due to a lessening of Boulter's suspicion of him but to the happy coincidence of the sees of Dublin and Cashel being vacant at the same time, so allowing Bolton's translation to Cashel in return for the acceptance of the appointment of an Englishman, John Hoadley, to Dublin. 
In Cashel, Bolton built a new palace, drained the extensive swamps to the west of the city, provided a public water supply, improved the way to the cathedral, and announced his intention to lay out $1000 in repairing the fabric. However, his most enduring legacy to Cashel was the creation of the library, which still bears his name. Following the death of Archbishop King in 1729 he had acquired about 6000 volumes from King's collection. These, with his own books, formed the nucleus of the library, which he housed in a two-storey building beside his palace. The collection is rich in law and theology, reflecting Bolton's academic background, but, despite his intellectual training and the convenience of a library, he published only a few sermons. By May 1735 his energies seemed exhausted and he wrote to Swift that 'a good bishop has nothing more to do than to eat, drink, grow fat, rich and die; which laudable example, I propose for the remainder of my life to follow' ('Correspondence', 5.173); thereafter little was heard of him. Bolton died on 31 January 1744, aged sixty-six, and was buried in St Werburgh's Church, Dublin, on 2 February. In his will he bequeathed his library for the use of the archbishop of Cashel and the clergy of the diocese for ever. 


@@@@@


doc= 63657


Craghead, Robert (c.1633-1711), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster and author, was born in Scotland to unknown parents and graduated MA from the University of St Andrews in 1653. In 1658 he commenced his ministry in Donoughmore, co. Donegal. In 1661 he was one of thirty-six Presbyterian ministers in Ireland ejected from his parish for refusing to conform to the established church. He remained with his people and contrived to exercise an effective ministry among them. The troubles of 1689 drove him and his family into the besieged city of Londonderry, and from it to Glasgow, where for a time he ministered in a congregation. 
On 1 July 1690 he was called to be minister of the Presbyterian congregation in Londonderry, and remained there until his death. The bishop of Derry from 1691 to 1702 was William King, afterwards archbishop of Dublin. King had already crossed swords with Joseph Boyse, minister of Wood Street congregation in Dublin, on the subject of Presbyterian worship, hoping to persuade his readers to follow his own pilgrimage from Presbyterianism to Anglicanism. His representations of Presbyterian practice were factually incorrect, and Craghead felt impelled to answer them in two pamphlets, 'An Answer to a Late Book Intituled 'A Discourse Concerning the Inventions of Men in the Worship of God'' (1694) and 'An Answer to the Bishop of Derry's Second Admonition to the Dissenting Inhabitants of his Diocese' (1697). Neither work reveals Craghead as a particularly effective controversialist. His replies to King are orderly, thorough, and factual. They contain a wealth of information about Presbyterian life and spirituality, and especially about Presbyterian public worship. They confirm the very large numbers attending Presbyterian services in north-west Ulster at this time. While Boyse and Craghead display common purpose in their defence of Presbyterian forms of worship, it is fascinating to discern contrasting views on points of detail. Boyse reflects the broader and more English practice of Dublin Presbyterianism, while the stricter Ulster-Scot ethos of northern congregations is firmly embodied in Craghead's work. Craghead's pamphlets lack the grace of Boyse's writing, and the fire of good polemic, but are none the less an important contribution. 
Craghead's other writings were of a devotional and practical kind. His 'Advice for the Assurance of Salvation' (1702) and the posthumous 'Walking with God' (1712) have both been lost to posterity. His 'Advice to Communicants' was first published in Glasgow in 1695, and was reprinted several times. It was an attempt to deal with many of the problems and difficulties felt by the ordinary people with whom Craghead worked as a pastor. It is a rich treasure house of Christian devotion and evidences the scrupulous care given by Craghead and others of his generation to the doubts and questions of his people. Through all his writings runs a firm Calvinist theology. Craghead married Agnes, daughter of the Revd John Hart, minister of Taughboyne, and they had three sons: Thomas, Robert, and Samuel. Craghead died in Londonderry on 22 August 1711. His son 


@@@@@


doc= 63658


French, Robert (1716-1779), landowner and politician, was the eldest son of Patrick French (died 1744), barrister, and Jane Digby, the daughter of Simon Digby, successively bishop of Limerick and Elphin. The Frenches, of Anglo-Norman origins, had settled originally in the port of Galway, where they were regarded as one of the dominant 'tribes'. This branch of the family had acquired lands in the county centred on Monivae. Patrick French became a barrister and conformed to the established church in 1709. Robert, after entering Trinity College, Dublin, in 1734, where he graduated BA in 1737, followed his father into the law. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1736 and to the King's Inns in Dublin in 1742. On inheriting Monivae at his father's death in 1744 he virtually ceased legal practice and devoted himself to the improvement of his patrimony and public affairs. In April 1746 he married Nicola Acheson (died 1762), the younger daughter of Sir Arthur Acheson, fifth baronet (died 1749), MP, and Anne Savage, of Market Hill in co. Armagh. He was a JP for co. Galway from 1745, and in 1753 he was elected to parliament for the same county. At first a 'protege' of the government manager, Archbishop Stone, he soon adopted an independent stance. In 1761 he transferred to the less prestigious borough seat of Carrick-on-Shannon, and in 1767 he was returned for the city of Galway, which his father had represented between 1713 and 1715. In parliament, while upholding the intimate constitutional link with Great Britain, he criticized the insensitive attempts by British ministers and Irish lords lieutenant to subordinate Ireland and curtail the powers of the Irish parliament. His views were summarized in the ostensibly anonymous pamphlet of 1770 'The Constitution of Ireland'. He actively forwarded, both in parliament and his locality, endeavours aimed at material and ethical betterment, himself serving in the Incorporated Society of Dublin and from 1769 on the linen board. 
French's Galway estate was praised by Arthur Young as a model of enlightened innovation. He had inherited rentals reduced by the agricultural depressions of the 1740s, and he invested heavily to attract skilled bleachers, weavers, and spinning-masters. As well as enlarging and modernizing his own mansion he rebuilt much of Monivae, adding a protestant church, charter school, and housing for tenants. He put into effect some of what he had noted during an extended trip to England during 1751. A slump in the market for Irish linens in 1773 made him reconsider his strategy. Only in the 1760s had his spending on capital improvements yielded significantly higher rentals, and by the 1770s accumulated debts restricted his activities. He did not seek re-election to parliament in 1774, but encouraged his son-in-law, Sir Lucius O'Brien, to continue his philanthropic and utilitarian interests. After his wife's death in 1762 he conducted an affair with a servant, Winifred Higgins; they had several children. French died in 1779. His eldest son, Acheson French, had predeceased him and so the estate was inherited by Acheson's son, Robert French. 


@@@@@


doc= 63659


Gore, Sir Ralph, fourth baronet (c.1675-1733), speaker of the Irish House of Commons, was born at Manorhamilton in co. Leitrim, the son of Sir William Gore, third baronet ('c'.1642- 'c'.1703), landowner, of Manor Gore, co. Donegal, and his wife, Hannah (died 1733), daughter and coheir of James Hamilton of Manorhamilton. He was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1693 but did not stay long enough to take his degree. He married his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Robert Colvill of Newtownards, co. Down, in 1705. They had two daughters, one of whom, Rose, married Anthony Malone (1700-1776), politician, in 1733. Having been elected to the Irish parliament for the first time in 1703 for Donegal borough, chiefly on his own family's interest but perhaps also in co-operation with William Conolly (the most important political figure in the north-west of Ireland, who controlled the nearby borough of Killybegs), Gore transferred to the county in the general election of 1713, and retained this seat in 1715. 
After a lengthy and unspectacular parliamentary apprenticeship, distinguished only by a solidly whig voting record, Gore was appointed in 1717 to the lucrative office of chancellor of the Irish exchequer, on the recommendation of Conolly, now speaker of the Commons in Dublin. Gore's own standing among Irish whigs had not been high enough for him to share in the general redistribution of places that followed the Hanoverian succession and the downfall of the previous tory administration, and even now there were those who questioned his qualifications for such an important office. The lord chancellor of Ireland, Lord Brodrick, Conolly's main rival for the leadership of the government interest, observed that Gore relied on 'a certain person and party here' who 'represent his merit and interest very much beyond the just size of either' (Midleton MS 1248/4, fols. 29-30, Lord Brodrick to Thomas Brodrick, 23 May 1717). More brutally, Brodrick described Gore as Conolly's 'creature', one who 'hath a spirit low enough not to disdain being thought a dependant' (ibid., fols. 35-6, 14 June 1717). Technically, Gore's lack of a legal education might have disqualified him from the post, but he was quickly admitted to the Irish bar and provided with a doctorate of laws by Trinity College. Over the next decade he proved himself a useful assistant to Conolly in parliamentary management, without making any mark as an orator. In 1719 he introduced on behalf of the speaker a bill to enable Protestant dissenters to hold some civil and military offices (a stratagem which Brodrick's faction was able to counter), and as chancellor of the exchequer he played an important role in supply legislation, taking the chair of the committees of supply and of ways and means. His involvement in the ill-fated attempt to establish a national bank in Ireland in 1720-21 probably lost him money but not reputation. Nevertheless, he relinquished his county seat in the Irish general election of 1727, in favour of the episcopal pocket borough of Clogher, a see once held by Bishop St George Ashe, the father of his second wife, Elizabeth Ashe (died 1741). Gore and his second wife, who was heir to the St George estate in Dunmore, co. Galway, had four daughters and three sons. 
In September 1729, when Conolly suffered the fit which destroyed his health, Gore was the first person thought of by colleagues in the court party to succeed. He was duly elected as speaker on 13 October 1729, and thus became the government's principal parliamentary 'undertaker', but refused Conolly's vacant place at the head of the revenue board, despite the influence it would have given him over patronage, preferring to retain the salary of $800 p.a. and extensive fees of his own office. The chief commissionership went instead to his close ally, Marmaduke Coghill. Together the two men rallied Conolly's friends sufficiently to maintain a working majority for the court in the parliamentary session of 1729-30, though they were unable to secure the long-term funding of the Irish national debt that the viceroy, Lord Carteret, had hoped for, since any proposal of this kind aroused the 'patriotic' sensibilities of back-bench MPs. There were also difficulties in Gore's relationship with the Church of Ireland primate, Hugh Boulter, who assumed the responsibility of representing the 'English interest' in Ireland, and checking the ambitions of the 'undertakers'. During the 1729-30 session Gore opposed Boulter's plan for a reform of the Irish coinage, and although the two men were both appointed as lords justices to govern Ireland after Carteret's departure, they were at odds again over the appointment of a new chief baron of the Irish exchequer, Gore recommending an Irish, and Boulter an English, candidate. During preparations for the next parliamentary session differences arose between Gore and Boulter on the issue of the supply, but these evaporated with the arrival of a new lord lieutenant, the duke of Dorset. Gore was an effective commons manager for Dorset in 1731-2, though again potentially controversial issues had to be side-stepped, the long-term funding of the debt and (even more dangerous) a proposed repeal of the sacramental test, which Sir Robert Walpole endorsed but which Gore argued strongly and successfully against. 
After having been reappointed with Boulter as a lord justice in the spring of 1732, Gore died, after a short illness, on 23 February 1733 and was buried at Christ Church in Dublin. His second son, Ralph (1725-1802), who succeeded his brother Sir St George Gore as sixth baronet, enjoyed a successful army career and was raised to the Irish peerage as earl of Ross in 1772. 


@@@@@


doc= 63660


Hennessy, Richard (1729?-1800), brandy distiller, was born at Ballymacmoy, near Mallow, co. Cork, the second son of at least six children of James Hennessy (died 1768), one of a close-knit group of minor Catholic gentry in the Blackwater valley, and his wife, Catherine Barrett (died 1770). His early education was probably with the Catholic schoolmaster in the parish of Monanimy. In 1748 he joined the French army, enlisting in the Irish regiment of Viscount Clare in which his kinsman, an earlier Richard Hennessy, had served with distinction. His army record describes him as 6 feet tall, auburn-haired, and blue-eyed, with a handsome, freckled, oval face. Warm-hearted, kind, and convivial in personality, in later life he was a freemason. His military career was brief, and he saw no active service. Commissioned 'sous-lieutenant' in 1753, he was by then already absent from his unit and attempting to start a business career in Ostend, with the consequence that the following year his service was terminated. He remained on good terms with Hiberno-French army officers, however, and in 1757 secured a certificate from Lord Clare falsely stretching his military service to ten years to qualify him for 'de facto' French nationality. In 1759 he volunteered his services for Choiseul's projected invasion of the British Isles, but his offer was rejected. 
Hennessy's early abandonment of the army was almost certainly prompted by the lack of prospects. Ostend was the location of the brandy-exporting business of his uncle, Charles Hennessy, but no partnership in the firm was offered to Richard, and he can have enjoyed only a precarious living there until his marriage in January 1765 to Ellen (Nelly) Hennessy, 'nee' Barrett (died 1781), the widow of his Ostend cousin, James, and a kinswoman of his mother. She was also a cousin of Edmund Burke, a childhood friend and schoolmate of Hennessy with whom he remained in periodic contact. The expectation of his wife's dowry (paid only belatedly, if at all) persuaded him to leave Ostend and acquire premises and an adjoining warehouse at Cognac, the centre of the brandy trade in which a number of Irishmen were involved. His wife and infant son, James ('b'. October 1765), joined him in May 1766. A daughter, Bridget (Biddy), was born in 1767. The volatility of the brandy trade, his lack of capital, and his deficient commercial and accountancy skills made much of Hennessy's career in business very difficult. He visited Ireland briefly in 1755 and again in the summer of 1768 during his father's final illness, but his hope at that time of exploiting his Cork connections to develop his trade was frustrated by competition from cheap American rum. Although he never returned again to Ireland, his correspondence shows that he always maintained an avid interest in the happenings and personalities of the district of his birth. A partnership with the Irish firm of Connelly and Arthur in Dunkirk did not provide the access to the London market for which he had hoped. He seriously contemplated emigration to the West Indies, but instead in 1776 he moved to Bordeaux. There he formed a partnership with George Boyd at a premises in the Chartrons district of the city where he developed an impressive sixteen-still capacity. The trade was chiefly with Ireland, much of it carried by smugglers. 
In 1781 Hennessy experienced great personal tragedy with the death in September of his wife, whose health was always frail, followed in October by the deaths of his two youngest sons from scarlet fever. Mounting losses undermined his relationship with Boyd, and in 1787 he was driven out of distilling, becoming for a time a brandy jobber and broker. His surviving son, James (Jemmy), after education at Douai, had eschewed the offer of a military career in the Franco-Irish regiment of General Arthur Dillon to enter business, first in Dunkirk and from 1785 in the Cognac house of his father's friend and fellow Irishman, John Saule. On Saule's death in 1788 the Hennessys, father and son, took over his business, and the following year the partnership was expanded by the addition of Samuel Turner, nephew of the Hiberno-Huguenot brandy merchant James Delmain. Having re-established himself in Cognac, Richard Hennessy travelled to London to promote the brandy trade in the winter of 1791-2, visiting Edmund Burke during his stay. James Hennessy and Turner proved capable and hard-headed businessmen who developed their house into the largest brandy business in Cognac during the revolutionary era. The Hennessys had no difficulty in accommodating themselves to the political changes of the time. Richard was appointed lieutenant of the 'garde nationale' in Cognac, and James in time became its 'commandant', leading 150 men to join in the suppression of the La Vendee royalists in 1793. Following the outbreak of war the Hennessys benefited enormously from government contracts to supply the expanding French army and navy, while Turner developed a lucrative export trade through Hamburg. In 1795 James further consolidated his position by marriage to a daughter of the rival Martell house. An estate was acquired at La Billarderie, near Cognac, and it was here, in the role of country squire, that Richard Hennessy spent his declining years until his death, after a short illness, on 8 October 1800. 


@@@@@


doc= 63661


Higgins, John (1676-1729), physician, was born in Limerick, the son of Dr Patrick Higgins, physician, and his wife, Mary Loftus, daughter of John Loftus of Annacotty, co. Limerick. Both his parents were from prominent Catholic families which had suffered in the Cromwellian conquest. His paternal great-uncle, also a physician, had been hanged after the 1651 siege of Limerick, and his mother's family had been deprived of its Mungret estate in the subsequent confiscation. After the defeat of the Irish Jacobites in 1691 he went as a boy to Paris, where his mother's relative Edmund Loftus was a banker. In 1700, after a brilliant academic career, he graduated bachelor, licentiate, and doctor from the medical school at Montpellier University. The duke of Berwick, commander of the allied armies of France and Spain from 1704, persuaded him to accept the post of 'medecin-major' in the medical services of the united forces during the War of the Spanish Succession. In that capacity he participated in the great military engagements in Spain over the next decade, such as the sieges of Lerida (1707) and Barcelona (1714) and the battle of Villaviciosa (1710). He was competent and efficient, but his care of the sick and wounded at Barcelona impaired his health, and having decided that his future lay in Spain he petitioned successfully to settle in Madrid. On 25 April 1712 he married Jeanne de Courtiade (1689-1764), the daughter of a Bayonne physician. They had one son, John Baptist Higgins ('b'. 1715), who subsequently became an officer in the Spanish army. 
Higgins's reputation as a physician rose rapidly. From 1711 he was 'medico de camara' to King Philip V, a post in which he was confirmed in 1715. In 1717 he became chief physician to the king, gaining the appointment over the other court physicians, who were all his seniors and who strongly resented his preferment. Within months he was credited with saving the king's life from a grave illness. Thereafter he enjoyed the highest esteem at court and was in constant attendance on the king, who praised him as the finest physician in Europe. Although primarily a physician, he was also skilled in surgery. He was elected president of the Royal Academy of Medicine and Surgery at Seville in 1718 and again in 1720 at the end of his first term. 
Despite having no political ambition, Higgins played some part in public affairs. In 1718 he successfully intervened with the Spanish government to secure the exclusion of Irish goods and ships from the confiscations and reprisals that followed the British sinking of the Spanish Mediterranean Fleet. In 1722 he was appointed to the council of Castile. Always a fervent Jacobite, in 1724 he was made a baronet by James III (the Old Pretender). He retained a deep love of Ireland and resented the losses suffered by the Irish Catholics, including himself and his family, emotions to which he gave strong expression when among friends. The duc de Saint-Simon, while French ambassador to Spain, was one of his patients and developed a high regard for his skill as a physician. The two men struck up a close friendship, and Saint-Simon related in his memoirs that Higgins was excellent company, candid and frank in conversation, fluent in French, and possessed of a fine intellect and a good knowledge of literature. Full of honours and renown, and having amassed considerable wealth, he died at Seville on 11 October 1729. His widow remarried, and died on 8 May 1764. 


@@@@@


doc= 63662


Iredell, Francis (d. 1739), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster and author, was born in co. Antrim, Ireland, and educated at a philosophical and theological school run in Antrim by the Revd Thomas Gowan. He was licensed by the Antrim meeting on 4 March 1684 and ordained in Donegore on 19 June 1688. That he was held in high esteem by his colleagues is indicated by the fact that in 1689 he was appointed as one of two ministers to present the address of the northern Presbyterians to the duke of Schomberg when he came to Ireland with the army of King William. He was clerk of the General Synod of Ulster from 1692 to 1696. In 1696 he resisted the command of synod to become minister of Armagh, and was rebuked for so doing. 
In 1699 the synod compelled Iredell to become minister of the Capel Street congregation in Dublin, and there he remained until his death in 1739. On 22 April 1701 he preached before the societies for the Reformation of Manners in Dublin, taking as his theme national righteousness. This sermon was the first of his works to be published. It was followed in 1705 by a funeral sermon for his talented young colleague the Revd John Milling. On 25 May 1716 he married Eleanor McCartney, daughter of Arthur McCartney of Dublin. 
Iredell was appointed moderator of the Synod of Ulster in 1701. Throughout his time in Dublin he continued to represent the cause of Irish Presbyterians in high places. Thus in 1711 the synod entrusted him to lay before the English government its answer to charges against them by the Irish House of Lords. A copy of his private instructions has been preserved, outlining the people to be met, the discretionary powers with which he was entrusted, the arrangements for consultation with leading members of the Synod of Ulster, and instances and explanations that he might employ to advance his arguments or counter those of his opponents. In 1715 he and Colonel Clotworthy Upton met George I to convey the grievances of their colleagues, chiefly regarding the operation of the 'Test Act' of 1704. Although sympathetically received, they failed to secure the promises of relief they sought, but they were successful in obtaining the prompt renewal of the 'regium donum'. In 1728 the lords justices of Ireland were alarmed by the excessive emigration from Ulster and turned to Iredell and his colleague the Revd Robert Craghead (died 1738) for advice about its cause. 
Although fully involved with his Dublin colleagues, Iredell represented an essentially northern presence in a congregation that belonged to the Synod of Ulster. Like them he was orthodox in doctrine. In the subscription controversy of the 1720s, however, he differed from them in being a subscriber by conviction. In 1726 he published 'Remarks upon some passages relating to the confession of faith in Rev Mr Samuel Haliday's letter to the Rev Mr Gilbert Kennedy'. This produced a printed reply from Haliday, and as a rejoinder Iredell published in 1727 'A letter to the Rev Mr. Samuel Haliday, wherein the remarks upon some passages in his letter to the Rev Mr Gilbert Kennedy are defended'. In his writings he argued cogently that the Westminster confession in its teaching regarding the person of Christ was at one with classical defences of orthodoxy. Against the charge of Haliday that the Westminster confession made a merely scholastic point the ground of ministerial communion, he argued that the confession faithfully expressed the teaching of the church in its historic creeds and councils that Christ possessed a divine nature from all eternity, but assumed a human nature, and that these two distinct natures were inseparably joined in one person, the word made flesh. Such statements were valuable and necessary safeguards against doctrinal error, including most notably the Nestorian and Eutychean heresies. Iredell also contended that the imposition of subscription was a legitimate way for church courts to suppress error and preserve truth. 
Iredell was a reluctant controversialist, and generous to his opponents. Yet he could not remain silent when he felt truth was at stake. Both in his preaching, which was simple and direct, and in his writing he gave ample evidence of clear thinking and careful scholarship. His increasing disenchantment with the northern non-subscribers and with those who sympathized with them in the south indicated his growing unease at the direction in which he perceived those opposed to subscription to be heading. He died in Dublin on 31 January 1739. He was survived by two sons, Francis, a merchant in Bristol, and Thomas, a barrister and president of the council of Jamaica, where he owned considerable estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 63663


Sarah Wesley (1726-1822), Methodist sympathizer, was born on 12 October 1726 at Garth, Brecknockshire, the fifth of the nine children of Marmaduke Gwynne (1691-1769), gentleman, and his wife, Sarah (1695-1769/70), daughter of Daniel Evans and his wife, Mary. She was educated by private masters, and by the age of ten was proficient in music and singing. Her father was a firm Anglican and magistrate, but his conversion by Howell Harris, the Welsh evangelical, led him to support the Methodists. Her mother was one of six heiresses, each reputedly with a portion of $30,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 63664


Wesley, Sarah (1759-1828), Methodist writer, was born on 1 April 1759 in Charles Street, Bristol, and baptized on 28 April in St James's Church, Bristol, the fourth child and only surviving daughter of Charles Wesley (1707-1788) and Sarah Wesley, nee Gwynne (1726-1822) ['see under 'Wesley, Charles]. She was partly brought up by a beloved Methodist nurse and for a time attended a school in Bristol, but was also taught Latin by her father. She was a silent child with the shyness and love of solitude and books which characterized her throughout life. She was under 5 feet tall, and when young was very handsome until, like her mother, she was disfigured by smallpox. According to her musician brother Charles Wesley (1757-1834) she had a good ear for music, sang well, and would have been a good instrumentalist but preferred reading to the rigours of practice. She wrote poetry from an early age but was reluctant to show her verses to her critical father. 
In contrast to the rest of her family Sarah Wesley did not hold tory principles; nor did she regard Charles I as a martyr, which made her father say that 'the rebel blood of some of her ancestors flows in her veins' (Stevenson, 'Memorials', 475). Though she had an aversion to politics she rejoiced at the destruction of the Bastille while abhorring the treatment of the French royal family during the revolution. She was a favourite of her uncle John Wesley, but her chief confidante was her aunt Martha Hall, who introduced her to Samuel Johnson. She was not afraid of him, and her brother said 'She used to show him her verses and he would pat her head and say to my aunt 'Madam, she will do'' (ibid.). 
Sarah's father was dedicated to her well-being and offered to share his knowledge of books and poetry. He thought she had a thirst and capacity for knowledge, but that she would be hindered by her lack of resolution to rise early and study regularly. Above all he was concerned for her religious development but, though he urged her to be grateful to the Methodists, he would not force her into Methodist meetings in case aversion to their company prejudiced her against religion. He thought she would not relish the writings of Thomas a Kempis and William Law, but did allow her to read one of his own favourite works, Edward Young's 'Night Thoughts'. 
Sarah was evidently not immune from fashion. Charles once suspected she had had a fall through wearing fashionable shoes, and her evangelical friend Hannah More once remarked that she found her 'more wit than Methodist' (Pollock, 155). Like her mother she was often used by donors to distribute charity. She was a member of City Road Chapel and there attended a ladies' working circle which sewed clothes for the poor while discoursing on religious and moral issues. Her circle of friends and correspondents included minor literary figures such as Elizabeth Benger, novelist and biographer, the Methodist artist John Russell (who painted her portrait), and the educationist Elizabeth Hamilton, who thought highly of Sarah's ability and believed that, had she made the effort, she could have earned a living by writing. Certainly Sarah appears to have translated material for George Gregory to use in his periodical articles. However, it seems likely that her retiring nature and modesty inhibited her from pursuing a literary career, though she wrote a good deal of poetry, mostly unpublished. Her principal legacy and chief significance for Methodism was indirect, acting as a repository and transmitter of the Wesley family traditions, partly from her mother. Adam Clarke's 'Memoirs of the Wesley Family' (1823) owed much to her manuscripts and recollections. She was particularly anxious to counter unfavourable judgements on the Wesley brothers' actions and characters. 
Sarah Wesley never married, though she appears to have received at least two proposals. She spent much of her time in the company of her gentle and rather unworldly brother Charles, and was much troubled by the irregular life of her brother the composer and organist Samuel Wesley. Though living in London for much of her life (from 1771 at 1 Chesterfield Street, Marylebone), her affections centred on Bristol. During a last visit there she fell ill and died of a throat disorder on 19 September 1828. She was buried in the churchyard of St James's, the church of her baptism. 


@@@@@


doc= 63665


Maule, Henry (1676-1758), Church of Ireland bishop of Meath and educational reformer, was the son of William Maule, comptroller of the customs at Dublin, and Jane, daughter of Roger West. Born perhaps at Arklow, Ireland, and educated at Mr Young's school in Dublin, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1691, aged fifteen. He graduated BA in 1696 and later received the degrees of LLB and LLD (in 1719) from the same institution. He was ordained in 1699, and in 1702 he was beneficed in the diocese of Cloyne. His preferment led to a protracted dispute between the bishop, eager to uphold his rights of presentation, and a too independent vicar-general. The wrangle seems to have stimulated Maule's own legal skills and brought him to the attention of clerical superiors, notably Archbishop King of Dublin. In 1706 he was appointed rector of St Mary's, Shandon, in the north of Cork city, a populous parish reckoned to yield an annual $300. There he presided over the establishment of almshouses and a charity school, complete with library. He put into effect what he had seen as he travelled in the Low Countries and England, and what he had read about in Halle. He became a corresponding member of the SPCK, whose London meetings he attended in 1716 and 1718. When in Dublin to forward business he helped to organize an association modelled on the SPCK. Maule used some of his own ample means to finance the Shandon initiatives. His pamphlet of 1721, 'Pietas Corcagiensis', shrewdly publicized what had been achieved through gifts of money and books and the record of pupils already apprenticed to tradespeople in the locality. As a member of a family enriched by office-holding, and married to Lady Anne Barry, daughter of Richard, second earl of Barrymore, he moved confidently among those whose support was vital to his charitable endeavours. Some contemporaries disliked the political and diplomatic dexterity which he displayed. He was suspected, too, of a residual toryism. These traits, when coupled with his birth and upbringing in Ireland and a supposed attachment to Irish as against English interests, delayed further preferment. In 1720 he was appointed dean of Cloyne. Despite the low yield of the deanery ($60 or $70 p.a.), he carried out physical improvements there. He missed the lucrative deaneries of Derry and Down, but in 1726 he was consecrated bishop of Cloyne. In 1732 he was translated to Dromore and then in 1744 to Meath. Following the death of his first wife Maule married twice again, first Catherine Rooth, formerly Stawell, and second, in 1725, Dorothy Roffen (died 1755), a widow of Rossmore. 
Much of the credit for drawing the hitherto haphazard ventures to provide protestant education into a coherent system through the Incorporated Society of 1733 went to Archbishop Boulter. However, in 1746 the then lord lieutenant, Chesterfield, gave Maule his due when he acknowledged that without the latter's 'care and perseverance', the charity schools 'would hardly have existed' (J. Ainsworth, ed., 'The Inchiquin Manuscripts', 1961, 160). As bishop of Dromore he continued to set an example, subsidizing a charter school at Ballynahinch. Ardbraccan, his seat as bishop of Meath, saw a similar venture. He also backed the projects of the Royal Dublin Society and the Physico-Historical Society to survey and publicize the natural resources of Ireland as a prelude to their more effective exploitation. In 1733 he made the work of protestant instruction the theme of his sermon before the lord lieutenant and House of Lords on the anniversary of the 1641 uprising. Through a network of schools he aimed to entrench the British and protestant interests in Ireland and bit by bit overcome what he -- in common with many contemporaries -- saw as the linked evils of ignorance, idleness, and Catholicism. He argued that only by concentrating on the training of the young could the future prosperity and stability of Ireland within the Hanoverian empire be secured. These views differed from those of his fellow Church of Ireland clergyman John Richardson, who wished to use the Irish language to win converts, and it was Maule's approach which was adopted in eighteenth-century Ireland. Maule died on 13 April 1758. 


@@@@@


doc= 63666


Maxwell, Henry (1668/9-1730), politician and pamphleteer, was born in Finnebrogue, co. Down, Ireland, the son of the Revd Robert Maxwell (died 1686?), Church of Ireland clergyman, and Jane Chichester, daughter of the Revd Robert Chichester of Belfast. His family appears to have been of Scottish descent. Educated in his early years by a Mr Harvey, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1683, aged fourteen; he received the degree of BA in 1688 and that of LLD ('speciali gratia') in 1718. He was a member of the Church of Ireland, and was married twice, first to his second cousin, Jane Maxwell, daughter of the Revd Henry Maxwell, of Armagh, and sister to John Maxwell, first Lord Farnham, and second in 1713, with a dowry of $1500, to Dorothy Brice ('bap'. 1690, died 1725), daughter of Edward Brice, a Belfast merchant and Presbyterian of Scottish descent. 
After having been successful in a by-election in 1698 Maxwell sat in every Irish parliament until his death, representing the boroughs of Bangor in co. Down (1698-1713) and Killybegs (1713-15) and Donegal (1715-30) in co. Donegal, the latter two on the interest of William Conolly, of whom he was a close adherent. Identified as a whig, Maxwell was an active participant in Anglo-Irish politics and has been associated with the reforming group of 'real Whigs' (Robbins, 6) centred around Robert Molesworth. However, Maxwell disagreed with this group in certain areas, most notably in his strong opposition to the repeal of the test imposed on protestant dissenters in Ireland. He was also associated with William Molyneux, a connection that was reflected in his writings. The first pamphlet attributed to Maxwell, 'Anguis in herba, or, The Fatal Consequences of a Treaty with France' (1702), was originally published 'a little before the death of the late King William, and about the time the second Grand Alliance was formed' ('Anguis in herba', 2). It was published for a third time in 1711, probably as part of the whig opposition to the peace negotiations in the last years of the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1703 he produced his most famous work, published the following year, 'An essay upon an union of Ireland with England: most humbly offered to the consideration of the queen's most excellent majesty, and both houses of parliament' (1704), in which, motivated by discontent over the subordination of the Irish parliament to that of England, he argued that a union was the only practical solution to ongoing constitutional conflicts, as it would create greater political harmony between the two kingdoms and would be of mutual commercial and economic benefit. He also argued for a more comprehensive union than the type of union espoused by Molyneux or the Molesworth group. However, despite Irish public and parliamentary opinion becoming increasingly in favour of a union, his pamphlet made no impact in England. His continuing concern with English interference in Irish affairs under the existing constitutional relationship led to his expression of dissatisfaction with the appointment of an Englishman to the bishopric of Meath in 1715 and his association with the opposition to the 'Declaratory Act' of 1720. 
Maxwell's next excursion into political pamphleteering occurred in 1721 as part of the disputes over the establishment of a Bank of Ireland, which saw the outbreak of a pamphlet war in the autumn and winter of that year. Although many of the contributions were 'hastily written trifles' (Burns, 1.128), Maxwell's two tracts of November and December stood out as the best arguments put forward for a national bank. His first pamphlet, 'Reasons Offered for Erecting a Bank in Ireland, in a Letter to H[ercules] Rowley, Esq.' (1721), which quickly went through two editions, argued for a bank on economic grounds, emphasizing how a bank would stabilize interest rates and increase the amount of currency available for trade. He also tried to assuage the fears of the landed interest that a bank would lead to a land tax and ultimately undermine the accepted land-based structure of society. His arguments prompted a response from Rowley, who appears to have been Maxwell's uncle, in opposition to a bank. Maxwell replied in 'Mr Maxwell's Second Letter to Mr Rowley, wherein the Objections Against the Bank are Answered' (1721), although his arguments failed to convince his fellow MPs, and the proposals were dropped. Maxwell avoided public office for most of his political career until 1727, when he was sworn of the Irish privy council. 
Maxwell died in Dublin on 12 February 1730. His father-in-law, Edward Brice, as next of kin to Maxwell's three children, Robert, Edward, and Margaret, became their guardian and the administrator of the family estate, since Maxwell had died intestate and all three children were still in their minority. Maxwell was buried in St Mary's Church in Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 63667


O'Gorman, Thomas, Chevalier O'Gorman in the French nobility (1732-1809), army officer in the French service and antiquary, was born on 16 September 1732 at Castletown, co. Clare, Ireland, the son of Matthew O'Gorman or MacGorman (1705-1740) and Margaret O'Loughlin, daughter of Donogh O'Loughlin of Castletown and his wife, Coelia. The family, although dispossessed of its property, belonged to the Irish Catholic gentry and was sufficiently well connected for Charles O'Brien, styled ninth earl of Thomond, commander of one of the Hiberno-French regiments, to assist O'Gorman's entry about 1750 to the Irish College in Paris, where he attended the university medical school and in due course qualified as a physician. He was commissioned into the army. Little is known of his military career, but he served in the Franco-Irish regiment of Rothe, later Walsh. He achieved the rank of captain and was made a chevalier of the military order of St Louis. 
In appearance O'Gorman was strikingly handsome and immensely tall, exceeding 6 feet 5 inches in height. In 1757 he married Marguerite Francoise Victoire D'Eon de Beaumont (1724-1788), daughter of the deceased Louis D'Eon de Beaumont (died 1749) of Tonnerre, a member of the lesser Burgundian nobility who had held several public offices, and his wife, Francoise de Charenton. O'Gorman and his wife had three sons, all of whom served in the French army or navy. His brother-in-law was the Chevalier D'Eon de Beaumont (1728-1810), the celebrated transvestite French diplomat. In 1763 D'Eon reacted sharply to an attempt by O'Gorman to interfere in his affairs and spurned his advice. However, in 1776, in London, O'Gorman offered to fight a duel on D'Eon's behalf. D'Eon, in his will, claimed that he was owed 60,000 livres by O'Gorman, which he bequeathed to O'Gorman's sons. 
Marguerite O'Gorman's dowry was a valuable wine-growing property in Burgundy, from which O'Gorman profited sufficiently to become a figure at court and maintain a costly establishment at Paris, where he moved in the best society. He was generous to his relatives and to Irish students in Paris. He was a native speaker of Irish and developed an interest in Irish antiquarian lore, especially genealogy. His wine business brought him regularly to Ireland, where his customers included noblemen such as the earl of Inchiquin. He took advantage of these visits to collect and copy manuscripts and to transcribe tombstone inscriptions, especially in co. Clare, co. Limerick, and co. Tipperary. O'Gorman came to be regarded as a 'perfect master of all matters relating to Irish pedigrees', and his work won acceptance from the authorities in France and Spain, where there was a ready market for Irish genealogical material among expatriates (Hayes, 'A forgotten Irish antiquary', 593-4). Genealogy handsomely supplemented his income: he charged up to $1000 for the preparation of a pedigree. His clients included such notable figures as Lord Clare and later his widow, and his fellow countrymen who fought in foreign service, General Count Alexander O'Reilly, General Daniel O'Connell, and others. There is no doubt that he did much useful work in this area, and the bulk of the extensive O'Gorman manuscripts in the Royal Irish Academy and the National Library of Ireland consists of genealogical correspondence, transcriptions, and notes. 
In 1772 O'Gorman was present at a meeting of the antiquarian committee of the Dublin Society, at which he was commissioned to request a copy of the 'Book of Lecan' from the superiors of the Irish College in Paris and their assistance in an enquiry into the antiquities of Ireland. The result was the establishment of a similar committee in Paris. Both bodies ceased to exist after a short time, but the contacts established may have helped lay the ground for the presentation of the 'Book of Lecan' to the Royal Irish Academy in 1787. O'Gorman has been credited with securing the donation, but in fact he played no role in the final negotiations. He did, however, acquire the 'Book of Ballymote' in Ireland, which in 1785 he presented to the Royal Irish Academy, of which he was made an honorary member. In 1787 he unsuccessfully sought the position of consul-general of France in Dublin. 
An ardent royalist, O'Gorman was ruined financially by the French Revolution, which led to the confiscation of his estate in Burgundy and ended the market for his genealogical research. His wife, from whom he was estranged for many years, died in 1788, and in 1792 he married in Dublin, Mary Cuffe ('nee' Ryan), the widow of Denny Baker Cuffe of Cuffesboro' in Queen's county. He took up permanent residence in Ireland from 1793. His sons also left France and entered the English service, two of them securing commissions in the 18th Royal Irish regiment. O'Gorman was soon heavily in debt and suffered harassment from his importunate creditors. To his embarrassment he was obliged to turn to friends and relations for support, and he wrote pitiful letters to various public figures for financial assistance to relieve his distress. To add to his troubles, the Irish government regarded him as a security risk, and he was temporarily imprisoned in the panic that followed the French expedition to Bantry Bay in 1796. Despite his misfortunes, he continued to pursue his antiquarian interests and retained his zeal for the discovery and presentation of manuscripts in the Irish language. Towards the end of his life he retired to his native co. Clare, settling at Drumellihy, near his childhood home, where he died on 18 November 1809. He was buried in the neighbouring churchyard of Kilmacduane. 


