@@@@@


doc= 63669


Rhames, Aaron (d. 1734), printer, is of unknown origins. The first reference to him is as an apprentice to the printer Joseph Ray of Dublin. He was freed of the London Stationers' Company on 7 August 1704 by Ray, and he spent the next few years working both in London and in the printing works at Three Keys, St Nicholas, Dublin. It was in London in 1705 that he married Margaret, daughter of John Millet and stepdaughter of William Onley, both printers. Their first son, Charles, died in 1708 and was buried on 8 February at St Werburgh's Church, Dublin. 
Rhames came into his own as a printer in 1709, when he turned out, sometimes using monogram, at least fifteen books and pamphlets, several for his former fellow apprentice, Jeremiah Pepyat. He was given the important task of printing the philosophical writings of George Berkeley, namely his 'Essay towards a New Theory of Vision' (1709), and 'Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge' (1710), at his new printing works situated at the back of Dick's Coffee House, Skinner Row, Dublin. 
Rhames established himself as a printer of distinction when he accepted the order on behalf of William Binauld and Eliphal Dobson of printing the whole of the 'Bible' in folio in 1714, the first extant Irish edition. He then printed for John Hyde and three others an octavo edition in 1722. In 1719 Hyde's company had instructed Rhames to print ten thousand copies of the 'Bible' for charitable distribution and he completed the order in 1722. In 1716 a 'Book of Common Prayer' was printed by and for Rhames, Dobson, and Pepyat, with another edition printed in 1724. Rhames took a leading role in the life of the Guild of Printers; admitted in 1714, he served on the council from 1721, as warden in 1723, and then as master in 1728. He was admitted a freeman of the city in 1714. 
A tory in politics, Rhames fully appreciated the political value of newspapers and attempted to produce a local newspaper for Dublin on three different occasions, failing each time. In 1705 he produced the 'Dublin Courant, or, Diverting Post', and it folded after two issues; in 1709 he printed five issues, and in 1725 between 25 October and 13 December he printed nine issues. On the last occasion he and the Dublin undertaker William Smith were involved. 
Rhames and his wife had three sons who survived infancy: Joseph ('b'. 18 July 1719), John ('bap'. 5 Dec 1727), and Benjamin ('bap'. 6 May 1730). All three followed him in the book trade, Joseph and John as printers and Benjamin as music printer and seller. When Rhames moved in 1725 to a printing works opposite the Pied Horse in Capel Street, it is probable that he began to print sheet music. Rhames was chosen as printer to the newly formed Dublin Society from 1731 to 1736; on 30 October 1731 his proposal for producing 'Till's Treatise of Horse Houghing Husbandry' was accepted, and printed by 11 November. By December he was owed $12 10's'. 3died by the society, and in the next five years he printed several pamphlets for the society on a variety of subjects, such as saffron, flax, bees, and hops. Among his other important printing tasks were Joseph Beaumont's 'Mathematical Sleaing-Tables, or, Mistery of Weaving Linnen-Cloth Explain'd' (1712), Bishop William Nicolson's 'Irish Historical Library' (1724), and the third edition of Gilbert Burnet's 'History of the Reformation of the Church of England' (3rd edn, 1730). He produced a number of red and black title pages, rare in the Dublin book trade, and when he died in Dublin on 9 December 1734 he was remembered as a perfectionist in the printing world. He was succeeded by his wife and his sons, and their descendants carried on until 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 63670


Upton, Clotworthy (1665-1725), politician and religious activist, was born on 6 January 1665, the fourth but eldest surviving son of Arthur Upton (1633-1706), landowner and politician, of Castle Upton, Templepatrick, co. Antrim, and his wife, Dorothy ('b'. 'c'.1643, died in or after 1717), daughter of Michael Beresford of Coleraine, co. Londonderry. The first Upton to arrive in Ireland had been Henry, a captain in Essex's army in 1598, who had married into the planter family of the Clotworthys, viscounts Massereene. Although of English descent, the Uptons had by the late seventeenth century become strict Presbyterians. In 1689 Arthur Upton was active in organizing local resistance to James II, while Clotworthy raised a troop and joined King William at the siege of Limerick, where he fell into the hands of the Jacobites and was for a time held prisoner. Prior to the rising of 1688 he had been entered at the Middle Temple, and he may have been the Mr Upton who was admitted in 1702 to the King's Inns in Dublin, although there is no record of his ever having practised law. 
Elected to the Irish parliament in 1695 for the borough of Newtownards, Upton succeeded his father in 1703 as MP for co. Antrim. In the Irish House of Commons he was always ready to speak in defence of his fellow Presbyterians. He strongly opposed the imposition of the sacramental test in 1704 and subsequently fought a lone battle for its repeal, so that he came to be recognized as 'the chief lay Dissenter in Ireland' (Bishop John Evans to Archbishop William Wake, 30 April 1717, Christ Church, Oxford, Wake MS 12). In 1715 he was sent to England by the general synod to solicit the repeal of the test, but returned empty-handed. A second mission in 1717, with toleration the objective, was similarly unsuccessful. But Upton badgered his friends in England, and in 1719 secured a promise from Lord Sunderland to instruct the new viceroy, the duke of Bolton, to push for repeal of the test. However, Upton could only watch helplessly as first the proposed repeal was abandoned, then ministerial proposals for a toleration bill were undermined by the Irish parliamentary opposition. The outcome, a limited toleration and a partial retrospective indemnity over the test, was bitterly disappointing. 
In his religion Upton was staunchly orthodox, and he may have been responsible for the appointment as minister for Templepatrick of the arch-conservative William Livingston. When conflict broke out within the general synod on the issue of subscription to the Westminster confession, Upton weighed in on the subscribing side. In 1722 he brought before the synod a 'charge' against the non-subscribers, claiming that one of their pamphlets proved them guilty of 'holding a principle that opens a door for letting in error and heresy' (Wodrow Letters Quarto 20, fol. 305). This affair rumbled on for two years and came to an unsatisfactory conclusion in 1724 when Upton was unable to attend the synod to prosecute his accusations, detained in Dublin on what was perhaps a diplomatic pretext. 
Upton was married three times, and each marriage was tragically brief: in 1692 to Lady Mary Boyle (died 1695), daughter of Roger Boyle, second earl of Orrery, and Mary Sackville; in 1706 to Mary (died 1707), daughter of William Stewart of Killymoon, co. Tyrone; and finally, about November 1712, to Jane (died 1713), daughter of John Ormsby of Athlacca, co. Limerick, who, before she died, gave birth to his only child, a daughter, Jane. He died at his home, Castle Upton, on 3 September 1725, after a short illness, when an infection in his leg became gangrenous. According to Livingston, he was 'lamented by men of all distinctions. The Tories and Jacobites say he was a fair and generous adversary, and the papists express a great concern for him, for... he protected them from some severities in the House of Commons' (Witherow, 207-8). He was succeeded at Castle Upton by his brother John, an army officer and a conformist, and father of the first Baron Templetown. By a settlement made shortly before his death Clotworthy Upton left a fortune of $6000 p.a. to his daughter, who after her marriage was created 'suo jure' Baroness Langford. Livingston, and his successors in the Presbyterian ministry of Templepatrick, received a legacy of $8 per annum. 


@@@@@


doc= 63671


Waters, Edward (d. 1751), printer and bookseller, was the son of a John Waters (died 1717?), a papermaker in Dublin. His name first appeared in 1707 as a printer, when he took over from John Brocas at School House Lane, near High Street, and used the metal-cast alphabet that had come originally from Amsterdam. In 1712 he and his father leased from Joseph Leeson a paper mill, printing press, and house at Milltown, near Milltown Bridge, co. Dublin. On 30 November 1717, presumably after his father's death, a new lease was made out in his name only. He married Sarah, daughter of Matthew Gunne, and they had a daughter, Annamaria, who was baptized on 13 June 1709. 
Waters now owned a flourishing business. Between 1707 and 1740 he occupied at least five different printing premises in Dublin: in School House Lane, Smock Alley, Essex Street, Copper Alley, and then near Essex Street as well as at Milltown Bridge. In all he started or ran no fewer than seven newspapers, the most significant of which was the 'Flying Post', or, the 'Post-Master' (1708-29), as well as occasional news sheets. He inherited three of the titles from Brocas. 
A tory, Waters was often in trouble with the authorities for his Jacobite activities. Described as 'Protestant Printer to the late Pretender' ('Dublin Intelligence', 3 May 1707), Waters and two other protestant printers, Cornelius Carter and Peter Lawrence, and a Catholic bookseller, James Malone, were taken into custody on 19 November 1708 on suspicion of 'printing and vending Popish Prayer-Book contrary to Law' (Pollard, 589). In February 1709 Malone and Carter were tried and found guilty, Waters and Lawrence having turned queen's evidence. Later that year Waters was indicted again for falsely reporting the burning of Wicklow by the French. On 10 June 1714 messengers were sent to arrest him for printing a scandalous ballad about Hanover called 'Tis time to come over &c' ('Portland MSS', 5.460). But Waters had escaped and 'gone fishing', thereby foiling his prosecutors. When they came for him in June 1715 for printing 'Polyphemus Farewell' he leapt out of the window, two storeys high, at the New Post Office printing house at the corner of Sycamore Alley, but was captured in a nearby cellar. He was again in difficulties in 1720 and was sent for trial by grand jury, and found not guilty, after a prolonged trial for printing Swift's 'Insolent and Seditious' 'Proposal for the Universal Use of Irish Manufacture' (Pollard, 590). It moved Swift to write to Sir Thomas Hanmer to persuade the lord lieutenant, the duke of Grafton, to drop the case, and when he arrived in Ireland in August 1721 a 'nolle prosequi' was granted. But in 1735 Waters was committed to Newgate for reprinting Bishop Hort's 'New Proposal for the Better Regulation of Quadrille'. He was soon released after a petition on his behalf was prepared and when the fines were paid. Within a few months, in 1736, he overstepped the mark again when he reprinted a pamphlet whose original publication a month earlier had led to George Faulkner's imprisonment in Newgate. Waters was sent to the same prison but was at work again in 1737. 
Waters was the first Dublin printer to publish Jonathan Swift's works, printing in 1711 the 'Conduct of the Allies', a scathing expose of the deficiencies of British allies in waging the War of the Spanish Succession, and 'Proposals for the Universal Use of Irish Manufactures' (1720). Waters printed the manuscript work by Manoel Alvarez SJ, 'A Jesuit Latin Grammar' (1716), as well as the 'magnum opus' of Dr Cornelius Nary, 'A New History of the World' (1720). One of the most intriguing pamphlets he printed was the eight-page 'Letter to the author of the Catholic answer to the seeker showing who are the first foxes he ought to hunt' (1736). The pamphlet's theme was transubstantiation and one of the 'first foxes' to be hunted was the Jesuit controversialist Robert Bellarmine. 
Waters died in Dublin of a lingering illness on 12 October 1751, after a full and troublesome life. 


@@@@@


doc= 63672


Ramsbotham, Herwald, first Viscount Soulbury (1887-1971), politician and governor-general of Ceylon, was born on 6 March 1887 at Winterbrook, Cholsey, Berkshire, the son of Herwald Ramsbotham (1859-1941), and his wife, Ethel Margaret Bevan (died 1943), daughter of T. Bevan of Stone Park, Greenhithe, Kent. He came from a distinguished wealthy Lancashire family noted for public service. He was educated at Uppingham School, and at University College, Oxford, where he graduated with a first class in moderations and Greats. In 1911 he was called to the bar, and subsequently practised as a barrister. He married Doris Violet (1890-1954), the daughter of Sigmund Sinaner de Stein, a wealthy banker, in Kensington on 14 November 1911. They had two sons and a daughter. The younger son, Sir Peter Edward Ramsbotham (1919-2010), was later British Ambassador in Washington. 
In the First World War, Ramsbotham commanded a company of the 7th battalion of the Bedfordshire regiment, before becoming staff-captain of the 53rd infantry brigade and deputy assistant adjutant-general. He was mentioned in dispatches three times, awarded the Military Cross, and appointed an OBE. Following the end of hostilities he worked in the City of London. Intent on a career in politics he contested Lancaster in 1910 and 1928 as a Conservative. He was finally elected for the constituency in 1929, and remained an MP until his elevation to the peerage in 1941. He became parliamentary secretary to Lord Halifax, president of the Board of Education, in 1931. His responsibilities were great, as Lord Halifax was employed in other duties and took little interest in public education. In 1935 Ramsbotham became parliamentary secretary to the board of agriculture before becoming minister of pensions, an office in which he continued to assist the minister of agriculture in the House of Commons. In 1939 he was appointed first commissioner of works and was sworn of the privy council. In April 1940 he became president of the Board of Education following the resignation of Lord De La Warr. This position was widely regarded as a political backwater. 
Unlike his immediate predecessors, who had been keen to move on to more prestigious positions, Ramsbotham remained at the ministry and initiated important reforms. One of his priorities was to restore the coherence of the educational system, which had become fragmented by the process of evacuation. He was also instrumental in developing plans for its long-term reorganization. The board's proposals were embodied in the so-called green book. Although confidential, this was distributed 'in such a blaze of secrecy that it achieved an unusual degree of publicity' (McKibbin, 221). This pioneering document, although based on an administrative approach to the educational service, was firmly based on the premise that the reforms must meet the educational requirements of the children. It highlighted the unfairness and indefensible inequalities of the educational system after the age of eleven. According to Nigel Middleton and Sophia Weitzman's 'A Place for Everyone' this innovation was instrumental in establishing a new constitutional approach based on a more open form of constructive debate. However, Ramsbotham 'was moving too fast for Churchill' (McKibbin, 221), and he was replaced by R. A. Butler in July 1941. The latter nevertheless continued the process of reform initiated by Ramsbotham. In July 1941 as compensation for relinquishing his position at the Board of Education he was raised to the peerage as Baron Soulbury of Soulbury. He was also appointed chairman of the recently renamed Assistance Board. The functions of its predecessor, the Unemployment Assistance Board, had been radically extended the previous year following the transfer to it of the administration of pensions relief, war distress, and allowances to families of men in the forces. In addition it had become responsible for the care of evacuees and air-raid victims. In 1942 Soulbury was appointed chairman of the standing joint committee on teachers' salaries (the Burnham committee), a position he retained until 1949. 
In November 1944 Soulbury became chairman of the commission on constitutional reform for Ceylon. The Soulbury commission report, issued in October 1945, drafted a constitution for Ceylon which provided self-government while retaining some imperial safeguards in defence and external affairs. Ceylonese leaders pressed for the removal of these safeguards, demanding the grant of dominion status. This was affirmed with the 'Ceylon Independence Act' of 1947, which was widely portrayed as a bold experiment in Western-style parliamentary government in a plural society. Soulbury was subsequently appointed governor-general of Ceylon, arriving in Colombo in June 1949. Within a month he was fluent enough to make his first speech in Sinhalese to the Ceylon National Congress. It was a testing appointment for Soulbury as the path to independence proved considerably more challenging than expected: Soulbury had to cope with the effects of the unexpected death of the prime minister, D. S. Senanayake, in March 1952, the general election later that year, and also a visit to Ceylon by Elizabeth II and the duke of Edinburgh. Early in 1954, moreover, shortly before the formal end of Soulbury's period of office, his wife died after being run down by a London bus. 
Following his return to England in July 1954 Soulbury was raised to a viscountcy. He continued to intervene occasionally in the House of Lords, and in August 1956, at the invitation of the archbishop of Canterbury, he was appointed chairman of the National Society. He was also chairman of the board of governors of the Royal Ballet School, from 1956 to 1964. On 10 November 1962 he married (Carmen) Ursula, widow of Frederick Wakeham and daughter of Armand and Helen Jerome. She died two years later on 12 November 1964. 
Soulbury is best remembered for his contribution to educational reform in Britain, and for his role in guiding Ceylon to independence. He had an impressive capacity for hard work, coupled with ability for common sense and shrewd judgement. His popularity among his departmental colleagues was a testimony to his good humour and charm. As leader of the commission which reported on Ceylon's future he played a key role in formulating a workmanlike constitution and made strenuous efforts during his period as governor-general to run the country in an effective way. A lucid if not inspirational orator, he gained a reputation as an honest broker and a safe pair of hands. Soulbury died on 30 January 1971 at Stoke House, Stoke Fleming, near Newton Abbot, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 63673


Nicholson, Marjorie (1914-1997), socialist and trade unionist, was born at 22 Cherryburn Gardens, Benwell, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 22 December 1914, the daughter of Edward Nicholson, manager of a hat factory, and his wife, Edith Emma, 'nee' Bone. Later the family moved to Kenton, Middlesex, and she was sent to Harrow high school. There she had an exemplary record, with high academic ratings leading to an open scholarship to read history at St Hilda's College, Oxford, the George Heelum scholarship, a Middlesex education committee senior county award, and another award from the Stapley Trust. As an undergraduate she was thus comfortably self-supporting and obtained second-class honours in modern history in 1936. By that time she had converted from the family tradition of Conservatism to socialism, and through the Oxford University Labour Club had met G. D. H. Cole and some of the leading young socialists such as Richard Crossman and Patrick Gordon Walker, then a don at Christ Church. She became committed to Indian independence and ultimately to self-government in the British colonial empire. On leaving Oxford she taught history at East Ham Grammar School for Girls and lectured for the Workers' Educational Association. By 1941 she had returned to Oxford as the organizing tutor in history for the Oxford delegacy in extra-mural studies in Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire. Her political ambition increasing, she stood as a Labour candidate in the strongly Conservative constituency of Windsor in the first three general elections after the Second World War. 
In 1945 Nicholson joined the Fabian Colonial Bureau as assistant secretary. There she forged close, enduring friendships with Rita Hinden, the secretary, and Arthur Creech Jones, the former chairman, who was then under-secretary and within a year secretary of state for the colonies. Her talents for negotiation and for writing succinct articles on colonial political and economic issues emerged at this time. This was an exhilarating period to be at the hub of Labour's interest in colonial development. The government was funding research into constitutional and economic progress, the Colonial Office and other ministries were issuing much more information about colonial issues, and interchange of ideas with emergent political leaders in the colonies had been well established. In the office of the bureau she met many of those leaders, and over the years she conducted a considerable correspondence with them. In 1950, when Rita Hinden resigned to become editor of 'Socialist Commentary' and Creech Jones, out of parliament, resumed his chairmanship of the bureau, Nicholson became its secretary. The bureau then was facing financial and organizational difficulties. To widen its outlook she introduced into its journal, 'Venture', more frequent signed articles and, following discussion there of the moral issues of trusteeship, issued a questionnaire on whether the prime aim of the Labour Party's colonial policy should be political, economic, or social development. On the basis of the responses to this questionnaire she submitted for further consideration a memorandum on long-term aims for Labour. Her own view was that the colonial governments should collaborate with nationalist leaders in breaking the dependence of colonial peoples on the ruling power. 
After five years Nicholson, recognizing that the bureau no longer exercised its original influence in the Labour Party, transferred to the Trades Union Congress (TUC) Commonwealth section to work on policy development. She maintained her relations with the bureau, attending its periodic conferences and writing for 'Venture'. Nevertheless, direct contact with the politically active trade union leaders in the British dependencies, and the continuity of the TUC's work, distanced from the ebb and flow of parties in the British government, suited her better. 
A love of fieldwork had been born in 1949, when the Fabians gave Nicholson three months' leave to conduct classes for adults in the Eastern Provinces of Nigeria. That course, on the making of modern nations, organized by the Oxford extra-mural studies delegacy, covered most of the problems facing colonies aspiring to independence, many of which were being explored in bureau pamphlets and all of them by colonial officials and academics. Every opportunity offered later by the TUC to observe and report on the relations between local governments overseas and the trade unions was welcomed. On further visits to Tanganyika in 1954 and to Nigeria in 1960 and 1970 the advice she gave to the unions, based on considered TUC policy, was not always what they had hoped to hear. Nevertheless, she respected their members' dignity and ability to decide what they wanted, and her aim was always to help them attain it through the constitutional methods provided by their union structure rather than through the oratory of unstable political pressure groups. In 'New Fabian Colonial Essays' she argued that the initiative for political development lay with the colonial peoples, with Britain merely assisting, and that accepting the goal of self-government precluded the imposition of a specifically socialist policy. Her practical recommendations to the Commonwealth section committees on her return were based on stringent observation, experience, wide reading, and recognition of the colonial peoples' ultimate goals. 
On retirement in 1972 Nicholson settled in St Albans and embarked on a scholarly study of the influence of the TUC overseas from 1916 to 1965. Unfortunately she died before the second volume was completed. Research for this work took her to India in 1973, thus fulfilling a lifelong ambition, and to the West Indies in 1976, where she met many old friends in positions of authority. While not allowing it to cloud her judgement, her appreciation of the scholarship and diverse talents of others was generous. 
On 14 September 1946 Nicholson married Lionel Victor Van der Meulen Fowler ('b'. 1900/01), journalist, son of Henry Walter Willson Fowler, company secretary, and former husband of Constance Marjorie, 'nee' Phillips, from whom he was divorced; they themselves were later divorced. She was appointed MBE in 1969. She died of a subarachnoid haemorrhage at Hemel Hempstead General Hospital on 22 July 1997. A memorial service was held on 1 August in the parish church of St Michael, St Albans. 


@@@@@


doc= 63674


Ellen Sharples (1769-1849). Both Rolinda's parents were professional artists, James being a very talented if not outstanding painter of portraits in pastel. Rolinda's half-brother Felix Sharples (1786- 'c'.1832) and her brother James ('c'.1788-1839) also became professional artists. Together with his family, James Sharples senior took his portrait practice to the United States, setting out in 1793 but being delayed by seven months' internment in Brest, after being captured by a French privateer. James Sharples drew many of the most prominent Americans, including George Washington, before the family returned to Bath in 1801. They all set out again from Bristol in 1806, but this time their vessel ran aground on the muddy banks of the Avon. Felix and James junior continued to the United States but their parents and Rolinda remained in Bristol until 1809. In February 1811 her father died in New York and in June, Ellen, James junior, and Rolinda returned to Bristol. Before her marriage about 1787 Ellen had been a pupil of James Sharples, learning drawing 'as an ornamental art for amusement' as she later wrote in her diary (Ellen Sharples's diary, summary of events, May 1806-Jan 1808). However, she made many excellent and indistinguishable copies of her husband's pastels and a small number of original portraits. Now, settled in the elegant and fast-expanding village of Clifton (then just outside Bristol), she devoted herself principally to her daughter's education and career. 


@@@@@


doc= 63676


Williams, David (1900-1978), historian of Wales, was born at Llan-y-cefn, north Pembrokeshire, on 9 February 1900, the younger son of David Williams, tenant farmer, and his wife Anne, 'nee' Morris. A Baptist, he came from a rural nonconformist background: he dedicated his 'Rebecca Riots' to his forebears, 'sons and daughters of Rebecca'. He was educated at Narberth grammar school and, after a brief period of war service in the army, at the University College, Cardiff. Here he obtained a first-class honours degree in history, along with a teacher's certificate (first class), and became a close friend of the economist and later Labour government minister Hilary Marquand. After leaving Cardiff, Williams taught history for three years at Tywyn intermediate school, Merioneth. However, he was anxious for a career in scholarship. In 1926 he gained a Rockefeller fellowship to France and Germany where he studied the political ideas first of Condorcet and then of Herder and worked under such scholars as Mathiez. Later he gained another Rockefeller fellowship to Columbia University in New York, where he obtained a master's degree. From 1928 to 1930 he taught at Barry Boys' County School. His pupils there, who included the historian H. J. Habakkuk, the economist Bryan Hopkin, and the archaeologist Glyn Daniel, testified to his inspirational qualities as a teacher; his cherubic appearance earned him the nickname Babyface. In 1930 he was to marry Irene Fothergill, a vivacious Cardiff girl and French scholar who became a university lecturer: their happy marriage was ended when she died young in 1942. 
In 1930 Williams was appointed to a lectureship in history at the University College, Cardiff. Here, despite possibilities of moving to Oxford or even Australia, he was to serve for the next fifteen years. He was an academic polymath: a younger colleague like Christopher Hill was almost overawed by his scholarly range. He published important articles on political ideas during the French Revolution (particularly Rousseau), and on early American history, notably on the philosophy of Benjamin Franklin. For the rest of his life, the bust of Voltaire on his desk recalled this early passion. He lectured with authority, mainly on modern European history; his professor instructed him to dictate from notes. But his research specialism was Welsh political and social radicalism in the early nineteenth century. In 1939 he published a major monograph, 'John Frost', a pioneering study of the leader of the Newport Chartists a century earlier. It was more an analysis of the social upheavals in the industrial valleys in the 1830s than a study of Frost himself. Characteristically, he argued that the Newport rising had no revolutionary intent. 
During the Second World War, Williams briefly served in the Local Defence Volunteers, and then from 1941 to 1945 worked as manpower officer for the Ministry of Labour in south-east Wales. In 1945 he was appointed to the Sir John Williams chair of Welsh history at Aberystwyth; he was linked with the college there for the rest of his life. During this period he got married a second time, to Hilarie Margaret Waddington (died 1996), a physiotherapist and lecturer in physical education. At Aberystwyth, Williams became a legendary figure. Master of scholarship and of gossip, he surveyed from his eyrie in the tower of Old College the human comedy of student and staff life in the little town, sometimes with the aid of marine binoculars. He also indulged his passion for classical music. In his youth he had a good tenor voice. 
Williams now showed his wide range of historical interest. 'Wales and America' (1946) and work on Welsh emigration was followed by studies of the Tudor dissenter John Penry, and in 1950 by an authoritative 'History of Modern Wales', for many years the standard work on the subject. But his main focus was on agrarian discontent and in 1955 this led to the publication of 'The Rebecca Riots', his historical masterpiece. The Rebecca riots were a remarkable series of attacks on the toll gates in south-west Wales by otherwise peaceful Welsh tenant farmers. Williams describes these events and their 'tarnished heroes' with restraint and frequent irony. But his book is far more than this. It lays bare a countyside in crisis. Its innovative method recalls the French historians of the 'Annales' school to whom this country-bred Welshman was intellectually closely related. Gently but powerfully, Williams examines the fractured society of south-west Wales and the gentry who led it, then the growth of radicalism through the newspapers and the chapels, then the riots and their aftermath. At one level it is a 'pointilliste' study of local detail by a master of the miniature; but it is woven into a subtle analysis of complex social movements. It is a study of 'history from below' ahead of its time. The conclusion has an inner strength. The toll gates went after all. The sons and daughters of Rebecca were triumphant. The book was universally acclaimed in the learned journals on both sides of the Atlantic. It might well have made him a fellow of the British Academy, but Williams was based in allegedly remote Aberystwyth, rather than Oxford or Cambridge. An unassuming man, he did not seem to mind. 
Williams continued to be active across a wide range of modern Welsh history. A study of Chartism in Wales in 1959 was followed by an edition of John Penry's 'Three Treatises Concerning Wales' (1960), and a 'Tour de force' in a centenary evocation of Aberystwyth's second principal, 'Thomas Francis Roberts' (1961), full of subtle asides and sly humour. He looked forward to a busy and creative retirement, working on the links between Welsh radicals and the French revolutionaries, notably his earlier namesake, David Williams. A Labour supporter, he regarded radical men and movements as grist to his mill. But it was not to be. In the early sixties, he showed signs of being afflicted by Parkinson's disease. Soon he was little more than an invalid, although he managed to attend a presentation dinner in Cardiff to receive a Festschrift on his retirement as professor in 1967. In his latter years, he depended heavily on the devoted nursing of his wife. He died at his home, 2 Laura Place, Aberystwyth, on 24 February 1978, and was cremated. 
David Williams was arguably the most influential historian of modern Wales that the nation has produced. A quiet, reserved man, neatly dressed in a grey suit and a Homburg hat, slow in gait as he progressed sedately along the Aberystwyth promenade, he was a man of great intellectual force. His technical mastery of his materials was complete, but it was allied to other powerful qualities -- a limpid literary style, an insatiable curiosity for detail mingled with what Richard Cobb called his 'tiny gentle claw of malice' (Cobb, 205), an instinctive rationalism which sought to deflate sentimental legends, but also an inner passion for the common people which emerged, with typical restraint, in the concluding pages of 'The Rebecca Riots'. A physical characteristic was a tic in his left eye that would become noticeable as he recalled some picturesque or scandalous historical detail. He was a powerful influence upon other historians, colleagues at Aberystwyth such as Richard Cobb and Gwyn A. Williams, and on a new generation of younger Welsh historians. They found that, beneath the placid, even cold, veneer, there was a warm human being. He taught them their craft but also encouraged them never to be in awe of the past. The awareness of the plural, multicultural nature of British historical experience in the later twentieth century, shown by the upsurge in the history of modern Wales, owes as much to David Williams as to any other person. 


@@@@@


doc= 63680


Driscoll, James (1880-1925), boxer, was born on 5 December 1880 at 12 Ellen Street in Newtown, Cardiff's main Irish quarter, the second son of the four surviving children of Cornelius Driscoll (1856-1881), a railwayman on the docks who died in an accident at work soon after Jim's birth, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Burns). His first job was in the printing works of the local 'Evening Express', where there was a boxing club, and despite its rudimentary facilities -- 'gloves' were made from waste paper and string from the packing department -- the fistic skills of club captain Driscoll soon brought him to the attention of larger and better-organized clubs in Cardiff. By seventeen he was appearing regularly in Jack Scarrott's fight booths in the south Wales valleys, and in 1901 he graduated into professional boxing. On 30 June 1907 he married Edith Gwynne (Edie) Wiltshire ('b'. 1880/81). 
At 5 feet 6 inches tall and weighing 9 stone, the clean-limbed, dark-haired Driscoll was fast and skilful; upright in stance, he possessed a flashing blade of a left hand with which he would beat his opponent into submission before employing a devastating right to deliver the final blow. These trademarks were all in evidence when he beat Joe Bowker on 25 September 1906 at the National Sporting Club (NSC) for the British featherweight title. The world title at that weight was held by Abe Attell, the 'little Hebrew' of New York, who won it in 1904. Attell's most difficult fight during the six years he held the title was against Driscoll on 19 February 1909 at the National Athletic Club in New York. The Irish-Welshman's success against each of his nine opponents during his four-month tour of the US between November 1908 and February 1909 made him a worthy opponent for Attell and they met on a 'no decision' basis, which meant that to claim the fight a boxer had to knock out or otherwise stop his opponent. For the entire ten rounds Attell was given a master class in the 'sweet science' in a performance which, though it failed to achieve the knockout which would have brought Driscoll the championship, earned him the name Peerless Jim. This nickname was first bestowed on him by the gunslinging scourge of Dodge City turned sports journalist and former US marshal Bat Masterson. Attell offered Driscoll a return bout for the world title, but Jim had promised to return home to box an exhibition match at the annual charity show of the Nazareth House Roman Catholic Orphanage in Cardiff. There would never be another chance to challenge for the title. 
At home Driscoll was naturally, if inaccurately, hailed as world champion. In February 1910 he beat Seaman Arthur Hayes for the British featherweight title over six rounds, and retained it by defeating Frank (Spike) Robson, twice, to become the first British boxer to become an outright holder of one of the coveted belts donated by Lord Lonsdale. In challenging his compatriot Freddie Welsh for the British welterweight title, however, he was conceding several pounds to his sturdier opponent. On a night choking with tension, 20 December 1910, at Cardiff's American Roller Rink arena, Welsh's street-fighter tactics of elbowing, gouging, and rabbit-punching drove an increasingly frustrated Driscoll into reckless retaliation in the tenth round, when he flagrantly and repeatedly butted Welsh across the ring and was immediately disqualified. 
From then on Driscoll fought infrequently. The second match with Robson was his sole contest in 1911, and he fought only once in 1912, though it was to win the European featherweight title by knocking out the French champion Jean Posey in the twelfth round. He drew with the experienced Owen Moran at the NSC in January 1913, then announced his retirement. On the outbreak of war he was drafted into the army as a physical training and boxing instructor, and celebrated the peace by training the British army team to win the allied boxing tournament at the Royal Albert Hall. 
At this point Driscoll, now in the early stages of tuberculosis and in financial straits, sought to revive his own boxing career. Although in March 1919 he easily beat the ageing Pedlar Palmer, who had challenged for the world bantamweight title in 1899, two months later he could only draw with the much younger and less experienced Francis Rossi of Pontypridd. Then he ill-advisedly agreed to fight Charles Ledoux, the thickset and stumpy French bantamweight champion known as the 'little assassin' who was 6 inches shorter but twelve years his junior. At the NSC on 20 October 1919 the immaculate left jab of a drawn and haggard Peerless Jim kept him well ahead for fourteen rounds, but at the end of that round he was shaken by a desperate right to the body from which he never recovered, and his seconds threw in the towel at the start of the sixteenth. Had this contest been over fifteen rounds instead of twenty, Driscoll, by common consent, would have won. The reluctant victor, Ledoux, paid him a handsome tribute: 'Jim Driscoll is the master. He is the greatest man I have ever met or ever shall meet. He played with me for fourteen and a half rounds and I could do absolutely nothing' (Hails, 16). 
Jim Driscoll died at home in the Duke of Edinburgh Hotel at 18 Ellen Street, Cardiff, on 30 January 1925 and his military-style funeral took place on 3 February. After requiem mass at St Paul's Roman Catholic Church 100,000 mourners accompanied his coffin, draped in the union flag and carried behind a gun carriage, to burial at Cathays cemetery. He was survived by his wife, Edie. 


@@@@@


doc= 63683


Steel, Dorothy Dyne (1884-1965), croquet player, was born on 21 April 1884 at Woodsetts, Yorkshire, the daughter of Henry Allen Steel, vicar of Woodsetts, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Roughton. She learned to play croquet on the vicarage lawn and developed an unexciting but highly effective style. Always known by her initials, D. D., she gave an indication of her potential by coming runner-up in the British women's championship in 1914. She won the title in 1919 and again in 1922, and in a remarkable sequence of victories triumphed thirteen times in fifteen years, 1925-39, missing only 1928 and 1931, when the championship was won by Mrs R. C. J. Beaton and Mrs A. C. Ionides, respectively. 
Between the wars Steel also won four open championships (1925, 1933, 1935, 1936), five open doubles titles (1924, 1927, 1928, 1930, 1931), six mixed doubles titles (1923, 1932, 1934-6, 1939), and the variously named President's cup six times (1922, 1923, 1931, 1933, 1934, 1937). The victories in the President's cup and in the open championship established Steel as the equal of any of the male players of the day, and the 'supreme woman croquet player of all time' (Arlott, 993). 
Steel represented England three times in MacRobertson shield matches against Australia. She helped the home side to a comfortable win over the visitors at the Roehampton club in June 1925 and was considered a vital member of the side chosen for the return match in Australia in 1927. She nevertheless refused to travel unless her expenses were paid, compelling the council of the Croquet Association to relax its strict rules on professionalism. The official fund could not, however, meet the costs and the impasse was broken only by the intervention of a generous benefactor, Sir Francis Colchester-Wemyss, a passionate supporter of the game and a future president of the Croquet Association. Steel aroused great interest in Australia but did not enjoy the best of tours: she suffered from the heat and lost two games that, had she won them, would have retained the shield for England. She played better in the 1937 test series in England and was picked for the team nominated to tour New Zealand in 1939-40, but this was cancelled because of the war. After 1945 Steel was increasingly afflicted by arthritis in her hands, and her victory in the mixed doubles in 1947 was her last major title. As her playing career came to an end she took to tournament management and proved no less dominant off the court than on. 
Steel played with an upright style and a sideways stance, holding the mallet with an extremely tight grip. But she appeared to take no effort in the execution of her strokes and her intense concentration lent a perfectly even rhythm to her play: 'She trod the lawn with a springy step on the balls of her feet as the queen of the game which she knew herself to be; resolute, even a little grim, but the mistress of her art' (Prichard, 91). Some thought Steel a dull player, but she enjoyed her dominance and was famously competitive; her self-belief communicated itself to her opponents, who were never permitted to believe that they could win. Maurice B. Reckitt, a contemporary player, thought her 'probably the most infallible 'machine for victory' in the history of the game' (Smith, 48). Steel presented a strait-laced image, with a mackintosh 'tightly belted around her plump waist', a 'squashed trilby hat', and steel-rimmed spectacles (ibid.). The overall effect was one of determination -- her nickname was Stainless Steel -- and Edward Ward Petley, who twice partnered her in mixed doubles victories, recalled of their games together: 'She told me exactly what to do and I did it' (ibid., 33). 
Steel spent much of her life at Biddenham, Bedfordshire, where she played for the Bedford club. She was a good horsewoman and a keen hunter in the winter months. She died on 22 January 1965 at her home, Kings Close, Main Road, Biddenham, Cardington, Bedfordshire. The following year the Steel memorial bowl was instituted in British croquet, to be awarded annually to the most improved woman player of the year. Steel lived with her unmarried sister Evelyn, herself an able croquet player. It was generally supposed that the two women were not well off; it came as a surprise, therefore, when Evelyn left $120,000 on her death in 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 63684


Batten, William (1889-1959), rugby player, was born on 26 May 1889 at 9 Gorton Terrace, Kinsley, Hemsworth, Yorkshire, the son of James Batten (1848-1910), a coalminer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Hughes. He played rugby as a junior with Kinsley and Ackworth United before joining Hunslet in the Northern Union. His signing-on fee was a new suit. He made his debut on 9 February 1907 in a 15-0 win against Barrow. In his second season, aged only eighteen, he helped Hunslet to become the first team to win all four cups. In the 1911-12 season Batten broke the club record by scoring twenty-five tries. He became Hunslet's captain in 1911 but was transferred to Hull on 5 April 1913 for $600, double the previous world record fee. His transfer came about because Batten felt he should be paid as much as contemporary colonial players in England and top association footballers were receiving. Ultimately Hull were reported to have paid Batten an unprecedented $14 a match. 
Billy Batten became the most outstanding and controversial personality in Northern Union (later rugby league) football. A centre three-quarter, weighing over 13 stone, he was regarded as the most thrustful player of his generation and the hardest-tackling back in the game. Many of his tries were scored by hurdling his opponents, a dangerous practice which was eventually outlawed. His style of play and swarthy, muscular appearance fascinated fans and made him a huge crowd-puller. His effect on the attendances at Hull was such that his $600 transfer fee was recouped by the club within a few games. He scored three tries on his Hull debut against Keighley on 12 April 1913. He became such an idol on Humberside that his absence from the team in any fixture was reckoned to cost the club $100 in lost gate money. He flourished in a team strengthened by Australian imports. In 1914 he starred as Hull won the challenge cup for the first time after beating Wakefield Trinity 6-0 in the final at Halifax. 
In 1920 Batten scored the only try of the game when Hull beat Huddersfield 3-2 at Headingley to lift their first rugby league championship. Hull retained the trophy in 1921 after defeating Hull Kingston Rovers in the final. In 1922 he was a try-scorer in Hull's 9-10 challenge cup final defeat by Rochdale Hornets and was again a scorer when the club won its first Yorkshire challenge cup in 1923 by defeating Huddersfield 10-4 in the final. Batten also helped Hull to win the Yorkshire league championship twice. In April 1920 Batten became the first player to receive a benefit of over $1000 ($1079), a mark of the enormous respect afforded him by the sport. He played his last game for Hull at Bramley on 5 April 1924. He was transferred to Wakefield Trinity for $350, helped them to Yorkshire cup finals in 1924 (when they won) and 1926 (when they were runners-up), and finished his professional career with Castleford in 1927 before returning to the amateur ranks. 
Batten won nineteen Yorkshire caps (1908-26) and played in twenty-seven international and test matches (1908-23). Despite being a centre, he played most of his games at representative level as a winger, where his damaging running was a sore trial to opponents. He made only one tour of Australasia -- the inaugural Lions tour of 1910, when he played in all the test matches. He declined to tour in 1914 for personal reasons and in 1920 refused to play in any tour trials, declaring that the selectors should have known enough about him after thirteen years at the pinnacle of the game. 
Batten was a generous man, who did not forget his roots. In 1921 when the mining villages of Kinsley and Fitzwilliam were in severe hardship, he gave much of his Hull benefit proceeds to suffering villagers. On 11 January 1909 he married Ann Glover ('b'. 1887/8), a domestic servant, with whom he had eight children: William, Sydney Melbourne, Mary, Eric, Florence, Emily, Ann, and Robert. Three sons, William, Eric, and Robert, became professional rugby league players, and Eric emulated his father in playing for Yorkshire, England, and Great Britain. Two of Batten's brothers, Edward and James, were also professional players. 
For most of his working life Batten was a colliery corporal, although he did briefly in the 1920s become the licensee of the Old King's Arms, Kirkgate, Wakefield. He served throughout the Second World War in the fire service. He died on 26 January 1959 of cardiovascular degeneration at Stanley Royd Hospital, Wakefield, and was buried four days later at Hemsworth parish church. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 63687


Marriott, William Mark Noble (1848-1916), meteorologist, was born at 8 Church Terrace, Pancras Road, Camden Town, London, on 9 August 1848, the only child of William Marriott ('b'. 1821/2), dairyman, and his wife, Sarah ('b'. 1824/5), daughter of Mark Cordwell of Greenwich. He was educated at Colfe's Grammar School, Lewisham, and afterwards at University College, London. From 1869 to 1872 he was a supernumerary computer at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, working under James Glaisher in the magnetical and meteorological department. Thereafter, from 1 May 1872 until he retired forty-three years later, he was employed as assistant secretary of the Meteorological (from 1883 Royal Meteorological) Society. He was elected a fellow of that society on 20 April 1870. 
In his application for the post of assistant secretary, Marriott stated that he was well acquainted with meteorological work in all its branches and that he frequently compiled the Royal Observatory's weekly and quarterly meteorological reports. He also stated that he had a knowledge of French and had translated letters and other works for several gentlemen. He said he was not unacquainted with the duties of secretary, having served as secretary of the Greenwich Wesleyan Mutual Improvement Society for the previous three years. 
Marriott married Jane Saunders Old, daughter of Peter Old, engineer, on 9 August 1875, coincidentally his twenty-seventh and her twenty-fourth birthday, and their only child, William James Marriott, was born on 1 June 1876. A year or two after his marriage he moved from Stockwell to Norwood, south-east London, where he lived until his death. 
As assistant secretary Marriott was methodical, meticulous, efficient, and energetic. His manner was quiet, courteous, and unobtrusive, and the kindness of his heart showed in his unhesitating readiness to help anyone who consulted him. He was personally well known to most members of the society, in particular to those who maintained the society's observing stations and to whom he gave valuable hints and helpful advice as to the methods and instruments they should use. He was officially inspector of these stations from 1878 to 1911. He was also for many years official lecturer of the society, in which capacity he delivered more than a hundred popular lectures to schools and scientific societies in different parts of Britain. Whenever the society's council required a special investigation of a storm, frost, tornado, or, indeed, any other form of abnormal weather, they turned to Marriott to undertake the task. In the period 1876 to 1916, he wrote for the society no fewer than thirty reports on such weather events. He was a faithful and devoted servant, and it was due in no small measure to him that the society progressed and prospered during the time he was assistant secretary. 
Marriott was a prolific author, with more than 100 publications to his name, many of them short articles published in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society'. Although he wrote on a wide range of meteorological subjects, the majority of his articles were concerned with abnormal weather, meteorological phenomena, instruments and their usage, or observations made at various places in the United Kingdom and overseas. He also wrote a number of obituaries and, in addition, compiled the mass of statistics published in the 'Meteorological Record' from 1881 to 1911. The most substantial of his publications were his three books, 'Hints to Meteorological Observers' (1881; 8th edn, 1924); 'Some Facts about the Weather' (1906; 2nd edn, 1909); and 'Our Weather' (1911), which he wrote with J. S. Fowler. 
After he retired on 30 September 1915, Marriott continued to attend meetings of the Royal Meteorological Society. His retirement was, however, short, for he suffered a heart attack and died at Gipsy Hill railway station, London, on 28 December 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 63712


Ricci, Seymour Montefiore Robert Rosso de (1881-1942), art historian and bibliographer, was born on 17 May 1881 at Meadowbank, Twickenham, the eldest son of James Herman de Ricci (1847-1900), barrister and former colonial judge, and his second wife, Helen, 'nee' Montefiore (1857-1932). His parents were divorced in 1890, and de Ricci thereafter lived with his mother in Paris, where he attended the Lycee Janson de Sailly (1890-98). He was brought up as an Anglican. His fellow pupils at the lycee nicknamed him Pico della Mirandola because his interests were so eclectic. In a working career of barely forty years, he published over two dozen books. He also wrote several hundred articles, and although many of these are essentially journalistic -- for he made a name for himself as an art critic, becoming the Paris art correspondent for the 'New York Herald' (1929-32) -- they are all distinguished by his attention to detail and, frequently, to the history of who owned whatever he was writing about. While still at the lycee, he was admitted to the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, at the Sorbonne, where he proceeded bachelier es lettres in 1896-7; he attained his licence in 1901. His first publications were in 1896; in the following year they included a substantial repertory of the Roman inscriptions in the Breton department of Cotes-du-Nord. Saturday afternoon visits to the Musee Guimet fired a growing enthusiasm for Egyptology, and he took up the study of hieroglyphs and -- again to the level of publishing -- of coptic and Greek papyri. 
About 1900 de Ricci began to acquire auction sale catalogues: his collection of these ultimately became one of the largest ever formed by an individual, and they underpinned many of his bibliographic and art historical publications. He also gained his first patrons: Emile Guimet, Emile Picot, and, crucially, Salomon Reinach (1858-1932). The last was a member of the Institut de France, director of the Musee National des Antiquites, and founder of the Ecole du Louvre; extremely well connected, he moved with ease in half a dozen scholarly and social worlds, and yet was remarkably prolific as an author. His protege from about 1896, de Ricci became virtually his adoptive son early in the twentieth century, and owed to him introductions to a glittering array of cosmopolitan friends, such as Bernard Berenson and Princess Bibesco. 
On his twentieth birthday, 17 May 1901, de Ricci became a French citizen. He was now eligible for any French state-funded post or for grants for learned missions and the like. With powerful patrons, astonishing talents, and already about twenty scholarly publications to his credit, he might have been expected to scale the heights of the academic world. Instead, he took to the life of an independent scholar, living by his pen and from modest private means; the buying of books (especially bibliographical), coins, and small-scale works of art (such as Renaissance bronze plaquettes) was his only luxury. It was a choice which he occasionally regretted -- as when he applied unsuccessfully for a post in the museum of antiquities in Alexandria (1902) -- but it was the way of life to which he was temperamentally best suited. He was not a reflective person, but he had an astonishingly retentive and quick memory, and could easily marshal supplementary details from his various and ever growing slip-indexes. He could rapidly turn out a piece of journalistic writing, while he often startled contemporaries by the speed with which he produced more serious works. It took him only a few weeks to compile the catalogue of the Musee Cognacq-Jay (1929) or the 'Handlist of Manuscripts in the Library of the Earl of Leicester, at Holkham Hall' (1932). He enjoyed a busy social life, with many friends in the artistic world, but his own lifestyle was hard-working and even austere. 
Not until the 1920s was de Ricci to find what was surely his most satisfactory vocation, as a cataloguer of medieval and Renaissance manuscripts, and even then his ever curious mind led him to produce book after book on subjects only tangentially related to this theme. In the century's first decade he perhaps gave primacy to Egyptology and epigraphy; on the other hand, he greatly enjoyed the no less technical problems posed by early typography. Sometimes he would explore such problems in detail, but he eventually decided on the formula of preparing an all-embracing catalogue or census in which he traced the history of each member of some class of materials. In 1906 he proposed to the Bibliographical Society a 'Census of Caxtons'; this listing of every recorded copy of each of Caxton's printings duly emerged two years later, to be followed in 1911 by a comparable 'Catalogue raisonne des premieres impressions de Mayence (1445-1467)'. Perhaps because of an innate modesty that made him a ready annotator of other people's work, his next work in this bibliographic genre was a revision of Henri Cohen's 'Guide de l'amateur des livres a gravures du XVIIIe siecle' (1912), detailing all the remarkable copies of French illustrated books of that period. 
Enumeration was only one way of acquiring mastery of the subject. Sometimes de Ricci would step back from the task and summarize his knowledge in a different way. His Sandars lectures in bibliography, delivered at Cambridge in 1929, have proved to be among his most enduringly useful works because he offered such a limpidly clear exposition of the subject: 'English Collectors of Books and Manuscripts, 1530-1930, and their Marks of Ownership' (1930). However, he was always eager to try out new methodologies or approaches that resulted from new documents or simply from a new way of looking at familiar material. A catalogue of 'Twenty Renaissance Tapestries from the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection' (1913) was an exercise in dating through constructing a chronology of female headdress. 
Tall, immaculately dressed, vivacious, and quick, the young de Ricci cut an attractive figure; one friend of his early years, Louis Reau, was later to recall him as a dandy. In these days he moved among fashionable and avant-garde literary and artistic circles in Paris. His bachelor years ended in his mid-twenties, when he married (Jenny Gabrielle) Therese Dreyfus (1882-1936). Marriage appears to have had little impact on his literary activities, save perhaps to make him veer more towards the remunerative and journalistic side, and he also began to involve himself in the book-trade side of the bibliographic world. From 1911 he had a daughter, Jacqueline, to bring up. In 1914 he launched his own bilingual review, 'Art in Europe'. Only three of its monthly issues were published before it was halted by the outbreak of war. From 1914 until 1919 he was mobilized, as a second-class 'chasseur a pied' in the French army and then as an interpreter for the British army. His marriage broke down in these years; in 1920 he was married again, to a war widow, Delphine Levy, 'nee' Feher (1887-1977), who had two children from her previous marriage. They rented a flat at 18 rue Boissiere; even with the extra capacity offered by cellars that had been specially lined to render them damp-proof, it was never capacious enough for his collections, which filled every little space, not excluding parts of Delphine's bedroom wardrobe. 
Just as the war was ending, de Ricci travelled for the first time to the United States, as part of a mission led by Salomon Reinach's brother Theodore; never one to miss an opportunity to inspect rare books or manuscripts, he put the trip to good use. His eyes must have been opened in a more general way to the opportunities that America offered, for henceforth he was at pains to cultivate its rare books world. Almost every year he crossed the Atlantic afresh, and catalogues of private collections were one result, notably of John Clawson's early English printed books (1924) and Mortimer Schiff's Italian maiolica (1927) and French signed bookbindings (1935). 
More importantly, a succession of scholarly articles on medieval manuscripts paved the way for de Ricci's most celebrated and colossal piece of work, his 'Census of Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts in the United States and Canada'. Discussions with the American Council of Learned Societies led to this project being adopted by the Library of Congress (1929), thanks to which he was furnished with an assistant, Dr W. J. Wilson, and secretarial back-up. Careful preparation, four extensive journeys around North America (1929-33), and de Ricci's phenomenal speed and his eye for a manuscript's signs of former ownership, combined with his indexes back in Paris, enabled him to complete the work within eight years. Two quarto volumes of 2343 pages contain descriptions of 15,000 books, letters, and groups of charters in 494 libraries (278 of them privately owned), all set out with accuracy and an extraordinary attention to their history and bibliography. These were published in 1935 and 1937; a third volume, with indexes, followed in 1940. 
The success of the 'Census' owed much to the way in which it had enjoyed institutional support, and de Ricci was at pains to take equal care over the backing that he realized would be required for his next major project, an even more ambitious survey of manuscripts in the British Isles. In 1934 he put such a scheme before the University of London's Institute of Historical Research and gained an undertaking to publish it, and modest financial support. With his characteristic energy de Ricci set to work, aided by just one secretarial assistant. By July 1939 he had completed 40,000 slips of paper for manuscripts and collections in permanent locations and 20,000 slips for existing or dispersed private collections; that summer he had a campaign of work in London, and went far towards completing his work on the British Museum and other institutions. His labours were halted by the outbreak of war, and there remain only the 60,000 slips, now in the Palaeography Room of the University of London Library, and certain other preliminary notes in the Bibliotheque Nationale de France. 
Like most Frenchmen, de Ricci failed to anticipate that the war's onset would be followed by so sudden a collapse of the French government; the fall of Paris in the summer of 1940 left him in a state of numbed shock. His health -- hitherto generally robust, despite his intensely hard-working lifestyle -- now collapsed; he published nothing further. Almost his last recorded action is his deposit in the Bibliotheque Nationale on 10 June 1940 of some thirty of his more precious manuscripts and collections of autograph letters. Prolonged illness was followed by his death, at 10 quai Gallieni, Suresnes, on the edge of Paris, on 25 December 1942. He was buried at the Pere Lachaise cemetery in Paris. 
De Ricci had long been concerned about what would happen to his extensive collections. In 1935 he gave to the Bibliotheque Nationale his Voltaire papers (including 1500 letters from Voltaire himself). By his will, made in 1938, he gave the pick of his works of art to the Reunion des Musees Nationaux, while to the Bibliotheque Nationale he left all his books, manuscripts, prints, drawings, medals, and working papers. His intention was that these last should be made available to researchers; yet the author of a book on library management ('Le probleme des bibliotheques francaises: petit manuel de bibliotheconomie', 1933) had perhaps not realized what difficulties his will would create for the library. Even after the war, when his old friend Julien Cain returned from deportation and resumed the post of administrator-general, the library was hardly able to cope with cataloguing his manuscripts, sale catalogues, and other printed books (perhaps numbering more than 80,000) -- apart from many fifteenth- and sixteenth-century books, essentially a scholar's collection that owed much of its value to de Ricci's abundant annotations -- never mind his boxes of working notes. 
De Ricci was survived for thirty-five years by Delphine. He had reached only the age of sixty-one, and though appointed an officer of the Legion d'honneur (1935) cannot be said to have achieved public recognition commensurate with his talents; his genius was perhaps too wide-ranging, his spirit too independent. 


@@@@@


doc= 63714


Robert Julian Yeatman (1897-1968) was born in London, at 82 Ashley Gardens, Westminster, on 15 July 1897, the second son of Harry Oswald Yeatman (1856-1919), a London port-shipper, and his wife, Benedicta Katherine Page. From 1911 he was educated at Marlborough College, where he succeeded alike as scholar, athlete, and musician, before leaving in 1914 to join the Royal Field Artillery. Commissioned lieutenant in 1915, he was awarded the MC a year later. He also suffered very severe wounds, described as having left him 'perforated like a colander' (Sherrin, xvi). In 1919 Yeatman (who pronounced his name Yetman) matriculated from Oriel College on the same day as Sellar, and took a second in modern history in 1922. At this point his and Sellar's paths diverged, for Sellar returned to Fettes as a schoolmaster, remaining there until 1928, while Yeatman after a spell in journalism became advertising manager for Kodak Ltd. Both men had literary ambitions. Sellar contributed short humorous articles to a number of journals and above all to 'Punch', which published three of them in 1925; in 1926 Yeatman too began to contribute to that journal. 


@@@@@


doc= 63719


Charles, Ethel Mary (1871-1962), architect, was born on 25 March 1871 in India, the second of six children of Thomas Edmondston Charles (1834-1906), a doctor in private practice (formerly of the Indian army) and an early advocate of cremation, and his wife, Ada Henrietta (1848-1931/2), daughter of Francis and Fanny Ada Rundall. Her father was lowland Scottish and her mother was English. Her elder sister, Bessie Ada Charles (1869-1932), also an architect and her closest ally, was born in India two years previously. The family returned from India in 1877 and settled in Cannes long enough for the girls to learn French with a Midi accent (1878-80). From 1880 to 1900 the Charles family spent summers in Switzerland and winters in Rome, paying an annual visit to England. Ethel and Bessie Charles were educated privately and both were presented at court. They read modern languages at Somerville College, Oxford (1891-2), achieving degree standard, but went down after a year. 
Encouraged by their father to pursue a profession, and doubtless stimulated by travel, Ethel and Bessie Charles selected architecture, a highly unusual vocation for Victorian women. Their decision was taken at the height of campaigns by the women's movement to open the professions to women. They were articled for three years (1892-5) to the architects Ernest George and Peto, London. George considered them serious and dedicated students, but outside the office the path was not smooth: the part-time evening courses which male apprentices took as a matter of course to supplement their training were either closed or only marginally opened to them. In 1892 they were proposed for membership of the Architectural Association, but withdrew after opposition. They attended the school of architecture at University College, London, studying architecture as a fine art, a course in architectural history (second class certificates, 1892-3); however, they did not take the professional elements of the programme, which were not thought appropriate for women students. 
Ethel Charles continued to expand her architectural knowledge at the margins of professional training. She took distinctions in university extension courses in English and classical architecture (1892-3) and began sketching English architecture, a practice which she extended to France and Italy and continued throughout her career. A life-long reader of the 'Wykehamist', her brother's school magazine, she entered two 'Building News' Designing Club competitions under the name of Wykehamica, coming second with a design for a block of three labourers' cottages in 1895. She acquired additional professional experience in the office of an arts and crafts architect, Walter W. Crane, in 1896. 
For sixty-four years, the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), the central professional body for architecture, neither had nor contemplated the possibility of women members, although a few women practised professionally outside its auspices. In June 1898 Ethel Charles became the first woman to sit for the associates' examination at the RIBA. After concerted opposition, she was elected to associate membership in 1898, but a few months later the RIBA came within one vote of passing a motion designed to exclude women. One year later, in 1900, Bessie Charles took the qualifying examination and was elected. Ethel Charles found herself embroiled in debates about appropriate spheres for women and became a focus of attention in the building press in Britain and America. She was the first woman to address an architectural society in Britain, speaking to the Architectural Association, London, in February 1902. Her subject and title -- not of her own choosing -- was 'A plea for women practising architecture'. She argued boldly, but the sharp debate afterwards and press criticism prompted her to select strictly architectural topics in her addresses to allied societies of the RIBA in Liverpool in 1903 and Leeds in 1905. She won the RIBA essay medal in 1905 for 'The development of architectural art from structural requirements and nature of materials'. 
From 1898 to 1905 Ethel and Bessie Charles lived together at 46 York Street Chambers, Marylebone, London, which provided accommodation for single professional women. Ethel Charles was handsome and contemptuous of fashion, while Bessie Charles was small, principled, and bossy in a quiet way. Their emotional life centred around their brothers and their children, on whom they lavished attention and treats but in an educational spirit. They worked from home but not always together, with Ethel proving the more active of the two. In their small, predominantly domestic practice, they used vernacular materials according to arts and crafts principles: Ethel Charles designed a house for a doctor (1901) and three labourers' cottages for Letchworth Garden City (1905), and collaborated with her sister on alterations to a house for a female client (1902). Both sisters lived from time to time in the family home in Camberley, Surrey, but they shifted the focus of their architectural practice to Cornwall when their parents bought Clift Cottage, Flushing. Ethel Charles designed two semi-detached houses (1906 and 1907) and with her sister made alterations and additions to two other houses (1905); their most notable work was the design of the Bible Christian Chapel, Falmouth harbour (1906). 
Ethel Charles's one moment of international architectural success came in 1909 when she won a competition for a church in Germany, beating 200 male architects in Berlin. However, virtually no architectural drawings survive after 1911. After the First World War she kept house for her brother, the commandant of the Royal Military Academy (whose library lobby she proposed panelling in 1925), and delighted in her cats and reading Kipling. She died on 8 April 1962 in Hollow Oak Nursing Home in Haverthwaite, Lancashire. She was cremated in Blackpool and her ashes were placed in Golders Green crematorium, Middlesex, alongside her sister who had died much earlier, on 4 November 1932, at 18 Heatherdale Road, Camberley, Surrey. Ethel Charles left her architectural drawings and sketchbooks to the RIBA. 


@@@@@


doc= 63722


Drennan, William (1754-1820), physician, poet, and political reformer, was born in Belfast on 23 May 1754, the child of the Revd Thomas Drennan (1696-1768) and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Lennox (1719-1806). Of Thomas Drennan, the minister of Belfast's First Presbyterian Congregation, very little is known. He was born on 25 December 1696. Having graduated from Glasgow in 1716, he seems to have moved to Dublin shortly after 1720, where he assisted the philosopher Francis Hutcheson in running a private academy for protestant dissenters. In 1726 he was licensed to preach by the General Synod of Ulster, and he accepted a call from the congregation of Holywood (co. Down) in 1731, following Hutcheson's appointment to the chair of moral philosophy at Glasgow. In 1736 he moved to the First Congregation of Belfast, affiliated to the non-subscribing Presbytery of Antrim, where he became the ministerial colleague of the Revd Samuel Haliday. Although he published no sermon, he was regarded as an elegant preacher and an accomplished scholar; his close friends and correspondents included not only Hutcheson but the Revd John Abernethy, the Revd James Duchal, and James Arbuckle, the poet and editor of the 'Dublin Weekly Journal'. In 1741 he married Anne Lennox. Of their eleven children only three survived: William, Martha (1742-1837), and Anne (1745-1825). Thomas Drennan died on 14 February 1768. 
William Drennan was educated by his father and by the Revd Matthew Garnet, an Anglican clergyman who conducted a local school. At the age of fifteen he matriculated at the University of Glasgow, graduated MA in 1772, and then took a degree in medicine at Edinburgh between 1773 and 1778. Even before his return to Ireland, Drennan had already been caught up in the excitement surrounding the volunteers, the independent militia companies raised to defend Ireland during the American War of Independence; and he supported their campaigns to secure 'free trade' and 'legislative independence' for Ireland, publishing his first political pamphlet in 1780. Towards the end of 1782 he moved to Newry, co. Down, where he set up practice as an obstetrician, and where he continued to be active as a volunteer and an advocate of parliamentary reform. His influential 'Letters of Orellana, an Irish Helot' (1785), published first in the 'Belfast News-Letter' and then as a pamphlet, established his reputation in radical circles. 
When in December 1789 Drennan moved to Dublin, he was caught up in the radical revival which followed the outbreak of the French Revolution. He joined The Monks of the Screw, a group of prominent patriot politicians, and a political club founded by Thomas Addis Emmet, Peter Burrowes, Wolfe Tone, and Whitley Stokes. In June 1791 he circulated in Dublin and Belfast a prospectus for an Irish brotherhood, a secret society to be organized along masonic lines and dedicated to radical reform; the paper was one of several initiatives which led to the formation of the Society of United Irishmen soon after. It is for his role as a founder and prominent member of the society (1791-4) that he is best-known; he served several terms of office as president of the Dublin branch, was responsible for framing the United Irish test, and was the author of many of the society's publications. One of these, the 'Address to the volunteers', dated 14 December 1792, eventually led to his trial for seditious libel on 29 June 1794. Although acquitted, he withdrew from the United Irishmen and played no part in the insurrectionary phase of the republican movement, though his ballads 'Erin' (1795) and 'The Wake of William Orr' (1797) demonstrate his continuing sympathy for the national cause. 
On 3 February 1800 Drennan married Sarah Swanwick (1770?-1866x70) from Wem, Shropshire. Following the death of his cousin, Martha Young, he inherited a small property at Cottown, near Bangor, co. Down, and retired to Belfast in 1807. At local political meetings, and in the editorials of his 'Belfast Monthly Magazine' (1808-13), he continued to support parliamentary reform and Catholic emancipation, though he became reconciled to the 'Act of Union', a measure which he had passionately opposed in 1799-1800. He helped to establish the Belfast Academical Institution (1810). His poems are now seldom read, but a number of his patriotic verses achieved popularity at the end of the eighteenth century, and he was the first to call Ireland the 'emerald isle'. His poetry was collected in 'Fugitive Pieces in Prose and Verse' (1815) and his translation 'The Electra of Sophocles' (1817) was published two years later. In 1931 a volume of his correspondence was edited by D. A. Chart and published as 'The Drennan Letters... 1776-1819'; it is highly valued by historians as a remarkable portrait of the political, social, and cultural life of late eighteenth-century Ireland. 
William Drennan died on 5 February 1820 at Cabin Hill, Belfast, and was buried in the Old Clifton Street graveyard. His funeral procession, at which the coffin was borne by six protestants and six Catholics, was a symbolic testimony to the liberalism which once distinguished a city later better known for its religious animosities. 


@@@@@


doc= 63726


Ogilvy, Mabell Frances Elizabeth, countess of Airlie (1866-1956), courtier and literary editor, was born in Charles Street, London, on 10 March 1866, the eldest of the four children of Arthur Gore (1839-1901), who was at that time Lord Sudley and who succeeded as fifth earl of Arran in 1884, and his first wife, Edith Elizabeth Henrietta Jocelyn ('c'.1844-1871), daughter of Robert, Viscount Jocelyn. Her mother died when she was four, and she was brought up by her dour widowed grandmother, Frances, Lady Jocelyn, who was the daughter of Lady Palmerston and a lady of the bedchamber to Queen Victoria. Visits to the duchess of Teck at White Lodge in Richmond Park, where Mabell met the duchess's daughter, Princess May (the future Queen Mary), were among the few events that lifted the enforced gloom of the children's childhood. Mabell and her two sisters received a restricted education from governesses. 
On 19 January 1886 Lady Mabell Gore married an active army officer, David William Stanley Ogilvy, sixth or twelfth earl of Airlie (1856-1900) -- the number is confused because of an eighteenth-century attainder -- at St George's, Hanover Square. Despite being in love, she found it difficult to adapt to the submissive role required of young wives, and to cope with her six pregnancies, which produced three daughters and then three sons. Neither domesticated nor maternal by nature, Lady Airlie enjoyed army life, and her relationship with her husband deepened as she involved herself in his world. He went to South Africa with his regiment on the outbreak of the South African War, and on 11 June 1900 he was killed in action at Diamond Hill, Transvaal. Lady Airlie threw herself into managing Cortachy, the Airlie estate in Forfarshire, on behalf of her six-year-old son. In 1902 her old friend the princess of Wales (as Princess May had become) offered her the position of lady-in-waiting, and, after some hesitation, she accepted. 
Thus began a fifty-year association between the two women. Lady Airlie offered a perceptive analysis of the relationships between Queen Mary, George V, and their children in her memoirs, and supported the queen through both world wars, the king's death, and the abdication of Edward VIII. She watched three generations of the royal family from close quarters, and encouraged the engagement of the future George VI to Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon, whom she had known from their childhoods. In 1953 Elizabeth II recognized her long service by investing her with the GCVO. Lady Airlie was valued at court for her wisdom and her lively conversation. She became more attractive in maturity and enjoyed the company and conversation of men, but she did not remarry, maintaining that only her firm conviction that she would be reunited with her husband after death enabled her to enjoy life without him. 
Away from court Mabell Ogilvy's priority was her family. Her working day began at four each morning, but she was always available to her children, whom she encouraged to be active and independent. She supported the Red Cross, and served for many years on the board of Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service. The First World War cut a swathe through her family: a son-in-law was killed in action in 1915, then her youngest son in 1917, and her third daughter was killed while exercising army horses in 1918. 
When her eldest son married in 1917, Lady Airlie moved from Cortachy Castle to Airlie Castle, near Kirriemuir, where she began to edit family letters for publication. 'In Whig Society, 1775-1818' (1921) and 'Lady Palmerston and her Times' (1922) were based on the papers of her great-grandmother, and 'With the Guards We Shall Go' (1933) followed a great-uncle through the Crimean War. Her volumes remain a fascinating source, although her editing skills, unsurprisingly, do not meet exacting modern scholarly standards. In later life she wrote 'The Red Cross in Angus' (1950) and began work on her memoirs, but did not complete them. They were discovered after her death by Jennifer Ellis, who edited them for publication as 'Thatched with Gold' (1962). 
Famously outspoken, Mabell Ogilvy defied fashion: 'With her striking appearance, with masses of white hair piled up, usually beneath a large picture hat, she could easily have been the subject of a portrait by Gainsborough, and she rarely deserted that old and elaborate fashion' ('The Times'). But she adapted gracefully to a changing world. As early as the 1890s she had written a pamphlet advocating improvements in women's education and employment, and, when asked in the 1930s if the admission of a working-class woman to the Queen Alexandra nurses would lower the prestige of the service, her response was characteristically blunt: 'stuff and nonsense' (Airlie, 193). All forms of suffering moved her, and in her late eighties she was still looking for ways to help disabled former servicemen. The death of Queen Mary in 1953 was a blow, and in 1955 heavy taxation, the rising cost of living, and shortage of servants forced her to leave Airlie Castle. Declining to impose on her children, she clung to her independence, taking up residence at 129 Bayswater Road, Paddington. Even this reverse did not break her effervescent spirit, and on her ninetieth birthday her daughter found her dancing a jig. Lady Airlie died there a few weeks later, on 7 April 1956. The Airlie family maintained and extended the close relationship with the royal family established by Mabell Ogilvy: her eldest son David served as lord chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, later Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, while his second son, Angus, married Princess Alexandra, daughter of the duke of Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 63733


Booth, (William) Bramwell (1856-1929), Salvation Army officer, was born at Halifax, Yorkshire, on 8 March 1856, the eldest son of William Booth (1829-1912) and his wife, Catherine Booth, nee Mumford (1829-1890), the founders of the Salvation Army. He had two brothers and five sisters, including Catherine Booth-Clibborn; all the children shared their parents' itinerant lifestyle until the family settled in London in 1865. Bramwell Booth saw the army grow from an obscure Christian mission, established in Whitechapel, into an international organization with numerous and varied social activities. He was educated at home and, briefly, a preparatory school and at the City of London School, where he was bullied. Known to his family as Willie, his health was poor, with digestive ailments, and he had a slight hearing loss. William and Catherine Booth set high standards for their children and Bramwell, as the eldest, found the weight of parental expectation particularly heavy. He was often responsible for his younger siblings, and both parents, William more than Catherine, took young Bramwell into their confidence. In 1870 he went to help in the management of his father's mission and in the cheap food kitchens established in its early days. It was as a teenager that the course of Bramwell's life was set; his parents were totally committed to their work and Bramwell, despite his early wishes to study medicine and his fear of public speaking, became William Booth's amanuensis, adviser, and administrator. 
On 12 October 1882 Bramwell married Florence Soper [Florence Eleanor Booth (1861-1957)], who was born at Blaenau, Monmouthshire, on 12 September 1861, the eldest daughter of Isabell Hawker Soper (1831/2-1907), surgeon, and his wife, Jane Eleanor, 'nee' Levick. Florence had joined the Salvation Army in 1880 and worked in France with Bramwell's sister Catherine. After her marriage she took charge of the women's social work. All of their seven children (five daughters and two sons) became active workers in the army. 
Bramwell Booth was chief of staff of the Salvation Army from 1881 until his father's death in August 1912. Through Booth's guidance the right to hold open-air meetings -- an issue which had brought the army into conflict with many local authorities -- was firmly established. In 1885 he was associated with William Thomas Stead (1849-1912) in an attempt to publicize the traffic in young girls, which resulted in the spectacular July 1885 'Maiden tribute of modern Babylon' revelations in Stead's 'Pall Mall Gazette' and the passing of the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' of 1885 raising the age of consent to sixteen years. Owing to Stead's bungling and a technical breach of the law in the collecting of evidence, Booth, Stead, and Rebecca Jarrett, a converted brothel-keeper who assisted them, were arrested and tried at the Old Bailey. Booth was acquitted but the others served prison terms. 
William Booth appointed Bramwell his successor. Like his father, Bramwell ruled autocratically, and expected complete obedience. However, what officers would tolerate from William (already glorified as 'The Founder') they would not take from Bramwell. Bramwell was enough of his father's son to stamp down on perceived insubordination and he summarily retired officers with little cause, but seemed to lack his father's willingness to forgive (and reappoint) former objects of his wrath. Allegedly he gave his children posts for which others were better qualified. Discontent simmered among senior officers, including some of Bramwell's brothers and sisters. In his last years he increasingly handed control to his wife, who was given power of attorney when he was away travelling. She had acted as the army's 'first lady' since his mother died in 1890, and she started several army organizations including the Home League, Girl Guards, and League of Mercy. 
As chief executive officer Booth was responsible for the preparation of 'Orders and Regulations for Officers and Soldiers' and for the direction of the army's propaganda and operations. He wrote 'Echoes and Memories' (1925), 'These Fifty Years' (1929), and other books, as well as many articles on 'Bible' studies and social problems, and frequent contributions to the press on prison reform, vagrancy, the homeless poor, and emigration. Bramwell did much to develop foreign missions, both as chief of staff and as general of the army. During his generalship the army made rapid progress, and he travelled extensively on its behalf. 
The early years of Bramwell's generalship were complicated by the First World War, which threatened the international character of the Salvation Army. Bramwell was able to steer a course that neither offended German salvationists nor outraged British public opinion. As time wore on, senior officers, including Bramwell's sister Evangeline Cory Booth, began to question his leadership. In May 1928 Bramwell's health began to deteriorate, and by September he was suffering from insomnia and depression. His poor health offered those in the army who were dissatisfied with his leadership an opportunity to act, and in January 1929 the army's high council of leading officers was summoned to adjudicate on his fitness for duty. He was relieved of the generalship in February 1929 and a successor elected by the high council. 
Bramwell Booth bore a strong facial likeness to his mother. Like both of his parents, Bramwell suffered much from poor health and adopted a vegetarian diet as a means of maintaining his rather fragile constitution. On the platform he presented a striking contrast to his father: the latter played on his hearers' emotions, his son relied on calm and reasoned argument. He was something of a mystic; none the less he inherited his father's flair with finance and property. Although mild and sensitive, he had inherited enough of his father's inflexibility and his mother's didacticism to preclude easy relations with his brothers and sisters and other senior officers; his loyalty to the Salvation Army was unquestionable and lifelong. He was 'promoted to Glory' on 16 June 1929 at his home, The Homestead, Hadley Wood, near Barnet, Hertfordshire, and was buried near his parents in Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington, London. Huge numbers attended his funeral. He was commemorated by the Bramwell Booth Memorial Hall, Queen Victoria Street, London. He was survived by his wife, who died at her home at Finchampstead, Berkshire, on 10 June 1957. 


@@@@@


doc= 63735


Pollard, Alfred Oliver (1893-1960), army officer and author, was born at Rycroft, Melbourne Road, Wallington, Mitcham, on 4 May 1893, the second son of James Alfred Pollard (died 1933), who worked in the City of London for Alliance Assurance Co., and his wife, Ada Jane Payne. He spent his early years at Tidbury, Belmont Road, Wallington, and was educated between 1906 and 1908 at Merchant Taylors' School, London. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Pollard was working as an insurance clerk for the same company as his father, in their St James's Street branch. He hurried to enlist in the Honourable Artillery Company (HAC), fretted at the delay in getting to the war, and then spent most of it in France and Flanders, in the course of which he won the Victoria Cross for his actions at Gavrelle (28-9 April 1917), and two MCs (gazetted 26 March 1917 and the bar 18 June 1917); he also received the DCM for his bravery, while a sergeant, on 30 September 1915 in Sanctuary Wood, near Ypres. He received his VC and MC and bar at Buckingham Palace on 21 July 1917. 
Pollard's chief claim to fame lies in an autobiographical account of his time in the war, with the entirely apposite title 'Fire-Eater: the Memoirs of a VC'; this was published in 1932. Pollard's book shows that he enjoyed his war in much the same way that Ernst Junger's autobiographical 'Storm of Steel' (1929) showed that Junger enjoyed his. Pollard was utterly convinced of the justice of the war. He noted in 'Fire-Eater', after recovering from a wound received while winning his DCM, 'I had fought for a year for the joy of it, for My Lady [his future wife], because I happened to be sent to France, for no particular reason. In future I would fight for my Country because it was the right thing to do. ('Fire-Eater', 130)' He writes in a lively, 'Schoolboy's Own' style, but this should not fool the reader into concluding that he was unthinking or without emotion. In January 1917, on the Somme, he led a patrol into the German lines and comments on his feelings. 'In June 1915 I was a mere boy looking on life with hopeful optimism, and on war as an interesting adventure. When I saw the Hun corpses killed by our shellfire I was full of pity for the men so suddenly cut off in their prime. Now I was a man with no hope of the War ending for years. I looked at a trench full of corpses without any sensation whatever. Neither pity nor fear that I might soon be one myself, nor anger against their killers. Nothing stirred me. I was just a machine carrying out my appointed work to the best of my ability. (ibid., 173)' 
'Fire-Eater' has many somewhat bitter references to his first wife, Mary Ainsley ('b'. 1891/2), whom he had eventually married on 4 June 1918; the marriage ended in divorce in 1924. He found it hard to settle, and in June 1924, at about the time of his divorce, he entered the Royal Air Force as a pilot; he resigned as a flying officer in December 1926. On 5 September 1925 he married Violet Irene Swarbrick ('b'. 1899/1900), who was to outlive him by three months, dying on 4 March 1961. There were no children of either marriage. 
Pollard took a variety of jobs, including ones which involved training salesmen and being director of a small aero-engineering firm. In 1930 he turned to writing, mainly mystery, murder, and spy novels, with titles such as 'Pirdale Island' (1931) and 'Murder Hide and Seek' (1931). 'Fire-Eater' was his fourth book, and by far the best. During the Second World War the books had a contemporary note, for example 'ARP Spy' and 'Gestapo Fugitive', both published in 1940. The last of his fifty-three titles was 'Wrong Verdict' (1960). Another of Pollard's jobs was that of a columnist, on a range of London and provincial papers, writing about chivalry (or the lack of it), air power, courage, and the appalling treatment of war veterans. He claimed in the 'Dundee Evening Telegraph' (January 1932) that his attempts to pawn his medals in 'twenty or thirty pawnshops in London' resulted in the reply that his VC they could not take and the others were 'not worth bothering with'. Pollard also engaged in some broadcasting for the BBC. He died suddenly on 4 December 1960 at his home, Linkwood, 18 Queen's Park Gardens, Bournemouth, and was cremated in Bournemouth on 7 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 63736


Lisle, Sir (Henry de) Beauvoir De (1864-1955), army officer, was born on 27 July 1864 on Guernsey, one of five sons of Richard Francis Valpy De Lisle MRCS, honorary deputy inspector-general, and his wife, C. E. de Lisle. His father had served as an assistant surgeon of the 96th foot (1841-51), and of the 1st (Royal) Dragoons (1851-2), and as surgeon of the 4th (King's Own) foot (1852-9) including service in the Crimean War. 
Beauvoir De Lisle was educated on Jersey, possibly privately, and in 1882 at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and was commissioned into the 2nd battalion, the Durham light infantry in 1883, joining the battalion at Gibraltar. He served in Egypt in 1885-6 with the mounted infantry of the frontier force, was awarded the DSO (after recommendation for the VC) for his part in the rescue of the garrison of Ambigole Wells Fort in August 1885, and took part in the battle of Giniss in December 1885. 
De Lisle rejoined his battalion in India in 1887, and was promoted captain in 1891. An excellent horseman and enthusiastic amateur jockey, he was also a natural all-round athlete and an accomplished big-game hunter. He was the captain of his battalion polo team (1888-98), and has been described as 'the inventor of modern polo' (McGregor, 89) for introducing team training and tactics into the sport. His team regularly won major competitions in India, including the infantry cup (1894-8), the all-India inter-regimental cup (1896-8) and the championship of India (British and Native) (1898), an unprecedented achievement for an infantry regiment. 
After attending the Staff College, Camberley, from 1898 to 1899, De Lisle saw active service in the South African War. He first commanded the 6th mounted infantry, and then held various brigade-sized mounted commands far above his substantive rank. He was severely wounded near Venterskroon in August 1900, and was promoted major in 1902. On 16 July 1902 he married, at Stoke Poges church, Leila Annette (died 1938), eldest daughter and heir of Wilberforce Bryant of Stoke Park, Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire. They had one son, Christian de Beauvoir. Recognizing De Lisle's abilities as a leader of mounted troops, Field Marshal Lord Roberts arranged his transfer to the cavalry. In 1902 he joined the 5th dragoon guards, and in 1903 the 1st (Royal) Dragoons, which he saw as the family regiment, wrongly believing that his father had served with it in the Crimea. He accompanied the regiment to India in 1903, and was promoted lieutenant-colonel commanding in 1906. He returned to Britain in 1910 to become general staff officer, grade l (GSO1) of the 2nd division at Aldershot, and in 1911 was promoted brigadier-general commanding the 2nd cavalry brigade. 
At the start of the First World War, De Lisle took his brigade into action in France as part of the British expeditionary force. He performed well in the retreat from Mons, being promoted to command the 1st cavalry division in October 1914 as a major-general. In June 1915 he was sent to Gallipoli to take the command of the 29th division, and in July was appointed to temporary command of the 9th corps. After the evacuation from Gallipoli he reverted to the command of his division, which under his leadership became known as 'The Incomparable 29th'. In early 1916 the division was sent to the western front to take part in the battle of the Somme. It also fought in all the major British battles on the western front in 1917. In March 1918 De Lisle was promoted as an acting lieutenant-general to command the 13th corps, followed by the 15th corps in April, taking part in the battle of the Lys and the Last Hundred Days campaign. Twice he was briefly in acting command of an army. 
Following the war Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig obtained De Lisle's final appointment as a substantive lieutenant-general and general officer commanding-in-chief, western command (1919-23), and in 1926 he retired from the army with the rank of full general. He remained much in demand for his polo skills, and spent 1929-30 in India training polo teams for the maharaja of Kashmir. 
Despite his very active life De Lisle was also a prolific writer. In addition to his memoirs and two semi-autobiographical books on polo, he also wrote numerous articles on warfare and sport. His unpublished works include detailed accounts of his service in Egypt, the South African War, the First World War, and a semi-autobiographical novel, all preserved in his papers. 
De Lisle passed staff college in 1899, was made CB in 1900, KCB in 1917, and KCMG in 1919, and was awarded various foreign decorations. He was colonel of the Durham light infantry (1928-34) and president of the 29th Division Association from 1919 until his death. During his last years De Lisle was virtually confined to his mansion at 34 Hertford Street, Mayfair, London, having gone blind. He died of old age at home on 16 July 1955, and a memorial service was held on 21 July at Christ Church, Down Street, London. 
Personally fearless and a devout Christian, De Lisle was regarded by contemporaries as perhaps the best example of the 'thruster' or 'fighting general' of the First World War. He summed up his own beliefs in 1939 as 'Sport and War are closely allied. The man who excels in sport always excels in war. To me both are great games and the greater is War' (De Lisle, 'Reminiscences of Sport and War', 272). 


@@@@@


doc= 63737


Kennedy, Sir John Noble (1893-1970), army officer and colonial governor, was born at the manse, Portpatrick, Wigtownshire, Scotland, on 31 August 1893, the eldest of the six children -- four sons and two daughters -- of James Russell Kennedy ('b'. 1854), a Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Sarah Maude Noble. Educated locally at Stranraer, he acquired a lifelong love of fishing and bird-watching. In 1911 he joined the navy as a paymaster-midshipman, but on the outbreak of war in 1914 managed to transfer to the army, fearful he might not see action. From the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he was commissioned in 1915 as a (regular army) second lieutenant in the Royal Regiment of Artillery. He was wounded in 1916 and in 1917 won the MC for conspicuous gallantry in action. 'He, with three men, established an observation post in 'No-Man's Land' and under a heavy hostile fire directed the fire of his battery most successfully' ('London Gazette', 26 March 1917). 
From 1919 to 1920 Kennedy served with the British military mission in south Russia, being appointed to the order of St Vladimir for helping to repel a cavalry attack near Moscow. He contributed papers to the 'Royal Artillery Magazine' and was credited with inventing 'a new method of gun-laying... adopted for field and heavy artillery' ('Wigtown Free Press', 5 May 1921). In 1926 Kennedy married Isabella Rosamond Georgiana Joicey-Cecil (died 1941). They had three sons and two daughters. 
Between the wars Kennedy served in Egypt as well as England. In 1921 he was a student, and in the 1930s an instructor, at the Staff College, Camberley. There he caught the eye of the commandant, Sir John Dill, who in 1934 was appointed director of military operations (DMO) and in 1935 brought him into the War Office 'in charge of that section of the General Staff which devilled strategy and war plans for him' (Kennedy, 1). After attending the Imperial Defence College in 1938, Kennedy returned to Whitehall as deputy director of military operations, becoming in the following year director of plans. He had now found his true metier and, apart from two brief periods in France and Ireland and several frustrating months in hospital after being run down in the black-out in December 1939, spent the whole war in Whitehall. 
As DMO from 1940 to 1943 and assistant chief of the Imperial General Staff (operations and intelligence) from 1943 to 1945, Kennedy gave loyal support, and was admired by successive holders of the post of chief of the Imperial General Staff, especially Sir Alan Brooke, who described his subordinate as 'a superb DMO gifted with broad strategic vision and the ability to express his thoughts in the clearest language' (Bryant, 'Triumph in the West', 41n.). 
Kennedy's 'The Business of War' (1957), based on notes he made at the time, gives an illuminating insight into the evolution and application of military strategy from 1938 to the end of 1944, and chronicles in detail the constant clashes between Churchill and his army advisers. 'Whenever an idea, however wild, was thrown up, he ordered detailed examinations, or plans, or both to be made at high speed' (Kennedy, 173). The War Office, concluded Kennedy, almost needed 'two staffs: one to deal with the prime minister, the other with the war' (ibid.). It was, Kennedy warned his subordinates, their duty to supply 'the military evidence' for or against any proposal and to resist the 'tendency to modify wording... of papers submitted to the prime minister with the idea of making them more acceptable to him' (ibid., 93). There was an embarrassing encounter between the two men when in April 1941 Kennedy, in Brooke's words, 'infuriated the PM' by arguing that plans should be prepared for the possible loss of Egypt, 'and was relegated amongst those 'many generals who are only too ready to surrender and who should be made examples of like Admiral Byng'' (Bryant, 'Turn of the Tide', 254). Though shaken, Kennedy bravely stuck to his guns, commenting later: 'The charges of defeatism which Churchill hurled at us all continually and were so resented at first, came to be regarded... lightheartedly' (Kennedy, 146). A man of generous disposition -- his earlier accident had, he insisted, been 'my own fault' -- Kennedy took in good part the abuse he had suffered. 'The massive figure of the great prime minister', he insisted, remained undiminished 'by glimpses of his petulance' (ibid., 356). Kennedy's first wife died in 1941 and the following year he married Catherine Fordham (died 1969). 
From December 1944 until the end of the war in August 1945 Kennedy was on sick leave, suffering primarily from exhaustion. In recognition of his contribution to the war effort, he received a knighthood in that year. However, he decided that to return to the army would be 'flogging a dead horse' (Kennedy, 355). Having retired, he was appointed governor of Southern Rhodesia, where he remained until it became part of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in August 1953. 'Here was a new world indeed,' he wrote later, 'expanding, growing, buoyant, stimulating, refreshing; inhabited by the kindest people imaginable' (ibid.). These feelings were reciprocated. 'Both he and Lady Kennedy devoted themselves to the welfare of all sections of the community', wrote one local historian (Kane, 239). 'He is regarded as one of the country's more open-minded governors... noted for his attempts to mix socially with Africans', confirmed another writer (Rasmussen, 130), while his own chief justice considered him 'the best governor we ever had' (Tredgold, 225). 
Kennedy makes no mention in his 'Business of War' of his brother, James Russell Kennedy ('b'. 1895), who was commissioned into the Royal Artillery on the same day as himself and also served in Russia and at the War Office, before retiring in 1931 to edit 'The Army, Navy and Air Force Gazette' and to write on military subjects. A progressive in military thinking -- he was a supporter of the tank enthusiast J. F. C. Fuller -- he became a political reactionary and fascist. J R, as he was known, was the author of several books on military matters, including 'Modern War and Defence Reconstruction' (1936). 
Sir John Kennedy briefly returned to Rhodesia in 1960 to chair a national convention on the country's future, but spent his final years enjoying country life in Scotland. He died at his home, Broxmouth House, Dunbar, East Lothian, on 15 June 1970. Although 'austere', recorded an obituary, and 'meticulous over detail', he remained 'hospitable, kindly and friendly, with' -- his most striking characteristic -- 'a tremendous capacity for work' ('The Times'). The honours Kennedy received for his distinguished service included KCVO (1947), KCMG (1952), and GCMG (1953). 


@@@@@


doc= 63738


Smyth, Sir John George, first baronet (1893-1983), army officer and politician, was born at Teignmouth, Devon, on 24 October 1893, the eldest of the three sons of William John Smyth ('b'. 1869) of the Indian Civil Service. His mother, Lilian May Clifford (1869/70-1956), was the daughter of a naval captain. At the Dragon School, Oxford, which he attended from 1901 to 1908, 'I had', he recorded in the second version of his autobiography, 'Milestones, a Memoir' (1979), 'shown signs of becoming an outstanding athlete, with quite a good brain' (Smyth, 'Milestones', 20) until for two years he was bedridden with a serious illness. 'These two years were, from a character-forming point of view, the most important in my life', he considered. 'I read voraciously and... was not afraid of death... Physical fitness became a 'sine qua non' all the days of my life' (ibid., 22). 
At Repton, from 1908 to 1911, determined to get into Sandhurst, 'I was', Smyth acknowledged in his original autobiography, 'The Only Enemy' (1959), 'that most unpopular of all species... a swot' (Smyth, 'The Only Enemy', 37), but he passed, eighteenth out of 250, into Sandhurst in 1911 and left the Royal Military College a year later, ninth among those passing out and a prize winner. He was commissioned into the Indian army and joined the 15th Sikhs, 'thin as a rail, perhaps rather too serious, but enormously keen' (ibid., 45-6). 
When war broke out in 1914, widespread doubt existed about the ability of Indian troops to stand up to modern weapons and trench warfare, but Smyth's regiment rapidly confounded the sceptics. On 18 May 1915, at 'that little cockpit of the Western Front near Richebourg L'Avoue, which the troops afterwards called 'the Glory Hole'... littered with the unburied dead of many battalions, stinking to high heaven' (Smyth, 'Milestones', 48), the crucial event occurred of Smyth's life. He was ordered to carry a supply of desperately needed bombs to a small party holding out in a captured section of the enemy front line. Two attempts to cross the intervening 250 yards of fire-swept no man's land had already failed disastrously and Smyth was 'in an absolutely blue funk' (ibid., 49) when instructed to make a third, but 'when I asked for ten volunteers to go with me... the whole company stepped forward'. All ten of those chosen, 'crawling forward, taking what cover we could from the British corpses...' were killed or wounded but Smyth survived, though 'I had bullets through my tunic and cap and my walking-stick had been hit... four times' (Smyth, 'The Only Enemy', 78). He succeeded in his mission none the less and that July he was awarded the Victoria Cross, making him nationally known. His men asserted that 'Smyth Sahib bears a charmed life' (ibid., 82) but he probably owed his survival to his being sent later in 1915 to serve in Egypt (having added the Russian order of St George to his honours) and, in 1916, back to India. 
Smyth's 'peacetime' service from 1918 was a misnomer, for it included the Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919-20), in which he won the Military Cross, putting down an insurrection in Mesopotamia, and operations on the permanently restive north-west frontier of India. In all three campaigns he was mentioned in dispatches. From 1931 to 1934 he was an instructor at the Staff College, Camberley, and from 1934 to 1939, following accelerated promotion, he held various staff and command appointments in India. 
The start of the Second World War found Smyth on leave in England, where he was appointed general staff officer, grade 1, of the 2nd London division, and then, in February 1940, commander of the 127th infantry brigade. This was also an eventful period in his private life. His marriage, on 22 July 1920, to Margaret Dundas, 'a very beautiful woman with a saint-like character' who 'gave me four wonderful children' (one of his three sons was to be killed in action in Burma in 1944) ended in 1940 in a divorce that 'was certainly not her fault' (Smyth, 'Milestones', 75). On 12 April 1940 he married Frances Mary Blair Read Chambers, the start of a 'really happy' partnership (ibid., 290), which endured until his death. 
Two weeks later, on 23 April 1940, Smyth left for France in command of 127th infantry brigade. By 1 June he was back in England, via the Dunkirk evacuations, and, after anti-invasion duties in East Anglia, he returned, during 1941, to India, being promoted acting major-general, at first in command of the 19th division. When, in December, the Japanese invaded Burma, he assumed command of the 27th division, during its withdrawal from Moulmein to Rangoon. On 23 February 1942 he approved the blowing-up of a vital bridge over the wide and fast-flowing Sittang River, which left two-thirds of his men on the far side, at the mercy of the advancing Japanese. Smyth always insisted that 'no educated soldier could have made any other' decision (Smyth, 'Milestones', 189), but he was blamed for what Churchill called 'a major disaster' (Churchill, 4.136). That November he was compulsorily retired from the army, on a colonel's pension, with, added later, the honorary rank of brigadier. 
Smyth became in 1943 military correspondent to the 'Sunday Times' and other newspapers, and subsequently its tennis correspondent. He proved a prolific and versatile writer. Following his first book, 'Defence is our Business' (1945), he produced more than thirty titles, mainly on military subjects, but also on tennis and cats (a lifelong love of his), as well as biographies, children's stories, a play, and 'The Story of the Victoria Cross' (1962). He also became chairman of the Victoria Cross and George Cross Association. 
In 1945 Smyth began a third career, as a politician, standing as Conservative candidate for Central Wandsworth against the formidable Ernest Bevin. He was beaten by 5174 votes, but in 1950 he stood again, at Norwood, and was elected by a majority of 2075; he remained an MP until 1966. From November 1951 he served as parliamentary secretary of the Ministry of Pensions, and he became joint parliamentary secretary when it was merged with the Ministry of National Insurance in 1953. He had little taste, however, for the ministerial battlefields of Whitehall and Westminster and in December 1955 returned to the back benches at his own request. On 23 January 1956 he was created a baronet and in 1962 he was sworn of the privy council. 
Late in life Smyth professed himself 'a happy man' and 'an incurable optimist' (Smyth, 'Milestones', 291). He died on 26 April 1983, at his home, 807 Nelson House, Dolphin Square, London, and was succeeded in his baronetcy by his grandson. He bequeathed his medals to the Imperial War Museum, but the VC was a replica. The original had been stolen and, to its owner's disgust, the War Office had charged him $1 11's'. 6died to replace it. 


@@@@@


doc= 63739


Smith, Eric Edward Dorman Dorman- (1895-1969), army officer, was born on 24 July 1895 at Bellamont Forest, Cootehill, co. Cavan, Ireland, the first of the three sons of Edward Dorman-Smith (1870-1947), justice of the peace, and his wife, Amy (1874-1961), daughter of Edith and William Patterson of Liverpool. Dorman-Smith was educated alone at home until he was twelve and then at Lambrook preparatory school, near Maidenhead, and Uppingham School. Distinguished by an unwavering sense of principle, a brilliant mind, and an oblique Anglo-Irish perception of the British establishment, he would at the height of his powers sum himself up, accurately, as a military scientist. His effect on the twentieth century, though, was to be twofold, from the opposite angles of military history and literature. 
Sprung with nervous energy, tall, thin, immaculately dressed and as capable of charming as of antagonizing, Dorman-Smith was nicknamed Chink because of his resemblance to his regiment's mascot, a Chinkara antelope. As a real-life hero of the First World War, the embodiment of chivalry, he inspired his friend Ernest Hemingway's lasting preoccupation with the themes of war and honour. And as deputy chief of staff and principal adviser to Claude Auchinleck, commander-in-chief in the Middle East, his operational advice based on Ultra decrypts of enemy Enigma signals was instrumental in halting Rommel's Afrika Korps at the first battle of Alamein in July 1942, now acknowledged as a critical turning point for the allies in the Second World War. 
Dorman-Smith passed out of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, after two terms in February 1914 and joined the Northumberland Fusiliers, with whom he travelled to France at the outbreak of the First World War; he was in battle at Mons within ten days. He was to be badly wounded three times, awarded one of the first MCs at Ypres in 1915, and mentioned three times in dispatches when, with the acting rank of major at the age of twenty-four, he fired Hemingway's imagination at their first meeting in Milan on armistice day 1918. In the twenties his army leaves were spent with Hemingway in Switzerland, Paris, and Pamplona, mingling with John Dos Passos, Gertrude Stein, Ford Maddox Ford, Ezra Pound, James Joyce, and Scott Fitzgerald, and he stood as godfather to Hemingway's first son. 
In his parallel army life Dorman-Smith rose rapidly, from adjutant of his regiment (1919) to instructor at Sandhurst (1924), and at the Staff College, Camberley (1927-9), he was awarded 1000 out of 1000 in the tactics entrance paper, a record that was never emulated. In 1931 he became brigade major to Archibald Wavell at 6th experimental brigade, and from 1934, as brevet lieutenant-colonel, he advanced mechanization development from the War Office. After a spell at the Staff College as an instructor he commanded his regiment in Egypt from 1937, before being appointed director of military training in India (1938-40), Britain's greatest single military commitment. 
Fuelled by anger at the losses witnessed in trench warfare, Dorman-Smith determined to right matters through intelligent tactics based on out-thinking the enemy and on speed of mechanization, which set him at odds with the cavalry and traditionalists. At the Staff College, where lasting impressions for future teamwork take shape, his open contempt for orthodoxy and for contemporaries who went 'by the book' gained him a reputation for arrogance, and led some who would later gain high command to detest him. At the War Office he blithely ignored the directive forbidding contact with the military journalist Basil Liddell Hart, whose tactical 'Theory of the Indirect Approach' matched his own conclusions. He took pride in not being a clubbable man, and the social skills of his popular first wife Estelle, 'nee' Dawson ('b'. 1903), whom he had married in 1927 after her divorce from Sir Thomas Berney, bt, smoothed his path. But in 1940 he chafed at being in a 'schoolmaster's role', as commandant of the Haifa Staff College in Palestine. 
Two successive commanders-in-chief, Middle East, however, made use of Dorman-Smith's skill at crucial junctures in the Second World War. Wavell brought him in to plan the initial moves of the small western desert force in October 1940 that resulted in the destruction of the Italian Tenth Army, which had been poised to take Egypt. And from 24 May 1942, when the Eighth Army's defeat at Gazala made the pivotal loss of Cairo and Alexandria appear inevitable, it was his unorthodox counsel that enabled Auchinleck to outmanoeuvre Rommel and plan the Eighth Army's subsequent strategy. But upon Churchill's preferment that August of Bernard Montgomery as general officer commanding, Eighth Army, whose tactical thinking Dorman-Smith scorned as 'taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut', disillusion and the inability to trim led to dismissal and reduction from acting major-general to his substantive rank of colonel; isolation was compounded by rumours of a love affair. Although given command of a brigade in Italy in 1944, he was again dismissed, this time under circumstances traceable to an old Staff College vendetta. 'Across the River and into the Trees' (1950), a bleak novel about military disillusion, would be Hemingway's lament. 
Dorman-Smith returned to Ireland, changed his name by deed poll to O'Gowan in 1949, and devoted himself to his young family -- a son (Christopher) and a daughter (Rionagh), both born to his second wife, Eve Nott, 'nee' Harben ('b'. 1913), whom he married on 17 May 1949 -- as well as to correspondence, scholarship, and his classical Palladian home. His first marriage had ended in divorce in 1948. As memoirs of the Second World War emerged he fought the smear of Montgomery's supporters that Auchinleck had been intending to retreat at Alamein if Rommel attacked again. Libel proceedings against Churchill over 'The History of the Second World War, 'vol. 4', The Hinge of Fate' (1951), were withdrawn only after Hartley Shawcross, who was advising Churchill, disclosed the prime minister's ill health. Having been implacably against partition since 1921, and having become increasingly bitter at the supremacy of the Montgomery version of wartime events, O'Gowan allowed his estate near the border to be used for IRA training camps in the mid-fifties. Opposing loyalties, however, were compartmentalized, with his knowledge of Ultra and his personal army contacts remaining confidential. As with the intermix of Hemingway escapades and formal regimental life thirty years before, he was adept at keeping two worlds apart. 'I know what I owe to you', Auchinleck wrote privately in the 1960s, 'and realise very clearly, as I have always done, that without your wise and indomitable thinking always at my side and in my head, we could never have saved Egypt... and all the rest... The 'voice' was certainly yours, even if the 'hands' were mine. (Auchinleck to O'Gowan, 5 July 1967, JRL)' O'Gowan died from cancer at Lisdarne Hospital, co. Cavan, on 11 May 1969, and was buried at the church of St John the Evangelist, Dartry, co. Monaghan, Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 63740


Wimberley, Douglas Neil (1896-1983), army officer and educational administrator, was born on 15 August 1896 at 8 Ardross Terrace, Inverness, the son of Colonel Charles Neil Campbell Wimberley (then a surgeon-captain), and his wife, Minnie Lesmoir Gordon, daughter of Colonel R. J. Wimberley. Educated at Wellington College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, he was commissioned into the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders in 1915. He served on the western front, was wounded, and won the MC. 
A very bright officer, Wimberley gained distinction in promotion examinations in 1924, and then studied at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, before entering the Staff College, Camberley, in 1925. On 29 April that year he married Elsye Myrtle Livington ('b'. 1903/4), daughter of Captain F. L. Campbell RN. They had a son and a daughter. He continued to win distinction as a peacetime soldier: his essay on the lessons of recent campaigns won the 'Army Quarterly' military prize in 1933. When war came Wimberley was commanding officer of the 1st Cameron Highlanders. Rapid promotion to general rank followed and in June 1941 he took command of the 51st (Highland) division. 
Although heir to a proud tradition, scattered across north-eastern Scotland as it was when Wimberley took command, the Highland division lacked cohesion. He forged a strong divisional 'esprit de corps', drawing heavily on Scottish patriotism. He insisted that the divisional concert party include plenty of distinctively Scottish material in its act. He rejected 'Sassenach' drafts and poached Scotsmen serving in other formations. Under Wimberley regimental tartan was worn whenever possible. Tartan Tam, as his troops dubbed him, proved an inspiring divisional commander and turned the highlanders into a formidable fighting force. 
Having arrived in Egypt in August 1942, the division fought with the Eighth Army from Alamein to the end of the Sicily campaign. Wimberley always explained forthcoming operations to officers on a model, insisting that COs repeat the exercise so that every soldier knew how his tasks fitted into the divisional plan. Tall and lanky, he became a familiar figure touring divisional areas in his jeep, his knees seemingly level with his chin. On these travels he was not averse to explaining developments personally to private soldiers he met. Nor was he reluctant to contribute his own physical labour to encourage tired men to further effort. 
The Highland division thrived under Wimberley's leadership, its unflagging morale underpinning exceptional fighting effectiveness. General Montgomery thought him a first-class divisional commander. After Sicily, however, both agreed that he needed a change -- a great loss to the division, which lacked its former edge under his successor. Judging Wimberley unsuited to corps command, Montgomery recommended him as commandant of the Staff College. After fifteen months in that post he moved in December 1944 to the War Office as director of infantry, which proved to be his last appointment in the army. 
In October 1946 Wimberley resigned to pursue a rather less happy career as principal of University College, Dundee (UCD, later the University of Dundee), then a constituent college of the University of St Andrews. Ambiguous constitutional arrangements between the two institutions provoked constant dispute. The ancient university, suspicious of the upstart college across the Tay and jealous of its own higher status, opposed all duplication of academic fields worked at St Andrews. Although most of UCD's council favoured accommodation with St Andrews, some Dundee academics, many of the city fathers, and the city's local newspaper agitated for independence. In the difficult balancing act of satisfying the reasonable and necessary ambitions of his institution without undermining St Andrews, Wimberley received little co-operation from the university's principal, Sir James Irvine. Dundee academics did not help by excluding Wimberley from much academic decision making, denying him the background in academic politics needed to deal effectively with Irvine. None the less, under Wimberley's leadership UCD expanded steadily. 
Wimberley avoided a military management style, which would not have worked in a college, but habitual morale-building was a welcome survivor of his military past. He strove to create an 'esprit de corps' among staff and students, improving college premises and facilities, and establishing a ceremonial university service at the parish kirk. The appointment to a lectureship of the prominent Scottish nationalist Douglas Young illustrates the retired major-general's open-mindedness. Young had preferred prison to fighting in a British (rather than Scottish) army during the war. This disqualified him in Irvine's eyes. Perhaps recalling the fierce patriotism he had encouraged in the Highland division, however, Wimberley admired Young's moral courage, ignored Irvine's objections, and hired him. 
Wimberley hoped to remain after the reconstitution of UCD within the university in 1954. Indeed, most Dundee academics wanted him to stay. The new vice-chancellor of St Andrews, however, insisted that college principalships be part-time posts filled by senior academics in rotation, precipitating Wimberley's retirement. Once a promising athlete, he took up genealogy in retirement and lived with his wife at Coupar Angus in Perthshire. He was colonel of the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders from 1951 to 1961. He died at Foxhall, Coupar Angus, on 26 August 1983, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 63741


Young, Peter (1915-1988), army officer and military historian, was born at 54 Fulham Road, London, on 28 July 1915, the son of Dallas Hales Wilkie Young, clerk, and Irene Barbara Lushington Mellor, and educated at Monmouth School and Trinity College, Oxford. He was commissioned second lieutenant in the Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire regiment in 1937, and was wounded during the evacuation from Dunkirk in 1940. As soon as he was fit again he volunteered for the newly formed commandos, with whom he had a distinguished war record, taking part in the commando raids on Guernsey, Lofoten and Vaagso, Dieppe, Sicily, and Italy, Normandy, and the Arakan (Burma). He was awarded the DSO and MC in 1942, and received in 1943 two more bars to his MC. When the war ended he was commanding the 1st commando brigade with the temporary rank of brigadier, aged only 30. 
In the Dieppe raid Young was the only commando officer to reach his objective and bring back all his men. He managed to take his raiding force up the cliffs on a network of barbed wire which, as he put it, an over-conscientious German officer had inadvertently provided for them to walk on. He was awarded the DSO for his part in this raid. Later, in the Arakan, a fellow officer recalls seeing Young's commandos under attack at Kangaw from hordes of Japanese, and sending a message asking Young if he would like reinforcements. 'No thanks', came back the message, 'we can see this lot off all right' ('Daily Telegraph', 14 Sept 1988). 
It is not surprising that such an outstanding battlefield leader did not find it easy to adjust to more mundane peacetime soldiering. Young found it difficult to decide whether to remain in the army, where he would undoubtedly go far, or return to his first love, which was history, and which won in the end. But before retiring in 1959 in the rank of brigadier, Young enjoyed three successful and exhilarating years (1953-6) in command of the 9th infantry regiment in the Arab Legion in Jordan. The 9th regiment was almost entirely Bedouin, and Young's somewhat swashbuckling character and obvious military ability led to a remarkable rapport between him and his 'jundis' (Arab soldiers). This was notably increased when as commander of the Jerusalem garrison he successfully thwarted an Israeli attack. His prompt and effective handling of a very dangerous situation brought 'sharf' (honour) to the regiment and added greatly to Young's popularity. However, it did not save Young from being included among the first of the British officers to be sent home in the wake of Glubb Pasha's dismissal in March 1956. This was owing to the fact that he and his regiment had been prominent in suppressing the anti-Baghdad pact riots that had torn Jordan apart at the end of 1955. He had married Joan Rathbone ('nee' Duckworth) on 23 June 1950. They had no children. 
Young retired from the army in order to become reader in military history at Sandhurst in 1959. He was there for ten years and his effect on the teaching of military history was dramatic. He recruited some of Britain's outstanding military historians -- John Keegan, David Chandler, and Christopher Duffy, to name but a few -- and inspired them by his own enthusiasm and erudition. He had always been particularly interested in the English civil war and in 1968 he founded the Sealed Knot Society of Cavaliers and Roundheads, in order to re-enact battles and engagements of that conflict. Dressed in period costume, which they had to provide themselves, they refought Naseby, Marston Moor, and so on, with Young as the somewhat portly 'Captain Generall' sporting a Van Dyck beard and flowing locks, mounted on a horse and directing proceedings. The society won for itself a national reputation, and people flocked to watch the battles taking place at various pageants and shows. 
A prolific writer of books and articles, Young as an author might have been wiser to concentrate on the civil war, on which he became something of an authority. 'The Great Civil War' (1959) was typical. He was editor-in-chief of Purnell's 'History of the First World War' and Orbis's 'History of World War II'. He also published an interesting account of his time in the Arab Legion, entitled 'Bedouin Command' (1956). His books on the civil war are likely to outlive the others. In the field of military history his opinions were always listened to with respect, if not always without argument. As a soldier he possessed nearly all the qualities which could have taken him to the highest ranks -- physical courage, robustness, common sense, personality, intelligence, and leadership -- but he did not much enjoy peacetime soldiering, and would not have fitted easily into Whitehall. His decision to go for history was probably the right one. 
There was about him something larger than life. He was in character essentially Elizabethan, a robust and rumbustious soldier-scholar, as ready to singe the king of Spain's beard as to enter into disputation with learned men concerning some matter of academic controversy. He also possessed a remarkably kind heart and gave much of his time to helping others, particularly budding historians. He died in Cheltenham General Hospital on 13 September 1988, and his funeral took place at St Mary's Church, Ripple, Worcestershire, on 4 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 63742


Beauman, (Archibald) Bentley (1888-1977), army officer, was born on 30 November 1888 in Paddington, London, the eldest son of Bentley Martin Beauman, a stockbroker. He was educated at Malvern College and Sandhurst and was commissioned into the South Staffordshire regiment in 1908. He joined the 2nd battalion in South Africa in the same year. After serving in South Africa and England he landed in France with the 2nd battalion South Staffordshire in 1914 with the original expeditionary force, but was wounded in the first battle of Ypres in November 1914 and invalided home. 
After recovering from his wounds Beauman returned to France in January 1915 and became adjutant of the 1st battalion. When his commanding officer became ill during the battle of Neuve Chapelle in 1915, Beauman commanded the battalion, and though only a captain at the time held the temporary rank of acting lieutenant-colonel. He was wounded again near Hooge later in the year and then served on the staff as deputy assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general (a major) before returning to command the 1st battalion during the battle of the Somme in 1916. 
In May 1918 he was promoted to command 69th infantry brigade in Italy, and thus achieved the temporary rank of brigadier-general at the age of twenty-nine. He was awarded a DSO during the battle of the Somme and earned a bar to it during the third battle of Ypres (Passchendaele) the following year. He was also mentioned six times in dispatches and received the Italian silver medal for valour and the Italian cross of war. 
In 1919 Beauman commanded the 20th Durham light infantry, in 1920 he took the course at the Staff College, Camberley, and from 1921 to 1925 he served on the staff in Baluchistan district, India. On 15 September 1923 he married Eva Dorothy (died 1949), second daughter of Albert E. Pullar of Durn, Perth. They had a son (who predeceased him) and a daughter. In 1926 he became chief instructor in tactics and military history at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and he then commanded the 1st battalion York and Lancaster regiment in Northern Ireland from 1928 to 1932. 
From 1932 to 1936 he was assistant commandant and chief instructor at the Netheravon wing of the Small Arms School, and from 1934 to 1938 he commanded 15 infantry brigade in Palestine. This last appointment involved active service during the Arab revolt and earned him a CBE and a further mention in dispatches. In 1938 he was aide-de-camp to the king. 
Although he retired from active service in 1938, Beauman was recalled in September 1939 and appointed commander, Cherbourg area. In 1940 he was promoted major-general to command northern district, lines of communication (including the defence of airfields), British expeditionary force. During and after the Dunkirk evacuation he commanded an improvised formation made up of miscellaneous troops gathered from the rear areas and named Beauforce, which later became Beauman division. Despite the circumstances Beauforce fought a creditable and gallant rearguard action. Beauman was mentioned in dispatches twice more at this time. After returning from France he commanded Sheffield sub-area and from 1942 to 1944 North Riding district. 
After the war Beauman, who had always been a keen horseman, acted for a time as a racing correspondent. He was an excellent cricketer and a keen fisherman. A popular and much respected commander, he was particularly good as a trainer of troops. In 1919 he wrote a booklet, 'With the 38th in France and Italy' -- 38 being the original number of the 1st Staffordshire regiment -- which gave a vivid account of his regiment's First World War experiences, and a book of reminiscences entitled 'Then a Soldier' (1960). In 1939 he published 'Common Mistakes in the Solution of Tactical Problems'. 
On 24 June 1952 Beauman married Barbara Gwendoline Arnold ('b'. 1907/8), who survived him. He died at his home, Orwell, Nursery Road, Walton on the Hill, Tadworth, Surrey, on 22 March 1977 at the age of eighty-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 63745


Bruce, Victoria Alexandrina Katherine (1898-1951), prison governor, was born on 13 September 1898 at Kennet House, Clackmannan, the youngest by fifteen years in the family of two sons and three daughters of Alexander Hugh Bruce, sixth Lord Balfour of Burleigh (1849-1921), secretary for Scotland in Lord Salisbury's cabinet from 1895 to 1903, and his wife, Lady Katherine Eliza Hamilton-Gordon (died 1931), youngest daughter of George John James Hamilton-Gordon, fifth earl of Aberdeen. She was probably educated at home, then became interested in social work, and after working from 1928 to 1931 as voluntary librarian of the boys' prison in Wandsworth, a special wing of Wandsworth prison for boys who had been removed from their borstals for bad behaviour or who had been recalled from parole, she was appointed a probation officer in the juvenile courts in London. 
In 1937 Victoria Bruce was offered the job of deputy governor of the Aylesbury Borstal Institutions, where Lilian Barker had been governor from 1923 to 1935, transforming the Aylesbury borstal, the only girls' borstal in the country, which had opened in 1912 in the former state inebriate reformatory in the wing of the women's prison. Borstal training, so called because the first experiment had been in the wing of a prison in Borstal, near Rochester, had been established as part of the penal system in 1908, as a result of the efforts of Sir Evelyn Ruggles-Brise, who held the view that up to a certain age every criminal was potentially a good citizen, and that a prison sentence was inappropriate for young offenders. Alexander Paterson had developed a system of institutional training followed by a closely supervised period of parole. 
Victoria Bruce spent three years at Aylesbury borstal before moving to Manchester in 1940 as deputy governor of the prison. In 1943 she returned to Aylesbury as governor of the borstal institution for girls, which now housed 250 girls. She introduced the house system, modelled on the English public school, and continued the work of preparing the girls for domestic and farm work, but Aylesbury borstal, which shared the prison block with the long-term women's prison, was still too large and prison-like to be suitable for young girls. She remained there until 1946, when she was appointed governor of HM prison, Duke Street, Glasgow, a women's prison. 
Victoria Bruce died on 25 November 1951 at 6 Cathedral Square, Glasgow, after a short illness, and was buried on 28 November at Clackmannan church, Clackmannan, Scotland. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 63748


Hale, Kathleen (1887-1958), fund-raiser, was born in London on 24 October 1887, the daughter of Thomas Francis Burke, an official of the London and North-Western Railway Company, and his wife, Georgina, 'nee' Connolly. Educated in London, she passed the senior examination of the Oxford delegacy for local examinations at the age of fourteen, becoming an Oxford associate of arts, and she later studied at the Sorbonne in Paris. Kathleen Burke was in New York when the First World War broke out, but she rushed back to Britain, where she was appointed secretary to one of the first British commissions to Belgium, helping the refugees flee to Britain before the German advance. After such work was no longer possible she became a secretary in the London office of the Scottish Women's Hospitals for Foreign Service (SWH), the organization founded by Dr Elsie Inglis to send all-women medical units to allied armies in the field. Before spring 1915 she had never made a speech in her life, but when Dr Inglis asked the young woman to take her place as a speaker for the SWH Kathleen Burke proved to have a natural gift for inspiring her audiences to part with money for the cause she pleaded. 
In summer 1915 Burke was invited by General Petain to visit Verdun after it was evacuated, and she was escorted to the trenches, an experience that she wrote up as 'The White Road to Verdun' (1916). On a more personal note she advised the SWH treasurer that she had been borrowed by the French Red Cross for 'a special and rather delicate mission to the French Military Authorities. I was obliged to track a French General down and when I found him we had to carry on our 'conversation' in writing owing to the noise of the guns!!! I was lucky enough to be successful... You see I have lived half my life with French Military people and so understand the 'kinks' in their character. (Burke file, SWH collection, Mitchell L., Glas.)' Unfortunately there is nowhere any hint of how or why the daughter of a British railway official came to have such close connections with the French military.In December 1915 Kathleen Burke shared a platform at Winchester with a rich American woman who knew her uncle well in New York; she tried to persuade Burke to spend some months in America to help raise money for the Serbian cause. Initially, Burke wrote in confidence to the SWH treasurer, 'the offer was a determined attempt to steal me from my present work', but she 'refused to consider the scheme unless I saw a good profit coming to the Hospitals' (Burke file, SWH collection, Mitchell L., Glas.). The SWH committee agreed to her going, and she crossed the Atlantic in February 1916. By early March she had already raised about $3000, and a fortnight later Andrew Carnegie gave her a further $1000. The SWH committee agreed that if she raised $10,000 they would send out a unit called the American unit, and in May she achieved that goal. 
Burke's success was so great that, inevitably, she went over to North America a second time, criss-crossing the USA and Canada for months, and raising so much money that she became known as the $1000-a-day girl. At one point she looked so tired that a millionaire friend made her an offer: he would pay the SWH $500 a day for two days if she would 'go down to his country place and stay quietly with his daughter'. Burke raised $1000 by doing nothing: 'I wish some of the other millionaires would follow his example', she wrote (Burke file, SWH collection, Mitchell L., Glas.). At San Francisco, when the mayor heard that, due to some petty bureaucracy, Burke had not been allowed onto the railway station platform to collect her luggage, he had her appointed a 'special policeman'; she said: 'I carry a good five pointed silver star inside my coat. It may be useful someday' (ibid.). She was given the freedom of several American cities and was appointed honorary colonel of the 138th US field artillery in recognition of her work for the American Red Cross. It was estimated that she raised about $4 million for various allied services. She was appointed CBE (1918), chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and knight of St Sava, Serbia. 
In January 1920 Kathleen Burke was in hospital in Santa Barbara in California, USA, 'with a general break down'; she wrote that she was 'threatening to marry one of the California multi-millionaires' (Burke file, SWH collection, Mitchell L., Glas.). Later that year, on 5 April, she did indeed marry company president Frederick Forrest Peabody (1859-1927) of Santa Barbara. In 1929, two years after his death, she married John Reginald McLean, but he died in the same year. Her third marriage, in 1931, was to Girard van Barkaloo Hale ('c'.1884-1958). Born in Denver, Mr Hale studied at the Rochester (New York) School of Art and at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, France. He was co-painter of a mural in the Utah State Capitol, Salt Lake City. During the First World War he was a member of the American field ambulance service, attached to the French army, when he received the Croix de Guerre and two citations. 
In the spring of 1940 Kathleen Hale returned to France, working with relief units of the American Friends of France. In 1946 the Hales 'adopted' the French village of Maille in Indre-et-Loire, which had been devastated in the Second World War, shipping out supplies for its 400 inhabitants, and its schools, churches, and farms. Kathleen Burke Hale died in Santa Barbara in November 1958, less than a month after her husband. Kathleen Burke's charisma, which induced her audiences to pour such vast amounts of money into allied coffers during the First World War, cannot be captured by the written word, but her warmth, charm, sense of humour, and intelligence are evident in every letter of hers preserved in the SWH collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 63750


Mayer, Matthew (1740-1814), Methodist preacher and promoter of the Sunday school movement, was born on 4 November 1740 at Portwood Hall estate, near Stockport, Cheshire, the son of John Mayer, yeoman farmer (died 1775), and his wife, Hannah. Educated at a good country school, Matthew had a strictly moral Anglican upbringing. In 1759, affected by illness and the death of an uncle, he became seriously religious, heard John Wesley preach, and joined the Methodists. After three years' struggle he was converted on 1 August 1762 while taking communion. He participated in newly created public prayer meetings around Manchester and began preaching, one of his converts being John Whitehead, a future biographer of Wesley. 
In June 1763 Wesley took Mayer to Birmingham and left him in charge of the Methodist circuit for a week, which resulted in conversions and confirmed his call to preach. He resolved not to be an itinerant or local preacher but to accept calls to evangelize new places. For twenty years he preached far afield at weekends and pioneered many causes in Cheshire, Staffordshire, Derbyshire, south Lancashire, and west Yorkshire. He faced mob violence and had 'providential' experiences of facing down mob leaders and 'judgements' on opponents. Though some envied his freelance preaching and popularity, he acquired close friendships with Wesley and leading preachers including Thomas Rankin and Joseph Benson. On 1 August 1771 he married Sarah Flower (1748-1825), a devout Methodist and only daughter of Joseph Flower (died 1785), a Bristol potter. They had at least four children, of whom two survived him. In 1783 he moved to Cale Green near Stockport and thereafter preached mainly in the Stockport area, monthly in Manchester, and occasionally further afield. 
Mayer was a leading founder and manager of Stockport Sunday school, later the country's largest institution of this type, which moved into its own premises in 1805. His son Joseph (1773-1857), a pioneer cotton manufacturer in Stockport, was a major force in the school and a public defender of its work and policy. Though originating on Methodist premises the school was undenominational, and taught writing and arithmetic as well as reading. In 1808 Matthew led a formal protest against the Methodist conference's attempt to restrict Sunday schools under Methodist control to reading only. The school became a centre for religion and culture for all ages and a kind of people's church. 
Mayer approved of Anglican liturgy and doctrine despite his Methodism and followed the biblical maxims 'Fear God and honour the king' and 'not to meddle with those who are given to [political] change'. Though supporting Wesley's doctrine of 'Christian perfection' he was critical of the claims of some perfectionists. He was respected for honest business dealings, benevolence, and charity. He was a notable example of a local Methodist preacher who nevertheless had a major role as a regional creator of societies. His Sunday school policy exemplified the earlier Methodist tradition of undenominational openness against the growth of tighter denominationalism. Mayer died on 5 November 1814 in Cale Green and was buried in Stockport, where Benson preached memorial sermons in the Methodist chapel and Sunday school. 


@@@@@


doc= 63753


Sydall, Elias (1671/2-1733), bishop of Gloucester, was born in Norwich; his father was a glover but no further details of his parents are known. In 1688 he entered Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, as a bible clerk upon Archbishop Parker's foundation, and proceeded BA in 1691, MA in 1695, and DD, by royal mandate, in 1705. From 1696 to 1703 he was a fellow of Corpus Christi and in 1698 he served as university taxor. Having been ordained priest by John Moore, bishop of Norwich, in May 1697 he acted as priest-in-charge of St Benet's, Cambridge, from 1699 until 1702, when he was appointed chaplain to Thomas Tenison, archbishop of Canterbury and a former fellow of Corpus Christi. Tenison rapidly appointed Sydall to a succession of benefices in the diocese of Canterbury: Biddenden (held from 1702 to 1704), Ivychurch (held from 1704 to 1731), and Great Mongeham (held from 1707 to 1730). In 1707 Sydall also became prebendary of the fourth stall in Canterbury Cathedral, to which Tenison added the mastership of the hospitals of St John Northgate and St Nicholas, Harbledown, in 1711. On 29 June 1710, at St Mary Bredin, Canterbury, he married Mary Deedes (1688/9-1758), daughter of William Deedes, a Canterbury physician. 
During the eventful convocation of 1710, held in the aftermath of Dr Henry Sacheverell's trial, Sydall served as proctor for the clergy of Canterbury diocese and was one of the joint committee of both houses of convocation working under the guidance of the prolocutor, Francis Atterbury, to prepare a 'Representation of the present State of religion'. However, Sydall did not share Atterbury's high-church convictions, and in the convocation of 1711 he attempted to prevent the passage of measures to censure the Arian opinions of William Whiston. Although it is recorded that Whiston had regarded him as one of the best candidates he had ever examined for orders Sydall seems to have felt no personal sympathy towards Arian doctrine: indeed in a subsequent diocesan proctorial election, in 1722, he enjoyed a decisive level of support from the orthodox clergy. 
After the death of Queen Anne, in 1714, Sydall gave enthusiastic support to the new Hanoverian regime, publishing two sermons in 1715: 'The Reasonableness of Rejoycing and Giving Thanks for his Majesty's Happy Accession' and a rhetorical piece preached at Canterbury on 5 November during the time of the Jacobite rising, 'The insupportable yoke of popery, and the wickedness of bringing it in again upon these kingdoms, after so many deliverances from it; consider'd and apply'd, with regard to the present rebellion'. In this second performance Sydall denounced 'any kind of Tyranny, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil' (Todd, 207-8) and scorned assurances offered to the Church of England by James Francis Edward Stuart, the exiled Stuart 'pretender'. As a reward for such loyalty he was appointed a chaplain to George I in 1716, and held this office as well as that of chaplain to George II from 1727, until he was installed as dean of Canterbury, in succession to Dr George Stanhope, on 26 April 1728. Following the death of Archbishop Tenison in December 1715 Sydall was instrumental in ensuring that all due forms were observed by the Canterbury chapter during the election of Tenison's successor, William Wake, and was chosen to preach the sermon at the latter's primary visitation of the cathedral on 16 June 1716. He was one of the prebendaries trusted by Wake to keep him informed about chapter business, and was 'much respected' at Canterbury 'as a polite Scholar, and much beloved as a mild and diffident Man' (ibid., 204). 
On 11 April 1731 Sydall was consecrated at Ely House in London to succeed Dr Smalbroke in the bishopric of St David's. The consecrating bishops were Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, Thomas Green, bishop of Ely, and Thomas Sherlock, bishop of Bangor. On 2 November 1731, on the translation of Joseph Wilcocks to the bishopric of Rochester, Sydall was advanced to the see of Gloucester, and retained this, together with the deanery of Canterbury, until his death, in London, on 24 December 1733 at the age of sixty-one. He was buried in the chancel of St James's, Piccadilly, on 31 December 1733; his wife, who died in 1758, aged sixty-nine, was buried near by. There were no children of the marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 63755


Ottley, Adam (bap. 1655, d. 1723), bishop of St David's, was baptized at Pitchford, Shropshire, on 5 January 1655, the second surviving son of Sir Richard Ottley (1626-1670) of Pitchford, gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles II, and his wife, Lady Lettice, daughter of Robert Ridgeway, second earl of Londonderry. The Ottleys had been staunchly royalist in the civil war; the bishop's grandfather Sir Francis Ottley (1600/01-1649) was Charles I's governor of Shrewsbury. Adam Ottley matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1672, was made a scholar in 1674, and took his BA in 1676 and MA in 1679. He then migrated to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he was a fellow from 1680 to 1684, and was admitted DD in 1691. He served as rector of Prestbury, Shropshire, from 1682, as a prebendary of Hereford from 1686, and as archdeacon of Shropshire from 1687. He married Ann Baldwyn ('bap'. 1660?, died 1720) at Stokesay church on 24 January 1688; she was probably the daughter of Sir Samuel Baldwyn, of Elsedge, serjeant-at-law, and thus sister of Elizabeth Baldwyn who married Ottley's elder brother Thomas and of Charles Baldwyn, whig MP for Ludlow in the 1681, 1685, and 1691 parliaments. The marriage seems to have been childless. She was buried at Pitchford on 14 April 1720. 
Ottley appears to have had tory sympathies and emerged as a candidate for promotion under the ministry of Robert Harley, earl of Oxford. His nephews Acton Baldwyn, who had succeeded to the family seat in the Commons at Ludlow, and the younger Adam Ottley (1685-1752) both had tory inclinations. When the see of Hereford fell vacant some in the diocese canvassed for Ottley to become bishop, but instead, following the translation of Philip Bisse to the see of Hereford, Ottley was nominated on 11 December 1712 to succeed him as bishop of St David's. The younger Adam Ottley enthusiastically reported that 'the whole ministry' (Evans, 119) struggled for Ottley's appointment, but he particularly indicated the support of 'Mr Brydges' -- probably the whig paymaster-general, James Brydges, later first duke of Chandos. Elected on 28 February 1713, Ottley was confirmed at Bow church on 14 March, consecrated at Lambeth on the following day, and enthroned at St David's Cathedral on 29 July. Although his penultimate predecessor, Philip Bull (1705-10), had been an effective reforming force the see of St David's had suffered from a long series of indifferent, often non-resident bishops, who (like Bisse) had used it merely as a stepping stone to greater things. From the beginning Ottley was determined to be an exception. He restored the episcopal palace at Abergwili, in Carmarthenshire, which had become uninhabitable, and did much to create the building that survived a devastating fire in 1903 and now houses the Carmarthenshire county museum. Ottley undertook three visitations of the diocese (in 1714, 1717, and 1723) and attempted to advance the careers of native Welsh clergymen. He was rigorous in enforcing clerical residence and in attempting to improve the quality of his diocesan clergy; he also tried to stamp out the itinerant preaching of the most popular of his clergy, Griffith Jones, rector of Llanddowror, whom he condemned for 'intruding himself into the churches of other ministers without their leave' (Jenkins, 14). His attempt to confine Jones, whose activities anticipated the growth of Welsh Methodism, within parochial boundaries was unsuccessful. Ottley was also recognized as a patron of Welsh literature; he was the dedicatee of Theophilus Evans's 'Drych y prif oesoedd' in 1716 and subscribed to Evans's translations of English-language religious works into Welsh in 1719 and 1722. In 1724 he wrote to the SPCK, suggesting that they publish an English translation of Rhys Prichard's 'Canwyll y Cymry', but the scheme fell through. 
Ottley fell ill on 23 September 1723 with 'a pain at my stomach, heart burning and an inclination to vomiting' (Evans, 128). He died at the episcopal palace, Abergwili, on 4 October and was buried at Abergwili -- a choice that was extremely unusual for post-Reformation bishops of St David's and a fitting final proof of his commitment to his diocese. His library and collection of curiosities was auctioned at Paul's Coffee House, London, on 19 April 1725. His nephew Adam was the chief beneficiary of his will, dated 5 September 1723, in which he passed on the estate that he had inherited in 1688 from his uncle and godfather Sir Adam Ottley, master of the chancery court. The nephew, registrar of St David's from 1713, was the writer of most of the materials in the Ottley papers, a substantial collection eventually deposited at the National Library of Wales. Generally regarded as one of the most effective eighteenth-century bishops in Wales, and one of the few bishops of St David's regularly resident and genuinely committed to his diocese, Ottley was even eulogized in verse: '
O thou who dost the sacred mitre grace, 

Thou the good star that rul'st St David's place... 

Thee Ottley with new vigour wee behold 

Enlivening statutes to their force of old, 

A Palace which some thought no crime t'impair, 

We see rebuilding by thy better care. 
(Evans, 130)' 



@@@@@


doc= 63756


Egerton, Henry (1689-1746), bishop of Hereford, was born on 10 February 1689 at Ashridge, near Little Gaddesden, Hertfordshire, the Egerton family seat. He was the third surviving son of John Egerton, third earl of Bridgewater (1646-1701), who held high office in William III's reign, and his second wife, Jane, 'nee' Paulet (1655-1716), eldest daughter of Charles Paulet, first duke of Bolton. He attended Eton College from 1706 to 1707, but then entered New College, Oxford, from which he matriculated on 31 March 1707. Unusually for a future cleric, he studied civil law at Oxford: he graduated BCL in February 1712 and DCL in July 1717. 
Egerton was ordained deacon on 12 December 1712 in Christ Church, Oxford, and subsequently priested. In 1713 he was instituted into two family benefices of Dunnington and Settrington, both in Yorkshire. In 1716 he became canon of Christ Church, and three years later hoped to be dean there, but in vain. He resigned his Yorkshire benefices in 1720, and, in exchange, was instituted into two other family livings, Whitchurch and Myddle, this time in north Shropshire in Lichfield and Coventry diocese. On 18 December 1720 he married Lady Elizabeth Ariana Bentinck (died 1764), daughter of Hans Willem Bentinck, first earl of Portland (1649-1709), formerly confidant of William III, and his second wife, Jane Martha, 'nee' Temple (1672-1751). They had five sons and one daughter. Under her father's will Lady Elizabeth was due to inherit $10,000 from his Dutch or English estates, but in 1727, owing to her half-sisters' claims, Egerton had to settle on his wife's behalf, it seems grudgingly, for $4000. 
Egerton was now well connected in whig circles, and not only through his own marriage. His brother Scroop, made first duke of Bridgewater in 1720, was a lord of the bedchamber to George I from 1719 to 1727. Furthermore, Egerton had himself become deputy to the clerk of the closet in 1719. In a shuffle of bishoprics in 1723 Edmund Gibson, bishop of London and Robert Walpole's chief ecclesiastical adviser, proposed him for the see of Hereford in succession to Benjamin Hoadly. Duly nominated, Egerton was consecrated at Lambeth Palace on 2 February 1724. He was reportedly unwilling to resign his Christ Church canonry, but none the less did so promptly. He was able to retain the Shropshire livings, holding them 'in commendam' with the bishopric until his death. 
From the outset Egerton was the subject of tory gossip and vilification. At his appointment to Hereford the Jacobite Thomas Hearne disparagingly described him as 'a nobleman of New College... he is young and hath no learning' ('Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne', 8.171). When, on 30 January 1727, Egerton preached before the Lords a sermon anti-Jacobite in tone, Hearne characterized it unfavourably as 'a most stupid thing, surely nothing can hardly be worse' (ibid., 9.284). Another tory, William Stratford, canon of Christ Church, told Edward Harley of a revealing confrontation between the bishop and the driver of a loaded cart. When the carter refused to give way to Egerton 'the bishop was dormant in him and the nobleman alert and dominant'. He swore at the carter 'like a dragoon and bruised the poor fellow with the butt of his whip' ('Portland MSS', 7.380). Egerton offered two guineas in compensation, but the carter through an attorney demanded one hundred and went to court. The result of the case is unknown. In Stratford's eyes, the hazard of a public trial was not enough for Egerton to overcome his love of money. Unfortunately few other personal views of Egerton exist. He was certainly very much a courtier-politician. Following his period as the clerk of the closet's deputy, he became clerk of the closet himself from 1737 until his death, and he attended parliament on average forty-one days a year, far more than any other Hereford bishop since 1660. 
Few records of Egerton's work in the diocese survive, yet it is notable that, though he ordained only once a year, he nearly always did so in the cathedral, and never in London like some contemporaries; evidence shows he also carried out visitations. He ensured diocesan administration continued efficiently under, for instance, his former Eton friend, the poet Samuel Croxall, archdeacon of Shropshire from 1732 to 1738 and later chancellor of the cathedral from 1738 until his death in 1752. When in London, Egerton was frequently in touch with Croxall especially during the long acrimonious dispute over jurisdiction with the new dean of Hereford, John Harris, also bishop of Llandaff. In another altercation the Society of Antiquaries severely criticized Egerton for destroying the eleventh-century bishop's chapel between 1737 and 1746. Unique in Great Britain, it was a Rhineland-style double chapel, dedicated to Sts Katherine and Mary Magdalene. 
Egerton died on 1 April 1746 at his house in St James's Place, Westminster, probably from tuberculosis, the scourge of the Egertons -- it had carried away his brother Scroop in 1744, and weakened his nephew Francis Egerton, third duke of Bridgewater and future internationally renowned canal-builder. Egerton was buried in the chancel at St James's, Westminster (now Piccadilly), on 5 April 1746 and was survived by his wife and three sons, one of whom, John Egerton (1721-1787), was bishop of Durham from 1771 to 1787. He was staunchly whig and anti-Jacobite. His frequent attendance in the Lords, his residence mostly in Westminster and sometimes in Whitchurch outside his diocese, his natural financial acquisitiveness, and his accretion of ecclesiastical benefices fit him more easily into the archetypal mould of an eighteenth-century courtier-prelate than any of his post-Restoration predecessors or indeed his more aristocratic successor, James Beauclerk. Perhaps not an admirable figure, he nevertheless made sure the diocese was run efficiently during his episcopate. 


@@@@@


doc= 63758


Lynch, John (1697-1760), dean of Canterbury and pluralist, was born on 5 December 1697 at Staple-next-Wingham, Kent, one of two surviving sons of John Lynch (died 1733) and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Francis Head esquire of Rochester. His father, whose family had been settled at Staple for many generations, was a colonel of militia and deputy lieutenant who served as high sheriff for Kent in 1714. After education at King's School, Canterbury, under Mr Smith, Lynch matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, on 24 June 1714, where he proceeded BA in 1718, MA in 1721, and DD in 1728. Following ordination in December 1721, he quickly attracted the patronage of William Wake, the archbishop of Canterbury, by whom in 1723 he was appointed prebend of the fourth stall in Canterbury Cathedral and rector of All Hallows, Bread Street, London, which he exchanged for All Hallows-the-Great in 1730. The rectory of Sundridge, Kent, was added in 1725. Further preferment followed his marriage to the archbishop's youngest daughter, Mary, in 1728: the mastership of St Cross Hospital, Winchester, and, in 1731, the valuable rectories of Ickham and Bishopsbourne, and the sinecure rectory of Aynesford. At this point Lynch relinquished Sundridge and his London living. On 18 January 1734 he was installed as dean of Canterbury, succeeding Elias Sydall, and in 1735 he became treasurer of Salisbury. During this time he resided principally at Lambeth Palace, attending to the affairs of his father-in-law, the archbishop. After Wake's death in January 1737, Lynch divided his time between the deanery at Canterbury and his family home at Staple, 8 miles away. 
Lynch's accumulation of preferment attracted critical notice, even in an age accustomed to such practices. His conduct inspired at least one satirical print, 'An Ass Loaded with Preferments' (BM 2269; Stephens, vol. 3, pt 1), published in February 1737, and by this time it was generally believed that his 'taking advantage of his father-in-law, the Archbishop of Canterbury's weak condition, and presenting himself to all that falls in the Archbishop's gift... was... very scandalous' ('Egmont Diary', 2.263). This charge was forcefully repeated in 'The Life of Dean L -- nch', an anonymous work of 1748, which alleged that ambition alone had caused Lynch to marry a wife who was 'exceeding plain in Person and much deformed' ('Life', 8) and that his selfishness had led him to neglect his brothers and aged father, and driven a younger sister to despair. The same work also charged Lynch with rapacious behaviour towards the tenantry on the cathedral estates, maintaining that 'Yeomen and Farmers he rated as his Dogs' (ibid., 29). 
The accuracy of these claims may be doubted. Lynch and his wife (who outlived him by several years) had a large family: five daughters and two sons, one of whom, Sir William Lynch, served King George III as envoy to the court of Turin. Friends pointed out that some of his appointments, notably the mastership of the hospitals of St Nicholas, Harbledown, and St John, Canterbury, brought no emoluments and much trouble, and that, elsewhere, his generosity was commensurate with his wealth. He was said to have expended above $3000 of his own money on repairs to his prebendal houses and deanery, and to have been a liberal and hospitable supporter of a wide range of public charities. The high reputation of the King's School at this time was also credited, in part, to his interest and encouragement. As a clergyman he was respected. In 1747 he was nominated prolocutor of the lower house of convocation, and he was considered a good preacher, although no remarkable qualities are evident in his only published sermon, delivered before the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in 1735. In 1757 Lynch suffered a paralytic stroke and was granted a royal dispensation, excusing him from all duty. He made a partial recovery, and continued to entertain at the deanery, but his faculties began to leave him some months before his death, which took place at Canterbury on 25 May 1760. He was buried in the church at Staple. 


@@@@@


doc= 63760


Hodgson, Solomon (bap. 1760, d. 1800), printer and newspaper proprietor, was baptized in Long Marton, Westmorland, on 29 September 1760, the son of Solomon Hodgson (1715/16-1779) of Knock, in that parish and his wife, Sarah Lothian (1718/19-1806), of Kirkoswald. He married in St John's Church, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 15 February 1785, Sarah [
It is supposed that Hodgson was apprenticed to Thomas Slack, assisting him in the work of his printing shop and in the publication of the 'Newcastle Chronicle', a weekly newspaper launched by Slack in March 1764. On 21 February 1785 the executors of Thomas Slack's estate transferred to Solomon Hodgson the 'Newcastle Chronicle', together with the printing, bookselling, and stationery business. It is probable that Hodgson also offered binding for, according to Thomas Bewick, he employed Gilbert Gray, a bookbinder who had served his time under Allan Ramsay, the Edinburgh poet and bookseller. Solomon, and later his widow, like Slack, also sold by retail and wholesale many nostrums, advertisements for them appearing regularly in their newspaper. The imprint 'S. Hodgson' appears in 1784 on an edition of 'The History of All Nations', printed for G. Robinson in London; he must, therefore, have assumed responsibility for the business immediately on the death of Thomas Slack, who bequeathed it, in a poorly drawn will, to his daughter Sarah. In 1794 Hodgson sold his bookselling and stationery business at his shop in Union Street to John (I) Bell (1755-1816), his former manager who had married Hodgson's sister-in-law, Anne Slack. In June 1800 Sarah Hodgson made clear her intention to buy back this business at the end of Bell's lease; this was completed by 1803 and thereafter she infused new life into the whole concern. 
Solomon Hodgson continued to develop the 'Newcastle Chronicle', acting as reporter, editor, and publisher, as well as advertising agent. His retentive memory allowed him to report political and other speeches without recourse to notes taken at the time. Richard Welford writes that Hodgson 'uniformly advanced the genuine sentiments of his mind, uninfluenced by party, or any political society... and so long as he could do it consistently with personal safety, he exercised the privilege of declaring his sentiments on every important subject with a boldness and freedom becoming a Briton... (Welford, 'Men of Mark', 2.544-5)' Hodgson's efforts 'raised the 'Chronicle' to the position of the leading organ of Whig politics in the North of England' (Welford, 'Early Newcastle typography', 46). Following Hodgson's death the 'Chronicle' of 11 April 1800 carried an advertisement from his widow in which she stated that she had taken over the paper from her late husband, adding 'She trusts that, in Consequence of the Arrangements which she has it in her Power to make, that Paper will be found not unworthy of the Patronage from a generous Public which it has hitherto experienced'. From 1784 the newspaper had been composed by William Preston, who assisted Sarah Hodgson with the editing and publishing of the 'Newcastle Chronicle' after the death of her husband. Preston left in May 1808 to set up in business as a printer with William Heaton, another former Hodgson employee. Sarah was later assisted in the production of the newspaper by her sons Thomas (1785-1850) and James (1798-1867), later an alderman who became mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1841. In 1850 the 'Chronicle' was sold to Mark William Lambert (1812-1893), who, in turn, sold it to Joseph Cowen (1831-1900), industrialist and MP, when it became a radical campaigning journal; it ceased publication in 1953. 
The Hodgsons continued the successful publications started by Thomas and Anne Slack, in particular the 'Newcastle Memorandum-Book', an annual which ceased publication only in 1893, and Mrs Slack's 'Ladies' Own Memorandum-Book', which he, followed by Sarah Hodgson, published jointly with the London publishers George Robinson & Co.; until the latter failed in 1805. Hodgson also issued editions of two more works by Mrs Slack, published under her maiden name, Anne Fisher: 'A Practical New Grammar', which appeared in 1785, 1787, 1788, 1789 (with a London-printed edition in the same year), 1795, and 1800; and 'The New English Tutor' (undated, but probably after 1786). Sarah published an edition of her mother's 'Young Scholar's Delight' in 1802. Solomon also issued editions of S. Thomas's (supposedly Thomas Slack's pseudonym) 'The Banker's Sure Guide' in 1791 and 1798, with an issue by Sarah in 1803; 'The British Negociator' in 1791, with one by Sarah in 1814; and 'The Ready Calculator' in 1786. 
Many of the works listed for Solomon Hodgson in the 'English Short-Title Catalogue' are slight items such as sermons and advertisements for subscription concerts, but it was not long after taking charge of the business that he became concerned with more substantial new material. In 1785 he printed the first volume of William Hutchinson's 'History and Antiquities of the County Palatine of Durham', a large illustrated quarto. The second volume appeared in 1787, but, having fallen out with the author, Hodgson was not responsible for the third. 
In 1786 Hodgson printed and published Mary Smith's 'The Complete House-Keeper' (always a popular subject), and in the same year three works by Claude Fleury, 'A Larger Historical Catechism', 'The Manners of the Israelites', and 'The Manners of the Christians' (the latter two translated by Charles Cordell, a Catholic priest living in Newcastle). Each year thereafter saw substantial works for which he was responsible, among them John Bailey's 'General View of the Agriculture of the County of Northumberland' (1797) for Sir John Sinclair's board of agriculture. 
The Hodgsons were also innovative in their choice of titles. Edward Moises' 'The Persian Interpreter' (1792) was the first book to be printed in an Arabic typeface in England outside London and the university towns of Oxford and Cambridge. At the end of this volume Moises presented proposals for the publication by subscription of an edition in six volumes of 'The Persian Poets, Historians, and Moralists', and of a large, one-volume Persian, Arabic, and English dictionary; nothing seems to have come of these proposals. 
About 1803 Sarah Hodgson started printing an Arabic version of the 'Old Testament', prepared by Joseph Dacre Carlyle (1759-1806), vicar of Newcastle upon Tyne, chancellor of Carlisle, and professor of Arabic at the University of Cambridge. Charles Wilkins, in the advertisement for his edition of John Richardson's 'Dictionary, Persian, Arabic and English' (1806), wrote of the Arabic typeface used in that work: 'The punches were gratuitously designed by myself, and executed, under my superintendence, by that ingenious mechanic, Mr William Martin [employed by George Nicol as type designer and typefounder for the Shakspeare Press of William Bulmer], expressly for the purpose of printing a portable edition of the 'Old Testament' in the Arabic language... [by]... that celebrated Arabic scholar... the Reverend Mr. Carlisle...' This work, with the 'New Testament' in Arabic, was finally published in 1811 as 'The Holy Bible Containing the Old and New Testaments in the Arabic Language'; it was produced under the patronage of Shute Barrington (1734-1826), bishop of Durham. After Carlyle's death it was seen through the press by Henry Ford, lord almoner's reader in Arabic at Oxford. This work should have been the first showing of Martin's Arabic type, which actually appeared first in William Jones's 'Grammar of the Persian Language' (1804). The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts contributed $250 for 1000 copies of the Arabic 'Bible' to be distributed in Africa and Asia, and the British and Foreign Bible Society also gave $250, purchasing or receiving over 1000 copies. Sarah Hodgson also used Martin's Arabic typeface in 1809 in 'The Arabick Alphabet', a slim octavo booklet by Thomas Burgess, bishop of St David's. 
Solomon Hodgson was friendly with the wood-engraver Thomas Bewick, and when the latter and his business partner, Ralph Beilby, were considering publishing 'A General History of Quadrupeds' they consulted the printer 'as to the probability of such a publication paying us for our labours', and were 'most warmly encouraged... to proceed', adding the footnote 'In this we were greatly mistaken, for Solomon's dissipated life prevented him attending to it' ('Memoir', 105-6). Hodgson printed (and published) the first four editions of the 'General History' in 1790, 1791, 1792, and 1800, and printed the first two editions of 'Land Birds', volume 1 of the 'History of British Birds', in 1797 and 1800, and 'Figures of British Land Birds' in 1800. The name Hodgson does not appear in the imprint of these works after 1800. 
After the death of Solomon Hodgson, Bewick quarrelled bitterly with his widow over a small discrepancy in the account for the printing of the first volume of the 'History of British Birds'. The engraver found he 'could not go on pleasantly with Mrs Hodgson in the Printing of the Quadrupeds' ('Memoir', 125), and offered to buy her share in the work; she refused to sell and later sold it to the London publisher Longman. Nevertheless, in 1805 the engraver had recovered from his ill feeling sufficiently to withdraw the charge that he had made for a memorial cut to Samuel Hodgson, reproduced in John Sykes's 'Local Records', (1866, 2.2). 
In 1799 Hodgson printed and published 'The Hive of Ancient & Modern Literature', a selection by himself of short pieces of prose and verse 'to inculcate in the minds of youth strong impressions of their moral obligations'. It is 'embellished with a number of engravings on wood by T. Bewick and L. Clennell, both of Newcastle' and was reprinted several times, Sarah publishing the third edition in 1806 and the fourth in 1812. 
In 1788 Hodgson printed for the Newcastle Dispensary (founded in 1777) a report on inoculation, and in the following year one on the resuscitation of drowned persons. He started printing the dispensary's annual reports in 1796, and was followed until 1821 by Sarah Hodgson when she transferred the work to her sons. Sarah also took over the printing of the annual reports of the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society in 1800, continuing until the year of her death, when her sons again took over. The society had been founded in 1793 by William Turner, the Unitarian minister of Hanover Square Chapel, Newcastle, and it may be that Sarah changed her religious affiliation about this time. The first of Turner's sermons to be printed by her appeared in 1800, and she and her sons were reported to have been members of Turner's Unitarian congregation (Welford, 'Men of mark', 2.548). Sarah printed several more of Turner's sermons and other works for the Unitarian chapel. It appears that Solomon had remained an Anglican. He died on 4 April 1800 and was buried under a table monument in the churchyard of St John's Church, Newcastle. 
Sarah Hodgson died on 10 September 1822 at Newcastle upon Tyne after a short illness, reported by the 'Tyne Mercury' as cholera morbus (presumably European cholera). The Revd William Turner preached the sermon, afterwards published, at her funeral at the Hanover Square Chapel on 15 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 63761


Cowdroy, William (1752-1814), playwright and radical publisher, is of obscure origins; details of his parentage and upbringing are unknown. He was apprenticed to John Monk, the printer of the tory 'Chester Courant', on 6 June 1764, and enrolled on 21 June 1770. He became a freeman of the city on 24 July 1777. He was probably already on the staff of the 'Chester Chronicle' when its editor, John Fletcher, was imprisoned for libelling the recorder of Chester in 1785. Cowdroy thereafter assumed the editorship. It is likely that his 'Directory and Guide for the County and City of Chester' (1789) was published from the same offices. 
As a young man Cowdroy had dabbled in amateur acting, and once apprenticed he gave comic lectures, using masks, such as 'Lectures on Heads' in the manner of George Alexander Stevens. He enjoyed some success as a playwright, publishing 'The Vaporish Man, or, Hypocrisy Detected' (1782), performed at theatres in Chester and Manchester, and sold by booksellers as distant as Shrewsbury. This was followed by the comic opera 'Love Conquers All, or, The Cheshire Knight Outwitted' ('c'.1786), which was managed by Joseph Munden in its first production at Chester. 
Moving to Greengate, Salford, in 1794, Cowdroy became the partner of Thomas Boden, the Manchester bookseller and printer already noted for publishing the proceedings of the trial of the Manchester radical Thomas Walker (1794). Together they published Thomas Battye's 'The Red Basil Book' (1797). While this pamphlet caused some embarrassment for the town's 'principal inhabitants', it was Cowdroy's association with Battye which was more revealing, especially as the Manchester cotton merchant and government spy, Robert Gray, was to describe Battye as a United Englishman and very dangerous, often heard damning the king. 
Cowdroy, with Boden, already enjoyed some notoriety as publisher of the radical 'Manchester Gazette and Weekly Advertiser', a successor to Walker's 'Manchester Herald' (1792-3), and one of a relatively small number of titles to appear after the Pitt administration's crackdown on the radical movement. The first issue of the 'Gazette' appeared on 21 November 1795, bearing the motto:'Be Temperate in Political Disquisition. Give Free Operation to Truth'. Its agenda included objecting to the war with France, to increased taxation, and to the repressive measures of the government. The newspaper boasted that it was 'extensively circulated' as far as Derbyshire, Yorkshire, and London. 
In 1798 Cowdroy's son, also William, was incriminated on the evidence of Gray, who had acted as an 'agent provocateur' by making a down payment at his publishing works for the printing of radical literature. Among the materials published were 'Declarations, Resolutions, and Constitution of the Society of United Englishmen', and 'Loyalty and Reason'. Gray had also attempted to ensnare Cowdroy senior, whose name, with Boden's, appeared on a government list of 'three printers'. Gray paid him at least one visit, and asked for a subscription for the United Irishman James O'Coigley's passage to France. Cowdroy donated 2's'. While this proved insufficient ground for prosecution, his republican leanings were not in doubt. In his conversations with Thomas Jowell, a United Englishman secretary, he expressed his belief that, if the minds of the people could be cultivated, they would revolutionize themselves. England was, for Cowdroy, a country where 'priestcraft' was suffered and the Christian religion frightened people into obedience. An apocryphal tale also related Cowdroy's insistence at his fourth son's baptism, that the child be named Citizen. 
Cowdroy died in Manchester on 13 August 1814, and was buried in St Mark's churchyard, Cheetham Hill, Manchester. At that time his publishing business was sufficiently lucrative for him to leave an estate worth up to $600, out of which his wife Sarah (died 1821), about whom further details are unknown, received an annuity of $150. He had parted company with Boden in August 1799, and been left in full control of the 'Manchester Gazette'. Thereafter, Sarah, with William junior, assumed control of the newspaper, sales of which rallied until the 1820s with the arrival of the 'Manchester Guardian'. Cowdroy and his wife had three other sons, Thomas, Benjamin, and Citizen Howard, all of whom became printers, and two daughters Mary Eliza and Caroline. 


@@@@@


doc= 63762


Unstead, Robert John (1915-1988), historian, was born at Firth Dene, Stanhope Road, Deal, Kent, on 21 November 1915, the son of Charles Edmund Unstead, a Post Office clerk and telegraphist, and his wife, Elizabeth Nightingale. He later told how he 'took up writing seriously at the age of 9' (Unstead), when he was awarded the East Kent Wolf Cubs' prize for an essay on the British empire. Educated at Dover grammar school (1926-33), he won a scholarship to Cambridge but could not afford to go and instead trained as a teacher at Goldsmiths' College, London (1933-6). The proceeds of the sale of a couple of short stories to an evening newspaper paid for an engagement ring and he married Florence Margaret Thomas ('b'. 1917) on 27 May 1939 at St George the Martyr's Church, Deal; she was a chemist's assistant and the daughter of Oswald Frederick Thomas, a collier. They had three daughters. He taught from 1936 to 1940, when he joined the RAF and became a sector controller on combined operations in Normandy, Greece, and Italy. In 1946 he was appointed headmaster of Norton Road primary school, Letchworth, and in 1951 of the Grange School, Letchworth, where he remained until 1957. Thereafter he concentrated on writing. 
Unstead reviewed for the 'Times Educational Supplement', producing protests from publishers as he scorned the turgid, matter-of-fact approach of many contemporary textbooks, declaring most history books to be written in a way calculated to put children off the subject for the rest of their lives. The publishers A. and C. Black took up his challenge and his 'Looking at History', published in four books (1953), constituted a new approach to the teaching of history in primary schools. As he remarked in the foreword to the 'Middle Ages' volume, 'You will not find very much about kings, queens and battles in this book... this is a book about everyday people and things'. Unstead wrote what might be termed 'inclusive history'; his book 'Castles' in 1970, for example, also dealt with fortified houses used in border warfare, showed how and why castles were built, defended, and attacked, and included a chapter entitled 'How to visit a castle'. He aimed to stimulate the reader's imagination about life as it was lived. The 'Times Literary Supplement' wrote of him that 'his narrative is always clear and his style direct and forceful'. He was also concerned for accuracy and possessed of a passionate patriotism. On the cover of book 4 of 'England: a History' (1963) he reproduced John Piper's window from the new Coventry Cathedral, and his philosophy was encapsulated in the book's foreword: 'at a time when it is fashionable in some quarters to belittle England's achievements in the past and to doubt her place in the future, I have tried to show that whereas England has often acted foolishly or badly, her history shows the persistence of ideals which good men have lived by since Alfred's day.' The popularity of Unstead's books -- over 8 million copies were sold of 'Looking at History' alone -- was based on perhaps two things above all else: his capacity for simplification, which was compared with Arthur Mee's in an earlier generation, and his recognition that most twentieth-century children preferred an illustrator's impression of a historical event to an authentic contemporary picture. His books were richly illustrated so as to bring history to life; his texts were tautly written. In more than fifty books he covered many civilizations ancient and modern -- Greece and Rome, Egypt, the British empire, Australia especially -- and he was able to make children's reference books, like the generously illustrated 'History of the English-Speaking World' (1972), as fascinating as fiction. The books were often keenly priced and they sold exceptionally well; they appealed to children and teachers as basic texts and as sources for the topics and projects so popular in primary and middle schools in the 1960s and 1970s. To Unstead's delight, they were sometimes bought as Christmas and birthday presents. 
Many of Unstead's titles were published overseas and this led to invitations to the United States, east Africa, and Australia, for example. His most ambitious work, 'A History of the World' (1983), was targeted at a wider readership and was also a decided success. A small boy at a prep school wrote sorrowfully to ask whether Unstead could write a series about the ancient world which he had to study. The result was 'Looking at Ancient History' (1959) -- another best-seller. 
Unstead was a modest and humorous man who aroused much affection by his balance between heart and brain which put people of diverse backgrounds at ease. He worked hard for his fellow authors: he was founder and chairman of the Educational Writers' Group of the Society of Authors (1965-8); a member of the Council of East Anglian Writers (1976-88); and he campaigned vigorously for the Public Lending Right. He remained interested in education long after he left teaching, and was a governor of Leiston middle school (1973-85). He gave freely of his time to young authors in particular and retained to the end a boyish enthusiasm as well as an outspokenness which marked him as an honest man and a sincere friend. He accepted philosophically that his early ambition to become a high-flown literary critic and novelist was not to be fulfilled. At the time of his death, from heart failure, at Ipswich Hospital, on 5 May 1988, he was working on a new book on the 1940s with his youngest daughter Sue, a children's publisher. 
A keen golfer and gardener, a devoted follower of cricket, Unstead was above all a family man. He was survived by his wife and their three daughters. In the words of Sean Lang in 'Teaching History', 'not one single writer of children's history has yet even approached the eminence or creative productivity, never mind the affectionate esteem, which were the hallmarks of R. J. Unstead' (Lang, 26). He was deservedly promoted by his publishers as 'the young person's historian'. As he remarked in his Dean lecture to Goldsmiths' College, in 1985, he 'wanted children to begin to understand that the past was different from the present and that it is unfair to judge people of the past by the standards and ideas of to-day' (Unstead). 


@@@@@


doc= 63763


Mac Conmara, Donnchadh Ruadh (1714/15-1810), Irish-language poet, is of uncertain origins. There are no written sources for his birth and the two accounts which purport to be based on reliable oral tradition show some discrepancies. O'Grady writing in 1853 states that he was 'guided by information carefully collected from such of the posterity of our poet as are still living, as well as from others in that part of the county of Waterford where he spent the greater part of his life' and goes on to say that Mac Conmara was born in Cratloe (An Chreatlach in Irish) in co. Clare 'in, or shortly after the year 1709' (Hayes, 3). Of Seaghan Pleimeann, or John Fleming, it is said that he had access to a similar type of informant: 'he was acquainted not only with some of Donogh's pupils, but also with one of his grandsons, and had many of his facts from living witnesses' (O Flannghaile, viii). Writing in 1881-2, Fleming states that Mac Conmara was born 'early in the last century' (ibid., 1), and he cites, in agreement with O'Grady, Cratloe as place of birth. Fortunately, a contemporary newspaper, the 'Freeman's Journal' (5 November 1810), recorded Mac Conmara's death at the age of ninety-five and, while the caveat as to the reliability of such oral sources as were available to the newspaper must remain, it is not unreasonable to posit 1714 or 1715 as Mac Conmara's date of birth. 
O'Grady and Fleming are in agreement that, having been educated first at home, Mac Conmara was sent to Rome in order to study for the priesthood. This would indicate either that his parents, of whom nothing is known, lived in relatively comfortable circumstances, or that his education was sponsored from the outset by some well-off relation or patron. He spent some five years in Rome and was then expelled from whatever college he had been attending for some misdemeanour of which nothing is known. These formative years equipped him for life with a thorough knowledge of Latin, which he demonstrated in the elegy he wrote for fellow poet Tadhg Gaelach O Suilleabhain in 1795. Donnchadh Ruadh was doubtlessly fluent in Irish from childhood, he acquired English in the course of his education, and it is not unreasonable to assume a knowledge on his part of some other continental languages gained during the course of his travels. O Foghludha rejects the opinion of O'Grady and Fleming that Mac Conmara studied in Rome, arguing that the Latinity the poet undoubtedly possessed would have been accessible to him in Ireland (O Foghludha, 'Donnchadh Ruadh', iii; O Foghludha, 'Donnchadh Ruadh MacComara', 10). While the reason put forward by O Foghludha for his opinion is valid, the unanimous opinion of the earlier commentators is bolstered by a well-established and widespread practice, which lasted up to the end of the eighteenth century, of young Irishmen going abroad to study for the priesthood. In the absence of documentary evidence to the contrary, the traditions of the poet's time spent in Rome must be allowed to stand. O Foghludha's attitude to this question may well have been influenced by an understandable desire, when he produced his two editions, to disseminate a certain orthodox and, therefore, simplified view of Gaelic Ireland in the eighteenth century. 
About 1740 Mac Conmara arrived from the continent and settled in the Decies country in Waterford. The strong scholastic and literary traditions of that district would have been attractive to Mac Conmara, though it cannot be ruled out that his decision to settle there had to do with his determination not to return to his native parts following his fall from grace in Rome. He taught school in various districts of Waterford, first in the parish of Seskinane in either the townland of Ballynaguilkee or of Knockboy under the auspices of fellow poet Uilliam O Morain. O'Grady and Fleming claim that at about this time he married Maire Ni Ogain, but O Foghludha's dissenting opinion (O Foghludha, 'Donnchadh Ruadh MacComara', 13-14) on this matter does not lack cogency. Unhappy with the life of a peripatetic schoolmaster, it seems that Mac Conmara set out for Newfoundland some time after 1745. The voyage across the Atlantic features in his most ambitious poem, entitled 'Eachtra Ghiolla an Amarain', 'The Voyage of the Luckless Fellow'. While it is not possible to state how long he spent in Newfoundland, it is clear that he had returned to Waterford by 1758 when he compiled the Maynooth manuscript M 85 (4 A 11) in which are found autograph copies of three of his poems, including the 'Voyage'. In 1764 Mac Conmara, having appealed to and having won the favour of James Ducket, of White's Town, became clerk of the protestant church in Kilmacthomas. He converted to the tenets of that church in order to get the clerkship and composed what must have been to his Catholic fellows a challenging poem that sets down boldly the reasons for his tergiversation. However, as in the case of his relationship with the Catholic church, his reluctance to toe the line had him in disagreement with the authorities in the new denomination, and he returned to Catholicism. In Mac Conmara's latter years he composed a formal poem of repentance, but does not refer at all to his denominational oscillations. It seems that he had married some years prior to 1764, for in his appeal to Ducket in that year, in the form of a poem, he alludes to his inability to provide for his 'naionain' or 'infant children' (ibid., 14). From approximately 1800 he spent some years teaching the Power family in the parish of Kill in co. Waterford, but eventually retired to the home of his son Donnchadh Og, a weaver by trade, in Newtown near Kilmacthomas, where he died on 6 October 1810; he was buried in Newtown. 
Mac Conmara will be best remembered for 'The Voyage of the Luckless Fellow' which can be classed as belonging to a category of narrative poetry. In these 291 lines a long sea journey is recounted, including a battle at sea, and an interval in the other world where characters from classical and Irish myth and history are encountered. It is worth noting, however, that his song in praise of Ireland, 'Banchnoic Eireann Oighe', which he based on an existing song, was probably composed while in Newfoundland, and is one of the best-known songs in the Irish language folk repertoire today. Despite, or, perhaps, because of the fact that he crossed swords with the Catholic church early in life, he had a lasting interest in the affairs of the clergy, which is reflected in what survives of his verse. In the most comprehensive and most acute analysis to date of Jacobite literature in Ireland (O Buachalla, 646-7) a hitherto unpublished satire by Donnchadh Ruadh is singled out for its biting invective in attacking the Catholic clergy of Ireland for seeking a 'rapprochement' with the Hanoverian kings and government. The concentrated and sustained criticism of the political tendencies of the church as found in these ninety-six lines of verse compensates for a certain flaccidity and lack of focus in Mac Conmara's other poems. This piece also foreshadows his willingness to break, if only temporarily, with the Catholic-Jacobite nexus in order to give priority to earning his bread as a protestant clerk through the offices of a protestant but Irish-speaking landowner. 


@@@@@


doc= 63765


Lynegar, Charles (fl. 1708-1731), Irish-language scholar and antiquary, was probably born in co. Fermanagh, Ireland, the son of Matha Ban O Luinin. The self-styled 'ardollamh Eireann' ('chief master of bardic learning in Ireland'), he belonged to the last generation of 'seanchaidhe' ('shanachies' or antiquaries), hereditary keepers of the genealogies and legendary history of the Irish chiefs in medieval and early modern times. The medieval Ui Luinin, like many others of their profession, were also hereditary erenaghs, or stewards of church lands, in the parish of Derryvullen, co. Fermanagh. An O Luinin took part in transcribing the annals of Ulster, which record individuals of this surname as scholars and churchmen from the late fourteenth century onwards. Even after the Ulster plantation a Giollaphadraig, or Patrick O Luinin ('fl'. 1638-1641), was employed as scribe and genealogist by the nobleman Brian Mag Uidhir of Tempo. The protestant Reformation resulted in erenagh families becoming simply tenants of Anglican bishops in the relevant dioceses, and many converted to Anglicanism, perhaps including Charles's grandfather, Matha O Luinin. He changed his name to Matthew Lynegar and translated the name of the family estate, Ard Ui Luinin, to 'Mount Lynegar' and his hereditary profession of 'seanchaidh' to 'chief antiquary and king-at-arms of Ireland', in which character he drew up pedigrees for many English planter families as well as the descendants of Irish chieftains. 
Charles Lynegar appears to have inherited some of his grandfather's manuscripts, but not Mount Lynegar. The collector Charles O'Conor of Belanagare (1710-1790) styled him Cormac ('of the Cul'), son of Matha ('the White') O Luinin, suggesting an association with the half-barony of Coole, co. Fermanagh, rather than the barony of Tirkennedy in which Mount Lynegar itself lay. Army lists of the period have been searched in vain for a commission justifying his use of the title Captain Lynegar. The earliest definite information known is his employment by the fellows of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1708 to teach Irish to the divinity students there, not as a permanent member of staff, but paid by voluntary contributions collected among the fellows themselves. He used the title 'Professor of Irish at Trinity College Dublin' thenceforth to 1731, when his teaching was interrupted by a sojourn in the city's Marshalsea prison for debtors. Nothing further is known of his career. 
During these years Lynegar supplemented his meagre salary by drawing up pedigrees for the Anglo-Irish and Gaelic aristocracy and assisting John Richardson in translating the 'Book of Common Prayer' into Irish (published in 1712). As well as acting as scribe for John Hall, vice-provost of Trinity, he addressed an Irish eulogy to him in 1709, composed in a faulty version of the bardic metre 'deibhidhe'. He was later to reuse some of the verses in a similar eulogy addressed to Lord St George, vice-admiral of Connaught (1727-35). Lynegar formed one of the circle of Irish scribes and men of letters that gathered in Dublin around the leading figures of Tadhg and Sean O Neachtain, though he was not apparently popular with them. A satire in Irish accuses him not only of protestantism, but of falsifying genealogies to flatter the patrons who paid him. It is these Irish-speaking colleagues who sometimes refer to him as Cathal, the more usual Irish-language equivalent for the name Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 63766


Mac Cumhaigh, Art (c.1738-1773), Irish-language poet, was probably born in the parish of Creggan (perhaps in the townland of Mounthill), co. Armagh; he also had links with nearby Kilcurly, co. Louth. His poetry displays a knowledge of the classics, but he spent his short life as a labourer, gardener, and herdsman, most of it in the employment of various priests and of a protestant minister, the Revd Hugh Hill. 
One of the best-known episodes in Mac Cumhaigh's life was his dispute with the parish priest of Creggan, the Revd Terence Quinn, whom he attacked -- as did his fellow poet Peadar O Doirnin -- for being overbearing, partial towards the well-to-do, and imposing heavy financial exactions on his parishioners. He also satirized the priest's sister and housekeeper in a celebrated poem as 'Mare Chaoch' ('Blind -- or squint-eyed -- Mary'). But, contrary to local tradition, the poem was not the sole -- nor perhaps even the primary -- cause of the poet's rift with the parish priest. That was more likely to have resulted from his abducting and marrying a second cousin Maire Ni Luain (Mary Lamb), in the protestant church, about 1770, an action that incurred his double excommunication. Ostracized by his neighbours, Mac Cumhaigh fled to Howth, co. Dublin, where he worked as a gardener. During his sojourn there, he composed his celebrated 'aisling' ('Ag cuan Bhinn Eadain ar bhruach na hEireann') in which he bemoaned his exile from his beloved Creggan. Within a year the excommunication was lifted and the poet returned to Creggan by permission, not of Father Quinn, but of the vicar-general of the archdiocese of Armagh. He then composed 'Cuilfhionn Ni Choinne' in reparation to the offended housekeeper; the work has been described by Tomas O Fiaich as 'a fulsome tribute which is metrically perfect and patently insincere' (O Fiaich, 'Mac Cooey', 14). He spent the remaining few years of his life working as a herd on a local farm. 
In all, some two dozen of Mac Cumhaigh's compositions survive. His poems in praise of the local Gaelic lords, the O'Neills of the Fews -- now in Spanish exile following the Williamite victory in the 'War of the Two Kings' -- include two on the ruined O'Neill stronghold of Glasdrummond Castle and an elegy of 262 lines on the death of Art Og O Neill, heir of the O'Neills of Creggan, who died in 1769 aged twenty-six (and for whom the poet had earlier composed a praise poem). A second elegy composed in that same year was a lament for his fellow poet Peadar O Doirnin. Following his return from 'exile' in Howth Mac Cumhaigh composed two savage satires entitled 'Bodaigh na hEorna' ('The Churls of the Barley') on the O'Callaghans of Cullaville, a well-to-do local Catholic family whose reputed snobbery, materialism, and philistine disregard for literature and music incurred the poet's wrath. Several of his poems relate to ecclesiastical matters, including a dialogue between the Catholic church at Faughart and the protestant church at Forkill, a succinct explanation of protestant doctrine addressed to a priest friend, and praise poems for two priests, the Franciscan Sean O hAnluain and Dominick Bellew, future bishop of Killala. There are poems in praise of a local tory or raparee, of a young woman, of a doctor who had healed an ulcer on the poet's leg, and on a member of the Catholic gentry. As well as some satirical or humorous pieces, there are a couple of vision poems known as 'aislingi', one of which, 'Urchill an Chreagain', has been described as 'one of the most interesting and sweetest aisling-poems in the Irish language' (O Fiaich, 'Art Mac Cumhaigh', 170, original statement in Irish). It is noteworthy that these 'aislingi' by Mac Cumhaigh lack the strong Jacobite sentiments of their Munster counterparts. 
Art Mac Cumhaigh was known locally as 'Art na gCeolta' (Art of the songs). Indeed most of his compositions were meant to be sung and the airs of many of the more popular items have been recorded. 
Mac Cumhaigh's untimely death, which occurred a short distance north of Crossmaglen probably on 5 January 1773, was almost certainly brought about by over-indulgence in alcohol. He was buried in Creggan churchyard in an unmarked grave. The bicentennial of his death was marked by the unveiling of a fine monument at the spot where he is traditionally said to be buried. A collection of his poetry first appeared in print in 1916 and the bicentennial of his death saw the publication of a comprehensive edition of his work, including a detailed analysis of Mac Cumhaigh's life and times and the historical context of his poetry, and an appraisal of his surviving work, by Tomas O Fiaich. 


@@@@@


doc= 63767


Casson, Elizabeth (1881-1954), medical practitioner, was born at Cae Derwen, Denbigh, on 14 April 1881, the sixth of seven children of Thomas Casson (1843-1911), bank manager, and his wife, Laura Ann, 'nee' Thomas (1843-1912). The actor and theatre director Sir Lewis Thomas Casson was her brother. Despite growing up in nonconformist Wales she was raised an Anglican and this deep faith was formative throughout her personal and working life. Her childhood and teenage years were spent in a particularly musical and artistic family and, although refusing to learn an instrument herself, she took pleasure in drawing, acting, painting, and singing. 
When the family moved to London, Casson was educated at St Mary's College in Paddington. She reluctantly attended secretarial college in London, afterwards working as secretary to her father, who had started a business building organs. After his retirement, she took employment as a housing manager and worked for the social reformer Octavia Hill between 1908 and 1913. As part of this work she was secretary of a community hall at Southwark (Red Cross Hall). She organized recreational activities for residents in the hall, which was designed with creative pursuits in mind. It had a concert hall, and walls were covered in murals by the artist Walter Crane. Her later work in occupational therapy, and her interest in art-based activities, was deeply influenced by this time with Octavia Hill, whose own interest in arts and crafts had been shaped by her friendship and working relationship with John Ruskin. 
Casson's uncle, Sir Isambard Owen, was then vice-chancellor of the University of Bristol and promised her a place on a medical course if she matriculated. At the age of thirty Casson made her career change. After struggling for two years to pass her Latin exams, she matriculated in London and registered at the University of Bristol on 1 October 1913. She lived in Hereford House, Clifton, while working to gain her medical degree. She graduated MB in 1919. She proceeded to her MD in 1926, becoming the first female doctor of medicine to graduate from the University of Bristol. 
After qualifying in 1919 Casson took up a resident appointment at the West Herts Hospital in Hemel Hempstead. However, she only held the position for a year and apparently found it difficult to adjust to the atmosphere of 'bored idleness' in the hospital (Oxford Brookes Special Collections (OBSC) DH/3/1/1.34). The turning point came one day close to Christmas, when Casson arrived at work and found an entirely different atmosphere in the women's wards. She noted that 'the patients were working happily in groups making flowers and leaves and using all their artistic talents with real interest and pleasure. I knew from that moment that such occupation was an integral part of treatment and must be provided' (OBSC DH/3/13, 34). 
In 1921 Casson took up a new appointment as medical officer at the Royal Holloway Sanatorium at Virginia Water, where the process of therapy had long involved some voluntary artistic and occupational activities. As she built on her work with Hill her interest in the nascent health care discipline of occupational therapy began to grow. She described hearing the psychiatrist Sir David Henderson speak of an occupational therapy programme in Scotland as her 'first real introduction' to the subject, an interest that grew when she visited an occupational therapy department in New York's Bloomingdale Hospital in 1926 (OBSC DH/3/1/1.34). During this period Casson consolidated her professional status by qualifying for the diploma in psychological medicine from the University of London in 1922, and winning the Gaskell prize (1927) of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association. 
Within a few years Casson had become determined to open her own facility for treatment by and the teaching of occupational therapy. A simple cable exchange between Casson and her brother Lewis secured the funds that she required: 'Can you lend me a thousand pounds?' 'Yes' (OBSC DH/3/13, vii). In 1929 she founded Dorset House as a residential clinic for women with mental disorders in Clifton, Bristol. A year later, she launched the first UK school of occupational therapy at the same location, with Casson as medical director and Constance Tebbitt as principal. Dorset House continued to operate as both an educational and a therapeutic facility, as students often worked with Casson's own patients. 
Casson pursued a vision of a therapeutic 'community where every individual was encouraged to feel that she had a real object' (OBSC DH/3/1/1.35). This approach not only drew upon Hill's community ethos, but also anticipated the post-war 'therapeutic community' movement. Within the school she led occupational and artistic therapies that were initially for the promotion of psychological wellbeing. Activities included dance, drama, and countryside excursions. Drawing upon her own creative childhood, Casson cast herself in Dorset House's annual drama production; in 1934, she played Mr Collins in 'Pride and Prejudice'. 
Casson's work in Bristol was not limited to the developments at Dorset House. In 1936, six years after she first offered to provide occupational therapy free of charge, the Health Committee at Southmead Hospital in north Bristol gave Casson a six-month trial. After the success of this trial, she was appointed as an honorary consultant in occupational therapy on half salary, and later full salary. 
Although Casson's work in Bristol was pioneering in many ways, it was not an isolated example. Over the course of the 1930s occupational therapy was increasingly recognized as an important health care discipline. The inaugural meetings of the Scottish Association of Occupational Therapy and the UK Association of Occupational Therapy were held in 1932 and 1935 respectively. The Second World War also created a particular impetus for the development of the physical aspects of occupational therapy, a trend that was reflected in Casson's work but not necessarily driven by it. In 1939 Casson set up the Allendale Curative Workshop in Bristol, where craft activities were used to help treat orthopaedic injuries and fractures. 
The original Dorset House school and treatment facility grew in size, with about 800 patients resident over the period 1929-41. It relocated during the Second World War to Bromsgrove. War damage to the Bristol premises prevented a return there, and in 1946 the Dorset House School of Occupational Therapy relocated to Oxford. Casson moved her patients to St Margaret's in Clevedon, Somerset, which she personally subsidized to maintain low rates for those requiring treatment. In 1948 the school was taken over by a limited non-profit making company but Casson maintained involvement as vice-chairman and medical director. A year later she created the Elizabeth Casson Trust for the purposes of continuing education and treatment in occupational therapy, of which Dorset House school was the primary beneficiary. 
In her personal life Casson was known as both characteristically determined and fun-loving. Younger relatives viewed Casson as holding a 'patriarchal' role in the family and as being intensely passionate about her work. Her nephew, who recalled 'Aunt Elsie's' unique dress sense and strong personality, described her as 'a real eccentric in that she saw herself as normal and other people as somewhat eccentric', while possessing 'infectious enthusiasm for whatever she was engaged in' and 'deep Christian beliefs' (John Casson, OBSC DH/3/13, vii). Her kindness extended to family, students, patients, and to a beloved Welsh terrier named Bran. 
Casson was awarded an OBE in 1951 for her work at Dorset House, the same year that she was elected an honorary fellow of the World Federation of Occupational Therapists. After a short period of failing health from obscure anaemia she died on 17 December 1954 at St Mary's Private Hospital, Bristol. Her body was buried at Backwell churchyard, Somerset, overlooking the Welsh mountains. Since 1973 the College of Occupational Therapists has hosted a prestigious Dr Elizabeth Casson memorial lecture. 


@@@@@


doc= 63777


Dakyns, Winifred (1875-1960), naval officer, was born on 16 September 1875 at Bensham Lodge, Gateshead, co. Durham, the youngest daughter of John Pattinson, analytical chemist, and his wife, Mary Jane, 'nee' Swan. She was educated at Gateshead high school and Newnham College, Cambridge, where she met, and married on 21 June 1902, Henry Graham Dakyns (1873/4-1937), a mechanical engineer. 
During the First World War Winifred Dakyns (and to a lesser extent her husband) was involved with the Voluntary Aid Detachment (VAD), run jointly by the British Red Cross and the order of St John. She worked closely with the director, Katharine Furse, and when Furse left in 1917 following a disagreement over the organization and employment of VAD nurses, Dakyns was one of a number of senior members who also left. 
Shortly thereafter, in November 1917, Furse was appointed as the first director of the newly re-created Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS) and looked to her former VAD colleagues to form the nucleus of the officer corps. In December Dakyns was appointed one of two assistant directors, working closely with Furse and with her deputy, Edith Crowdy, to draw up the terms and conditions of service for the WRNS. As the service grew, two more assistant directors were appointed and Dakyns assumed the title of assistant director (administration) with particular responsibility for the smooth running of the rapidly expanding service. She held this post until 1919, when the WRNS demobilized. Along with the other officers she was appointed CBE (military) 'for valuable services in connection with the war' ('London Gazette', 9 May 1919), and, in respect of her service with the VAD, made an honorary serving sister of the order of St John of Jerusalem. 
After the war Dakyns became honorary secretary of the University Women's Club and was actively concerned in its running for thirty years. Known as a woman whose firmness of character was overlain by a kind and gentle manner, she was living at Wickham Farmhouse, College Lane, Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, at the time of her death at Cuckfield Hospital, Cuckfield, Sussex, on 22 January 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 63781


Dunbar, Evelyn Mary (1906-1960), painter, was born at 179 Oxford Road, Reading, Berkshire, on 18 December 1906, the daughter of William Dunbar of Moray, a master tailor, and Florence Murgatroyd of Yorkshire. She was educated at Rochester Girls' Grammar School, and first studied art at Rochester School of Art. At the age of twenty-three she won a Kent exhibition (a county scholarship) to study at the Royal College of Art, which she did from 1929 to 1933. One of her studies of that period, 'Flight' (oil and watercolour on paper, 1930) intended for a mural decoration, is now in the Tate collection. Dunbar first came to public notice as one of the outstanding young graduates of the college working on decorations for Brockley county school, south-east London, depicting scenes drawn from Aesop's 'Fables' and other sources, under the direction of Cyril Mahoney, 1933-6. Her composition 'The Country Girl and the Pail of Milk' was especially praised. Following this she embarked on a career as a freelance painter and illustrator. She enjoyed gardening subjects -- the Tate collection includes her 'Winter Garden' (oil on canvas, 'c'.1929-36), a painting in the long horizontal format which she favoured in some other works. A characteristic painting of the late 1930s is 'Rochester from Strood' (oil on canvas, 1938), in which the tower of the castle and the spire of the cathedral are seen from a distance, the foreground being a garden dominated by a humble potting-shed. In 1937 she turned to book illustration, working with Cyril Mahoney on 'Gardener's Choice' and later with Michael Greenhill on 'A Book of Farmcraft' ('c'.1942). 
During the Second World War, Dunbar became an official war artist (1940-45); her 'Convalescent Nurses Making Camouflage Nets' was reproduced in colour in Eric Newton's 'War through Artists' Eyes' (1945). She concentrated mainly, however, on subjects taken from the activities of the Women's Land Army. Typical of her unusual vision is the painting in Manchester City Galleries, 'A 1944 Pastoral: Land Girls Pruning at East Malling' (oil on canvas, 1944). The scene, of the girls climbing trees and moving their triangular ladders about, has a painted surround of compartments depicting disembodied hands using saws, knives, and pruning shears, as well as decorative compositions of fruit. In the same collection is 'Potato Sorting, Berwick' (oil on canvas), an austere frieze-like composition of seven farm workers in a bleak landscape, gathered near the large wheeled piece of equipment used for their task, while in 'Sprout Picking, Monmouthshire' (oil on canvas, also in Manchester City Galleries) the bent figures in it are in a field receding sharply in perspective to a row of greenhouses, above which the trees and hills are surmounted by a glowing cloudy sky. A major work now in the Tate collection is 'A Land Girl with the Bail Bull' (oil on canvas, 1945), another long horizontal picture. On 17 August 1942 Dunbar married, at St Nicholas, Strood, Kent, Roger Roland Westwell Folley ('b'. 1912/13), a flying officer in the RAF and later an agricultural economist at Oxford. She was for many years friendly with the painter Percy Horton, and he invited Dunbar to teach at the Ruskin School of Drawing, which she did for a number of years from 1950. She painted lunette murals at Bletchley Park Training College, Bedfordshire (1958-60), as well as 'The Seasons' at Wye College. She was a member of the Society of Mural Painters and, from 1945, the New English Art Club. She died on 12 May 1960 near her home, Staple Farm, Hastingleigh, East Ashford, Kent. She was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 63790


Hassall, Arthur Hill (1817-1894), physician and microscopist, was born at Teddington, Middlesex, on 13 December 1817, the son of Thomas Hassall (1771-1844), surgeon, and Ann Sherrock (1778x80-1817). After attending school at Richmond, Surrey, he was apprenticed in 1834 to his uncle Sir James Murray, who had a fashionable Dublin medical practice. In 1839 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, in London, and in 1841 he was awarded the diploma of the Society of Apothecaries. Hassall's apprenticeship had included walking the wards of Jervis Street Hospital in Dublin, and the Mercers' Hospital. He had also taken the midwifery diploma in 1837 from Trinity College, Dublin, studied the nearby seashore and the coasts, and won a prize in botany. He presented his 'Catalogue of Irish Zoophytes' to the Dublin Natural History Society on 6 November 1840. Hassall went on in 1848 to graduate MB from University College, London; in 1851 he proceeded MD and became a member of the Royal College of Physicians. 
His return to Richmond, near the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, enabled Hassall to study structural and physiological botany at Kew. Between 1840 and 1845 he published several articles and books on botanical topics, mostly on freshwater algae, though many of the papers suggested a rather haughty concern with claims to priority. His 'History of the British Freshwater Algae' (1845) became something of a controversial classic in the field; most of his research for this work came from the region of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and the specimens he left are now largely in the possession of the Natural History Museum, London. Hassall's studies on fungal rot of fruits and potatoes by experimental inoculation of sound tissues were highly apposite given the subsequent potato famine in Ireland. On 26 May 1846 Hassall married Fanny Augusta, daughter of Alexander Du Corron. 
Hassall came to public attention with his book 'A microscopical examination of the water supplied to the inhabitants of London and the suburban districts' (1850), in which he reported on the state of the water supplied by each of the London water companies. Containing colour illustrations of the organisms found, this work helped to convince people of the revolting nature of having living organisms in their water and drew their attention to the 'carcasses of dead animals, rotting, festering, swarming with flies and maggots' on the banks of the Thames (Hamlin, 115). According to Christopher Hamlin, the book was 'one of the most effective appeals to sensibility in the history of public health', and that one of the most important things it did 'was to make microscopic life a new category of impurity' (ibid., 104). There was, however, a great deal of debate about what the presence of such organisms in the water signified. Hassall found that all waters contained microscopic life but 'was not able to recognise a distinct flora and fauna for each company as he had hoped to' (ibid., 111). He testified before the Board of Health in March or April of 1850 and in parliament Sir Benjamin Hall used Hassall's drawings to attack opponents of water reform. Organisms came to be seen as proof of impurity. 
Over this same period, and despite ill health, Hassall began to study food adulteration. This brought him to the attention of Thomas Wakley, who between 1851 and 1854 published in 'The Lancet' reports by Hassall concerning the virtually universal practice of adulteration. 'The Lancet' reports led in 1855 to a parliamentary select committee (with Hassall as chief scientific witness) and later to the first general preventative (and other) 'Adulteration Acts' (1860), as well as to the presentation on 4 May 1856 from both houses of parliament to Hassall, for public services, of an elegant silver statuette of Angel Ithuriel. Hassall established a reputation as Britain's leading food analyst and was employed as an analytical microscopist by the General Board of Health. 
Hassall also became a physician at the Royal Free Hospital, London, which later named a ward after him. By 1866 he was suffering from severe lung problems. His recovery involved long periods confined to bed at his brother's house in Richmond, at Hastings, and at St Leonards, before he transferred to Ventnor, Isle of Wight, as winter approached. Hassall made his home there until at least mid-1877, though he was still able to undertake professional duties in London at least twice a week. During 1866 he was allotted a civil-list pension of $100 per year for public service. While at Ventnor, Hassall and his assistants continued to investigate food adulteration, using the laboratory he had built there. 
Hassall decided that Ventnor would be an ideal place to establish a hospital for treating lung disease. The first block was completed in 1868 and the Ventnor Hospital inspired moves to establish similar institutions in Vienna and elsewhere. Hassall's concept was so successful that, by 1908, 23,000 or more patients had been treated there. This hospital finally closed on 15 April 1964, the remaining patients being transferred to the Hassall ward in St Mary's Hospital, Newport, Isle of Wight. 
Hassall left Ventnor in 1877 and was presented with a silver service and 300 guineas. Aiming to rest in warmer climes, he spent over a year in Germany and one winter season in Cannes. Italy's ready acceptance of foreign medical qualifications led Hassall finally to settle in San Remo, with occasional stays in London over the summer. Hassall acquired permission to practise in Switzerland and thereafter worked in Lucerne in summer and San Remo in winter; at San Remo he attended Edward Lear. Hassall's time on the continent enabled him to establish a role in pioneering climatic cures for consumption. His 'San Remo and the Western Riviera Climatically and Medically Considered' (1879) was a classic of its kind. Hassall died at his home, Casa Bosso, San Remo, on 9 April 1894 and was buried at All Saints' Church, San Remo. He was survived by his second wife, Alice Margaret, whom he had married some time between 1858 and 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 63794


Harlow, Vincent Todd (1898-1961), historian and constitutional adviser, was born at 17 Alexandra Place, Newcastle, on 14 August 1898, the elder son of Vincent Harlow (1868-1930), a master builder who became a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Esther Agnes, 'nee' Todd ('c'.1871-1957). He went to Durham School, from which he was called up in March 1917. Commissioned in the Royal Field Artillery, he was mentioned in dispatches for service in France. After demobilization in January 1919 he read modern history at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he took a second in 1921, followed by research for the BLitt. He taught at University College, Southampton, from 1923 until returning to Oxford in 1928 as keeper of the new Rhodes House library, for which he devised a subject catalogue unique in the Bodleian Library's dependent libraries of the day. He was Beit lecturer in colonial history, 1930-35, then lecturer in British empire history, 1935-8, and simultaneously director of studies for the Oxford Commonwealth group. He married on 14 August 1924 Margretta Badcock, daughter of Joshua Cory Badcock, gentleman, of Yarm, Yorkshire. They made their home in Old Marston, where Harlow served St Nicholas's Church as churchwarden and lay reader. There were no children of the marriage. 
Succeeding A. P. Newton as Rhodes professor of imperial history at King's College, London, in 1938, Harlow spent the Second World War with the empire division of the Ministry of Information. In 1948 he returned to Oxford as Beit professor of the history of the British empire and a fellow of Balliol College. During the years 1950-51 he was called on to act as a constitutional adviser three times. Along with Margery Perham of Nuffield College he was a member of the Colonial Office's secret smaller territories inquiry, which considered the future of twenty-one small dependencies and concluded that most of them could never be independent. He also proposed a single Ministry for Commonwealth Affairs. He was a member of the British Guiana Constitutional Commission (1950-51), and he advised the Constitutional Amendment Commission for Sudan (1951-2). For both these countries he recommended the safeguard of a second chamber. He was appointed CMG in 1952. 
Harlow's contributions to Commonwealth history came in three distinct phases. First, from his postgraduate and Southampton years, came seven books on the origins of empire in the Caribbean. In this work he frequently drew links with contemporary issues. Thus Barbadian assertions of self-government in the 1650s were compared with later dominion status. Second, he found continuity in imperial development before and after the American War of Independence. In 'The new imperial system, 1783-1815', published in volume 2 of the 'Cambridge History of the British Empire' in 1940, he stressed the experimental nature of British responses to the American secession, especially in Ireland. An offer of equal legislative autonomy under the crown, combined with trade reciprocity, a contribution to imperial defence, and acceptance of imperial control of external affairs (as offered to the Americans in 1778) was put to the Irish in the 1780s. The scheme was never fully implemented, but Ireland had come 'near to being the first Dominion' ('Cambridge History of the British Empire', 2.134). In response to these failures the government sought strong local executives to pursue 'vigorous paternalism' in Canada, India, the Cape, Mauritius, Ceylon, Malta, and the Ionian Islands. The crown colony system became a 'form of tutelage', that could lead 'by ascending gradations to an ultimate self-determination' (ibid., 136, 187). 
Expanding these themes in his two-volume magnum opus 'The Founding of the Second British Empire, 1763-1783' (1952-64), Harlow rejected a chronological break between 'first' and 'second' empires at the American War of Independence. He depicted a 'swing to the East' in imperial aspirations after 1763 as Britain sought new markets in the Far East and the Pacific. The second empire 'was not, in fact, an empire in the normal sense'. The ideal was 'a chain of trading ports, protected at strategic points by naval bases' ('Second British Empire', 1.41). Paradoxically, dreams of trading relations with independent states drew Britain into administering vast new territories. Harlow's 'swing to the East' remains a most suggestive concept. If it has not stood the test of time in detailed studies, Harlow has been seen as a pioneer in the study of 'informal empire' (Robinson, 45). Frederick Madden, a successor as Beit lecturer, regarded this book as 'the most substantial piece of scholarship to appear from Oxford imperial historians in the [twentieth] century' (Madden, 19). 
Third, Harlow was concerned with definition of the subject and advocacy of the Commonwealth. Distinguished visitors addressing the Ralegh Club gave students a 'ringside seat' for viewing Commonwealth evolution and taught Harlow more about the Commonwealth, so he recalled, than any other single source (V. T. Harlow, 'The Historian and British Colonial History', 1951, 4). This interest gained greater focus in his London years with wartime work at the Ministry of Information. Harlow contributed to weekly newsletters on current issues and later produced three popular pamphlets describing the background and purposes of the post-war empire Commonwealth. At a more serious level he sought to define the subject. His inaugural lecture at King's College, London, in March 1939, and his Beit inaugural lecture at Oxford in November 1950, gave him opportunities to present the view that empire provided the ultimate test of a nation's values. Imperialism, he argued, was 'an expression of the dynamic qualities in human nature... It can be the most terrible scourge: contrariwise, it can provide a fruitful field of experiment in the difficult art of inter-racial co-operation' (V. T. Harlow, 'The Character of British Imperialism', 1939, 7). He saw its practice as 'the supreme test of a nation's quality: it is a fearful and searching ordeal' that always carried the seeds of its own destruction (ibid., 35). To study this phenomenon meant investigating 'the projection of a civilization in all its splendour and all its squalor and... the resulting reaction between communities involved a slow but inexorable testing of its moral worth' ('The Historian and British Colonial History', 23). 
At Oxford Harlow revived weekly Commonwealth seminars, where his deeply serious, Christian approach to the subject was evident. He stood five foot seven, and was remembered as an attractive lecturer, but as having a somewhat austere and patronizing manner. Graduates from the dominions who came to gain doctorates were impatient when he delayed letting them upgrade from BLitt enrolment, and some questioned his judgements on the scholarly potential of candidates. In faculty debates he fought hard for his corner, but was sometimes found inconsistent in his viewpoints. He suffered a heart attack on 6 December 1961 at Gloucester Green, Oxford, in his car, 'en route' to the Friday Commonwealth seminar, and was pronounced dead on arrival at the Radcliffe Infirmary. He was survived by his wife, Margretta. 


@@@@@


doc= 63795


Patey, Thomas Walton (1932-1970), mountaineer, was born at the rectory, Ellon, Aberdeenshire, on 20 February 1932, the son of Thomas Maurice Patey, a minister of the Scottish Episcopal church, and his wife, Audrey Amy, 'nee' Walton. He was educated at Ellon Academy, Robert Gordon's College, Aberdeen, and the University of Aberdeen, where he studied medicine. His national service (1954-61) was spent as a surgeon lieutenant at the naval hospital in Gosport, and with the marine commando climbing unit. In 1961 he went into general practice at Ullapool. He married at St Andrew's Cathedral, Aberdeen, on 29 July 1957, Elizabeth Mary (Betty) Davidson ('b'. 1932/3), a shorthand typist, the daughter of William James Davidson, petroleum depot charge-hand. They had three children. 
Patey was taken hill walking by his father, and continued with the Boy Scouts and friends from Gordon's College, where he began to collect 'Munros' (the Scottish peaks of over 3000 feet, listed by Sir Hugh Thomas Munro). His first contact with climbers came at the end of 1949, and he climbed his first major route in Scotland (Douglas-Gibson Gully) at Christmas 1950, shortly after entering university. He began a series of first ascents in the Cairngorms, and other parts of the highlands (many solo), and such was his reputation that he was considered for the Everest expedition of 1953, only to be rejected as too young. Also during the 1950s he initiated the exploration of Chudleigh Rocks in Devon, made some first British ascents in the Alps, several first ascents in Norway, and was a member of the successful Himalayan expeditions to Mustagh Tower in 1956 and Rakaposhi (with the Royal Marines) in 1958. During the 1960s he continued his major series of first ascents in Scotland, and made some important first ascents in the Alps (for example, the west face of the Aiguille du Plan). He was also involved in the well-known BBC television live broadcasts of rock climbs at South Stack in Anglesey (1966) and the Old Man of Hoy in Scotland (1967). The latter is significant since Patey is considered to have initiated sea stack climbing in Scotland, and was sometimes referred to as Dr Stack. 
In addition to his prolific climbing achievements and his work as a physician, Patey was a talented musician and writer; he was often the life and soul of parties, where he played the accordion and sang songs, including comic parodies he had written such as 'Onward, Christian Bonington'. Bonington called him 'the most unpredictable, sheer-fun-to-be-with, richest character I have ever come across in my climbing career and yet at the same time there was a very real depth to him, both in terms of the prolific number of new routes he achieved, and the range and quality of his writing. (Bonington, 11)' And Joe Brown noted, 'It was worth driving all the way up to the Highlands just to socialise with Tom' (Gray, 182-3). 
Apart from his numerous first ascents, Patey's most enduring legacy is his writing, much of it collected in the posthumously published 'One Man's Mountains' (1971). His work has won high praise from writers on the climbing scene: the American David Roberts considered that ''One Man's Mountains' may well be the most entertaining climbing book ever written' (Roberts, 90), while the British writer Jim Perrin described the essence of Patey's writing as 'a delicious and warm-hearted exaggeration of character, the art of comic deflation, a delicate sense of the inherent absurdity in all our actions' (Perrin, 129). 
Tom Patey was awarded a queen's commendation for bravery during a mountain rescue; and was elected president of the elite Alpine Climbing Group in 1969. He died on 25 May 1970 of a fracture of the base of the skull sustained in an abseiling accident following an ascent of The Maiden, a sea stack off Whiten Head on the Sutherland coast. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 63797


Charleson, Ian (1949-1990), actor, was born on 11 August 1949 in the Eastern General Hospital, Leith, near Edinburgh, the son of John Thomson Charleson, a printer, and his wife, Jane Turner Attenburgh. He grew up in one of Edinburgh's working-class tenements but won a scholarship to the Royal High School where he excelled as a singer, becoming the 'star treble' of 'a school choir fine enough to win awards and broadcast quite regularly on the Scottish region of the BBC Home Service' (C. MacDonald, 'Too many records', 'International Record Review', 3/3, June 2002, 96). He then won a further scholarship to Edinburgh University, where he began a degree course in architecture. However, performing with the university's dramatic society, he discovered, in his own words, that he possessed the ability 'to make people laugh and make them cry' ('Daily Telegraph', 9 Jan 1990), and after leaving university in 1970 he moved to the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (LAMDA). 
Although initially Charleson found the change from amateur to professional acting difficult -- 'At college I had been a very flashy, noisy actor, but at LAMDA they told me to lose all of that brashness and do it from the inside' (Morley), he would later recall -- he was taken directly from the academy into Frank Dunlop's Young Vic company in 1972. His roles there included, prophetically, Hamlet in Tom Stoppard's 'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead', as well as a notable Jimmy Porter in John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger'; and in 1975 he played Shakespeare's Hamlet for the first time, for the Cambridge Theatre Company in a production which 'Nobody saw... but [from which] I learned a lot' (ibid.). He made his West End debut later that year, in Simon Gray's 'Otherwise Engaged', and two years later joined the National Theatre Company, playing Octavius in 'Julius Caesar' and Peregrine in Jonson's 'Volpone'. 
In 1978 Charleson moved to the Royal Shakespeare Company, for which his roles ranged from Ariel to the defeated screenwriter Laurence Vail in 'Once in a Lifetime' by George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart, the first of many American roles. He also appeared in the original Other Place production of Pam Gems's 'Piaf', staying with the production when it transferred to the Aldwych and from there to the West End in 1980. In the audience for one of these performances at Wyndham's Theatre were the director Hugh Hudson and producer David Puttnam, in search of an actor to play Eric Liddell in the film 'Chariots of Fire' (1981). 
The role of Liddell -- Scottish missionary and Olympic sprint gold medallist, whose observance of the sabbath threatens to jeopardize his athletic career -- was not written specifically for Charleson but might well have been, and not only because, in his own phlegmatic words, 'There weren't too many young Scots actors who could run really fast' (Morley). His striking combination of beauty and detachment, passion and aloofness perfectly suited the part, and was matched by his imaginative commitment to it -- the sermons Liddell preaches in the film were devised by Charleson himself, using texts he drew from what David Puttnam called 'the most closely annotated copy [of the 'Bible'] I've ever seen' (Shipman and Puttnam). Indeed, Liddell's widow thought these scenes even improved her husband: 'You know', she said: 'Eric's great sadness was that he was a poor preacher -- he had bags of conviction but lacked a way with words. Your Mr. Charleson made it all come right. He said what Eric always wanted to say, and to millions of people all around the world. (ibid.)' Although the film won the award for best picture at the 1981 Oscars, neither Charleson nor his co-star Ben Cross became major stars as a result (indeed, initial reports of Charleson's death in one national newspaper accidentally carried a picture of Cross). One rather similar film role soon followed, as another missionary, the Revd Charlie Andrews, in 'Gandhi'. His performance received great acclaim for what its director, Richard Attenborough, called its 'simple, true and seemingly effortless' acting (de Jongh and Attenborough). 
Television work after 'Chariots of Fire' included leading parts in two of Jonathan Miller's BBC Shakespeare productions (Bertram in 'All's Well that Ends Well' and another Octavius) and Major Archer in an adaptation of J. G. Farrell's 'Troubles', as well as several American miniseries, but Charleson's last eight years were dominated by four major roles -- three of them American -- at the National Theatre. 
In 1982, while the success of 'Chariots of Fire' was still being felt, Charleson was cast as Sky Masterson -- the role associated with Marlon Brando -- in Richard Eyre's revival of 'Guys and Dolls'. His 'deliciously smooth and sexy' performance (Benedict) was distinguished by his 'romantic grace' (de Jongh and Attenborough) and the quality of his light tenor voice, a 'pure and wholly unaffected' instrument, unspoilt since his days as a boy soprano (Eyre), which Eyre had first heard him using at parties. (It is a measure of the affection in which his Sky was held that one of the first benefit performances for the posthumous Ian Charleson Trust was a 'Guys and Dolls' which managed to reassemble virtually all the other members of that first cast, some of whom returned especially from other work abroad.) This production was followed in 1984 by a 'mesmerising' (Benedict) performance of the lead role in Sam Shepard's 'Fool for Love' opposite Julie Walters. 
In 1986 Charleson discovered that he was HIV positive: his initial reaction was to abandon acting entirely, but, with the knowledge a secret to all but his closest friends -- as it remained until after his death -- he returned to the National two years later to play the alcoholic former football star Brick in Howard Davies's production of Tennessee Williams's 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof'. This performance, in which, ironically, he played a man struggling to hide his homosexuality, seemed to many critics to uncover a new 'weight and depth' (Eyre) in Charleson's work. In the words of one he 'plumbed the painful depths of a role which can seem passive and pallid in lesser hands' (Wolf). At this time Charleson discussed with Eyre the roles he was most keen to move on to. The list was exclusively Shakespearian: Richard II, Angelo, Benedick, Hamlet. It expanded by the time of his death to encompass even Lear, but, in the event, only one of these proved possible. 
After Daniel Day-Lewis's sudden withdrawal from the title role of Eyre's Olivier production of 'Hamlet', Charleson, with the memory of Brick still fresh, was the obvious replacement. Indeed, his considerably greater stage experience -- including that Cambridge 'Hamlet' nearly fifteen years before -- would have made him a more natural choice to open the production, had he not been suffering from the effects of AIDS-related illnesses and therapies. He was still ill, of course, when he took over the role: performance photos show a face made puffy by heavily swollen sinuses, while the rehearsals were interspersed with painful acupuncture and chemotherapy. The sinus complaint, and the operation which preceded it, were used by the theatre as an explanation for Charleson's appearance and his evident fatigue; but it seems to have been clear to many witnesses that his Hamlet drew much of its power from his illness and his expectation of death. Although, as John Peter observed, writing of a November performance, not long before Charleson was forced to retire, this 'brilliant exercise in mature judgment' was marked by 'restless, inquisitive... intelligence' (J. Peter, 'Sunday Times', 12 Nov 1989), it was also that of an actor whose own suffering had merged with that of his character. By the final performance, watched by many who knew that it would be his last, 'he wasn't playing the part, he became it... He stood at the curtain call like an exhausted boxer, battered by applause' (Eyre). His inability to perform thereafter seems to have hastened his end, and he died in his west London home less than eight weeks after that last curtain call, on 6 January 1990 at the age of forty. 
Any assessment of Charleson's work must be written in the knowledge that much of the best of it was surely still to come: by general consent, his last two performances, as Brick and Hamlet, achieved a depth missing from his earlier work. But these were also his only major roles after the diagnosis of HIV, so this gravity perhaps went hand in hand with the illness. Although this development was possible, then, it is his earlier work which supplies a more representative picture. In these roles he showed himself to be an actor with a great natural range: one who displayed immense charm, grace, and lightness in musicals and comedies, but who could find a fierce, sardonic passion in his more serious work, all of which stemmed, in Richard Attenborough's words, from a 'latent emotion he could express with the utmost grace and taste' (de Jongh and Attenborough). 


@@@@@


doc= 63799


Cruickshank, Andrew John Maxton (1907-1988), actor, was born on 25 December 1907 at 1A Castlehill, Aberdeen, the son of Andrew Cruickshank, a hall porter, and his wife, Ann Morrison Cadger, a stocking knitter. Cruickshank was educated at Aberdeen grammar school, which he left with the intention of becoming a civil engineer. He had been drawn to the theatre, however, and, having found his way into provincial repertory, spent eighteen months there before his London debut in 1930, when he had a non-speaking part in the Paul Robeson 'Othello'. Thereafter he built a career which encompassed both classical drama and less demanding West End fare. He performed in both Britain and America, notably in 'Lysistrata' in 1936 at the Gate in London, and in a Shakespearian season at the Old Vic from 1937 to 1940, where he played a range of parts including Banquo to Laurence Olivier's Macbeth. He was one of the cast that performed John Gielgud's 'Hamlet' at Elsinore in Denmark. After a first marriage to Stella Bickerton in 1934, which ended tragically the same year when she died of meningitis while pregnant, on 12 August 1939 Cruickshank married another actress, (Martha) Curigwen Lewis. They had one son and two daughters; one daughter, Marty, followed her father into the acting profession. 
During the Second World War Cruickshank served in the Royal Welch Fusiliers, rising to the rank of major. He was appointed MBE in 1945. After the war he played Wolsey, Kent, and Julius Caesar at Stratford in 1950. In London he appeared in a variety of plays including Frederick Knott's 'Dial M for Murder' (1952), Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. Lee's 'Inherit the Wind' (1960), Felicity Douglas and Henry Cecil's 'Alibi for a Judge' (1965), and William Douglas-Home's 'Lloyd George Knew my Father' (1973). He straddled with ease the two worlds of commercial theatre and art theatre: as far as the latter was concerned, he had a particular affinity for Ibsen, and performed with distinction in several of his major works, including 'The Master Builder' (1963), 'When We Dead Awaken' (1975), and 'The Wild Duck' (1980). Cruickshank continued to move happily from one sphere to the other until the end of his career: he was at the National Theatre from 1978 to 1980, appeared in a revival of Sir David Lindsay's (or Lyndsay's) 'The Thrie Estatis', at the Edinburgh Festival in 1984, and in 1987 he was in the West End production of Jeffrey Archer's 'Beyond Reasonable Doubt'. Cruickshank was taken ill during the run of this play and died of bronchopneumonia and heart failure on 29 April 1988 in Westminster Hospital, London. 
Andrew Cruickshank learned his trade in the English theatre, but observers of his performances were rarely in any doubt as to his Scottishness, which manifested itself in mannerisms, and in the inflections of his voice, which owed not a little to the pulpit. Cruickshank himself commented 'There is a greater toughness in Scottish acting than I could find in my English colleagues' (Cruickshank, 101). However by the time he came to prominence with television audiences, he had acquired a genial, if crusty, benignity that belied a darker side of his professional persona. That could be seen in several of his stage performances, particularly in his Ibsen roles. 'Dr Finlay's Casebook' (1962-71), a BBC television series based on stories by A. J. Cronin, teamed Cruickshank as the older and wiser Dr Cameron with the enthusiastic but much brasher Dr Finlay (Bill Simpson). Together, with the help of their housekeeper, Janet (Barbara Mullen), they ministered to the medical -- and often non-medical -- needs of a pre-Second World War Scottish small town. In the course of over 150 episodes, Cruickshank was able to offer the most sustained Scottish characterization of his career. It was one which generated an enormous surge of popular affection both in Scotland and beyond. The series was later reprised on radio with the same cast, but to much less effect. 
Cruickshank wrote a number of books on philosophical and religious matters, which he felt deserved rather more serious attention than they were given. At the height of his fame as Dr Cameron he appeared on a number of occasions on the airwaves discussing the work of the Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard. His autobiography, published posthumously, alternates constantly between accounts of his professional activities, and meditations driven by a desire to apprehend 'the harmony of all things' (Cruickshank, 77). Although latterly he described himself as a 'protestant Anglican', in religion -- and in politics -- Cruickshank was an individualist and a freethinker rather than an orthodox believer. 


@@@@@


doc= 63800


Marjorie Elizabeth Jane Chandler (1897-1983), palaeobotanist, was born on 18 May 1897 in Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, the oldest of six children of Frederick Augustus Chandler, jeweller, and his wife, Alice Sarah Roberts. She attended a dame-school in Leamington Spa and then, from Leamington high school, she went by scholarship to Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1915, qualifying first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1919. (She received her MA in 1948.) 


@@@@@


doc= 63803


Ballard, Philip Boswood (1865-1950), educationist, was born on 13 February 1865 at Ty Gwyn, Maesteg, Glamorgan, the second of four children of Evan Ballard, grocer, draper, and later manager of a tinplate works, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Philip Cook, a local doctor. Between the ages of five and seventeen, he attended the local British elementary school in Castle Street, Maesteg, under the tutelage of T. L. Roberts, who enjoyed a reputation for being the best schoolmaster in the area. He exerted a major influence upon Ballard's early education. For five years, Ballard was apprenticed to Roberts as a pupil teacher, obtaining a first-class position in the 1883 queen's scholarship examination. In 1884, Ballard entered Borough Road Training College, London, where after two years he was awarded his teacher's certificate, also in the first-class division. In later life, he took an active interest in his old college, meeting regularly for 'Old Bs' reunions and serving as chairman of the college committee. 
In 1886 Ballard entered the service of the London school board as an assistant master at Settles Street Boys' School in the East End, where he remained for eight years. Teaching in crowded conditions, with classes of upwards of seventy-five boys, all of whom came from poor homes, was a challenging task for a young teacher. Yet he attributed his subsequent career success to the experience of these formative teaching years. In 1888 he enrolled for a part-time degree course at the University of London and, devoting all of his spare time to study, was awarded a first-class BA in 1891. In 1894, his teaching career took a new turn as he became involved with specialized instruction of pupil teachers and was promoted to an assistantship at the Chelsea Pupil Teacher Centre. With five years' experience of working with London pupil teachers behind him, he returned to south Wales as principal of the Tondu Pupil Teacher Centre in Glamorgan, meanwhile studying for his London MA, which he was awarded in 1903. He gained the Carpenter gold medal for mental and moral science. 
In 1904 Ballard was appointed as an inspector of elementary schools under Glamorgan county council, but he left south Wales for good in 1906 to begin his long career as an inspector of schools with London county council (LCC). He married, on 27 March 1907, Florence Lucy Stone ('b'. 1880/81), a schoolmistress, daughter of Thomas Stone, a clerk. On 3 March 1915, then a widower, he married his second wife, Freda Mary ('b'. 1886/7), daughter of Frederick William Bartlett, an architect. They had one child -- a daughter named Mary Bronwen. 
Through his work as district inspector of London's elementary schools, Ballard became interested in educational psychology. Along with W. H. Winch, a fellow inspector of the LCC, and other key figures such as Charles Spearman, John Adams, Thomas Percy Nunn, and Cyril Burt, he was one of the leading pioneers of modern educational psychology in the British education system. On the basis of his ground-breaking work, published in 1913 as 'Obliviscence and Reminiscence', he was awarded an honorary doctorate by London University. He was inspired by Burt's meritocratic and progressive vision of educational opportunity suited to the intellectual needs of all children, and was responsible for popularizing much of Burt's work on mental testing and for introducing psychology to the LCC education department. He was a founder member of the British Psychological Society and a lifelong member of the editorial board of its journal the 'British Journal of Educational Psychology'. He was also president of the Child Study Society and took a keen interest in the work of the Child Guidance Council. During the 1930s, working closely with Burt and Spearman, he was a member of the International Institute examinations inquiry which sought to publicize and promote a more scientific and objective approach to public examinations. He lectured widely on mental testing at various prestigious institutions including the London School of Economics, University College, and the London Institute of Education and became well known for his witty and inspiring style. 
Ballard's writing for teachers on the subject of testing included a number of successful books of which 'Mental Tests' (1920), 'Group Tests of Intelligence' (1922), 'The New Examiner' (1923), and 'The Changing School' (1925) were the best-known. They demonstrated his passionate commitment to assisting the practical needs of serving teachers in schools. He firmly believed in the professional right of classroom teachers to advance the knowledge and practice of education and was keen to break down barriers between the academic and the practical in educational psychology. 
Ballard's final career promotion, in 1928, was to a divisional inspectorship. He retired from the LCC on 30 April 1930, aged sixty-five. An official LCC report paid tribute to his work: 'Few men have had a more important or a more beneficial influence upon the teaching profession, and few inspectors have brought a more cultivated mind or more happy gifts of temperament to their official duties' (Hughes, 164). Throughout his retirement he continued to keep abreast of educational changes, writing books and making frequent topical contributions to the 'Times Educational Supplement'. He had a remarkable capacity for hard work but was above all remembered for his generous and friendly counsel to teachers, his genial personality, and his good sense of humour. Ballard died at his home, Hazel Cottage, Chute, Pewsey, Wiltshire, on 1 November 1950. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 63804


Brockington, Sir William Allport (1871-1959), educational administrator, was born at 62 Constitution Hill, Birmingham, on 18 June 1871, the son of Thomas Alfred Brockington (died in or before 1898), a gold beater, and his wife, Fanny Allport. Educated at King Edward VI Grammar School, Birmingham, and Mason College, he graduated BA as a London University external candidate with first-class honours in English in 1890, taking an MA in 1893. 
After spending the next seven years lecturing at Mason College, Brockington went as principal to the Victoria Institute, Worcester, in 1898, marrying Jessie Mac Geoch (1869/70-1951), daughter of Alexander Mac Geoch, a draper, on 23 August in the same year. In 1903 he was appointed director of education for Leicestershire county council where he stayed for the next forty-four years, becoming, in the process, one of the most distinguished county education officers of the first half of the twentieth century. 
Brockington's first task when the new local education authority (LEA), created by the 1902 'Education Act', came into being on 1 July 1903 was to centralize the education administration previously undertaken by numerous school boards. Accordingly, by 1915, this had been concentrated in the county education offices with a staff of thirty-eight of whom Brockington was to remain both the only graduate and the only former teacher until his retirement. He next addressed the problem of numerous, small, voluntary church elementary schools inherited by the new authority, replacing them with council schools whenever possible. Nevertheless, in 1915, there were still 189 church schools and only 74 council schools in the county. 
In 1917, however, the wartime shortage of teachers gave Brockington the opportunity to begin the restructuring of the county's elementary schools. Showing remarkable diplomacy, he convinced the managers of the church school in the village of Enderby of the wisdom of admitting all the children over eleven, while the council school admitted the juniors, anticipating by a decade the kind of reorganization advocated by the Hadow report of 1926. This policy of 'beheading' schools, despite considerable opposition, was vigorously pursued in the inter-war period, in the process of which the county became a pioneer of what later became the secondary modern school. 
A plethora of small, uneconomic grammar schools provided a third problem, prompting Brockington to compensate for the authority's lack of Edward VI foundations by creating Edward VII schools at Coalville, Melton Mowbray, and Market Harborough under LEA control. Moreover, suspecting that those children whose families could not pay fees were a source of hitherto untapped ability, he introduced in 1919 a general secondary schools selection examination, taken by all children at eleven, which revealed the need for many more scholarships. Accordingly, despite adverse economic conditions, he managed to keep the number of scholarships fluctuating between 300 and 400 until fees were abolished in 1944. The resultant expansion in the secondary school population, meanwhile, drew all the grammar schools, except the two at Loughborough which remained independent, into the control of the LEA. 
In 1914, aged forty-three, Brockington was rejected for military service, serving instead in the Territorial Army, which was fortunate because it enabled him to play a crucial role in launching a most remarkable educational development. In 1915 Herbert Schofield's appointment as principal of Loughborough Technical Institute, established largely on Brockington's initiative in 1909, coincided with an urgent demand for munitions. Seizing their opportunity, Brockington, Schofield, and Alderman Bumpus, chairman of the governors, by personally guaranteeing $1000, secured the establishment of an 'instructional factory' in which the Ministry of Munitions invested buildings and machinery worth $150,000, all of which were transferred to the LEA at the end of the war. Thus began the principle of 'training on production' which quickly gave Loughborough a national and later an international reputation and the distinction of being the prototype of the colleges of advanced technology designated in 1955. 
In 1924 Sir Robert Martin became chairman of both the county council and the education committee, forming, with Schofield and Brockington, a powerful triumvirate intent on expanding the Loughborough concept. Accordingly in 1930 the teacher training college for physical education, art, and craft was added to the embryo campus. By the time Brockington retired in 1947 the constituent components of what was later to become the University of Loughborough were all flourishing. 
Brockington, meanwhile, had become a national figure. Serving on the Burnham committee on teachers' salaries from 1919 to 1944, he was a member of the consultative committee to the Board of Education from 1926 until 1944, participating in the production of two Hadow reports, 'The Primary School' (1931) and 'Infant and Nursery Schools' (1933), and the Spens report, 'Secondary Education' (1938), of which he drafted the chapter on administrative problems. He also served on the Secondary Schools Examination Council which produced the Norwood report of 1943. Appointed OBE in 1917, he was made a CBE in 1928, but although he was sixty-five in 1936 his continuing vigour and non-pensionable post left retirement out of the question. Consequently, having previously served as president of the Association of Directors and Secretaries for Education, he was still able to hold the office of honorary secretary of the authorities' panels from 1944 until 1947. 
A most humane and approachable individual, Brockington regarded administrative minutiae with disdain. A stickler for economy, he was his own inspector-cum-adviser. As a result it was the local HM inspector, S. C. Mason, who fed into the office much of the information needed for the development plan established by the county following the 1944 'Education Act', and duly succeeded him as director in 1947. Brockington, who was knighted in 1946, died at 3 Owls Road, Boscombe, Bournemouth, on 14 February 1959, his successor having just inaugurated the 'Leicestershire plan' of comprehensive education, the foundation for which Brockington had laid. 


@@@@@


doc= 63805


Cook, Henry Caldwell (1886-1939), schoolteacher and educationist, was born on 20 May 1886 at 1 The Elms, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, the fourth son of William Cook, merchant, and his wife, Jessie Euphrasia (formerly Caldwell). His father had considerable business interests in Argentina, and following the family's move to London Cook was educated at a preparatory school in St John's Wood, then as a boarder at Highgate School before entering Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1905. He took second-class honours in English language and literature in 1909, followed by the Oxford diploma in education, with distinction, in 1911. That year he approached Dr W. H. D. Rouse, headmaster of the Perse School, Cambridge, for employment (without salary), as the school's innovative methods interested him. There he remained as a form master and teacher of English for the whole of his teaching career. From 1915 he saw active service in the Artists' Rifles in France, and Rouse later noted that the war left its mark on him (Beacock, 'Play Way English', v). 
In his early years at the Perse School, Cook encouraged boys in acting, public speaking, and writing their own plays. These were published as the 'Perse playbooks' (nos. 1-5, 1912-15; no. 6, 1921). His teaching methods attracted national attention at a time when similar innovations entailing spontaneous creative work by pupils and a renunciation of the teacher's traditional authoritarianism were being promoted by a number of prominent educationists. Largely at his own expense he established the 'Mummery', a permanent theatrical space in the school, and his curriculum centred on creative performance of Shakespeare. In 1917 he published 'The Play Way, an Essay in Educational Method', widely read and reprinted many times, in which he gave colourful descriptions, embellished by drawings and photographs, of his young secondary-school pupils indulging their imaginations, making plays, writing ballads, and lecturing on their interests and hobbies. Its challenge to traditional formality was sharpened by disillusionment with world war on his own part and on the part of many of his readers. Its title, much misunderstood, became mistakenly synonymous with progressive education in general. The distinctive and sometimes idiosyncratic details of his approach were principally applied, however, in the teaching of English language and literature, and it is in this area of the curriculum that his writings have had long-lasting impact. 
Broadly, Cook's educational principles were that effective learning comes not from reading and listening but from action and experience, and that good work is more often the result of spontaneous effort and free interest than of compulsion. Play was observed to be the natural means of study for children: 'By Play I mean the 'doing' of anything one 'knows' with one's heart in it' ('Play Way', 17). He hoped to persuade his pupils that their education was a journey of their choice, on which they travelled at their own pace. Only by their own efforts could they attain that perfection of inherent ability which is the true end of education. His belief in the value for civilization of artistic practice was influential and corresponded with the ideas of other contemporary innovators. His emphasis on play and creativity may be related to earlier psychological investigations by Karl Groos and G. Stanley Hall, and to artist educators such as Franz Cizek and Emil Jacques-Dalcroze, who recognized the seriousness of children's creative activity and the quality of their art. He encouraged folk-dancing at school, with the support of his friend Cecil Sharp. His engagement in open-air activities such as swimming, camping, and scouting was shared by other innovative colleagues at the Perse School. 
Following the publication of 'The Play Way' Cook's work was celebrated and the school was much visited. Notable pupils were Humphrey Jennings, Spike Hughes, F. R. Leavis, and Marius Goring. Jennings and Hughes each published several poems in 'Perse Playbook' no. 6 (1921), and both Hughes and Goring publicly recorded their debt to Cook. His teaching methods were resurrected at the Perse School from 1941, to the influence of which the director Sir Peter Hall testified, and the school was prominent in the revival of education through drama in the 1960s. 
Cook was remembered as immensely tall, always clad in a Norfolk jacket and light-coloured knickerbockers, made of home spun. Their clean and wholesome smell was lightened with a whiff of scent, quite in keeping with the fastidious neatness of his wavy greying hair. One former pupil thought that he 'might have been drawn by Aubrey Beardsley'. Some saw him 'impeccably dressed and civilized in speech and behaviour, as the epitome of the gentleman we aspired to become', though others reacted more negatively to 'his mode of dress and rather precious manner' (Perse School Archive MSS). He remained a bachelor, always quiet, retiring, and somewhat hard to know. The evidently homosexual aspects of his personality have been considered only by later commentators, and must be understood in the context of public school life and contemporary cults of sensibility. During his career at the Perse he had rooms in the house of a teacher colleague, R. B. Appleton, and they lie in adjacent unmarked graves. After Rouse's retirement a new regime at the school was hostile to Cook's methods. Consequent stress led in 1931 to a nervous breakdown, and in 1933 he retired. He lived an increasingly reclusive life in Cambridge, where he died at the Devonshire Nursing Home, 97 Tenison Road, of pneumonia, heart failure, and acute alcohol poisoning on 21 May 1939. He was buried on 24 May in the borough cemetery, Newmarket Road, Cambridge. The contribution of alcohol to his death was disputed by Rouse, who insisted that he had died of a broken heart (Mitchell, 166). 


@@@@@


doc= 63806


Eichholz, Alfred (1869-1933), medical inspector of schools, was born at 196 Wilmslow Road, Fallowfield, Manchester, on 26 November 1869, the son of Adolph Eichholz, cotton merchant, formerly of Hildesheim and Hanover, and his wife, Babet Praeger of Amsterdam. He was educated at Manchester grammar school and at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he gained first-class honours in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1891, 1892). 
After graduating Eichholz published two papers on the palate process of the maxilla and the morphology of the limb arteries in the 'Journal of Anatomy and Physiology' in 1892 and 1893 respectively. In 1893 he was elected to a fellowship at Emmanuel, becoming one of the first Jews to hold a fellowship at a Cambridge college. He married on 26 June 1895 Ruth Adler, the younger daughter of Hermann Adler (1839-1911), the chief rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the British Empire, and they were to have three sons. In 1894 the 'Jewish Chronicle' commented that his engagement to the chief rabbi's daughter 'evidences anew the growing importance attached in Jewish circles in England -- as it has long been abroad -- to professional as distinct from commercial distinction' ('Jewish Chronicle', 5 Oct 1894, 6). After a period as a medical student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, he graduated MB BCh at Cambridge in 1895 and was an additional demonstrator in the department of physiology at Cambridge. He declined to pursue an academic career and, gaining his Cambridge MD degree in 1898, he took up a post as one of her majesty's inspectors of schools in the same year. 
Eichholz had a particular interest in the impact of economic and social conditions on the health of children, and in the effect of health on educational performance. In 1902 he compiled a brief report for the Board of Education on the education of 'feeble-minded' children in Germany ('Report of the congress on the education of feeble-minded children', 'Special Reports on Educational Subjects', vol. 9, 'Parl. papers', 1902, 27, Cd 836), and in 1903 he wrote a report on the physical condition of children attending the Johanna Street board school in Lambeth in south London ('Note on physical condition of London children in poorer districts', TNA: PRO, PC8/584). This report played a major role in the discussions which preceded the establishment of the interdepartmental committee on physical deterioration, and Eichholz's evidence to the committee exercised a decisive influence on its final recommendations. When the committee was first appointed it was widely believed that the unhealthy effects of town life were leading to a 'hereditary deterioration' in the health of the working-class population. Eichholz's evidence helped to persuade the committee that 'while there are, unfortunately, very abundant signs of physical defect traceable to neglect, poverty and ignorance', there was no evidence to show that these possessed any marked hereditary effect, and so 'there is every reason to anticipate rapid amelioration of physique so soon as improvement occurs in external conditions' ('Report of the interdepartmental committee on physical deterioration', 'Parl. papers', 1904, 32, para. 69). Among the many recommendations of the physical deterioration committee, one of the most important concerned the imposition of 'a systematised medical inspection of schoolchildren... as a public duty on every school authority' (ibid., para. 423, section 41), and in 1907 parliament passed the 'Education (Administrative Provisions) Act', which instructed every local education authority to make arrangements for the medical inspection of elementary schoolchildren, and gave them the power to make arrangements for medical treatment. 
In view of his experience of working in schools, Eichholz might have been expected to become the board's first chief medical officer, but the government was anxious to ensure the closest possible co-ordination between the school medical service and the existing public health service, and the new post was offered to Dr George Newman, the medical officer of health for Finsbury. Eichholz was appointed with Newman, and these two, together with Dr Ralph Crowley (1869-1953) and Dr Janet Campbell (1877-1954), were largely responsible for the development of the school medical service before the First World War. During the war Eichholz also carried out a major survey of the health conditions of munitions workers, for which he was made CBE in January 1919. Later in the same year, when Newman became chief medical officer of the Ministry of Health as well as of the Board of Education, Eichholz was promoted to the post of chief medical inspector, a post which he continued to hold until his retirement in 1930. 
In retirement Eichholz wrote a major report on the problems faced by deaf people in England and Wales ('A Study of the Deaf in England and Wales, 1930 to 1932', 1933). He urged local education authorities to improve their arrangements for the early detection of hearing problems, and highlighted the importance of vocational training in giving deaf people the skills needed to maintain financial independence. He also called on the government to improve the provision of secondary education for deaf and deaf mute people, pointing out that 'there is, at present, no body of highly-educated deaf persons in the country such as would be able to voice the cause of the deaf and dumb with adequate effect from within' (p. 177). His report was granted the unusual distinction of being published under his own name, and was cited approvingly in two Board of Education circulars (nos. 1337 and 1337a) published in the following year. 
Eichholz was heavily involved in educational and philanthropic work in the Jewish community. His wife, Ruth, had been actively engaged in social work in the East End of London before their marriage, and she went on to become a prominent social worker in her own right. Eichholz himself became president of the East End Social Club for Jewish Deaf and Dumb in 1912, before becoming vice-president of the Jewish Health Organisation of Great Britain and chairman of the New West End Synagogue League of Social Service. Shortly after Eichholz's death, the chief rabbi, Dr J. H. Hertz, wrote that 'aside from his eminent educational labours in the service of the state, it is Jewish religious education that commanded his utmost devotion' ('Jewish Chronicle', 10 Feb 1933, 12). Eichholz was chairman of the Central Committee for Jewish Education, president of the Union of Hebrew and Religion Classes, and a vice-president of the Jewish Religious Education Board. He was actively involved in local religious activities, including the Hampstead and West Ham religion classes and the West Ham Talmud Torah, and he was a past president of the Palestine Society and a member of the Maccabeans. He was also a founder member of the National Special Schools Union. 
Eichholz died at his home, 26 North End House, Fitzjames Avenue, North End Road, London, on 6 February 1933, and was buried on 8 February at Willesden cemetery. He was survived by his wife. In March 1933 the national institutes of the blind and the deaf, the Scottish Association for the Deaf, and the Advisory Committee on the Welfare of the Blind launched a national appeal to raise funds in his memory. He was also commemorated by the establishment of the Alfred Eichholz Memorial Clinic and Institute of Massage and Physiotherapy in July 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 63807


Gittins, Charles Edward (1908-1970), educational administrator, was born on 24 January 1908 at Rhostyllen, Esclusham, Wrexham, Denbighshire, the son of Charles Thomas Gittins, a colliery engine fitter, and his wife, Susannah Frances Rabbitt. He was educated initially at Bersham boys' council school and Grove Park county school, Wrexham. His undergraduate years (1925-8) were spent at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, where he graduated in 1928 with a first-class honours degree in history. The following year he obtained his teaching diploma and took up a postgraduate research studentship from 1929 to 1931 in the same college. He was awarded his MA degree in 1934, his subject being education in the early years of the French Revolution. Proud of his debating prowess, he became president of debates as well as treasurer and president of the students' union. His future wife, Margaret Anne Davies, also born in 1908, was a fellow student who became a teacher. They married on 28 December 1934 and had two children, John ('b'. 1938) and Margaret ('b'. 1942). 
From 1931 to 1938 Gittins was senior history master at St James Grammar School, Bishop Auckland, co. Durham, where his headmaster regarded him as an outstanding teacher. He was also deputy headmaster from 1937 to 1938. He combined his teaching career with lecturing for the Workers' Educational Association (1932-5) and the extramural department of Durham University (1935-8). 
In 1938 Gittins was appointed assistant education officer in the Durham county education authority, where he headed an investigation particularly pertinent to the period -- the relationship between intelligence and undernourishment. In 1942 he was appointed administrative assistant to the county education committee of the West Riding of Yorkshire, where he was responsible for school meals, emergency feeding centres, nursery education, and post-war development schemes. A. L. Binns, the education officer, whose word mattered, counted him among the best ever administrative assistants in his department. 
In 1944 Gittins was appointed to the post of director of education in Monmouthshire, where he was responsible for primary and secondary education as it evolved after the major education legislation of that year. Following R. A. Butler's 'Education Act' each county was required to submit a development plan for the reorganization of school education from a parallel system of elementary and secondary schools to a sequential system of primary, secondary, and further education. The system which emerged under Gittins's direction followed the standard bipartite pattern of grammar and secondary modern schools. He served on the usual variety of outside committees, including the Burnham Technical Committee (1946-53), the Schools' Broadcasting Council (Wales) from 1947, the Welsh committee of the Arts Council (1947-55), and, most important, the Central Advisory Council for Education (Wales) from 1956. He supported the founding of the National Youth Orchestra of Wales and a village college movement in Monmouthshire. 
In 1956 Gittins was appointed professor, head of the department, and dean of the faculty of education at the University College of Swansea. As head of department he presided over the expansion of both postgraduate teacher training and in-service courses. He inaugurated diploma courses in educational psychology, special needs, and counselling, areas in which the Swansea department acquired a national reputation. Though he published little himself, he fostered research, and from the early 1960s his department's work on compensatory education acquired international significance. The department's work in identifying the effect on pupils' educational progress of material, social, and emotional disadvantage gained an international reputation. In the same period faculties of education -- university departments, training colleges, and local schools -- were developing an important role under the aegis of the four Welsh university colleges. Gittins stimulated a comprehensive programme of courses for teachers, including the new master of education degree, and secured the use of a dedicated college building for faculty use. He was a highly effective head of department. His spare, grey-haired, medium-height figure exuded charm and dignity of manner, and inspired respect among colleagues and students. His conduct of committees was crisp and efficient. His colleagues remembered his integrity and courtesy, administrative abilities, and loyalty to them. He was also active in the local community and in the city of Swansea. Brought up a Methodist, he later attended Anglican worship and served as churchwarden in Bishopston, Swansea. In 1964 he was chairman of the arts and crafts committee of the national eisteddfod in Swansea. 
Although Gittins had been a member of the Local Government Boundary Commission for Wales in 1958, his most notable committee work was as chairman of the Central Advisory Council for Education (Wales) from 1964 to 1967. In one of the more significant post-war acknowledgements of a distinctive Welsh education, the Welsh committee was required by Sir Edward Boyle to produce a general report on primary education and the transition to secondary schooling which exactly paralleled that of Lady Plowden's Central Advisory Council for Education (England). Gittins served as the crucial link, as a member of the English committee and chairman of the Welsh. Just as the 'Plowden report' is one of the landmarks in primary education in England in the post-war period, so is the 'Gittins report', published in 1967, of central importance in the history of Welsh education, as much for what it symbolized as for what it advocated. 'Primary Education in Wales' ran to 646 pages and echoed the progressive, child-centred approach of the English committee. Gittins recommended the reorganization of primary education in Wales, with part-time nursery provision from age three, infant schools from five to eight (to be renamed first schools), middle schools from eight to twelve plus, then transfer to the secondary school. There were enlightened recommendations to ease the transition from primary to secondary schools, and a firm recommendation that the class should not form the essential teaching group but be broken down into flexible groupings to meet differing needs, with no streaming. The fixed timetable in junior schools was to be replaced by programmes of work which broke down traditional subject barriers. There was considerable controversy within the committee and in Wales over recommendations to make religious education and corporate worship non-statutory. The report was prescient in recommending ubiquitous teaching of Welsh with the aim of making pupils bilingual by the end of the primary stage. In 1968 Gittins was made CBE for his services to education. 
The final phase in Gittins's career came with his appointment as vice-principal of University College, Swansea, in 1967, in which his abilities as an administrator were particularly evident. From 1967 to 1968 he combined this work with the headship of the department of education. Then the mounting problems of universities, both financially after the dramatic expansion of the previous decade, and in relations with students, decreed that he devote himself full-time, deanship of the faculty of education apart, to his duties as vice-principal. In years of unprecedented campus militancy, he was left to take the main responsibility at Swansea for fraught negotiations with students. 
Gittins was anxious to become permanent vice-principal, though this involved a break with tradition. Despite prevarication by the principal, the appointment was agreed in the summer of 1970. Shortly afterwards one of his university colleagues suggested a boating trip. It turned to tragedy. In Oxwich Bay, off the Gower peninsula, the boat capsized. Gittins died of heart failure, due to the shock of immersion in the sea, on 6 August 1970 at Singleton Hospital, Swansea. He was cremated and his ashes scattered in the grounds of Bishopston parish church, Swansea. A memorial volume of essays was published in 1972, and a regular lecture in his memory was instituted at the University of Wales, Swansea. 


@@@@@


doc= 63808


Green, John Alfred (1867-1922), educationist, was born on 15 October 1867 in Langset Road, Nether Hallam, near Sheffield, one of the three sons of Walter Green, a grocer and provision dealer, and his wife, Sarah Jane Wild. He attended the elementary school near his home in Parson Cross and then Burton Street council school, where he became a pupil teacher; he went to evening classes at Firth College in Sheffield from 1882 until 1886. He gained further experience at the Borough Road Training College, was appointed a junior tutor there, and was awarded his BA degree in London. 
In 1894 Green was appointed lecturer in education at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, and in 1900 he became professor. He was responsible for the day training department of the college, and helped to promote the training of secondary teachers and also that of kindergarten teachers. Outside Bangor he was involved in several educational organizations, including the British Association, and he studied the educational institutions of several continental countries, including Germany. He married Adeliza Norman Johnston, a colleague in the department and the daughter of a Manchester councillor; they had five sons and one daughter. 
In 1906 Green returned to his native Sheffield as professor of education at the newly constituted university with an annual salary of $550. He was responsible for the training of secondary teachers and for instruction in advanced psychology and education, and took charge of the newly created department of education. He was awarded the MA degree by the university in 1908. Active in the administration of the new university, he served as dean of the faculty of arts from 1916 to 1919, and was prominent in helping to develop a close relationship between the university and its local community. Some regarded his best work as being in connection with the Sheffield Workers' Educational Association, in which he was a leading figure. In his public roles he was an engaging and direct speaker. From 1917 he was also a member of the Sheffield education committee, where he quickly gained a controversial reputation for his outspoken views as a champion of the principle of free secondary education for all. His other involvements included work with the Froebel Society, the Handwork Association, the Teachers' Registration Council, and the Training College Association. He was regarded as a moderate Liberal in his politics; he was not identified with any religious denomination. 
Green's early research was in educational theory and history, especially the ideas of the continental educational reformer J. H. Pestalozzi. His interests turned increasingly to the new developments in educational psychology on the continent after the turn of the century. He became a prominent member of the British Psychological Society and was editor of the 'Journal of Experimental Pedagogy' for many years. He was one of the earliest supporters in Britain of the Binet-Simon scheme of psychological tests. His published work included a number of books on Pestalozzi, notably 'The Educational Ideas of Pestalozzi' (1907), an edited collection 'Pestalozzi's Educational Writings' (1912), and a 'Life and Work of Pestalozzi' (1913); he also wrote on psychology and teaching practice ('An Introduction to Psychology: More Especially for Teachers', with T. Loveday, 1912, and 'A Primer of Teaching Practice', with C. Birchenough, 1914). He was an outstanding teacher with a wide range of audiences and interests, and a strong administrator who helped to establish the study of education at the university level. He was a prominent figure in educational debates at the time of his sudden and early death, from appendicitis, at 64 Clarkegrove Road, Sheffield, on 12 March 1922. He was buried on 15 March at City Road cemetery, Sheffield. His widow, Adeliza Norman Green, became lecturer in education at University College, Southampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 63809


Holmes, Sir Maurice Gerald (1885-1964), civil servant and educationist, was born on 14 June 1885, the son of Edmond Gore Alexander Holmes (1850-1936), chief inspector of elementary schools for England, and his wife, Florence Mary (died 1927), eldest daughter of Captain P. M. Syme RA. He had two sisters, one of whom was the engineer Verena Winifred Holmes. He went to school at Sutherland House, Folkestone (1894-6), and then at Stanmore Park, Middlesex (1896-9), before going on to Wellington College (1900-04). He studied law at Balliol College, Oxford, from 1904 until 1908, when he was awarded a first-class degree in jurisprudence. He entered for the bar at the Inner Temple in 1908 (being called to the bar in 1909) and at this stage appeared destined for a legal career. When he applied in October 1908 to the Board of Education for a temporary position as a junior examiner he was already about to enter a barrister's chambers to gain further expertise in this area. He had no training or experience as a teacher, and his appointment came at a time when the board was heavily criticized for recruiting by patronage. However, his legal background and knowledge proved highly valuable throughout the rest of his long career in the department. 
Holmes's early employment at the board consisted of a range of junior positions; he worked as a temporary barrister and then examiner in the technological branch, then as a junior examiner at assistant principal level at a salary of $230 per annum. During the First World War he served in France, Belgium, Egypt, and Palestine, and rose to lieutenant-colonel in the Army Service Corps. He was appointed OBE for his military service in 1919. In 1917 he married Ivy Marie Beatrice ('b'. 1892), the daughter of Brigadier-General Francis Pearson Shaw Dunsford. They lived for most of their married life at 7 Sloane Street, London, and raised two daughters. 
After the war Holmes rose swiftly within the Board of Education. He was entrusted with important duties in which, as the then permanent secretary of the board, L. A. Selby-Bigge, observed, he 'made good', and demonstrated 'great aptitude for Establishment work' (TNA: PRO, ED 36/4). In 1919 Selby-Bigge appointed him to the post of chief clerk of the Board of Education at the level of principal. Among the sensitive tasks for which he assumed much responsibility was the moving of Board of Education staff from the Victoria and Albert Museum to Whitehall in 1920. He also assisted with supply and transport in north Wales in view of a threatened strike of railway and transport workers in April 1921, a situation in which he apparently displayed 'great energy, capacity and resource' in dealing with difficulties (ibid.). In 1922 he became private secretary to the president of the Board of Education, initially H. A. L. Fisher and then Edward Wood. The following year, still in his thirties, he became director of establishments to the board, a prime-ministerial appointment. After the retirement of Sir Edward Chambers in 1926 he was appointed principal assistant secretary (secondary schools). Five years later he became deputy secretary of the board, and in 1937 he succeeded Sir (Edward) Henry Pelham, also a Balliol graduate, as permanent secretary at a fixed salary of $3000 per annum. He was appointed KCB in 1938. 
During his eight years as permanent secretary Holmes was largely responsible for managing the board's involvement in the major educational debates which culminated in the 'Education Act' of 1944. He exhibited a shrewd capacity for working with the key figures on whom the board depended to construct reasoned positions on educational reform, and for developing the potential role of committees in specific areas of inquiry, such as the Norwood committee on the secondary-school curriculum and examinations and the Fleming committee on the public schools. He generally preferred the role of the board itself to be developed, and in fact strengthened during this period, out of the public eye rather than as part of a political debate. In 1941 the circulation of the so-called green book entitled 'Education after the War', a prototype statement of educational reconstruction composed by senior officials of the board, with a foreword by Holmes, was restricted to a small circle of insiders. His own opinions on key issues relating to reform carried a great deal of weight within the board, or the ministry as it became after 1944. He advised the president of the Board of Education, R. A. Butler, in 1942 that the duration of the war itself would largely determine the outcome of educational reforms: 'The longer it lasts, the more clamant the demand for social equality is likely to be' (TNA: PRO, ED 136/294). 
Holmes could express his views precisely and often in strong terms, for instance in attributing the 'woefully inadequate' provision of technical education to the lack of interest taken by industry and to external financial pressures (TNA: PRO, ED 136/132). At the same time he avoided becoming involved in public controversies such as those to which his father had become attracted towards the end of his career. In this respect he also differed from his Edwardian predecessor Sir Robert Morant, who had been strongly influential in the debates that led to the 'Education Act' of 1902 but had himself become a focus of contention. Behind the scenes Holmes's authority and experience as an administrator constituted a key factor in the success of the Board of Education in negotiating a safe passage for the 'Education Act' in 1944, and stands as his major contribution to the development of educational and social policy in twentieth-century Britain. It also helped to ensure not only broad social and political support but also lasting agreement around measures that were potentially divisive, a combination that was to elude attempts to recast the educational system later in the century. 
Immediately after the war, in semi-retirement, Holmes remained influential, for example in his advice to the new education minister in the Labour government, Ellen Wilkinson, that, despite what he called 'constant pressure to secure that this or that subject is included in the curriculum of schools', it was better to resist such proposals on the ground that 'in this country' the details of the curriculum were not controlled or dominated by the ministry, but were left to the determination of the local education authorities and the teachers (TNA: PRO, ED 147/21). He retired in 1945 and was promoted GBE. 
In 1947 Holmes served on the east African salaries commission and in 1948-9 chaired the Caribbean public services commission. He also undertook a number of local inquiries for the Ministry of Transport. He was a governor of Wellington College and chairman of the Oxford and Cambridge Club. He maintained a keen interest in the work of George Bernard Shaw and in the life of Captain James Cook, and published bibliographies on both. He died at his London home, Flat 8, 7 Sloane Street, on 4 April 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 63810


Houghton, Sir William Frederick (1909-1971), educational administrator, was born on 30 November 1909 at 27 Rutland Street, Oldham, Lancashire, son of Arthur Houghton, travelling salesman for a vinegar manufacturer, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Cocker. It is not recorded where he attended school. In 1928 he matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he gained a second class in part one (1930) and a first class in part two (1931) of the historical tripos. 
After graduating in 1931 Houghton spent four years (1932-6) as a schoolmaster, first at Methodist college, Belfast, and then at Wirral grammar school, Cheshire. Just before he left teaching, his fictional work 'Greeks and Romans' (1935) was published. He married on 31 December 1935, at the Baptist chapel in King Street, Oldham, Mary Wimpenny Newton ('b'. 1909), daughter of Frederick Schofield Newton, an Oldham waste dealer. 
In 1936 the newly married couple moved to east Suffolk where Houghton had been appointed as assistant secretary to the education committee. He took to educational administration and made rapid progress. A post as deputy director of education in west Sussex followed in 1938 and from 1941 to 1947 he was chief education officer in Darlington. Two deputy education officer posts in larger local education authorities came next: the first in Birmingham from 1947 to 1952 and the second with London county council (LCC) from 1952 to 1956. 
With senior experience in five different local education authorities, Houghton was an obvious candidate for promotion to the most influential and prestigious educational administration post in Britain: the position of LCC education officer, to which he was appointed when it became vacant in 1956. Father of two sons, of whom one predeceased his father and the other became a teacher, he made his home in London and remained at the helm of its education for the rest of his life. Only Sir Robert Blair, who led education in London from 1904 to 1924, served longer. When the LCC was abolished in 1965, to be replaced by the inner London education authority (ILEA), Houghton became ILEA's first education officer and oversaw the smooth transition from one system to the other. 
Houghton was renowned in ILEA for his approachability and practical 'northern' common sense. He made tireless visits to schools, irrespective of other commitments, during which he invariably took time and trouble to talk to pupils and teachers informally. Another strength was his ability to see things from a teacher's point of view. Under him a new education welfare service was set up in London. He also led the imaginative establishment in the ILEA area of a network of local teachers' centres at which teachers from different schools could meet and undergo in-service training. The acquisition and development of a residential in-service training centre at Stoke D'Abernon, near Leatherhead, in Surrey, was another innovation which took place under Houghton's leadership. He served on a number of national and international bodies and, early in 1971, led an ILEA team which went to Hong Kong to advise on the colony's education service. 
Beyond education Houghton pursued interests in reading, theatre, sport, and travel. He became an honorary fellow of the College of Preceptors in 1965 and was granted an honorary doctorate by the University of Surrey in 1968. In 1967 he was knighted for services to education. He suffered a stroke after attending a meeting of the Home Office committee on adopted children and died from a 'cerebro-vascular accident' at Whittington Hospital, Islington, London, on 16 November 1971. He had planned to take early retirement at the end of 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 63811


Jackson, Sir Percy Richard (1869-1941), educational administrator, was born at Hebble Terrace, Huddersfield, Yorkshire, on 23 January 1869, the son of William Michael Jackson, tea merchant, and his wife, Anne Field. He attended Huddersfield collegiate school before entering business in the textile industry, where he became head of the firm of Field and Bottrill Ltd, plush manufacturers, of Skelmanthorpe, near Huddersfield. On 26 April 1893 he married Mary Elizabeth (1870/71-1938), daughter of Thomas Blacker, a contractor, at Skelmanthorpe Wesleyan Methodist Church, near Huddersfield. They had three sons, the eldest of whom was killed in the First World War, and four daughters. 
As Jackson was an active member of the Methodist church and of the Liberal Party, his career in public affairs in the West Riding of Yorkshire strongly reflected local traditions of nonconformity and Liberalism. He was first elected to the West Riding county council in 1904 and remained a member until his retirement in 1937. He joined the education committee in 1905 and was chairman from 1918 until 1937; he was thus closely involved in the principal educational initiatives of one of the largest authorities in England. A man of abundant energy and a perceptive grasp of affairs, his special gift was an ability to reconcile sharply opposing interests without a sacrifice of principle -- a gift that he had ample opportunity to exercise. Religious decisions over education were particularly contentious; so too were the problems thrown up by the relationships between the county and the part III elementary education authorities (medium-sized boroughs and urban districts which gained the right to become local education authorities for specified purposes) and county boroughs which lay within the boundaries of the West Riding. 
The strong local nonconformist tradition led to more difficulties in this authority than anywhere else in England after 1902, when the 'Education Act' of that year required local education authorities to maintain church schools. The initial refusal of the activists among the Liberal members fully to accept their new legal responsibilities produced difficult relationships with both Roman Catholic and Anglican schools. While the position gradually settled down in the existing schools, attempts between the wars to reorganize schooling to give pupils aged over eleven separate senior or modern schools again excited traditional attitudes, for the churches certainly did not want to lose their older pupils to council senior schools. In the face of considerable opposition from some of his more entrenched councillors, Jackson managed in 1930, after an earlier, unsuccessful agreement in 1926, to secure a concordat on religious education with the Church of England diocesan authorities. This enabled some reorganization to go forward in the 1930s. The full significance of Jackson's achievement became clear when his compromise was used as an essential element in the national settlement in the 'Education Act' of 1944. 
After the First World War conflicts between counties and larger boroughs assumed sufficient importance for the government to appoint a royal commission in 1923. The West Riding, with nine county boroughs by this time, most of which seemed intent on enlarging their boundaries at the expense of the county, strongly defended its position in evidence. Yet in practice there was need for co-operation if the interests of the area as a whole were not to suffer, and this was particularly urgent in technical and further education. Jackson succeeded in bringing the main local authorities together in the Yorkshire council for further education in 1928. This became an effective organization for regional planning and co-operation in the 1930s. It served as the model in the wartime Board of Education for the planners of post-war technological education. The subsequent regional advisory councils set up from 1946 to cover the whole country followed its pattern. Jackson also managed to hold together the county councils of the three ridings in the Yorkshire council for agricultural education, although this broke up a few years after he ceased to be chairman. 
Jackson, who was knighted in 1925, became a leading figure in education at national level. He was a member of the executive of the Association of Education Committees, of which he became president in 1924, and was chairman of the education committee of the County Councils Association. This dual responsibility gave him a position of considerable significance on the Burnham committee on teachers' salaries, of which he was deputy leader. He was a member of the consultative committee of the Board of Education from 1922 to 1938 when it produced the two major reports on schools of the inter-war years, the Hadow report, 'The Education of the Adolescent' (1927), which recommended ending the all-age elementary school and separate provision for pupils over eleven, and the Spens report (1938) on secondary and technical education. He was a member of the royal commission on the civil service (1930-31). 
In 1925 Jackson became a trustee of the United Kingdom Carnegie Trust, which supported many forms of social activity, and was appointed vice-chairman in 1934. He continued his work with the trust until his death. He gave up his membership of the county council in 1937 but remained a member of the executive of the Land Settlement Association, of which he had been a founder and the first chairman. Its purpose was to provide estates where unemployed men from depressed areas could learn how to run their own smallholdings. He took a particular personal interest in the work of the settlement at Carlton, Snaith, which was nearest to his home. 
Following the death of his first wife in 1938 Jackson married Jessie Ewen Robertson ('b'. 1894/5), a schoolmistress, at Hove Presbyterian Church, Sussex, on 14 February 1939. He died of coronary thrombosis on 24 December 1941 at his home, Woodlands, Scissett, Skelmanthorpe, Yorkshire, and was buried on 28 December at Skelmanthorpe cemetery. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 63812


Kandel, Isaac Leon (1881-1965), educationist, was born in Romania, the son of Abraham Kandel, a velvet merchant, and his wife, Fanny. The family moved to Manchester when he was a child, and he attended Manchester grammar school from 1892 to 1899. He won a university scholarship and studied classics at Manchester University from 1899 to 1902, graduating with first-class honours. Four years later he was awarded the MA and in the same year completed the teacher's diploma course where he came under the stimulating influence of Professor J. J. Findlay and the academic study of pedagogy, and of Michael Sadler, the professor of the history and administration of education. Both shared an admiration for the Jena educationist Wilhelm Rein, whom Kandel visited in 1907. At Manchester University he had met Jessie Sara Davis ('b'. 1891/2), a classicist and trained teacher; they married at the Great Synagogue, Prestwich, on 27 July 1915, and had a daughter and a son. 
Kandel taught his subject briefly at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution before moving to America in 1908 (where he became a citizen in 1920), studying at the Teachers' College, Columbia University, for a PhD, which was awarded in 1910 for a dissertation on the training of elementary school teachers in Germany. He worked with Paul Monroe, head of the Teachers' College, on the important 'Cyclopaedia of Education' from 1909 until 1913, when he was appointed a lecturer at the Teachers' College. Concurrently acting as a researcher for the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching from 1914 to 1923, he explored many aspects of education and, in contributions to the United States bureau of education's 'Bulletin', deepened his interest in foreign systems, particularly those of Germany, France, and Britain. His studies were assisted by his exceptional linguistic ability. The international institute of the college had links with the New Era Fellowship with which Kandel had sympathies, particularly with its emphasis on human fulfilment, peace, and co-operation, although he disliked the dogmatism of some progressive educators. The views of Findlay and Sadler on the vital role of the teacher and the cultural aspects of education were reinforced by a colleague, W. C. Bagley, a leader of the essentialist movement in education. In 1923 Kandel was promoted from associate professor to the chair of the history of education, and he remained in that post until his retirement in 1946. 
Kandel wrote numerous papers and books. Early studies were a 'History of Secondary Education' (1930) and 'The Making of Nazis' (1935). A complex historical perspective underlay all his work and contributed to his understanding of comparative studies: 'The history of education has in the main been devoted to a study of theories and practices in isolation instead of being what it should be, a study of the relationships between education and cultural backgrounds in the fullest sense of the term, concerned with the history of culture and politics and their impact on education. ('Universities Quarterly', 3/3, May 1949)' Such an approach ensured that comparative education as taught by Kandel was an academically robust form of analysis far removed from the mere collection of data on foreign systems. His pioneering reputation was established in 1933 with the publication of the classic and widely translated 'Studies in Comparative Education', which laid a basis for the increasingly sophisticated analysis of educational systems during the rest of the century. 'The New Era in Education' (1955) was complementary, as it picked up and developed 'trends already in the making' (preface, ix) when the earlier volume was published. Other influential methodological statements, both called 'Comparative Education', appeared in 1936 and 1939. 
Always seeking to understand underlying causes in education despite superficial similarities and wary of transferring practices from one country to another, Kandel in his books 'Conflicting Theories of Education' (1938) and 'Education in an Era of Transition' (1948) reflected the social and political complexities of the 1930s and 1940s; on the other hand his 'The Impact of the War upon American Education' (1948) and 'American Education in the Twentieth Century' (1955) focused on his own society. He was in demand as a visiting professor and taught at Johns Hopkins, Yale, and the universities of California, Maine, and Pennsylvania; his lectures at Harvard and the University of London in the 1930s resulted in the books 'The Dilemma of Democracy' (1934) and 'The Outlook in Education' (1933). His scholarship and international outlook were recognized by honorary degrees from the universities of Melbourne and North Carolina, while France conferred on him the Legion d'honneur. As well as many contributions to works of reference he was editor from 1924 until 1944 of Colombia University's influential 'Educational Year Book', and from 1946 to 1953 edited the weekly journal 'School and Society'. Kandel's reputation was recognized by his election to the distinguished National Academy of Education. His stature as an internationalist and a prudent educationist drew him into the orbit of government and from 1937 to 1946 he was a member of the United States national committee on intellectual co-operation, and he was invited to join a Jamaican committee to reform secondary education. In 1946 he was part of the United States education mission to Japan. 
After so long at Columbia University, Kandel had a brief but notable second career when he returned in 1947 to Manchester University as a Simon research fellow. His intellectual energy was at once apparent both in the university and outside, and in 1947 he presided over the North of England Education Conference. America's importance in the war had encouraged the British government in 1941 to encourage greater understanding of American life through education. Manchester responded and set about what proved to be a frustrating attempt to secure a suitable person to head a proposed department of American studies. During his fellowship year Kandel's ability was quickly recognized, and he was the first professor of American studies from 1948 to 1950. He created an innovative department which drew on and co-ordinated the academic resources of the university. His experience and wide knowledge were of value to Lord Simon of Wythenshawe, the founder and editor of the 'Universities Quarterly', and on Simon's appointment as chairman of the BBC Kandel became editor. His work and personality were so highly regarded at Manchester that his resignation in 1950 was greatly regretted. 
This was not the end of Kandel's career. He continued to write and travel extensively and consolidated the internationalist approach advocated in his 'International Co-operation: National and International' (1944). From 1946 he was an effective consultant with UNESCO, writing particularly on education as a human right and compulsory education, themes continued in work for the United Nations human rights division in 1955. In a period of decolonization he turned his attention to the educational issues of independence and development. In 1960 he attended a conference at Natal University in South Africa, where he witnessed the effects of apartheid. Kandel died in Geneva, Switzerland, on 14 June 1965. 


@@@@@


doc= 63814


King, Bolton (1860-1937), educational administrator and historian, was born at Chadshunt, Gaydon, near Kineton in Warwickshire, on 8 May 1860, the only son of the second marriage of his father, Edward Bolton King (1801-1878), to Louisa Palmer (1825-1920), descendant of the fourth earl of Aylesford. His father, a landowner, had been Liberal MP for Warwick (1832-7) and for South Warwickshire (1857-9). 
King was educated at Eton College from 1872 to 1879, in which year he went up to Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained first-class honours in modern history in 1883. The master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett, of whom he was a protege, noted his seriousness of character and enthusiasm for progressive causes. King abandoned his intention to enter the church through scruples about subscribing to the articles of faith (Jowett, 283), but found an alternative vocation through the influence of Arnold Toynbee and his ideals of social reform. He was closely involved in the foundation of Toynbee Hall Settlement in the East End of London, where he lived and taught until 1892. He was a friend of A. H. D. Acland and belonged to Acland's 'inner ring'. He founded the Toynbee Travellers' Club, which organized educational tours to the continent. Dame Henrietta Barnett referred to his gracious personality, princely generosity, and dreadful clothes (Barnett, 26). He married on 8 May 1895 Lydia ('c'.1869-1965), daughter of George Arnold of Gaydon; they had three sons and one daughter. 
King left Toynbee Hall to complete 'A History of Italian Unity' (1899) and 'Mazzini' (1902). These studies were influential; the first was for long standard and the second is still quoted. 'Italy Today' (1901), an account of contemporary Italian history, written in collaboration with Thomas Okey, the master basket maker and self-taught Italian scholar whom he met at Toynbee Hall, is more dated. 
Though his stepbrother inherited Chadshunt, King did not lose touch with Warwickshire's labouring community. He set up two experiments in co-operative farming at Radbourne Manor and Ufton Hill. These were well thought out, but ultimately unsuccessful. In Gaydon he built a hall and reading room and houses with allotments for agricultural labourers. He occupied one himself with his wife, Lydia, but later moved to Warwick. With Joseph Ashby of Tysoe, who did most of the fieldwork, he published 'Statistics of some midland villages' in the 'Economic Journal' (March and June 1893), setting out the problems that the agricultural working class faced. 
King's radical views prevented his election to the newly created Warwickshire county council in 1892, when he stood at Kineton against Lord Willoughby de Broke, but he was chosen as a county alderman. He opposed the South African War and stood unsuccessfully for parliament as Liberal candidate for the Stratford upon Avon division of Warwickshire at a by-election in June 1901. Experience as chairman of the Warwickshire technical education committee between 1893 and 1903 led to his appointment in 1904 as Warwickshire's director of education under the 1902 'Education Act'. 
Armed with resources, and supported by the chairman of the county council's education committee, James Broughton Dugdale, King was able to set up a workable administrative structure, build new elementary schools in the populous areas, create new secondary places as at Nuneaton Girls' High School, and provide the educational ladder of minor and major scholarships. Two central intermediate schools in rural areas allowed abler children to stay on if they wished and share the opportunities provided for rural pupil teachers. He strongly supported the 1918 act, which raised the school leaving age to fourteen, and drew up the county's plans to implement the act; these are to be found in his third printed report, 'Education in Warwickshire' (1919). This envisaged the setting up of non-selective secondary schools, ten of which were to be created each year until the planned target of sixty schools to cover the whole county was reached. But this ambitious scheme was thwarted for lack of funds. Warwickshire was the only county to set up a successful day continuation school, offering day release up to the age of sixteen, which was enthusiastically adopted by employers in the skilled industries of Rugby. But King was disappointed that day continuation schools were not established elsewhere. His faith in the teaching profession led him to set up a teachers' consultative committee to advise on books and scholarship examinations. He encouraged secondary teachers to write on their teaching subjects and elementary school teachers to expect responsibility from quite young children. 
Clashes with his former opponents recurred when, on the outbreak of war in 1914, the education committee circulated a leaflet prepared by King, 'Why We Are at War', containing the passage 'this then is a righteous war. Many of the wars we have fought have not been righteous. We have sometimes done unjust and cruel things'. Asked by the committee to withdraw the latter words, King refused 'as a historian', but offered to resign. His chairman, who had given permission for the publication, took the blame for the issue and the matter was dropped. A later leaflet, 'The Schools and the War' (1916), detailing the schools' war effort, was well reviewed in 'The Spectator' (22 April 1916) and met with general approval. 
When he retired in 1928 King made a moving tribute to the teachers: 'It is upon you that it depends whether Education shall be lifeless or life-giving, whether the children shall go into life just with more or less undigested knowledge, or with character and mind so formed that they grow to be thinking men and women and giving citizens. (King, Browne, and Ibbotson, 28)' In retirement he wrote 'Schools of Today' (1929), describing recent changes in education, and supporting the recommendations of the Hadow report, notably that for raising the school leaving age to fifteen. His suspicions of Mussolini's regime were confirmed by Professor Gaetano Salvemini, who had fled from Florence after imprisonment and with whom he spoke on Mazzini at the King's High School, Warwick. A miniature edition of King's study 'Fascism in Italy' (1931), translated into Italian, was dropped on Rome by a young airman, Lauro di Bosis. King died on 15 May 1937 at Redholme, Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, where he lived in his advanced years, and his ashes were interred in the family vault at Chadshunt. The blessing at the interment was pronounced by Bishop Barnes of Birmingham, like King a Christian of advanced opinions. 


@@@@@


doc= 63816


Lowerison, Bellerby (1863-1935), socialist and schoolmaster, was born on 13 July 1863 in Great Lumley, co. Durham, son of George Lowerson, a coalminer, and his wife, Dorothy Richardson. Very little is known about his early life and some basic facts are unclear. The family's name on his birth certificate is Lowerson but he always kept the 'i' in his surname. He called himself Harry until 6 May 1910, when, in an article in the socialist newspaper 'The Clarion', he adopted the forename given on his birth certificate, which was Bellerby. He left his family after disagreements with them over their strict religious views and later attended St Bede's College, Durham, where he trained as a teacher. Any record of his life has to begin in earnest in 1889, when he became a socialist as a result of meeting participants in the London dock strike. 
Lowerison joined the east London branch of the Fabian Society and by 1891 was joint secretary of what was the biggest branch of the society in London; it met at his home in Homerton. In April 1891 he was elected to the national executive committee of the society, on which he served for a year. He was widely recognized as a very hard-working socialist propagandist (see 'Justice', the paper of the Social Democratic Federation, 18 April 1891). He wrote numerous articles for 'The Clarion', his most productive year being 1911, and he addressed socialist meetings throughout the country. On 23 July 1892 he married Alice Mabel Dutton, a Post Office clerk; they had two children, Gordon and Elaine. 
Despite Lowerison's staunch secularism, a central component of his socialism was the idea that 'there is lot of miserable cant talked about religion necessarily making a milksop of a man, when the truth is that unless a man has a religion of some sort or other he is either a brute or a madman. (H. Lowerison, 'Mother Earth', 1902, 136)' The co-operative commonwealth based on fellowship could not be brought about by means inimical to its ends. Though economic reform was vital, so too was change in the people's moral outlook. This change could be accomplished by bringing people into closer contact with each other, with learning, and with nature. To achieve the closer harmony of man and nature Lowerison helped to set up and organize the Clarion field clubs, the subject of his 'Fields and Folklore' (1899). He envisaged the clubs as the collective stewards of the people's heritage. His essays in the collections 'Sweet Briar Sprays' (1899), 'Mother Earth' (1902), and 'In England now' (1906) merged his political and naturalist interests; much of his later journalism blended politics and astronomy. 
From 1894 to 1899 Lowerison taught at Wenlock Road School in the London school board division of Hackney. He was repelled by the physical surroundings for, like many schools of the time, the school was overcrowded and filthy. But most of all he loathed the character of the education that he was employed to deliver, particularly the religious elements of the curriculum. While he was a teacher he tried to improve the education of his pupils and struggled to open the eyes of his colleagues to more progressive teaching methods. It was to these ends that he helped to establish the London School Swimming Association and attempted to set up a London schools rambling club. 
However, by the end of the 1890s Lowerison was running up against the system, and in particular against the headmaster, at Wenlock Road. In July 1898 letters he had written to 'The Clarion' brought him to the attention of the school board and in November 1899 his lack of respect for the headmaster led to his dismissal without a reference. The offending letters were entitled 'My ideal school', in which he set out the principles on which he would found Ruskin School ('The Clarion', 15 July, 7 Oct, and 18 Nov 1899). He planned, first, to teach the laws of health and exercise, second, to teach, by example, habits of justice and gentleness, and, third, to discover, draw out, and develop the natural capabilities of each child. 
After Lowerison's dismissal from Wenlock Road School his scheme was realized with funds donated by readers of 'The Clarion'. Ruskin School was opened in Hunstanton, Norfolk. In February 1902 the school moved to new premises a few miles away at Heacham. Lowerison's preferred method of teaching was to link subjects such as astronomy, literature, and art and then to arouse children's interest in this unified body of knowledge. He did this by allowing them to find one aspect that excited their imaginations, and using this as a gateway to the whole. These methods were detailed in his book 'Star Lore for Teachers' (1911) and exemplified in 'From Palaeolith to Motor Car' (1906). Given that Lowerison, in common with most socialists of his day, viewed the ends of struggle and the means of getting there as being of necessity the same, he structured the school so that it was as deinstitutionalized as possible. He therefore allowed children considerable freedom to roam the countryside and to pursue and develop their own interests. A. S. Neill visited Ruskin School and may well have been influenced by what he saw there. 
Ruskin School Home was busiest in 1909-10, when it had fifty pupils, but it declined after the war and closed in 1926. The school's decline was matched, if not caused, by Lowerison's political drift. By 1914 his socialism had changed into a form of paternalism and with the outbreak of war he became a rampant nationalist baying for German blood ('The Clarion', 13 Nov 1914). When the school closed he retired to Green Garth, Houghton, near Huntingdon, where he died on 6 June 1935; he was buried later that month in Houghton on Whit Monday. 


@@@@@


doc= 63817


Forsyth, David (1844-1934), headmaster and educationist, was born in October 1844 at Coatbridge, Glasgow, the son of David Forsyth, a master engineer, and his wife, Agnes Laidlaw. He began his teaching career at the age of thirteen as a pupil teacher in Ayrshire. In 1862, at the age of eighteen, he won a first-class queen's scholarship to the Church of Scotland Training College in Glasgow. He entered the University of Glasgow in 1864 and gained his MA degree in 1870, the year in which, on 5 July at Cambridge Street, Glasgow, he married Christina Cairns (1845-1922) of Darlington, daughter of Andrew Cairns, a foreman cabinet-maker, and his wife, Mary Ann Brand. By this time he had already served for one year as headmaster of Green Street School, one of the largest elementary schools in the east end of Glasgow. 
In 1875 Forsyth was appointed to a lectureship at the Church of Scotland Training College, having spent the previous three years as headmaster of its practising school. During his time at the college he developed a specialist interest in geology; he gained a BSc degree at the University of Glasgow in 1884 and became a DSc by examination in the same subject in 1890. He also travelled extensively throughout Scotland, lecturing on a variety of subjects, and wrote a book on the teaching of perspective (1883). He later edited a volume of Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar' (1899), and provided an introduction to a successful chemistry textbook (1899) written by one of his staff. 
In 1889 Forsyth was appointed headmaster of the higher grade school in Leeds. Here, as in most major towns and cities, the expenditure of ratepayers' money by the school board on higher grade education, which was secondary in all but name, was a major political issue. Strongly opposed to the class system that shaped secondary education in England, Forsyth sought to promote higher grade (post-elementary) education as the English equivalent of the practice, more common in Scotland, of educating in the parochial schools pupils drawn from very different classes within society. He played a major role in establishing an Association of Headmasters of Higher Grade and Organized Science Schools and, as its president, appeared before the royal commission on secondary education in 1894. He saw the future of higher grade schools in making the great mass of the people aware that they offered, at a very moderate cost, an education which would open the doors of the professions and the universities to children from poorer, as well as from more prosperous, families. Under his leadership the Leeds higher grade school, which had opened in temporary premises in 1885 with over 500 pupils, developed to become by the end of the century an institution with a distinguished academic record and a recognizable tradition that attracted favourable national and international attention. 
In the closing decades of the nineteenth century public funds for education were available -- subject to inspection, success in examinations, or both -- for public elementary education and for courses and classes which met the very different requirements of the Department of Science and Art. These funding arrangements were complex and lacked co-ordination but Forsyth exploited them to the full to construct a senior-school curriculum at the Leeds Central higher grade school that included English, Latin, mathematics, French, German, science, geography, history, art, commercial subjects, and drawing. Pupils from the school were outstandingly successful in a range of public examinations, securing prizes for their work in the examinations set by the Department of Science and Art and gaining a stream of passes in the important matriculation examination of the University of London. In addition, between 1894 and 1903, they won over $8000 in scholarships and bursaries, and sixty-five former pupils gained university degrees. 
Equally committed to the democratic control of the governance of schooling, Forsyth advocated a national system of directly elected school boards responsible for the provision of education on behalf of the community. Although a different model of educational governance was embodied in the 'Education Act' of 1902, his vision of the role of higher grade schools had a pioneering quality, and their work can be seen both as a response to the political and educational aspirations of a rapidly growing organized labour movement and as an important element in the emergence of a lower middle class within late nineteenth-century society. If higher grade schools necessarily fell somewhat short of accommodating all classes within society, there is no doubt that they provided an advanced academic education for many children belonging to a class that had hitherto had no such opportunity. Forsyth's own school was particularly important in educating the sons of Jewish immigrants who had settled in Leeds from about 1880 onwards; children from Jewish homes accounted for about 40 per cent of the boys in the senior classes at the school by the end of the First World War. 
A firm disciplinarian deeply committed to the academic and professional improvement of his teaching staff, Forsyth was a familiar figure in a frock coat and silk hat, walking each day to school with short brisk steps. In the re-organization of post-elementary education that followed the legislation of 1902, his school became the Leeds Central high school, under the control of the newly created Leeds local education authority. He seized the opportunity provided by the events of 1902, and the subsequent establishment of an adjacent secondary school for girls, to develop the Central high school into a highly successful boys' grammar school, with its own Latin motto, and organized into houses that competed academically and on the sports field. The school continued to recruit pupils, on the basis of a scholarship examination, on an unusually wide social and geographical basis. 
Forsyth remained headmaster until 1918, when he finally retired at the age of seventy-four. In 1915, accepting the award of an honorary degree of LLD from the University of Leeds, he expressed his gratitude that the university had acknowledged 'his type of school' and the work he had done to promote the cause of popular higher education and the 'cultivation of a University spirit among the democracy' (Forsyth to M. E. Sadler, 20 March 1915, University of Leeds archive, microfilm 107, fol. 116). He was to do more, campaigning vigorously throughout the 1920s for funds for the institution which had honoured him. He died on 6 August 1934, two months short of his ninetieth birthday, at the home of his son, Dr J. A. Cairns Forsyth, in Fairholm, Alloway, Ayrshire. He was buried at Lawnswood cemetery, Leeds. 


@@@@@


doc= 63818


Ansell, Gertrude Mary (1861-1932), suffragette and businesswoman, was born on 2 June 1861 at 1 Vernon Place, Bloomsbury, London, the third child and only daughter of George Frederick Ansell (1826-1880) and his wife, Sarah Cook. Her father, a scientific chemist, had in 1856 been appointed to a clerkship in the Royal Mint with a brief to eliminate waste and mismanagement. Despite his success he was forced in 1868 to give up his position, in circumstances worthy of treatment by Trollope. Ansell has left a full record of the problems, his solutions, and his downfall (G. F. Ansell, appendices). He died in 1880 leaving his family ill-provided and in 1881 Gertrude Ansell was working in a telephone office. By 1900 she had set up in business as a 'typewriter'. 
From her own brief memoir it would appear that Gertrude Ansell's thinking was dominated by the welfare of animals and the need to enfranchise women. She acted in the interests of the former by becoming, by 1909, honorary treasurer of the Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society and one of the organizers of that year's International Anti-Vivisection and Animal Protection Congress. Ansell had become convinced that the economic position of women would never be satisfactory without political freedom. In December 1906 she joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), the militant suffrage society led by Mrs Pankhurst, and on 13 February 1907 took part in demonstrations surrounding the WSPU's women's parliament in Caxton Hall. On 13 October 1908 she was arrested after taking part in a WSPU 'raid' on the House of Commons and was sentenced to a month's imprisonment in Holloway. In her speech, made at the breakfast given to celebrate her release from prison ('Votes for Women', 26 Nov 1908, 154), Gertrude Ansell's veneration of Mrs Pankhurst is clear. 
Although during the next five years Gertrude Ansell took part in all the major WSPU spectacles, she had given an undertaking to one of her animal committees to abstain from further active militancy. However, in the summer of 1913 the 'Dogs Exemption Bill' and the 'Plumage Bill', two acts for which she had been working, were defeated in the House of Commons and she was released from her promise. On 31 July she smashed a window at the Home Office and was sentenced to a month's imprisonment. She immediately went on a hunger and thirst strike and was released under the ''Cat and Mouse Act''. She escaped rearrest, although she can hardly be said to have been in hiding, because she was recaptured on 30 October while selling 'The Suffragette', the WSPU newspaper, at Holborn tube station. The criminal record office had circulated her photograph and description (5 feet 4 inches, grey eyes, hair turning grey) as a 'Known Militant Suffragette'. There followed a pattern of arrest, imprisonment, hunger and thirst strike, leading to release and escape until on 12 May 1914 she smashed Herkomer's picture of the duke of Wellington in the Royal Academy and was sentenced to six months' imprisonment. This time she was not released and, because she carried on with her hunger and thirst strike, was forcibly fed. 
Ansell was finally released on 10 August, under the amnesty accorded to suffragette prisoners on the outbreak of war, having been forcibly fed 236 times. There is no record of how her family reacted to her militancy. One of her brothers had become a barrister and later published a history of the family name (J. E. Ansell, 'Ansell: History of the Name, 1086 to about 1600', 1929; 'Ansell: History of the Name... Completed', 1933). It was to his children that Gertrude Ansell left her small estate, noting in her will, a businesswoman to the last, that 'I am hoping to get my investments settled into good securities before I die... It is my habit to keep everything paid up.' Gertrude Ansell died at the General Hospital at Saffron Walden on 7 March 1932 following an operation for gallstones. 


@@@@@


doc= 63819


Sennett, (Alice) Maud Mary Arncliffe (1862-1936), women's suffrage activist, was born on 4 February 1862 at 142 Bishopsgate Street Without, London, the elder daughter of Gaudente Sparagnapane ('c'.1816-1877), an Italian immigrant wholesale confectioner, and his wife, Aurelia Williams ('c'.1832-1915). Nothing is known of her education. Of striking, dark appearance, she became an actress, using the stage name Mary Kingsley. She played at theatres throughout England and Scotland and, for a year, in Australia. She married Henry Robert Arncliffe Sennett (1863/4-1944) at the church of Holy Trinity, St Giles, London, on 9 July 1898, put the stage behind her, and, with her husband, ran her family firm of 'G. Sparagnapane & Co., The Oldest Established Manufacturers of Christmas Crackers and Wedding Cake Ornaments', which had its premises on the borders of Clerkenwell and the City. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1906 Maud Arncliffe Sennett became interested in the women's suffrage movement which, for the next fifteen years, dominated her life. Between 1906 and 1913 she belonged, both consecutively and in parallel, to the constitutional and militant wings of the movement, being at some time a member of the constitutional London Society for Women's Suffrage as well as a member of the executive committees of the Women's Freedom League, the Hampstead branch of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), and the Actresses' Franchise League. Her experience as an actress made her a most effective speaker; she did not undervalue her own worth in this respect. In November 1911 she was found guilty of using threatening behaviour after breaking a window in the office of the 'Daily Mail', protesting against the paper's policy of ignoring the fund-raising success of the WSPU. At her trial she is reported as saying: 'I am an employee of male labour, and the men who earn their living through the power of my poor brain, the men whose children I pay to educate, whose members of Parliament I pay for, and to whose old-age pensions I contribute -- these are allowed a vote, while I am voteless. ('Votes for Women', 24 Nov 1911, 126)' Her subsequent fine was paid by Lord Northcliffe. 
In 1913, inspired by the spectacle and emotion surrounding the funeral of Emily Wilding Davison and encouraged by Alexander Orr, an Edinburgh businessman she met there, who felt that men were keen to press for women's suffrage, Maud Arncliffe Sennett founded the Northern Men's Federation for Women's Suffrage (NMF). It was composed mainly of Scottish councillors and baillies, and she determined to send, in support of women's suffrage, a deputation of these worthies to Prime Minister Asquith, who was equally determined not to receive them. The NMF did, however, receive considerable press coverage and continued its campaign, generously funded by Maud Arncliffe Sennett, during the First World War. She, in turn, was accorded a singular deference by the members of the NMF, who were referred to as her 'bairns'. In 1916 she wrote a 'Manifesto on Venereal Disease' and for the remainder of the war campaigned vigorously against the 'Contagious Disease Acts' that were included in the 'Defence of the Realm Act'. With the granting of a limited measure of enfranchisement to women in 1918 support for the NMF dwindled, despite Maud Arncliffe Sennett's renaming it the Northern Men's Federation for Women's Suffrage and Land Reform and drafting a 'Land Charter'. Although she kept in touch with some of her fellow suffragists, in the ensuing years she does not appear to have been involved in the continuing feminist campaigns but to have devoted her energies to her new foundation, the Midhurst-Haselmere Anti-Vivisection Society. She died from tuberculosis on 15 September 1936 at her home, Eversheds, Midhurst, Sussex. Her devoted husband then arranged the publication of her autobiography and gave to the British Museum the scrapbooks she had compiled during the suffrage campaign, thereby ensuring her the measure of immortality that she undoubtedly desired. In 1937 he married Johanna Olsen (died 1939). 


@@@@@


doc= 63820


Lucas, Norman Bernard Charles (1901-1980), headmaster, was born on 2 January 1901 at 3 Salisbury Terrace, Craven Road, Newbury, Berkshire, the son of Allan Lucas, solicitor, and his wife, Norah Eveline Brooks. Lucas's troubled experiences as a child had a significant influence on his work as a teacher. At the age of three he was boarded out, but rejoined his parents aged six, when his father's business difficulties led to the removal of the family to Winnipeg, Canada. Here his parents' marriage broke up and he was eventually sent back to an aunt in England. By his ninth birthday he had been transferred to his tenth home, that of his maternal grandparents in a village near Newbury. In 1912 he gained a scholarship to Newbury grammar school but had to leave at fifteen to work for his grandfather as a baker's roundsman. A year or so later in Newbury he happened to meet his headmaster, who asked him home and offered him a place at his own expense in the sixth form as a boarder from September 1917. Four terms later Lucas won an open scholarship in history at Cambridge. One significant consequence of this was that as headmaster of Midhurst grammar school many years later he took on as boarders at his personal expense some able boys who needed the support of a boarding education to achieve their potential, including, at one stage, some from Germany and Austria threatened with persecution by the Nazi regime. 
In 1919 Lucas went up to Emmanuel College, Cambridge; he graduated in 1922 with a first-class degree. He taught in France and Egypt for three years. On returning to Britain he taught from 1925 at Rendcombe College in Cirencester, an experimental boarding-school, whose headmaster, J. H. Simpson, had been greatly influenced by the ideas of Homer Lane. Simpson's main aim was to enable pupils to combine acceptance of authority with much freedom and a considerable degree of self-government, and within this framework to achieve a high academic standard. Lucas believed that it was here that he learned much of the art of headmastership which he later put into practice at Midhurst. In 1927 he moved to London and taught at Highgate School for three years before undertaking research in France, with financial support from the Rockefeller Foundation, on the thought of Georges Sorel. He returned to England in 1933 to teach history at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, and on 2 August 1934 he married Vera Agnes Douglas (1908-1971), whom he had met when both were engaged on research in the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris. She had read modern languages at Somerville College, Oxford, taken a first-class degree, and then held successively the Zaharoff travelling fellowship and the Esmond senior scholarship, before becoming a schoolteacher. 
Lucas was appointed headmaster of Midhurst grammar school in 1938. No new staff had been appointed there since 1927 and the number of pupils had declined to about 150. The boarders and most day boys were fee payers; a fifth held free places. The current level of achievement was such that the county education authority would give no guarantee that it would continue to support the school. Sixth-form work was virtually non-existent. The most urgent task facing Lucas was to see that far more attention was given to study and achievement. The first group of sixth formers under the new arrangements consisted of seven boys, six of whom got open awards at Oxford and Cambridge. During a period of twenty-five years the sixth form increased from 7 to over 130. The outbreak of war in 1939 led to the evacuation to Midhurst of a London girls' grammar school, which meant that the main school buildings had to be shared. This facilitated radical change in that for half of each day pupils had to use the large boarding-house, where less formal group teaching, clubs, and discussion groups were organized, and fuller use was made of the extensive playing fields. Weekly meetings of boys to deal with school matters in the boarding-house were used to accustom pupils to a considerable degree of self-government. 
Within a few years the school became a community based on mutual respect in which pupils, including those with emotional or social disabilities, were enabled to develop independent personalities so that they could accept with assurance and sensitivity their place in the community, be it school, place of employment, or society generally. Under Lucas's guidance Midhurst grammar school became co-educational in 1956 to help overcome the shortage of places for girls in the area. A girls' boarding-house was built to balance the boys' house while preserving the value that Lucas saw in a part boarding, part day school. Ten years later there was further change when the school became comprehensive. Lucas was asked to stay for a further year beyond retirement age to see through the fusion of the county secondary school with the grammar school voluntary-controlled foundation. Throughout the three decades of Lucas's headmastership his wife, through both her ideas and her teaching (she was head of the modern languages department from 1939 and senior mistress when the school went co-educational), made a vital contribution to the school. 
In 1967 Lucas retired to Haslemere, Surrey. In 1972, the year after Vera Lucas's death, he married on 25 July Doreen Mary Bassett (1913-1995), who had worked at the school as secretary and later caterer for a quarter of a century. In retirement he wrote 'An Experience of Teaching' (1975), in which he set out many of his ideas and described his work in a unique and outstandingly successful school community. Lucas died at his home, Coombe Cottage, Grayswood Road, Haslemere, Surrey, on 12 July 1980, of coronary thrombosis. 


@@@@@


doc= 63821


MacMunn, Norman (1877-1925), schoolmaster and educationist, was born on 20 July 1877 at Waterloo Road, Wolverhampton, the third son of Charles Alexander MacMunn (1852-1911), a surgeon and later honorary pathologist at Wolverhampton Royal Hospital, and his first wife, Laetitia ('nee' MacMunn). His education from 1882 at a dame-school in Wolverhampton and from 1889 to 1895 at Wolverhampton grammar school he described as 'mental agony', as he worked not on prescribed lines but read voraciously out of school hours. He entered Keble College, Oxford, in 1895 with plans for the church as a career, but he developed an interest in the stage, transferred to Marcon's Hall, Oxford, in 1897, and graduated in 1899 with a third-class degree in English literature. He worked at first in journalism and travelled to Australia and New Zealand, where he spent six years on the 'Auckland Star' as literary and drama critic and sub-editor, then returned to England as a reviewer for 'The Athenaeum'. He decided to take up educational work, moved to Paris, and taught at the Berlitz School and in a large 'lycee'; he was subsequently appointed in 1913 as a teacher of French at King Edward VI Grammar School, Stratford upon Avon. 
There MacMunn developed and publicized his 'differential partnership method' of teaching, introducing activity and creativity into the classroom, a system which corresponded with contemporary innovations such as the 'direct method' of language teaching. 'A Path to Freedom in the School', which he published in 1914, was dedicated to the boys of the school for their zeal and sympathy in developing the new freedom, and acknowledged the inspiration of Montessori, Homer Lane, and Edmond Holmes. It expounded a theory of child emancipation, outlined practical solutions, and looked forward to the 'commonwealth school'. 
Rejected on health grounds for war service, MacMunn moved in 1914 to West Downs, Winchester, a well-known preparatory school, under its innovating and influential headmaster, Lionel Helbert. There the regime was marked by intense concern for individuals and supportive, familiar relationships with boys. MacMunn was given the freedom to develop his radical new methods, including the establishment of clubs for science, literature, and painting. 
In September 1918 MacMunn took a lease on Tiptree Hall, near Kelvedon, Essex, to found a school for war orphans. He worked ceaselessly with his own hands at repairing and furnishing the premises but was hampered by lack of funds. The school opened in January 1919 with twenty boys and girls, but after a year the girls had gone and MacMunn was left with a few of the poorest boys. On 11 November 1919 he married Ethel May Scanlan ('b'. 1881/2), who had joined the staff of the school in the previous March; she was the daughter of William Robert Scanlan, civil engineer. By July 1920 MacMunn had to find homes for his nine orphans and reluctantly took on fee-paying pupils, leading to conflict with parents who rejected the more extreme aspects of his regime, such as a refusal to include compulsory games or to prepare boys for public school. Tiptree was a 'self-governing community' with children free to construct the greater part of their own timetables, and MacMunn described his role as 'chief adviser'. Visitors from many parts of the world included Helen Parkhurst, who developed her own innovatory teaching methods in Dalton, Massachusetts. 
From 1914 MacMunn had been active as a contributor to conferences and journals promoting new methods in education, designing, developing, and exhibiting teaching apparatus. Typical was the 'card cyclopaedia', a card catalogue of words and information made collaboratively with his pupils by cutting and pasting extracts from books. In 1921 he published 'The Child's Path to Freedom', a version of his 1914 volume entirely rewritten in the light of six further years of experience. It was a highly successful and influential work, and was posthumously republished in 1926 with a foreword by Percy Nunn. MacMunn drew on Freud and on his own teaching experience. He saw himself as an early pioneer relieved to find acceptance in the climate of Montessorism and the new ideals from 1914 onwards. 'Differentialism' was his own attempt to foster individuality; he worried about the effects of the class lesson on children, and when contemporaries encouraged him to take his theories seriously he was driven to more radical steps. 'To have arrived in practice at the ideal of a school free from rewards and punishment -- from compulsion of any sort;... to have eliminated the class and based all on individual taste and choice -- this is to imply a new and not yet easily-digested educational creed' (N. MacMunn, 'The wisdom of educational experiment', 'Hibbert Journal', 1920, 740). He shared with others during and after the First World War the view that traditional school discipline had resulted in German autocracy. In children alone lay the hope of a reformed world. He exhibited the messianic enthusiasm of the first progressives; like others, he acquired the reputation of a crank as he developed his ideas, but his book was widely read, and his ideas widely disseminated among new generations of teachers by John Adams and Percy Nunn. 
In January 1924 MacMunn moved his school to Rapallo, Italy, with four boys from Tiptree, and in December the school moved again to San Remo, where it was known as the Home School. The number of boys went up to over twelve, but again he lost many potential pupils because of his unwillingness to compromise with parents. On 8 October 1925 he died at San Remo from bronchopneumonia, and a memorial fund was established by friends and sympathizers who subscribed to bring his card cyclopaedia over from Italy and to give away hundreds of copies of his book to teacher training colleges. 


@@@@@


doc= 63823


Mander, Sir Frederick (1883-1964), headmaster and trade unionist, was born at 172 Wellington Street, Luton, Bedfordshire, on 12 July 1883, the son of Arthur Mander, an iron plate worker, and his wife, Carrie Ellingham. His name was registered at birth as Fred, which was also recorded on his marriage certificate, but in later life he was known as Frederick. He was educated at Luton higher grade school before training to become a teacher at Westminster Training College and obtaining a University of London external BSc degree. He was a schoolmaster when he married, on 2 September 1911, Hilda Irene Sargent ('b'. 1883/4), the daughter of Thomas William Sargent, gentleman; they had two sons and a daughter. 
By 1915 Mander was headmaster of a Luton school, where he remained until 1931. Having become involved in the politics of the National Union of Teachers (NUT) at a local level, he was elected to the NUT executive in 1922. The following year he played a leading role in the well-known Lowestoft strike, when 163 teachers withdrew their labour for eleven months in protest against the local authority's decision to reduce salaries by 10 per cent. The actions of the local education authority (LEA) received widespread censure, especially when the NUT demonstrated that non-union 'blackleg' teachers were sub-standard. The Lowestoft dispute proved to be a landmark case. In 1926 the Board of Education stipulated that LEAs should pay teachers salaries agreed at a national level by the Burnham committee. Mander, together with Michael Conway, W. G. Cove, and Leah Manning, was seen as a leader of the 'forward movement' within the NUT. In reality, however, it was his conservatism which helped him to advance within the NUT executive. He became vice-president in 1926 and president the following year. In 1931 he resigned his post as a head teacher to become general secretary, a position which he held until his retirement in 1947. He was knighted in 1938. 
In Mander's first year as general secretary of the NUT he was a vigorous opponent of demands for teachers' pay to be reduced by up to 30 per cent in response to the economic crisis. The National Government initially sought a reduction of 15 per cent but strong NUT resistance limited the cut to 10 per cent. Having emerged from this difficult period, the second half of the 1930s saw the union renew its campaign for educational expansion, including the raising of the school-leaving age to fifteen and the provision of free secondary education for all. During the Second World War these and other themes were central to government plans for educational reconstruction and Mander was regularly consulted by civil servants and by R. A. Butler, president of the Board of Education from 1941 to 1945. In 1942 Mander was appointed to the inquiry into the supply, recruitment, and training of teachers and youth leaders, chaired by Sir Arnold McNair, which reported in May 1944. He also worked constructively with civil servants and representatives of the LEAs to promote the 1943 white paper 'Educational Reconstruction' and the 1944 'Education Act'. 
Mander participated in some delicate negotiations concerning the future of church schools and, when it looked as if the legislation might be wrecked by calls for equal pay for women teachers, he instructed NUT members of parliament to save the bill rather than support an amendment which reflected union policy. When the Burnham committee was reconstituted in 1944 Mander, in his capacity as leader of the teachers' panel, was drawn into a dispute with the LEAs concerning the payment of allowances for additional qualifications and training. A compromise was reached, however, and it can be argued that Mander's good personal relationships with Butler, Sir Maurice Holmes, the board's permanent secretary, and Sir Percival Sharp, secretary of the Association of Education Committees, did much to cultivate the sense of 'partnership' in education policy making which characterized the wartime and immediate post-war period. 
Within his own union, however, Mander was never universally popular, particularly among communist members of the executive. Indeed, as the 'Education Bill' progressed through parliament, he found himself having to work with his long-standing opponent G. C. T. Giles, the communist headmaster of Acton School, who was union president during 1944. He retired as NUT general secretary in 1947 but remained active in local politics, chairing Bedfordshire county council between 1952 and 1962, and was a member of the executive of the Association of Education Committees. He died at Luton and Dunstable Hospital, Luton, on 27 February 1964; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 63824


Ball, William (fl. 1911-1913), suffrage activist and trade unionist, came from a working-class family, possibly based in the midlands. Little is known of his early years apart from his paid work after leaving school. After working initially as a gardener, he became a master tailor with his own business, moving into unskilled work when this failed. In 1911-12 he was living in Birmingham with his wife and five children and was a member of the Transport Workers' Federation. 
Ball came to public attention in 1912 as a result of involvement in the Men's Political Union (MPU), one of several men's groups campaigning for women's suffrage. As a working-class man, he was an anomaly in an organization whose members were predominantly from middle-class educated backgrounds. Ball was arrested in December 1911 after breaking Home Office windows in protest against the prison treatment of a fellow MPU member. On 22 December 1911 he was sentenced to two months' hard labour. Once in prison he went on hunger strike and refused to wear prison clothes. As a result he was forcibly fed twice a day for five weeks. By 25 January 1912 prison authorities recorded that he was 'restless and talking wildly' but was taking food voluntarily four days later (Holton, 'Manliness and militancy', 126). However, on 9 February 1912 he was declared insane and was released as a pauper into the care of a lunatic asylum, on the grounds that he had no family or friends to receive him. Ball's wife had been informed of his release only after the event, and was able to move him into private care only after some argument. 
The issue of Ball's prison treatment and release into a lunatic asylum was taken up by members of the MPU, in particular by Hugh Franklin, who protested to his uncle Herbert Samuel, a member of the Liberal government. The MPU was concerned not only that Ball had been released before the end of his sentence, but also that he had been sent to an asylum without his family being informed. The haste and apparent secrecy surrounding this action, together with grave concerns about his health, raised questions about the mistreatment of Ball in prison and about the possible attempt to cover this up. A doctor examining William Ball after his release from prison found high levels of sugar in his urine and an ulcer on his throat, yet there was no reference to either condition in his prison notes, nor was any date given for the onset of the mental illness which was supposedly the reason for releasing him in the first place. 
Bowing to pressure, the Home Office launched an inquiry into Ball's prison treatment, headed by Sir George Savage. The resulting white paper vindicated the prison authorities, maintaining that Ball was a man of 'feeble intellect', 'defective' in general knowledge, and 'illiterate'. It concluded that his mental breakdown had nothing to do with his treatment as a prisoner on hunger strike, but was the outcome of 'living in a state of emotional excitement because of his suffrage activities, or maybe the consequence of an accident he had suffered as a dock labourer' (Holton, 'Manliness and militancy', 126). Prison records reported that although Ball had co-operated with forcible feeding, he had shown some evidence of sensory and auditory hallucinations, believing he had experienced electrical torture. After his release Ball maintained that he had been tied down and given electric shocks while being force-fed. 
The MPU and others challenged the report, arguing that Ball was a literate, skilled worker who had fallen on hard times, and that the industrial injury to which the report attempted to attribute his breakdown was a strain to his knee, not to his intellect. It is notable also that Ball conducted his own defence in court when arrested; this action certainly seems at odds with the Savage report's claims about his inferior intellect. 
Ball was back in prison a year later after involvement in another protest. Although he went on hunger strike, he was released after two days when his fine was paid anonymously. Nothing is known of his life after these events. 


@@@@@


doc= 63825


Barrett, Rachel (1874-1953), suffragette and newspaper editor, was born on 12 November 1874 at 23 Union Street, Carmarthen, the daughter of Welsh-speaking parents, Rees Barrett, land and road surveyor, and Anne Barrett, 'nee' Jones. Educated at a private school in Stroud, she later won a scholarship to Aberystwyth College, gaining a BSc (London) in 1904, and taught in schools at Penarth and Carmarthen. 
In 1906 Rachel Barrett joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), the women's suffrage organization founded by Emmeline Pankhurst, and helped Adela Pankhurst, the WSPU organizer in Cardiff. She spoke at many meetings on behalf of the cause and incurred the disapproval of her headmistress, especially, she said, when 'her science mistress was reported in the local papers as drenched with flour at an open air meeting at the Cardiff docks' (Barrett, 126-7). In July 1907 she resigned her teaching post and enrolled at the London School of Economics (LSE), intending to study for a DSc in economics. In 1908, however, Christabel Pankhurst asked her to become a full-time organizer for the WSPU. This meant giving up her studies at the LSE, but, 'it was a definite call', she said, 'and I obeyed' (ibid., 127). In 1910 she was appointed WSPU organizer for Wales and moved to Newport, Monmouthshire. 
Rachel Barrett was recalled to London in the spring of 1912, following Christabel Pankhurst's flight to Paris, to help Annie Kenney run the national campaign. Later that year she was asked to become assistant editor of 'The Suffragette', the new weekly newspaper of the WSPU. Annie Kenney said that she had chosen Rachel for this task because she was 'an exceptionally clever and highly educated woman, she was a devoted worker and had tremendous admiration for Christabel' (Kenney, 179). Rachel Barrett's reaction to being asked to edit the paper was that it was 'an appalling task as I knew nothing whatever of journalism' (Barrett, 129), but she took it on and with it the risks which the increasingly militant tactics of the WSPU involved. When she went to Paris to consult with Christabel, she had to travel under cover, and whenever they talked on the telephone, she 'could always hear the click of Scotland Yard listening in' (ibid., 129). In April 1913 the WSPU offices were raided and the staff of the paper arrested on charges of conspiring to damage property. Rachel Barrett was sentenced to a month's imprisonment. She immediately went on hunger strike and was released five days later under the terms of the ''Cat and Mouse Act''. She was subsequently re-arrested and released twice more and while out on licence for the third time had herself smuggled into WSPU offices in Kingsway House where she carried on bringing out 'The Suffragette'. She lived there in secret for five months, but while she was away in May 1914, the offices were raided once again. In consultation with Christabel, it was decided that she should go to Scotland, where newspaper law was different from England, in order to publish the paper from there. She lived in Edinburgh under an assumed name, calling herself Miss Ashworth, and brought out the paper each week until the last number appeared on the Friday after the First World War was declared. 
Rachel Barrett never married. While working at 'The Suffragette' she met Ida Alexa Ross Wylie (1885-1959) the Australian novelist, who was a contributor to the paper, and they are thought to have become lovers (Cline, 173). The couple figure in the 1920s as close friends of Radclyffe Hall and supporters over the trial of 'The Well of Loneliness' in 1928. She died of a cerebral haemorrhage on 26 August 1953, at the age of seventy-eight at the Carylls Nursing Home in Faygate, Rusper, Sussex. Her death certificate describes her as a spinster and a teacher resident in Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 63826


Mason, Stewart Carlton (1906-1983), educational administrator, was born on 28 February 1906 in St John's Wood, London, the only child of Carlton Willicomb Mason, musician, and his wife, Alys Kastor. Educated at Uppingham School, but denied family support because of his desire to teach, he was able to take up an exhibition at Worcester College, Oxford, where he read Spanish and French, only through the generosity of a wealthy patron. Accordingly, after graduating in 1928 he taught first at Berkhamsted (1930-31) and was then a modern languages master at Harrow School under Cyril Norwood, whom he greatly admired. In 1937, momentously as it turned out, he joined the inspectorate and as an inspector in Cambridgeshire was deeply impressed by the work of the chief education officer, Henry Morris. 
In 1941 during wartime secondment to the Admiralty, a first marriage having been dissolved, Mason married Ruth Elizabeth Wise; they had four sons. In 1944 he went as inspector to Leicestershire, from where his family originated and where the chief education officer, Sir William Brockington, was in his seventies. Seizing his opportunity, there being no deputy director, he virtually compiled single-handedly the authority's development plan for implementing the 1944 'Education Act' and duly succeeded Brockington in 1947. 
Something of a mystic, Mason was convinced that 'all the fates' had determined this almost unprecedented career reorientation and he eagerly set about guiding this nominally conservative but largely non-political shire authority through the immediate post-war years. During his first decade, supported by the paternal Sir Robert Martin, chairman of both the county council and the education committee, he laid the foundations of what became a vast collection of fine art for the embellishment of schools, while, at the same time, designating strategically placed 'community colleges' on the Cambridgeshire model. Simultaneously, he supported his music adviser, Eric Pinkett, in the creation of the internationally renowned Leicestershire Schools Symphony Orchestra. He encouraged the primary schools, meanwhile, to adopt the progressive practices which had enchanted him at the village school at Quy in Morris's Cambridgeshire -- practices which attracted many American observers to Leicestershire in the 1960s. 
Hitherto Mason had unquestioningly supported the tripartite structure of post-1944 universal secondary education but, gradually, he became disturbed by the injustices that eleven-plus grammar-school selection could impose on families, including his own. Accordingly, in March 1957, after much pondering, he persuaded the authority to accept a 'limited experiment' in a two-tier system of secondary education which, consisting of high schools for those aged eleven to fourteen and upper (grammar) schools for those aged fourteen to eighteen, not only eliminated the dreaded selection examination but also effectively guaranteed access to grammar schools to all children whose parents promised to keep them there until the age of sixteen. By 1969 the 'Mason plan', described in his booklet 'The Leicestershire Experiment and Plan' (1960; rev. edn, 1964), covered the whole county -- the first shire authority to turn comprehensive; it was Mason's finest achievement. 
In 1959, with Leicestershire's reputation as a patron of fine art fully established, Mason was invited to serve on the National Advisory Council on Art Education and virtually began a second career. First as vice-chairman (1961-70) and later chairman (1970-74) of the National Council for Diplomas in Art and Design he not only presided over the reorganization of art education but, believing, as an employer of artists in a qualification-conscious world, that artists needed degrees, led it against virulent opposition into the mainstream of higher education via the Council for National Academic Awards. He also served on both the advisory council of the Victoria and Albert Museum (1961-73) and the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries. Similarly, at regional level he chaired the visual arts panels of both the East Midlands Arts Association (1971-5) and, having retired to Suffolk, the Eastern Arts Association (1972-80), where he converted the local Tolly Cobbold art exhibition into a national competition for contemporary artists. 
Significant though these activities were, however, Mason's greatest and most lasting achievement outside the education field was made as a trustee of the Tate Gallery (1966-73), when in the summer of 1972, salvaging a previously abandoned scheme, he engineered the establishment of the Institute of Contemporary Prints at the Tate under the Sir Robert McAlpine Trust. Through the generosity of donors and Mason's assiduity as curator (1972-6) in approaching artists, some 3000 prints were acquired which the gallery could never have afforded to buy. Whereas print acquisition hitherto had been the province of the Victoria and Albert and British museums, the Tate now had its own core collection; a fitting memorial to Mason's work on behalf of both artists and the art-loving public. 
Mason died of spinal cancer at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, on 23 November 1983, survived by his wife. He was fortunate to have been ideally placed to exploit the massive post-war educational expansion at a time when local education authorities provided scope for people with vision. Not everything he touched turned to gold, however, and in the harsher climate of subsequent decades some of the innovations in both primary and secondary schools that he encouraged may have appeared controversial and even ill-advised. There was also a protracted dispute between himself and Robin Pedley, a lecturer in education at Leicester University, over the origins of the idea of the two-tier system of secondary school reorganization. His adversarial style, moreover, did not always endear him to those in high places, which possibly explains why he was made CBE in 1968 but he never received the coveted knighthood. Nevertheless, there is no denying the contemporary national impact of the developments that he fostered across a remarkably broad front. Many had been pioneered elsewhere, but his bringing them together in a single authority designates him as one of the great directors of education of the post-war era. 


@@@@@


doc= 63828


Mayhew, Arthur Innes (1878-1948), educationist, was born at 18 Bradmore Road, Oxford, on 27 September 1878, the third son and sixth in the family of seven children of the Revd Anthony Lawson Mayhew (1842-1916), chaplain of Wadham College, Oxford, and a noted lexicographer of the English language, and his wife, Jane Innes (1843-1915), the daughter of John Griffen, a doctor in Banbury. He attended the Oxford preparatory school (1888-91) before winning an open scholarship to Winchester College in 1891. Six years later he won a further scholarship to New College, Oxford, from where he graduated in 1901 with firsts in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores'. By his own admission he was fascinated by Plato's insistence on the state's responsibility for the education of its citizens and this eventually led him, after travel in Europe, Ceylon, and Burma, to join the elite Indian education service in 1903. He was to spend almost twenty years in India, during which time he met his future wife, raised a family of three children, and achieved high office in the educational bureaucracy. 
Mayhew's first appointment was as a school inspector in Madras. Within four years he was deputy director of public instruction and two years later inspector of European and teacher-training schools. In 1909 his career took an unusual turn when he was seconded for two years as the educational adviser to the nizam of Hyderabad. In 1914, at the age of thirty-six, he was appointed acting director, and two years later director, of public instruction in the Central Provinces. As acting director he presided over a committee whose report subsequently led to the establishment of Nagpur University. In 1919 he was made CIE for his services to Indian education. Prior to his departure from India in 1922 he also presided briefly over the newly created central advisory Board of Education. 
In September 1908 Mayhew married May Catherine (1882-1954), the daughter of Sir James Davies, a judge of the high court of Madras. They had two sons and a daughter. Mayhew left India partly for family and health reasons but also because he was opposed to the transfer of education to local Indian control in 1921. He feared that this would lead to increasing political interference, especially in universities, with appointments being made in return for political favours and a further decline in already dubious academic standards. 
Upon his return to England Mayhew taught classics at Eton College and wrote two books, 'The Education of India' (1926) and 'Christianity and the Government of India' (1929), which established him as a leading scholar on British rule in India. By the late 1920s he was seeking a new career opening; he was selected in 1929 as one of the two joint secretaries of the revamped and enlarged Colonial Office advisory committee on education in the colonies. 
Mayhew was fifty years old when he started sharing an office with Hanns Vischer, the other joint secretary, at 2 Richmond Terrace, situated on the southern side of Whitehall, London. During the next ten years he travelled widely. In 1931 he visited the West Indies and, together with F. C. Marriott, wrote a report on education in Trinidad, Barbados, and the Leeward and Windward islands. In 1932 he visited the Gold Coast as a member of the first inspection team of Achimota College. He attended two major overseas conferences on colonial education, at Yale (1934) and Hawaii (1936), and thereafter visited Fiji to prepare a report on education (1937). Throughout the 1930s he was also known personally to dozens of officers in the colonial education service; he edited 'Oversea Education', a successful journal about colonial education; he was closely involved in the ever expanding activities of the advisory committee; he lectured on British education policy in India and the colonies at the London Institute of Education; and he also wrote a third book, 'Education in the Colonial Empire' (1938), which established his reputation as the leading authority on the subject. His experience in India had made him acutely aware of the practical problems which confronted men and women working in schools in tropical Africa and elsewhere and enabled him to empathize with teachers and administrators. 
Mayhew's was the major voice on colonial education in Whitehall in the 1930s, and his advice was always sought. His successor at the Colonial Office, Sir Christopher Cox, spoke of his selfless character, his unassuming and modest, but far from diffident, personality, and his depth of knowledge, sanity, clarity, and accuracy, to which he sometimes added irony and a salty wit (TNA: PRO, CO 1045/1483). As an educationist he was highly critical of British education policy in India. He recognized the value of Western knowledge and the English language in helping India and the colonial empire to relate to the modern world but he was equally insistent that the education system of any country must be closely linked to its own unique history and culture. Throughout his life he retained strong Anglican beliefs derived from his family background and these helped him to win the trust and respect of the Christian missions; his close and friendly links with protestant missions raised his influence within the Colonial Office. He was made a CMG in 1936. 
The onset of war in 1939 gave Mayhew few opportunities to enjoy retirement. He continued to edit 'Oversea Education' until 1946 and remained an active member of the advisory committee on education in the colonies besides doing war-work of a non-educational kind in Whitehall. He was also a member of the council of Radley College, and in 1940 he wrote a series of articles for the 'Times Educational Supplement' entitled 'Educating the colonies'. He died unexpectedly in his sleep at his home, Normanhurst, Slough Road, Datchet, Buckinghamshire, on 16 March 1948, and was cremated on 18 March at Woking. 
Mayhew's career epitomized the Platonic ideal of the guardians that so interested him as a student at Oxford at the turn of the century. He never consciously sought the limelight -- he remained a relatively obscure figure in British colonial education -- and his outstanding intellect was best suited to those behind-the-scenes activities traditionally associated with the drafting of memoranda and official correspondence, but, as Cox suggested, there was also a warm human side to his personality. W. E. F. Ward wrote soon after his death: 'There are probably many of us in the Colonial Education Service to whom for many years the Colonial Office meant simply Arthur Mayhew. In our timidity we never ventured to approach the frowning portals of Downing Street; but on the other side of the Cenotaph, in the sunny seclusion of Richmond Terrace, we were sure to find a ready welcome from a professional colleague. Mayhew was a man of two worlds: a man of Kipling's India and, though he never served in the Colonies, a man of the Colonial Empire. (Ward, 755)' 



@@@@@


doc= 63830


Morris, Henry (1889-1961), educational administrator, was born on 13 November 1889 at 131 Poulton Road, Southport, Lancashire, the fourth son and seventh of the eight children of William Morris, journeyman plumber, and his wife, Mary Ellen Mullin (died 1901/2). His mother was Irish, a Roman Catholic until her marriage, and perhaps an influence on his early inclination to a career in the church, though she died when he was twelve. Morris left school at the age of fourteen to work as an office boy on the 'Southport Visiter', and from 1906 to 1910 continued his education through adult classes at the Harris Institute, Preston. At the age of twenty-one he began to train for the priesthood at St David's College, Lampeter, and after obtaining a second class in theology moderations, he entered Exeter College, Oxford, in 1912. In military service from 1914, he was commissioned in the Royal Army Service Corps and served in France and in Italy. He completed his undergraduate studies at King's College, Cambridge, from 1919 to 1920, in which year he gained an upper second in moral sciences. 
Morris made his mark in the inter-war period of educational reorganization, when so much was hoped for and so little realized in the reform of state schooling. Beginning as assistant education secretary in Kent under the careful tutelage of E. Salter Davies in 1920-21, he soon moved to Cambridgeshire and in 1922 succeeded to the post of county education secretary there. His rapid and politically astute achievement of an agreed religious syllabus for the county schools, the first of its kind in England, was a prelude to his inspirational and energetic campaign for village colleges. These entailed the consolidation of county and denominational schools in order to provide a panacea for the widely recognized 'rural problem'. The village college was to provide a focus for educational, cultural, and social activity in increasingly depopulated and economically deprived agricultural areas. Morris's achievement in founding four such colleges in Cambridgeshire by 1939 was the result of determined pursuit of the requisite funding, and resolute handling of the resistance which he encountered. The first village college opened at Sawston in 1930. Village colleges aimed to provide not only juvenile and adult education, but also the social and cultural activities Morris saw as necessary for a healthy and progressive rural community. At Oxford he had been deeply influenced by Hastings Rashdall's exposition of the medieval university in its integral relationship with society, but he had been inspired too by the fine architecture of the ancient university town, and he believed passionately in the educational importance of an aesthetic environment, epitomized in the distinguished design which he secured from Walter Gropius for Impington Village College, opened in 1939. R. A. Butler, wartime minister of education, made frequent acknowledgement of Morris's achievement, and in the 1942 birthday honours Morris was made CBE. Cambridgeshire's village colleges provided the model for many developments in community education after the Second World War, for example in Leicestershire, Derbyshire, and Devon. 
Morris continued as director of education for nine years after the war, and by this period he had acquired a national reputation, resulting in advisory work for the Colonial Office on provision of further education in west Africa. From 1947 he was seconded part-time by the Ministry of Town and Country Planning to advise on social and cultural provision for the new towns, an extension of his life's work in the context of a highly significant policy developed by the post-war Labour government. One notable achievement in this connection was the establishment of the Digswell community of artists and craftsmen near Welwyn Garden City, a project intended as part of a greater aim of bringing artists into contact with town planners, architects, manufacturers, and the local public. Trustees such as Herbert Read and Gordon Russell demonstrate the level of support which Morris received. He put a great deal of personal commitment and energy into this project, and despite many difficulties it was formally opened in 1959. 
Morris's educational innovations sprang from a set of ideals based on his interest in religion, education, science, and the arts. Religion in its widest and deepest sense meant much to him, though his early attachment to the church was severed by war experience and by the teachings of scientific humanism. But above all it was his intense love of beauty in various forms -- music, art, poetry, and especially architecture -- which underlay his professional and personal life. Dorothy Bimrose, his personal secretary for many years, recalled that 'he had no beliefs, no formal religion, yet his passionate belief in beauty and graciousness and in the possibility of full and complete living, was his religion' (Ree, Lupton, and others, 13). Friends felt privileged to share his practical gospel of enhancing life by regenerating the culture as a whole, and this gospel was realized through his firm belief in local government and through his pragmatism. 
Nan Youngman, art adviser in Cambridgeshire from 1944, described Morris as 'tall, with a long pale face and wild blue eyes. His hair was mousy, sparse and straight -- there was always one long wisp hanging out at the back. He had a beautiful voice, and, as many testify, he was unpredictable in his moods, but never dull. (Ree, Lupton, and others, 32)' His unpredictability embraced a social ambivalence; he despised pomposity but could be snobbish, and embarrassment about his own humble origins is evident from the testimony of former colleagues and from misleading entries in Oxford and Cambridge college registers. He could be by turns generous and close-fisted. He was difficult to work with, demanding and intolerant, and a master of the premeditated insult. Yet Morris inspired loyalty among close friends who admired his infectious and vituperative vivacity and who recorded his antipathy to prejudice and hypocrisy, his deep sense of the humane, and compassion for human suffering. He was hospitable to artistic and intellectual company in the elegance of three successive homes which he occupied throughout his years in Cambridge; both there and on European travel with friends he indulged his aesthetic and culinary tastes. His homosexuality was generally concealed from acquaintances in his lifetime, but more intimate friends later described his sexual passions and frustrations, and his long-standing friendship with Charles Fenn has been well documented by Ree. Nan Youngman observed that although a homosexual he was almost never unfriendly to women; Jack Pritchard recalled his love of happy families with children and his sadness that he would never marry and have a family himself. 
In 1960 Morris officiated at the opening of Comberton Village College in spite of his declining health, and at the end of that year he was persuaded to retire from the ministry of town and country planning. Physical and mental deterioration compounded his characteristically eccentric behaviour, but he continued to receive support from friends and former colleagues. Dementia, pneumonia, and Parkinson's disease combined to cause his death on 10 December 1961 at Hill End Hospital, St Albans, where he had spent his last months. A simple cremation ceremony at Golders Green crematorium on 14 December was attended by Henry Moore and J. B. Priestley, among many old friends. Published tributes and commemorations following his death, and later marking the centenary of his birth, reflected the inspiration and the affection felt by many who had been influenced by his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 63831


Russell, Sir (Edward) Lionel (1903-1983), educational administrator, was born at 35 Sotheby Road, Islington, London, on 8 May 1903, the son of Edward Russell, an analytical chemist, and his wife, Kate. He was educated at Clifton College and at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he gained a first in part one of the mathematical tripos (1923) and a second in English (1925). Following a lectureship at the University of Lund, Sweden (1925-31), and a period as assistant master at Charterhouse School (1932-5), Russell moved into local education authority administration, as assistant director of education in Liverpool (1935-8), the career he was to follow for the rest of his life. He was assistant education officer in Birmingham (1938-46) and chief education officer for the city from 1946 to 1968. 
A manager rather than an educational theorist, Russell was soon recognized as an astute and reliable administrator with a practical and humane approach to educational policy. At Birmingham he instituted a strong sense of civic pride and emphasized the obligations of the education service to the city and its inhabitants. He acquired a reputation as a demanding chief, committed to the highest standards and to meticulous administrative efficiency. Throughout his career he had a strong interest in and commitment to adult and further education. He was closely involved, for example, in the evolution of the University of Aston (1966) from its origins in the Birmingham College of Technology. 
Nationally, Russell was from the 1950s onwards a prominent member of influential public bodies concerned with education: the University Grants Committee (1954-63), the Council for National Academic Awards (1964-70), and, as president, the Association of Chief Education Officers (1955-7). He was called upon frequently as a private adviser to education ministers and was seen as a wise counsel and a safe pair of hands. It was therefore no surprise when in 1969 he was invited by the secretary of state for education, Ted Short, to chair a committee of inquiry to review the provision of non-vocational adult education in England and Wales. However, by the time the report, entitled 'Adult Education: a Plan for Development', appeared in 1973, the political situation had changed markedly (Margaret Thatcher was now secretary of state for education in Edward Heath's Conservative government), and economic crisis was imminent. 
Events therefore overtook and effectively submerged what was in reality a reasonable, practical, and mildly progressive programme for adult education recommended by the report. The Russell report suggested no fundamental changes to structures or provision, but rather a general expansion, a greater emphasis upon adult education in the further education sector, and a higher priority in the adult education provision of the Workers' Educational Association (WEA) and the universities for work with disadvantaged communities. With some prescience, given the emphasis upon lifelong learning in the later 1990s and beyond, Russell envisaged a more accessible, flexible, inclusive, and learner-centred system of post-compulsory education and training. 
At the time, however, the Russell report and the liberal, welfare state world view it reflected, was overwhelmed by larger forces. Adult education in all sectors was fundamentally and systematically undermined through the late 1970s and the 1980s by a series of spending cuts and restructuring. Despite rhetorical support for adult education and its liberating mission, none of the political parties gave material support to adult education as such, let alone to the modest developmental proposals of the report. It was not only ignored, in effect, by the political parties: the professional field was generally critical of Russell's perceived caution and pragmatic, evolutionary tenor. Through the 1970s, therefore, the report had few friends. However, with the hindsight of almost thirty years, the report and its recommendations had considerable resonance. 
Russell's professional values and personal qualities were well symbolized by the report's pragmatic liberalism. He was a very private man, dedicated to liberal educational values and the highest standards of public service. He was meticulous and particular, not least in the drafting of documents, and was well known for ravaging the drafts of his subordinates. He was a rather heavy, formal, and seemingly austere figure. Yet his shyness concealed a kindly and considerate man who treated with courtesy everyone with whom he had contact. 
One of the leading figures in English education during the quarter of a century following the 1944 'Education Act', Russell was appointed CBE in 1953 and knighted in 1962. He never married. One of his few interests outside his work was cricket, for which he had a passion, particularly in Gloucestershire. He died at Manor Park Hospital, Bristol, on 26 December 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 63832


Bentinck, Ruth Mary Cavendish- (1867-1953), women's suffragist and socialist, was born in Tangier on 21 October 1867, the illegitimate daughter of Edward Adolphus Ferdinand St Maur, Earl St Maur (1835-1869), eldest son of the twelfth duke of Somerset ['see under 'St Maur, Edward Adolphus], and Rosina Elizabeth Swan (died 1872), daughter of a bricklayer and a Gypsy. Shortly after her birth she and her mother were brought to England. In 1869 her father died of a lung tumour, and Rosina and her children (she had given birth to a son, Richard Harold, in 1869) came under the care of the duke and duchess of Somerset. In 1872 Rosina married Francois Tournier of Bordeaux, but died shortly afterwards of consumption. The children became the informally adopted wards of their Somerset grandparents (the relationship was also acknowledged in their surname, St Maur), living with them mainly at Bulstrode Park in Buckinghamshire, Stover Lodge in Devon, and in London. Although suffering the social stigma of illegitimacy, Ruth received a good private education and was introduced into aristocratic society. 
In 1885 the duke died, leaving Ruth St Maur a fortune of $80,000, and she went to live with her aunt, Lady Guendolen Ramsden, in Upper Brook Street, Mayfair. She began to take an interest in social questions at this time, and in the condition of the poor. In 1887 she made her debut in society, creating a stir by her combination of wealth, striking good looks, and outspoken wit, which did much to overcome the disadvantages of her birth. In the course of her first season she met, and on 8 August 1887 married, (William George) Frederick Cavendish-Bentinck (1856-1948), barrister, a great-grandson of the third duke of Portland. The young couple received the castle on Brownsea Island as a wedding present; they travelled widely in Europe and the Mediterranean, and after a period of financial difficulty consequent on the death of Frederick's father, settled at 78 Harley Street, a house owned by Frederick's wealthy benefactor and cousin Lucy, Lady Howard de Walden. They continued to travel and to visit widely among friends and relatives, meeting both royalty and Fabian socialists. 
Ruth Cavendish-Bentinck grew increasingly active politically, becoming involved with a girls' club in the East End of London, supporting the Bryant and May matchgirls' strike, and helping Beatrice Webb with the reform of the poor law. She came to know Beatrice and Sidney Webb closely, and was a friend of Keir Hardie and R. B. Cunninghame Graham, as well as many other socialists. She contributed to such papers as the 'Socialist Review' and the 'Labour Leader', and took a strong radical line over such matters as the South African War and Lloyd George's budget, as well as being a confirmed anti-vaccinationist. Her labour movement activities involved her particularly with the Women's Trade Union League, and later the National Federation of Women Workers, and in 1911 she helped Ben Tillett organize the dockers' strike. At the same time she continued to move in high society, although she did not always meet with its approval, particularly on the part of her husband's family (her husband remained a lifelong Conservative). Her attitudes in this respect always remained contradictory. 
Ruth Cavendish-Bentinck also became increasingly active in the campaign for women's suffrage. In this she was to some extent following in family tradition: Caroline Norton, the campaigner for married women's rights, was a great-aunt, and Lady Guendolen Ramsden was also a supporter of women's suffrage. Ruth Cavendish-Bentinck's main sympathies came to lie with the militant Women's Social and Political Union, and she frequently spoke publicly and demonstrated on their behalf, on one occasion parading between sandwich-boards outside the House of Commons. However, she herself was never actually arrested for militant action, and she did maintain friendly relations with non-militants. In 1913, with Florence de Fonblanque, she founded the Qui Vive Corps, which was intended to be a sort of suffragist 'flying squad', with its own uniform (brown with a green cockade and badge). Members were pledged to turn out at any time to support suffrage activity, but without the use of militant tactics. It is unclear how active this organization proved to be. 
In 1909 Ruth Cavendish-Bentinck established the Cavendish-Bentinck Library as a subscription library for suffragists, collecting not only feminist classics and works of antiquarian interest, but up-to-the minute publications such as Havelock Ellis's 'Studies in the Psychology of Sex' (the future Lord Rhondda, being unable because of censorship to buy a copy, had to ask his daughter, a member of the Cavendish-Bentinck Library, to borrow it for him). The library eventually became part of the Women's Service Library (now the Women's Library), and Ruth Cavendish-Bentinck maintained an active interest in it until her death. 
In the First World War, Ruth Cavendish-Bentinck campaigned for women's war work, although she was highly critical of the war mentality; her elder son was severely wounded at Mons. After the war she became an enthusiastic supporter of the Soviet Union, especially in the 1930s, when she joined with Beatrice Webb in demonstrating the necessity and legitimacy of the Moscow trials; the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939-41 appears to have shaken her confidence in Stalin only briefly. In the Second World War she and her husband had to move out of their Harley Street house into a flat, but otherwise suffered little. Despite differences in temperament and politics they had been a devoted couple. However, after the war her husband's health declined, and he died in 1948. Ruth Cavendish-Bentinck survived him by five years, dying at her home, 36 Harley House, Marylebone Road, London, on 28 January 1953. She was survived by four children (a fifth had died in infancy); her elder son eventually became the eighth duke of Portland and was succeeded by his brother Victor Frederick William Cavendish-Bentinck (1897-1990). 


@@@@@


doc= 63833


Schonell, Sir Fred Joyce (1900-1969), educationist and university administrator, was born on 3 August 1900 in Perth, Western Australia, the son of Edward William Schonell, a headmaster, and his wife, Agnes Mary, 'nee' Mawer. His early education was at Perth modern school. Having taught between 1921 and 1922, he graduated BA in English from the University of Western Australia in 1925. In the following year he moved to London, where he returned to teaching. With a Hackett scholarship awarded by the University of Western Australia he was a research student under Cyril Burt and Percy Nunn at the Institute of Education and King's College, London, between 1929 and 1931, gaining a PhD in education in 1932. On 22 December 1926 he married Florence Eleanor Waterman, with whom he collaborated closely on a number of educational projects until her death in 1962; she was the daughter of William de Bracey Waterman of Perth, Western Australia. They had a son and a daughter. 
Partly in step with his postgraduate research, Schonell had taken additional courses in educational theory and teacher training at Cambridge and the Institute of Education in London, obtaining a teaching diploma from the latter in 1929, while still continuing to teach and to research into aspects of educational psychology. He evolved his diagnostic and remedial techniques in schools in London and Kent while a lecturer in education at Goldsmiths' College, University of London. He held that post from 1931 until 1942, when he was appointed professor of education at University College, Swansea, where he built up a major department. In 1946 he succeeded Charles Wilfrid Valentine as professor of education at the University of Birmingham, where he was closely concerned with setting up a new institute of education, a research department, and a remedial education centre. He was awarded a DLit from London in 1943 and an MA from Birmingham in 1947. 
Schonell returned to Australia in 1950 to become professor of education at the University of Queensland where he built up the education faculty and established a remedial centre on similar lines to that in Birmingham. In 1960 he became the first vice-chancellor of the university to be appointed from the academic community (a position previously held by prominent lay figures in an honorary capacity), playing a prominent role in promoting and developing the university during his nine-year tenure from 1960 until his death. 
Schonell was a considerable researcher and a prolific author with a particular interest in children who would be diagnosed today as having learning difficulties. Between 1932 and 1962, for instance, he published over fifteen books, including 'Backwardness in the Basic Subjects' (1942), 'Diagnostic and Attainment Tests' (1949), and 'Diagnosis and Remedial Teaching in Arithmetic' (1957). His major long-term interest was in the problems that such children encountered with reading, spelling, and simple arithmetic. This concern took in both the detection and the improvement of deficiencies in such key skills. His widely utilized diagnostic tests for arithmetic and intelligence can be seen as directly expressing this interest, as can his series of elementary books designed to improve performance in English and arithmetic. His 'Happy Venture' series of reading books sold in millions to primary schools in Britain and the Commonwealth. The regime that his books for use in schools promoted was that the material should be arranged in strictly increasing order of difficulty, and that progression from the easier to the more demanding material should be based on a rigorous grading scheme. 
Schonell served on numerous committees and professional bodies. He was at various times honorary secretary of the education section, president of the midland branch, and council member of the British Psychological Society (BPS). He was made an honorary fellow of the BPS in 1966. After 1950 he was equally active in the Australian branch of the BPS, later becoming a fellow of the newly autonomous Australian Psychological Society. In 1959 he was elected a fellow of the Australian College of Education. He was president of the Australian and New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science from 1965 to 1966 and national chairman of the Winston Churchill Fellowship selection committee from 1966, as well as serving on the council of the Association of Commonwealth Universities. Outside his academic life, his main interests were in art, music, and, especially, Elizabethan theatre. 
Schonell was made a knight bachelor in 1962 and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Western Australia (1963) and Sydney (1965). He died of lymphatic cancer on 22 February 1969 at his home in Rutledge Street, Indooroopilly, Brisbane, a few months before his intended retirement date. After a funeral service at St John's Anglican Cathedral in Brisbane he was cremated at the Mount Thompson crematorium, Brisbane, on 26 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 63834


Billinghurst, (Rosa) May (1875-1953), suffragette, was born on 31 May 1875 at 35 Granville Park, Lewisham, London, the second of nine children of Henry Francombe Billinghurst ('c'.1832-1912), bank manager, and his wife, Rosa Ann Billinghurst, 'nee' Brimsmead. At the age of five months she suffered an illness which resulted in paralysis from the waist down. For the rest of her life her legs were strapped in irons and she relied on the use of an invalid tricycle for mobility. 
As a young woman May Billinghurst worked among Greenwich workhouse inmates, and with poor children in the Deptford slums. She also joined one of her sisters in the work of rescuing young girls from prostitution in Greater London. It was the injustices she encountered while engaged in this work that shaped her political beliefs and led her to join the fight for women's suffrage. She had been a member of the Women's Liberal Association, but resigned in early 1907 to join the newly formed Lewisham branch of the militant Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). She became heavily involved in organizing campaign events and public meetings, and in June 1910 she helped form the Greenwich branch of the WSPU, becoming its honorary secretary. A familiar face now at WSPU events and demonstrations she became widely known as 'the cripple suffragette'. Her disability was certainly no bar to her participation in the physically demanding activities undertaken by suffragettes. 
May Billinghurst joined her comrades at the WSPU demonstration in London on 18 November 1910, which was to become known as 'black Friday'. She was badly assaulted by the police, who, having pushed her down a side road by twisting her arms behind her back, pocketed the wheel valves of her tricycle leaving her unable to escape from the angry crowd. These harrowing events only made her more determined to participate in militancy. Four days later she was arrested at another demonstration and subsequently imprisoned for five days, for attempting to push her tricycle through a cordon of police. In March 1912 she was once again imprisoned for militant activity, sentenced to one month in Holloway prison for window-smashing. 
A final term in prison in January 1913 for destroying the contents of a post-box was to test to the limits her political convictions. On starting her eight-month sentence in Holloway prison on 9 January 1913, she immediately went on hunger strike. Against the medical opinion of her own doctor, despite her infirmities, and against her will, the prison authorities attempted forcibly to feed her several times. One attempt to gag open her mouth was so violent that her teeth were damaged and her cheek gashed open. After serving only ten days, she was released from Holloway by the order of the home secretary. After her release she campaigned to stop the forcible feeding of suffragette prisoners and continued to battle for the vote. 
With the onset of war May Billinghurst left Lewisham and went to live with her artist brother Henry Billinghurst in Regent's Park village. Her commitment to feminist societies continued throughout her life: she was a member of the Suffrage Fellowship and the Women's Freedom League, donating $100 in 1953 to Jill Craigie's Equal Pay Film Fund. The last few years of her life were spent living at 2 Fordbridge Road, Sunbury-on-Thames. She died on 29 July 1953 in St Mary's Hospital, Twickenham, from heart failure while recovering from pneumonia. Her unrelenting commitment to the welfare of women and her belief in reincarnation led her to leave her body to the London School of Medicine for Women. 
May Billinghurst's obituary in the 'Women's Freedom League Bulletin' on 4 September 1953 described her as having 'a strong sense of humour, even perhaps, a mischievous one... full of life and courage and not to mention jollity... [thinking] of this life as but one of many'. 


@@@@@


doc= 63835


Bigge, Sir Lewis Amherst Selby-, first baronet (1860-1951), civil servant and author, was born on 3 April 1860 at Oakwood, Kent, the second son of Charles Selby Bigge (1834-1889), landowner and JP, and his wife, Katharina (died 1918), daughter of John Scott Ogle. He had two brothers. Educated at Winchester College until 1879, where his contemporaries included R. L. Morant and H. A. L. Fisher, he went on to hold a scholarship at Christ Church, Oxford, gaining firsts in classical moderations (1881) and in 'literae humaniores' (1883). He was elected to a fellowship of University College, Oxford, in 1883 and tutored in philosophy, developing a particular interest in the work of the eighteenth-century British moralists. He considered Hume's 'Treatise' as possibly the most important philosophical work in the English language and published indexed editions of Hume's works, as well as an anthology of the writings of the moralists, which are still highly regarded by philosophers. 
On 15 September 1885 Selby-Bigge married Edith Lindsay (1864-1939), daughter of John Robert Davison QC MP; they had a son and two daughters. After his marriage Selby-Bigge commenced studying law, and was called to the bar in 1891 by the Inner Temple. In 1894 he was appointed to the Charity Commission as an assistant commissioner where his somewhat cautious and conservative approach melded admirably with both the work and his colleagues. The transfer of the commission's educational work to the newly created Board of Education after 1900 led to his joining the board as a senior examiner and acting assistant secretary in the charitable trusts division in 1903. 
Selby-Bigge's work prior to 1907 was devoted chiefly to resolution of the complicated legal and administrative problems affecting the nation's voluntary schools arising from the implementation of the 1902 'Education Act'. This entailed sensitive and delicate negotiations with a variety of denominational bodies and in them he was highly successful, an accomplishment which reflected both his professionalism and his constant delight in creating order out of chaos. His promotion to a principal assistant secretaryship in 1907 was recognition of his considerable administrative skills and he worked more closely with Sir Robert Morant, the permanent secretary, whom he found a challenging but inspirational mentor. Morant's transfer to the National Health Insurance Commission in 1911, because of the damaging affair of the Holmes circular and his conflicts with the elementary school teachers and local education authorities, resulted in Selby-Bigge's succeeding him at the board. 
Faced with a muted response to his appointment, a generally hostile teaching world, and a new and untried president in J. A. Pease, as well a poor performance as a witness before the royal commission on the civil service, Selby-Bigge found his initial period as secretary both challenging and formative. His subsequent adoption of a more consultative and conciliatory approach enabled him both to heal existent schisms and to create the beneficial model of dual authority and partnership which came to characterize the relationship of the board, and its successors, with the local education authorities for much of the century. Essentially pragmatic rather than visionary in his approach to education administration and reform, he shared some of his predecessor's elitist views about the development of the nation's education system and tended to be sceptical about ill-planned or idealistic enthusiasms related to it. Although the events of the First World War reinforced the case for education reform, Selby-Bigge ensured that the board's pre-war views remained paramount through both his membership of Lord Haldane's education committee of 1916 -- Haldane thought him 'a black-browed man, very jealous, and full of red tape and sealing wax' (Sherington, 179) -- and his close working relationship with H. A. L. Fisher (as president). If the passage of the 1918 'Education Act' was a triumph for Fisher its contents could also be considered a success for Selby-Bigge. 
The creation of both a superannuation scheme and new (Burnham) salary scales for teachers, in 1918 and 1921 respectively, were other signal developments in which Selby-Bigge played a major role. Post-war economic exigencies, however, prevented or impeded the implementation of many of the reforms he valued and also coloured much of his remaining period in the board. None the less, his effective partnership with Fisher ensured that the board deflected or reduced many of the stringent economic cuts to the education system desired by an austere Treasury and the Geddes committee. 
Selby-Bigge's seminal role in education developments between 1911 and 1925 has been seen by some as one which either hindered or endangered education reform. Christopher Addison felt he was too much the finicky don, inclined to split hairs and miss key opportunities, while J. Dover Wilson believed his conservative approach effectively betrayed the nation's future. Some historians, notably G. Sherington and B. Simon, have criticized him for continually attempting to reinforce the board's powers, whereas others have indicted him for the lack of development of technical education. One of his colleagues, however, claimed that he had made the Board of Education the headquarters of civilization ('Times Educational Supplement', 29 June 1951). 
In his retirement Selby-Bigge maintained a keen interest in education, publishing several articles about English and Indian education as well as a seminal text on the Board of Education. He served on national and Indian advisory committees, was a co-opted member of East Sussex local education authority until 1946, a governor of Lewes County Boys' School for seventeen years, and a JP. He was appointed CB in 1905 and KCB in 1913; in 1919 he was created baronet; in 1946 he was appointed OBE. He died at his home, Kingston Manor, near Lewes, Sussex, on 24 May 1951, and was buried on 26 May at Kingston church. His son, John Amherst Selby-Bigge (1892-1973), an artist, succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 63836


Bonwick, Theodora Ellen (1876-1928), educationist and women's rights activist, was born on 27 December 1876 at 60 Coningham Road, Shepherd's Bush, London, the daughter of William Priessnitz Bonwick, a schoolteacher, and his wife, Sarah, formerly Beddow, an executive member of the Women's Liberal Federation, and a member of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. Like her mother, Theodora undertook temperance work and Sunday school teaching, which she gave up for the suffrage cause. She trained at Stockwell College and obtained a BA degree from the University of London. She taught in London elementary schools and was headteacher of Enfield Road School for Girls in Hackney before the First World War; in the 1920s she became headteacher of York Way Girls' School in King's Cross. Joining the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) in 1905, she was a popular speaker -- she spoke at the Woman's Sunday demonstration in Hyde Park on 21 June 1908 and became the secretary of Hornsey WSPU. She was an active campaigner for women's rights in the London Teachers' Association, and was particularly prominent in the movement before the war for equal pay. Even her opponents respected her powers of oratory. The National Union of Teachers (NUT) paper, 'The Schoolmaster', declared that her strong speech for equal pay, which was endorsed at a packed meeting in the Royal Albert Hall in 1913, was 'undoubtedly the speech of the day' ('The Schoolmaster', 1913, 710). 
Theodora Bonwick joined the London-based Women Teachers' Franchise Union (WTFU) and became its president in 1914. She encouraged the affiliation of teachers' organizations to the Labour Party when the NUT was conducting a referendum on the question, believing that sex distinction was as invidious as class distinction. Like many contemporary feminists and humanitarians, Theodora Bonwick became a theosophist and joined the central London lodge in 1909. A member of the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene, she became a strong advocate of sex education in schools and gained the support of parents to teach this as a class subject in her Enfield Road School. This was the only school in the London county council (LCC) area which undertook such teaching as a class topic. But when she advocated that this subject should be taught throughout LCC schools in her presentation to the LCC inquiry on the teaching of sex hygiene, it was rejected. Believing that sex education was necessary to safeguard the moral and physical health of the nation, she continued to give talks on sexual and moral conduct, particularly to the Women's Suffrage Federation in London's East End. She argued that if young people were given knowledge this would prevent them from being 'poisoned by ignorance or impurely minded persons'. In common with the anti-regulationist strand of the social hygiene movement she argued for 'self protection' rather than tighter laws. In the 1920s she developed her interest in educating children in moral behaviour through her work as organizer of the cinema group of the London unit of the National Union of Women Teachers (NUWT). She was the only British representative at the second European film conference in The Hague in 1928 and led a deputation to the Cinematograph Exhibitors' Association to encourage the making of healthy, wholesome, amusing, and instructive films for children ('Woman Teacher', 2 Jan 1928, 75). 
Theodora Bonwick supported progressive ideas in education, opposing a competitive spirit in lessons and sports, and introduced the Dalton plan, a form of independent resource-based learning for older pupils, in her York Way school. Although the school's inspector, Dr Hayward, described her as 'an enterprising and devoted headteacher', he was critical of such methods (TNA: PRO, Ed 21/57031, 1926). She opposed the teaching of domestic science to girls, since this encouraged a feeling of inferiority and trained a girl 'to be a household drudge and to spend herself submissively attending to the needs of the men-folk' ('Woman's Dreadnought', 71). By the 1920s Theodora, like many other feminists, had left the London Teachers' Association and joined the NUWT. She was a member of its central council from 1925 and the incumbent president of the London unit on her death. Friends believed that her early death from heart failure on 10 November 1928 at Woodlands, Crouch End Hill, London, was attributable to a nervous breakdown caused by exhaustion from her political activities. At her request the flowers donated at her cremation at Golders Green crematorium were given to an infirmary, a workhouse, and Holloway prison, the site of suffragette imprisonment. 
Theodora Bonwick was a committed schoolteacher who brought her feminist and progressive beliefs to bear upon her work with children in the classroom. Her support for equal rights for women was articulated in her trade union, suffrage, and professional activities. 


@@@@@


doc= 63838


Bowerman, Elsie Edith (1889-1973), suffragette and lawyer, was born on 18 December 1889 at Barnsbury Lodge, Garden Road, Tunbridge Wells, the only child of William Bowerman ('c'.1825-1895) and his wife, Edith Martha Barber (1864-1953). She was educated at Wycombe Abbey School (1901-7), in Paris, and then at Girton College, Cambridge (1908-11), from where she graduated with a second-class degree in medieval and modern languages and a distinction in oral French. 
Elsie Bowerman and her mother, now Mrs Chibnall (she had remarried in 1907), both joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) in 1909. Elsie founded a branch of the WSPU in Girton, inviting such speakers as Lady Constance Lytton to address the undergraduates, despite lack of co-operation from the college authorities. Her mother was active in the WSPU branch at St Leonards, Sussex, and was injured while taking part in a WSPU deputation to the House of Commons in November 1910. Having graduated Elsie Bowerman returned to St Leonards, as a paid organizer for the WSPU. On 15 April 1912, while travelling as first-class passengers to America for a holiday, she and her mother survived the sinking of the 'Titanic'. 
In September 1916 Elsie Bowerman sailed to Russia as an orderly with the Scottish women's hospital unit, at the request of the Hon. Evelina Haverfield, a fellow suffragette whom she had known for several years. With this unit she travelled via Archangel, Moscow, and Odessa to serve the Serbian and Russian armies in Romania. The women arrived as the allies were defeated, and were soon forced to join the retreat northwards to the Russian frontier. While awaiting her passage home, in March 1917, Elsie witnessed the 'February revolution' in St Petersburg. A diary that she kept, recording her experiences with the hospital unit, is held by the Women's Library, London. 
On her return to England Elsie Bowerman joined Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst's campaign for industrial peace, holding meetings at pitheads and factory gates in Sheffield, Manchester, and south Wales. At the general election of 1918 she was Christabel Pankhurst's agent in Smethwick and, after that defeat, was one of the founders, and took a leading part in the campaigns, of the Women's Guild of Empire (WGE), which denounced trade unions and family allowances and called for an alliance of capital and labour. Elsie Bowerman was honorary secretary of the WGE from 1920 to 1929, and edited the guild's 'Bulletin'. She joined the Middle Temple in 1921, read for the bar, and was called -- one of the first women barristers -- in 1924. She practised on the south-eastern circuit from 1928 until 1946, was involved with the Sussex sessions from 1928 until 1934, and wrote 'The Law of Child Protection' (1933). In 1938, with Lady Reading, she founded the Women's Voluntary Service, and from 1938 to 1940 edited its 'Monthly Bulletin'. During the Second World War she worked for the Ministry of Information (1940-41) and was liaison officer with the North American Service of the BBC (1941-5). After the war she spent a year in charge of the status-of-women section of the United Nations in New York. She was a governor of Wycombe Abbey School and wrote 'Stands there a School' (1965), a history of the school and its founder, Frances Dove. 
After a long and active life Elsie Bowerman suffered a stroke, and was declared dead on arrival at the Princess Alice Hospital, Eastbourne, on 18 October 1973. She never married, and left the residue of her estate to the Dove-Bowerman Trust, a fund that she had established to help educationally disadvantaged young people. 


@@@@@


doc= 63839


Stenhouse, Lawrence Alexander (1926-1982), educationist, was born on 29 March 1926 at 17 East Avenue, Burnage, Manchester, the son of Lawrence Drummond Stenhouse, jute manufacturer's representative, and his wife, Joanna Fraser Henderson. He was educated at Manchester grammar school and at St Andrews University, where he read English and graduated with a second-class degree in 1951. He later studied for his MEd at Glasgow University (first-class degree and William Boyd prize in education, 1956). From 1951 until 1956 he taught in multilateral secondary schools in Glasgow and Dunfermline. In 1957 he became staff tutor in psychology and secondary education at the Durham University Institute of Education until 1963, when he returned to Scotland as head of the education department at Jordanhill College of Education, Glasgow. In September 1967 he became director of the Humanities Curriculum Project (HCP), funded by the Nuffield Foundation and Schools Council (1967-72), which was at first based at Philippa Fawcett College, London. 
In 1970 Stenhouse moved to the University of East Anglia, and established the Centre for Applied Research in Education which developed research in curriculum and evaluation and an innovative masters degree in education, as well as continuing with HCP until 1972. He became professor of education at the University of East Anglia in 1978 and remained in post until his death. He was married on 5 September 1949 to Evelyn Annie, a clerk, daughter of William M'Lean Ross, wholesale stationer. They had one son and two daughters; he separated from his wife in 1969. 
As an educator Stenhouse was very much a product of the Enlightenment, but his humanist and rationalist ideals were fused with his own educational experiences. His main ambition was to improve the educational process for the majority who, he believed, were sold short by the system. He saw that, after secondary education for all was introduced, the need was not simply to extend the existing curriculum to a higher proportion of students, but to transform the teacher-pupil relationship. 
Stenhouse was an original thinker who deserved to reach a wide audience and readership. In general his ideas were based on his own thinking and experience rather than the ideas of others. But there were some important exceptions -- for example, he frequently acknowledged his debt to the philosopher R. S. Peters (especially to 'Ethics and Education', 1966). He was also impressed by some aspects of the work of the American psychologist Jerome Bruner (especially 'The Process of Education', 1965, and 'Toward a Theory of Instruction', 1966), although he was critical of some aspects of Bruner's famous curriculum project, 'Man: a course of study'. Stenhouse wanted to be seen as a curriculum theorist rather than a sociologist, psychologist, or philosopher. 
The first of Stenhouse's major publications was 'Culture and Education' (1967). Like much of his work, it was a mixture of new theory and direct practical experience. Some of the book is based on his own teaching in Scottish schools and reflects his love of literature and his concern for the historical. He also brought to curriculum studies, for the first time in the United Kingdom, an anthropological dimension which was later to prove of considerable significance. 
From 1967 to 1972 Stenhouse was almost completely preoccupied with HCP. It was a remarkable project which, unfortunately, did not survive the financial cuts of the later 1970s, and the anti-professional political campaigns of the 1980s. His ideas about 'humanities in school' were derived partly from the kind of sixth-form general studies he had himself enjoyed as a pupil at Manchester grammar school. What he wanted to do was to make that kind of humanities and discussion-based learning available not just to an elite few, but to all pupils. Hence his early rejection of the official brief for HCP -- that it should be designed for the average and below average. He retained his view that raising the school leaving age gave schools an opportunity to present 'all' young people with a curriculum which was relevant and worthwhile. If the HCP did eventually fail in some respects, it failed not because of lack of planning or vision, but because successful implementation of the project would have been too costly for the 1970s and 1980s. If a broader view is taken, however, HCP must be regarded as a success: after exposure to the ideas of Stenhouse and his colleagues, many teachers were led towards a new role for teachers and a less authoritarian structure for schools. 

'An Introduction to Curriculum Research and Development' (1975) is, without doubt, Stenhouse's 'magnum opus'. It is important in a number of respects, not least because it rejects the mechanistic behavioural objectives model of curriculum. At a time when the behavioural objectives model was fashionable in the USA and attracting some attention in the UK, Stenhouse was unequivocal in rejecting a view of teaching and learning which stated that the only way to organize the curriculum was to divide teaching programmes into pre-specified outcomes in terms of measurable changes in student behaviour. He carefully demonstrated that such an atomistic view was not only dangerous but was based on mistaken understanding of philosophy and psychology. The book not only demolished the objectives model very convincingly, but it set up in its place an alternative, much more humanistic view of teachers, research, and curriculum, in language which was clear and concise. It is an excellent book, which contains such quotable sentences as 'prophets may teach private wisdom: teachers must deal in public knowledge' (p. 4). That quotation illustrates one of the paradoxes about Stenhouse: he had the reputation in some quarters of being 'anti-subject', yet much of this book is concerned with the importance of 'disciplines'; for it is by resting on the traditional standards of a discipline that a teacher can enjoy the scrutiny of the quality of 'input' rather than being obsessed with trying to measure 'output'. 
In 1980 Stenhouse edited another excellent contribution to the study of curriculum and evaluation: 'Curriculum Research and Development in Action'. It is a review of a number of research projects, including HCP, and remains the best account of curriculum development in the 1960s and 1970s. Stenhouse wrote the introduction and a section on HCP. But the most interesting piece of his writing in the book is his concluding chapter: 'Reflection'. He put the curriculum development movement of the previous twenty years (and therefore his own work) into the context of the change in society, in schooling, and in teacher education and professionalism over the same period. It presents a remarkably insightful picture of the problems of education in 1980 which remained challenges in the 1990s. Stenhouse's partner for the last eleven years of his life was the educationist Jean Rudduck (1937-2007). Stenhouse died of cancer at his home, 80 St Clements Hill, Norwich, on 5 September 1982. His work as an educational thinker lived on after his death, not only in his writings, but in the work of the many able educationists who had worked with him, such as John Elliott, Jean Rudduck, and Barry McDonald. 


@@@@@


doc= 63840


Brown, Agnes Henderson (1866-1943), suffragist, was born at 125 Princes Street, Edinburgh, on 12 April 1866, the youngest child of William Brown, master fruiterer, and his wife, Jessie Henderson. She was generally known as Nannie Brown, and had two brothers and one sister, Jessie, who was also an active suffragette and involved in many of the same activities as Nannie. Nannie's father, who was the proprietor of a number of fruiterer shops in Edinburgh, was sympathetic to the suffrage movement. He was a leading figure in the opposition to annuity tax, part of the suffrage struggle, as it opposed taxation on women so long as they were not considered 'persons' -- that is, did not have the vote. William Brown was gaoled for his part in that campaign, wrote a book about his experiences in prison, and is said to have passed on his public-spiritedness to his two daughters. Nannie was later to refer to her father as the last political prisoner in the old Calton prison for making this stand. 
Nannie Brown's early public activities were associated with the suffrage movement and the Women's Freedom League. She was one of only six women who participated in the historic march of the 'Brown Women' from Edinburgh to London. The march, which was organized by the Women's Freedom League in 1912, lasted for five weeks. The women, dressed in the tailor-made coats and skirts of russet brown which gained them their name, and wearing white blouses and light green scarves and hats, collected signatures on the way and sometimes held as many as four meetings a day. Given her father's support for the suffrage movement, it is unsurprising that Nannie Brown favoured admitting men to the Women's Freedom League, and in 1913 she became the honorary secretary of the Northern Men's Federation for Women's Suffrage. 
From 1917 Nannie Brown was associated with the Scottish Women's Rural Institutes (SWRI), playing a leading role in organizing the movement on a Scotland-wide level. When the SWRI was included in the work of the board of agriculture for Scotland, she served as a member of the board's staff. After the SWRI division was cut out of the board's work, she continued to work for the south-eastern area. However, ill health forced her to retire from this work in 1928, although she continued as honorary adviser to the area. She was also, in 1918, one of the fourteen founder members of the Scottish Council of Women's Citizens' Associations whose aim was to promote civic awareness among women and to gain greater representation of women in public affairs and equality of treatment with men. 
However, Nannie Brown's activities were not confined to the endless round of meetings associated with formal organizations; she was a prodigious writer of articles, stories, lectures, and plays, an active participant in and promoter of amateur dramatics in Edinburgh, and, with her sister, a leading member of the Edinburgh Dickens Fellowship. She was also a keen walker and traveller. She once spent two separate holidays walking from John o' Groats to London and some of her travel experiences in France, Corsica, Russia, and Germany found expression in articles which she contributed to the 'Weekly Scotsman'. Her pioneering spirit was also manifested in other areas; according to one of her obituaries, she was one of the first women who learned to type and, with her sister, Jessie, among the first women to be seen riding a bicycle in Scotland. 
Although Nannie Brown was described as 'thoroughly stern in outlook' ('The Scotsman', 3 Dec 1943), there are countless references to her vivid personality and lively sense of humour. When in later years she became too frail to venture far afield, her house in Castle Terrace, Edinburgh, became a centre where any and every SWRI member could find advice and hospitality. Indeed, the home which she shared with Jessie in Castle Terrace became something of a cultural centre after the First World War. They would hold 'Scots evenings' or 'Dickens evenings', at which stories, songs, and sketches were performed. 
Nannie Brown died on 1 December 1943 at 3 Blackford Road, Edinburgh. The words spoken at her burial service (she was buried in Edinburgh) perhaps best sum up her life: 'Look up not down, Look out not in, And lend a hand' (private information). 


@@@@@


doc= 63841


Valentine, Charles Wilfrid (1879-1964), psychologist and educationist, was born on 16 August 1879 at Halton Road, Runcorn, Cheshire, one of the eight children of Henry Valentine ('b'. 1841), a Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Sophia Woodcock. He attended Nottingham high school and then Preston grammar school, leaving at seventeen to teach in a small boarding-school. Nevertheless, after seven years of teaching at various secondary schools, interspersed with largely self-financed degree studies, Valentine's university education was eventually both thorough and extensive. He obtained a BA from London University (taken externally at University College, Aberystwyth, where he was an exhibitioner), an MA from Cambridge gained with a double first in philosophy and psychology in 1909 (as a foundation scholar in moral sciences at Downing College), and a DPhil from St Andrews in 1913. He also spent part of 1908 as a student at the Wurzburg laboratory of Oswald Kulpe in Germany, where he steeped himself in the new experimental investigation of what were then termed the higher mental functions, including imagery and thinking. What seemed particularly to impress Valentine and also Cyril Burt, a fellow student at Wurzburg who became a lifelong friend, was the work on human learning, memory, and experimental pedagogy, especially that by Ernst Meumann. 
On returning from Germany, Valentine obtained his first academic post at twenty-nine and spent the next five years until 1914 as lecturer in psychology to St Andrews provincial committee, working also as assistant in education at the University of St Andrews for four of them. During his tenure at St Andrews he married, on 4 January 1911, (Margaret) Ethel Rothwell Jackson (1887/8-1956), daughter of Arthur Jackson, retired mechanical engineer; there were three sons and a daughter from this union. After a further five years as professor of education at Queen's University, Belfast, he became professor of education at the University of Birmingham in 1919, a post he held until his retirement in 1946. 
In Birmingham, Valentine's considerable talents as teacher, writer, and researcher flourished as he established what was in effect the first major centre for educational psychology in the UK. His broad and eclectic education, together with his wide teaching experience, helped him to command the shifting borderland between psychology and education, where formidable psychological, statistical, and also social skills were vital. Over this long period his research into such topics as child development, transfer of training, imagery, mental testing, home and classroom discipline, the reliability of examinations, and the questionable place of Latin in the curriculum gave rise to more than fifty papers and sixteen books (most of which went into several editions). The most influential of these were 'Psychology and its Bearing on Education' (1950), 'Intelligence Tests for Children' (1948), and 'The Difficult Child and the Problems of Discipline' (1940). Like Sully, Binet, and Piaget before him he made his systematic observation of his own children's development the basis of one of his major works: 'The Psychology of Early Childhood' (1942). 
Valentine probably also found his other academic love, the psychology of aesthetics, as early as 1908 in Wurzburg; Burt claims that they were both surprised by Kulpe's strong interest in the subject. In any event Valentine's earliest published book, 'An Introduction to the Experimental Psychology of Beauty' (1913), was on what he termed his 'hobby'. This apparently minor interest continued to fascinate him. His last published work on the subject, 'The Experimental Psychology of Beauty', appeared in 1962, only two years before his death. An interest in aspects of Freudian thinking, in particular in the psychology of dreams and the light that they cast on the unconscious, occupied him for many years, culminating in the publication of 'Dreams and the Unconscious' (1921). A revised edition appeared in 1928 under the title 'The New Psychology of the Unconscious'. He also enthusiastically embraced the problems of military education in the Second World War, even to the extent of enduring the rigours of army basic training though nearing retirement age. The outcome of this work appeared in the two short but typically practical and down-to-earth books, 'Principles of Army Instruction' (1942) and 'The Human Factor in the Army' (1943). 
Among Valentine's other major contributions to British academic life was his role as founder and editor for nearly ten years of 'The Forum of Education', and then of its successor, the 'British Journal of Educational Psychology', which he edited and managed for a further unprecedented twenty-five years from its creation in 1931. During his tenure the 'Journal' was committed to championing the contribution that a distinctively British psychology had made to education. He was also associated with various societies that supported psychology; he was president of Section J (psychology) of the British Association of Science in 1930 and president of the British Psychological Society for 1947-8. Earlier he had also served with considerable success on local bodies, for example as chairman of the Birmingham higher education subcommittee from 1919 to 1925, a considerable coup for someone barely settled into his major academic position. Still writing to within a few months of the end, Valentine died at his home, the White House, 92 Silver Street, Wythall, Worcestershire, on 26 May 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 63842


Codd, Clara Margaret (1876-1971), suffragette and theosophist, was born on 10 October 1876 at Pill House, Bishops Tawton, Barnstaple, north Devon, the eldest of ten children of Henry Frederick Codd (died 1899) and his wife, Clara Virginia, 'nee' Botto (1853-1927). She was educated at home by governesses, and at fifteen rejected Christianity and declared herself an atheist. When she was twenty-three her father, a school inspector, died and the family moved to Geneva, Switzerland, where Codd financed her sisters' education by herself working as a governess. In addition to teaching English and music, she worked as a costume model and travelled across France and Switzerland playing the violin and piano in orchestras. She later wrote of how her experiences in Geneva marked 'the first time in life I came into contact with all sorts and conditions of men, and learned to be free and a friend of all that lives, instead of the proper, little caste-ridden Victorian that I was in the beginning. (Codd, 24)' It was in Geneva that Codd first came into contact with the movement to which she dedicated her life. A friend took her to hear Colonel Henry Olcott speak on theosophy; she later wrote of how 'Life changed miraculously for me from that moment onwards' (Codd, 29). The family soon returned to England and settled in Bath, where Codd, and later her mother, began to attend the local Theosophical Society lodge. 
Codd officially joined the Theosophical Society in 1903, at about the same time that she joined the socialist Social Democratic Federation. In 1907 she joined the militant, Pankhurst-led Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), principally inspired by the work of one of the national organizers, Annie Kenney. Codd became close friends with Kenney and was active in arranging and speaking at street meetings in Bristol, often experiencing physical violence. In 1908 she participated in a 'rush' on the House of Commons, managing to enter the building despite a heavy police presence. She was discovered and arrested, and went on to serve a one-month sentence in Holloway gaol. 
On her release Codd returned to Bristol, only to face increased violence in the local campaign. She was offered a paid position as a WSPU organizer but turned it down in order to dedicate herself fully to theosophy. After a short period of employment as a teacher, she was offered work as a lecturer by the Theosophical Society, and soon spent two years at the society's headquarters in Adyar, India, as the result of a private bequest. She continued to lecture for the society throughout the 1910s, her wages being raised by the head of the movement, Annie Besant. Codd spent the remainder of her life as a travelling lecturer for the Theosophical Society, spending several years in the United States, New Zealand, Australia, where she was general secretary from 1935 to 1936, and in South Africa, where she lived during the Second World War. 
Codd was both unassuming and sincere; her ability to communicate directly across class and cultural barriers undoubtedly contributed to her international success as a lecturer. Her history of addressing working men and women in the socialist and suffrage movements had developed her skills as a public speaker, while her experiences as a young woman in the cosmopolitan circles of Geneva had encouraged her to be accomplished, informed, and, importantly, self-reliant. 
There is little secondary work on Codd: the most detailed sources remain her own writings. Her autobiography, 'So Rich a Life', published in 1951, records details of her travels and remains the fullest published account of her life. She wrote several books on theosophy, including 'Trust your Self to Life' (1968), 'The Way of the Disciple' (1964), 'The Mystery of Life' (1963), and 'On Lecturing' (1921), which featured a foreword by Annie Besant. Many of her works have remained in print and in use by members of the movement decades after her death. Codd died at Heatherwood Hospital, Ascot, Sunninghill, Berkshire, of heart failure on 3 April 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 63843


Yeaxlee, Basil Alfred (1883-1967), educationist, was born at 29 Oxford Street, Southampton, on 2 December 1883, the eldest son of Alfred George Yeaxlee, pastry cook and confectioner, and his wife, Lila Lavinia Read. According to an obituarist, his life was one of 'complete obscurity' until he appeared at New College, London, to prepare for the Congregational ministry ('The Times', 24 Aug 1967). Prior to that he attended Smyth's school, Southsea, then, from 1905 to 1909, he was at Oxford University attached to Mansfield College, having matriculated as a non-collegiate. After service as an assistant Congregational minister in Bootle, Lancashire, he was appointed in 1912 educational assistant to the London Missionary Society and editor to the United Council for Missionary Education. The following year he married Annie Julie Mary Leadbeater (died 1955); they had two daughters. 
The First World War changed the direction of Yeaxlee's career. In the autumn of 1915 the YMCA set up a committee to organize educational facilities for the wartime army and appointed him secretary. The task was to recruit civilian lecturers, mostly people associated with the universities, to give talks, and lead classes in military locations at home and behind the fighting lines abroad. By the end of the war a far-flung structure had been created. Subsequently H. A. L. Fisher, president of the Board of Education, assigned to it 'the credit of introducing and developing the largest scheme of adult education which has ever at any time been launched from the country' ('An Educated Nation', 1920, 58). An obituarist saw added significance in Yeaxlee's own work in France during 1917: the YMCA scheme was a calming influence in a situation where the uncertainties of world politics, and lack of information, were producing considerable unease among the troops ('The Times', 28 Aug 1967). 
By the summer of 1917 Yeaxlee was sufficiently well known to find himself part of a national inquiry into adult education, sponsored by the Ministry of Reconstruction. YMCA involvement in army education came to an end in April 1919, and he moved on to be joint secretary to the Educational Settlements Association (ESA), a body with close free-church connections. In this capacity he was recruited to the Board of Education's new advisory committee on adult education at its formation in 1921. 
The eight years during which Yeaxlee was secretary to the ESA saw no remarkable progress. A successor in the office has speculated that his approach, emphasizing individual development rather than social activism, may have been inappropriate to the times (Thomas and Elsey, 664). That is debatable, but clearly his interests were recrystallizing. His doctoral thesis for London University (published as 'Spiritual Values in Adult Education', 2 vols., 1925) surveyed the place of organized religion in adult education. By 1929 his 'Lifelong Education' (a very early use of what much later became a vogue term), was locating adult education in a longer process of 'growing up'. In 1930 he became principal of Westhill College, Birmingham, a centre for nonconformist teacher training; then from 1935 an increasing interest in 'modern psychology' as applied to religious development in the young ('The Approach to Religious Education', 1931; 'Religion and the Growing Mind', 1939) brought him appointments in the department of education at Oxford University (1935-49), and a fellowship of the British Psychological Society. 
There was one significant interruption to Yeaxlee's culminating Oxford career. After 1939 the Second World War forced adult education back onto the military agenda: a central advisory council for adult education in HM forces was set up, and the 'sage and experienced' Yeaxlee brought in as secretary (Kelly, 324). There was little of the improvisatory dash of twenty-five years before, but the council had an even bigger task of co-ordinating the civilian contribution. Its chief officer was later (1946) appointed CBE in recognition -- a topping up, one might say, of his earlier OBE. 
Retirement in 1949 did not halt Yeaxlee's involvement with Mansfield College, the British Council of Churches, and the Institute of Christian Education. In 1958, three years after his first wife's death, he married Margaret Frances Addison Tatham. He himself died at his home, Church Cottage, Islip, Oxfordshire, on 23 August 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 63844


Evans, Dorothy (1888-1944), activist and organizer, was born on 6 May 1888 at 14 St Paul's Road, Kentish Town, London, daughter of Edward Evans, commercial clerk, and his wife, Marian, 'nee' Smith. Little is known of her parents beyond the occupation of her father. Dorothy Evans was educated at North London Collegiate School, trained as a teacher at Dartford College of Physical Education, and worked briefly as a teacher of gymnastics before resigning to commit herself full-time to the cause of women's suffrage in 1909. From this point she began a lifelong career of political activism and organization, primarily in relation to issues of women's inequality. 
As an active member of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), Dorothy Evans was deeply committed to militant tactics of civil disobedience in pursuit of women's suffrage. She was arrested and imprisoned on numerous occasions, undertaking hunger and thirst strikes and suffering forced feeding. In 1910 she was first arrested for failing to pay a dog licence on the grounds that women should not be taxed unless they had political representation. Involvement in a window-smashing campaign in the West End in 1912 resulted in her first imprisonment. The next year her loyalty to the WSPU and its leadership led to the trusted role of liaison officer between the WSPU headquarters in London and its exiled leader Christabel Pankhurst in Paris. To move freely between the two capitals Dorothy Evans was forced to travel in disguise. 
As a key activist and organizer, Dorothy Evans was sent by the WSPU to the north of Ireland to increase agitation for women's suffrage. In 1913 she was arrested for being in possession of explosives during an abortive attempt to blow up Lisburn Castle. For this and other activities in Ireland she was charged with conspiracy. However, as on other occasions, her court appearances and prison terms were disrupted by repeated hunger and thirst striking. In 1914 she was released from prison under the government's wartime amnesty for suffragette prisoners. 
Shocked by the scale of suffering caused by the First World War, Dorothy Evans became a 'whole-hearted pacifist', speaking in favour of international arbitration at public meetings (Whately, 46). After the war she continued to devote her time and energy to feminist causes, working with other suffragettes in the newly formed Six Point Group which was committed to securing legal equality between the sexes. During the 1920s her commitment to issues concerned with legal equal rights for women, such as equal pay and women's right to custody of their children and to retain their nationality on marriage, linked her with the 'old' feminism rather than the 'new', or special needs, feminism espoused by Eleanor Rathbone and her National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship. Although a committed socialist and pacifist during this period, she was always prepared to put aside issues of personal political affinity to work for equality with women across the political spectrum. 
In the mid-1930s, together with socialist feminists such as the Labour MP Edith Summerskill, Dorothy Evans became convinced, through her concern for the welfare of married women and housewives, that feminist groups should shift their focus of concern to married women's position in the home. At the same time, she believed it was necessary for feminism to reach out to working-class women by building alliances with the labour movement. She was instrumental in founding the Married Women's Association, a key feminist organization of the 1940s and 1950s committed to securing the legal and economic rights of housewives. 
Dorothy Evans's interest in the position of married women and housewives was particularly notable given that her personal opposition to the institution of marriage was well known. Although involved in a long-term relationship with A. Emil Davies, treasurer of the Fabian Society, with whom she had a daughter, she never married. According to her biographer, Monica Whately, she believed in a 'partnership held together by love, comradeship and mutual respect and not by legal ties' (Whately, 47). In the mid-1930s she also began a long-term lesbian relationship with the feminist and pacifist activist Sybil Morrison. 
During the Second World War Dorothy Evans continued to work full-time for equality. She was appointed secretary of Women for Westminster, a national organization committed to increasing women's representation in parliament. During the same period she was also largely responsible for researching and framing the 'Equal Citizenship (Blanket) Bill'. Although unsuccessful, this attempted piece of legislation stands as a fitting testimony to Dorothy Evans's political aspirations, since it was intended to rectify in one stroke all instances of discrimination against women on the statute book. 
By the time of her death in 1944, Dorothy Evans had become a leading figure in women's politics. Despite what was for the period an unconventional lifestyle, she appears to have gained the respect, admiration, and support of a wide range of women, including those who disagreed with her on moral or religious grounds. She was also one of the few feminists able to bridge the generation gap between older women, like herself, who had been involved in the suffrage struggle, and younger women who had come into politics during the 1930s and 1940s. According to Bee Serota, a young member of the Six Point Group in the early 1940s, Dorothy Evans had 'this tremendous quality of being able to encourage young people and not necessarily to think as she thought, but to do things themselves' (Blackford, 89). On 28 August 1944 at the age of fifty-five Dorothy Evans died of cancer in Canniesburn Auxiliary Hospital, Bearsden, Glasgow. Active in women's politics even in the late stages of her illness, she was in Glasgow to address a public meeting. She left her body for medical research. 


@@@@@


doc= 63845


Thomas, Terry (1888-1978), headmaster, was born on 19 October 1888 at 40 Sapphire Street, Roath, Cardiff, the son of David Terry Thomas, schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Ann Walton. He was educated at Howard Gardens School and at University College, Cardiff, graduating in physics in 1909. He was chief science master at Inverurie Academy for two years and, in 1911, he went to St John's College, Cambridge, reading in successive years for the mathematical, natural sciences, and law triposes. From 1914 until December 1922 Thomas served as head of the military and engineering side at Haileybury College, where he established his reputation as a science teacher and produced a number of books for schools. He gained a London PhD in 1922 for a thesis on the thermoelectric properties of metal wires. On 19 August 1915 Thomas married Mary ('b'. 1890/91), the daughter of Henry Davies, director of mining education, at the Congregational chapel, Charles Street, Cardiff. 
Thomas became headmaster of Leeds grammar school in January 1923. During the time of his predecessor the school had tripled in size to nearly 600 pupils. Like other endowed city grammar schools it had become directly grant-aided by the Board of Education in the first decade of the century and as a condition admitted annually a number of scholarship holders from the elementary schools. The school continued to grow and, by the time of Thomas's retirement thirty years later, there were more than 900 pupils enjoying good facilities for the study of a wide curriculum that included sporting and other non-academic activities. In his early years a playing field was acquired on the outskirts of the city at Lawnswood. New building work was undertaken at the school to provide additional classrooms and a laboratory so that biology might be introduced into the curriculum. By 1939 further building work had been carried out to provide a swimming pool, a gymnasium, a new dining room, accommodation for theatrical performances, a major enhancement of the chapel, and other facilities. 
Historically Leeds grammar school was one of the best-endowed in the north of England, and this greatly helped Thomas with his projects. He was very successful in stimulating enthusiastic financial support among 'old boys' and parents for the development fund, which took an institutional shape with the formation in 1937 of the Friends of Leeds Grammar School. He was a man of strong personality who succeeded in evoking a keen sense of loyalty and support, though some saw him as self-willed and possibly too hasty in judgement. 
Beyond the school Thomas's reputation grew and he became president of the Incorporated Association of Headmasters in 1936 and then treasurer for 1937-46. He was a very active member of the Headmasters' Conference (HMC) and chaired some of its committees. Along with the heads of Winchester and Charterhouse he served on a group to represent the HMC's views to the Board of Education during the years leading to the enactment and implementation of the 'Education Act' of 1944. He was seen as a firm upholder of the independence enjoyed by direct-grant grammar schools. In 1941 he was appointed by the Board of Education to the Norwood committee to inquire into the curriculum and examinations in secondary schools. He caused some disquiet at the board by his lone refusal, at the committee's very last meeting, to agree to the central recommendations to move nationally from external to internal school-leaving examinations. A few years later, as a member of the Secondary Schools Examinations Council, he had the satisfaction of seeing his own views triumph in the report which led to the creation of the general certificate of education. 
Thomas's increasing concern for the prospects of grammar schools such as his own may be seen in his reaction to the order of the Ministry of Education that, after 1944, all direct-grant schools should resubmit applications if they wished to remain on the list. Some were rejected by the ministry. Leeds grammar school submitted its application but withdrew it after the return to office of the Labour Party in 1945, Thomas preferring that it should become an independent school relying upon fully fee-paying clients. This policy continued until reversed by his successor in 1957; in an inflationary climate the absence of grant aid made the financial position of the school more difficult, forcing it to raise fees to a level beyond the reach of able entrants from modest backgrounds, whose exclusion was not helpful in sustaining academic achievement over the longer term. 
During the struggles of the 1940s surrounding the future pattern of secondary schooling, Thomas emerged as a vigorous national leader in the headmasters' organizations, fighting to sustain the position of the direct-grant schools. For many years a member of the court of the University of Leeds, his services nationally were recognized when the degree of doctor of laws 'honoris causa' was conferred upon him in 1948. 
After his retirement in December 1953, Thomas maintained a close interest in the affairs of Leeds grammar school. He also continued to be very active in public service. He had become a magistrate in 1937, served as chairman of the Leeds bench from 1950 to 1963, as chairman of the visiting magistrates for Leeds prison from 1948 to 1963, and as chairman of the West Riding branch of the Magistrates Association from 1956 to 1959. He died at Seacroft Hospital, Leeds, on 22 July 1978. His funeral was held in the school chapel on 27 July, followed by cremation. He was survived by his wife, Mary, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 63847


Frances, Juanita (1901-1992), feminist activist and organizer, was born on 5 October 1901 in Adelaide, Australia. Her mother, whose name was Lemont, was a shop assistant; her father, who was in the navy, was unknown to her, but is described on her marriage certificate as Timothy Lemont, master mariner. Her early education and professional training as a nurse took place in Adelaide. However, by the late 1920s she had moved to London, where she worked first as a nurse and then embarked on a brief stage career as a dancer and a conjuror's assistant. 
On 16 April 1934 Juanita Lemont married Gerald Leonard Schlesinger (1889-1965), a divorced banker, with whom she had two daughters. The marriage ended in divorce in 1947, whereupon she took the name Juanita Frances (although she was known in some circles as Frances). As a young married woman living in west London, she became involved in charitable work with women in North Kensington. A meeting with Flora Drummond, veteran feminist and chair of the Women's Guild of Empire, launched her on what was to become a lifelong career of feminist activism in pursuit of married women's rights. While working for the guild in North Kensington she soon became acquainted with the small circle of feminists campaigning in London at the time. Her organizational potential was spotted by Dorothy Evans, secretary of the Six Point Group, who asked her to join a new committee on the housewife. In 1938, with Frances as its chair, the committee broke away from the Six Point Group to become the Married Women's Association (MWA). Although concerned to retain links with old feminism, Frances was keen to develop a new feminist organization which would bring to the foreground issues relevant to the lives of young married women and mothers. Hence her early decision to drop the term 'feminist' from the MWA's literature was an attempt to attract the support of young women, many of whom had not previously been politically active. 
As chair of the MWA, Juanita Frances steered the association through the first ten years of its life, playing a prominent role in its development and, at the same time, making a major contribution to the shape of post-war 'new' feminism. So called because of its emphasis on equality in difference, 'new' feminism focused in particular on the legal and economic rights of the married woman and housewife. Under Juanita Frances's leadership and in close association with the Labour MP Edith Summerskill, the MWA demanded recognition of the housewife as an equal worker and marital partner entitled to half the male wage and property of a marriage. 
In the late 1940s and 1950s, a period when women were widely thought to have achieved equality, and feminism was often viewed as redundant, Juanita Frances struggled, often against the wishes of branch members, to ensure that the association remained committed to her feminist vision of legal and economic equality for women on the home front. As editor of the MWA's monthly journal, 'Wife and Citizen', she sought to maintain what was in the late 1940s and 1950s one of the only published forums for feminist debate. 
Although she was committed to cross-party women's politics, Juanita Frances's own sympathies lay with the Labour Party, particularly in the immediate post-war years. By the 1950s and 1960s, her political interests and energies were committed to working at a national rather than at a local branch level. With the aim of turning the MWA into a pressure group for married and divorced women's rights, she worked hard during this period to generate support from a range of high-profile figures. Her ability to court and attract attention to the MWA was a key factor in the association's emergence as a leading women's pressure group in the 1960s. 
During the 1960s piecemeal legal reforms such as the 'Married Women's Property Act' (1964) and the 'Matrimonial Homes Act' (1967) began to address MWA concerns. Acknowledging that 'the door to the economic rights of a wife during marriage has been opened', the MWA retained its commitment, as it does to this day, to joint ownership of all marital income and property (Blackford, 'Ideas and structures of feminism', 222). 
Although towards the end of her life failing health prevented her from playing a major role in the MWA, Juanita Frances remained committed to the association, a familiar figure at its lunch parties in the houses of parliament. She died of heart failure on 25 November 1992, in the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, and was cremated at Golders Green on 3 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 63848


Franklin, Hugh Arthur (1889-1962), women's activist, was born on 27 May 1889 at 28 Pembridge Villas, Notting Hill, London, the fourth of six children of Arthur Ellis Franklin (1857-1938), a senior partner in the banking firm of A. Keyser & Co., and his wife, Caroline Jacob (1863-1935), who was an active supporter of women's enfranchisement, eventually being elected to the executive committee of the Jewish League for Woman Suffrage. His elder sister, Alice Franklin, was an energetic feminist. Another sister, Helen Caroline Bentwich (1892-1972), spent many years in Palestine and was later prominent in the London county council. Hugh Franklin's parents were Jewish, and he was brought up in the Jewish faith. 
Franklin was educated at Clifton College, and from 1908 at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he initially read engineering, later changing to economics and sociology. He joined the Independent Labour Party and the Fabian Society, and in 1909 he became actively involved with the women's suffrage movement, joining the Men's League for Women's Suffrage, and organizing meetings at Cambridge for the constitutional suffragists Millicent Garrett Fawcett and Lady McLaren. However, his main sympathies lay with the militants of the Women's Social and Political Union, and when in 1910 the Men's Political Union for Women's Enfranchisement was formed by Victor Duval as its male affiliate, he immediately joined it. Also, at this time Franklin abandoned Judaism and declared his intention of leaving Cambridge, although he was persuaded to stay for finals. None of this met with the approval of his father, who allegedly offered money (which was refused) to Victor Duval as an inducement to him to persuade Hugh Franklin to leave the Men's Political Union. Hugh Franklin's involvement with suffrage activity, particularly in organizing the Women's Social and Political Union procession 'From Prison to Citizenship', which took place on 18 June 1910, made him miss several of his finals papers, and at the end of June he went down for good from Cambridge. With some reluctance, he accepted employment as private secretary to Sir Matthew Nathan, then secretary to the Post Office and a prominent member of the Anglo-Jewish 'cousinhood'. 
In the 'black Friday' suffrage demonstration of 18 November 1910 Franklin was arrested, but not charged; he was outraged by police tactics, and on 26 November 1910 he attempted to whip Winston Churchill, whom as home secretary he believed to be responsible. For this he was sentenced to six weeks' imprisonment in Pentonville, where he went on hunger strike; also, he was dismissed from Nathan's employment. On 8 March 1911 he was again arrested for trying to break Churchill's windows, again refused food, and was forcibly fed. Thereafter he travelled the country speaking on behalf of women's suffrage, particularly protesting against the treatment in prison of the male suffragist William Ball. He then set fire to an empty railway carriage at Harrow Station, and promptly went into hiding above Henderson's bookshop (popularly known as 'the Bomb Shop' because of its supposed anarchist clientele) at 66 Charing Cross Road. He was arrested in February 1913, and sentenced to nine months' imprisonment. Again he went on hunger strike, and was forcibly fed, apparently more than 100 times, until his release on licence under the 'Prisoners (Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act', commonly called the ''Cat and Mouse Act''. Like most 'mice', he disappeared immediately on release, adopting the alias Henry Forster, and with his fiancee, the militant suffragette Elsie Diederichs Duval (1893?-1919), sister of his Men's Political Union colleague and friend Victor Duval, he escaped first to Dresden, then to Belgium, where he remained until the outbreak of war, and the amnesty on women's suffrage offences in August 1914. 
Hugh Franklin was disqualified for war service on the grounds of poor eyesight, and served on the staff of the ordnance factories at Woolwich. On 28 September 1915 he married Elsie Duval at the West London Synagogue. He supported anti-war movements, particularly favouring Sylvia Pankhurst. His wife, whose health had already been undermined by hunger striking and forcible feeding, died of influenza on 1 January 1919 at her father-in-law's house. 
After the war Hugh Franklin was set up in the timber trade, at which he was ultimately unsuccessful. He appears to have married again in 1921. His second wife was Elsie Constance Tuke, known as Bunny. This marrying out of the Jewish faith may explain why Franklin's father cut him out of his will. Despite being disinherited, he does not seem to have needed to work for a living, and in 1931 he gave up business for writing. He joined the Labour Party, in whose interest he unsuccessfully contested the parliamentary seats of Hornsey in 1931 and St Albans in 1935, finally winning a seat on the Middlesex county council in 1946. He was treasurer of the National Council for Civil Liberties from 1934 to 1939. He also held office on committees of the London county council, the Metropolitan Water Board, the New Fabian Research Bureau, the Labour Party national executive council, and on boards of governors of schools and on hospital management committees. His experiences of imprisonment led him not only to join the Howard League for Penal Reform, but also to write a play (never produced) entitled 'On Remand'. 
Hugh Franklin in later life appeared a typical unremarkable resident of Hampstead Garden Suburb, though with an active, albeit impractical, interest in inventing. Tall, thin, with long legs, he was always tinkering with an antique motor car, and to his nephews and nieces seemed great fun. He died of heart failure at New End Hospital, Hampstead, on 21 October 1962, leaving no issue. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 63849


Anderson, (Margaret) Betty Harvie, Baroness Skrimshire of Quarter (1913-1979), politician, was born on 12 August 1913 at 9 London Terrace, Glasgow, the only child of Colonel Thomas Alexander Harvie Anderson CB TD DL (died 1953), solicitor and magistrate, and his wife, Margaret Agnes (Nessie) Wilson Shearer (died 1938), daughter of Sir John Shearer, engineer and shipbuilder. She grew up on the family estate at Denny, and was educated at the nearby Quarter village school and St Leonard's School, St Andrews, of which she was later president. After leaving school in 1931 she followed her father into local politics and the volunteer militia, winning election to the Denny district council in 1938 and enlisting in the Auxiliary Territorial Service that same year. During the Second World War she saw action against German raids on the Forth and became chief commander of the mixed anti-aircraft brigade, a post she held until 1946. She became the first woman to join the Glasgow Territorial Association, of which her father was secretary for twenty-nine years. 
In November 1945 Betty Harvie Anderson was elected to Stirlingshire county council for the division her father was vacating and in 1953 she became leader of the council's moderates (Conservatives). Among her special interests on the council were agriculture, education (she was a member of the secretary of state for Scotland's education advisory committee), housing, and welfare. Her work was recognized in 1955 with her appointment as OBE but she eventually left local government for parliament. After unsuccessfully contesting West Stirlingshire (1950, 1951) and Sowerby in Yorkshire (1955), she was finally elected for the Conservative stronghold of Renfrewshire East in October 1959. On 5 May 1960 she married John Francis Penrose Skrimshire MD FRCP ('b'. 1917/18), a heart specialist and the son of Francis Robert Bradley Skrimshire of the Royal Army Medical Corps. They had no children. 
Betty Harvie Anderson (she retained her maiden name) and her husband divided their time between their farmhouse in Worthing, Sussex, and her ancestral estate in Stirlingshire. The interest in wildlife which she developed through her closeness to the countryside led her in 1964 to introduce a successful bill restricting the importation of endangered animals into Britain. Her colleagues twice elected her to the executive of the powerful 1922 committee of Conservative back-benchers: from 1962 to 1970, and again from 1974 until 1979. While her party was in opposition she argued against the Labour government's drastic restructuring of and cutbacks to the armed forces, particularly the Territorial Army, and throughout her career she contributed to debates on Scottish affairs. Her knowledge of Scottish local government resulted in her appointment to the royal commission on local government in Scotland, which sat between 1966 and 1969. The note of reservation which she jointly wrote for the final report, urging separate councils for the three island groups rather than a single council, was adopted by the government and praised as an enlightened acknowledgement of Scotland's regional diversity. 
Anderson's activity in parliament earned her a reputation for diligence; she was perhaps motivated by her view that while a second-class woman would lose to a second-class man, a first-class woman could compete with a first-class man. She also believed that women were handicapped by the fact that a decade was required to become established in parliament but during the crucial years needed to launch their careers most women stayed at home with their children. Although she did not support the feminist movement, she made history in July 1970 as the first woman deputy chairman of the ways and means committee, and thus as the first woman deputy speaker of the house. Uncertain whether MPs would accept a woman in the chair, she initially accepted the post on a three-month trial basis, but proved so successful that she was urged to stand for the speakership when it became vacant in 1971. Previous deputy speakers had worn morning suits, but rather than dressing in black and white as expected, she wore stylish yet businesslike clothes with colours chosen to complement the green of the Commons chamber and tailored to withstand lengthy sittings. Contemporaries described her as slight and graceful in stature, 'birdlike' in appearance, and brisk but stimulating in conversation. In addition she possessed a firm grasp of parliamentary procedure, which helped her to chair the stormy debates over EEC membership and the 'Industrial Relations Act', and a strong belief in the right of individual members to hold the executive to account. 
This unswerving belief in parliamentary supremacy and tradition was a factor in Anderson's disagreement with her party's policy on Scottish devolution, which she felt created needless bureaucracy, would facilitate the break-up of the kingdom, and was mistakenly regarded as a panacea for Scotland's problems. In 1968 she led a small group of Conservative MPs in protesting to the party whips against Edward Heath's 'declaration of Perth' in support of devolution. Placing principle before career advancement she resigned as deputy speaker in 1973 to argue against a Scottish assembly. In 1975 she declined the Scottish portfolio in the shadow cabinet and helped to form the 'keep Britain united' campaign with a small group of tory dissidents. 
During the debates of 1977-8 over the 'Scotland and Wales Bill', Anderson unsuccessfully moved amendments to exclude the Shetland and Orkney islands from the new assembly's purview, and to postpone the referendum until the entire country could express its opinion at a general election. Before retiring from the House of Commons in May 1979 she witnessed the proposals for a new assembly fail because of the low turnout in the Scottish referendum. Her early stand against devolution no doubt influenced her party's eventual change of policy, and her attainment of the deputy speakership demonstrated without ostentation what women could achieve in politics, thus paving the way for further progress. Shortly after leaving the Commons she was created Baroness Skrimshire of Quarter, but only days after taking her seat in the House of Lords she suffered an asthma attack and died, at Worthing Hospital, Worthing, Sussex, on 7 November 1979. She was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 63854


Spiers, Dorothy Beatrice (1897-1977), actuary, was born on 25 May 1897 at 34 Downs Park Road, Hackney, London, the second of three daughters of Samuel Davis, schoolmaster and later head of the Jewish Free School, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Samuel. She was educated at the London county council Wilton Road School and the City of London Girls' School; in 1915 she entered Newnham College, Cambridge, where she graduated BA in mathematics in 1918 and MA in 1923. While employed by the Guardian Assurance Company from 1918 to 1931 Davis was allowed, in 1918, to attend the lectures for the examinations held by the Institute of Actuaries. In 1919 a resolution was passed by the institute's governing body, admitting women to the fellowship on the same conditions as men; Davis was the first woman to be admitted a fellow of the institute, in 1923. She married on 25 October 1931 Henry Michael Spiers, an industrial chemist, with whom she had two sons. Between 1931 and 1954 she returned to the Guardian Assurance for short periods; between 1932 and 1938 she worked on the continuous mortality investigation for the Institute of Actuaries, and from 1943 to 1946 with the Eagle Star Insurance Company. Spiers had wide-ranging interests and in retirement she devoted much time and energy to the League of Jewish Women, serving on the council and as national treasurer, where her common sense and mathematical ability were much appreciated. She made small bequests to the Jewish Welfare Board and to the Jewish Blind Society. Having been predeceased by her husband Dorothy Spiers died at the Central Middlesex Hospital, Park Royal, on 2 September 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 63858


Watson, Sir Alfred William (1870-1936), actuary and civil servant, was born at 11 James Street, Bristol, on 11 March 1870, son of Alfred Reuben Watson ('b'. 1845), violinist and composer, who became musical director of the Theatre Royal, Nottingham, and his wife, Emily Morris Hobro. He was grandson of Reuben Watson, a consulting actuary to several friendly societies, including the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows. After attending Nottingham high school Alfred Watson joined his grandfather's practice and studied for the fellowship of the Institute of Actuaries. In 1893, at the comparatively early age of twenty-three, he came top in the final examination for the fellowship, being the only candidate to be awarded a first class. He married, on 20 June 1895, Elizabeth Edith Moffrey ('b'. 1871/2), daughter of Robert William Moffrey JP, civil servant and a grand master of the Manchester Unity. They had one son (who died in childhood) and two daughters. 
Watson's exceptional abilities as an authority on friendly society actuarial and financial matters were recognized in 1896 when -- aged only twenty-six -- he was invited to serve on the Treasury-controlled Rothschild committee which was set up by the government to investigate the viability of insurance-based old-age pension schemes. Despite his youth he played an important part in the committee's proceedings, subjecting several witnesses to rigorous cross-examination. Watson's strong support for the contributory insurance principle found favour with Treasury officials, who appreciated both his actuarial expertise and his views on the correct funding of any future state pension scheme. The most famous of his many publications was his pioneering study (published in 1903) of the sickness and mortality experience of Manchester Unity members during the five years 1893 to 1897 (contrasting this with data from earlier periods in the nineteenth century): though slightly flawed in methodology this work still stands as one of the few examinations of sickness and mortality by age, occupation, and region, and has been frequently cited by modern social historians. 
Watson transferred his consulting practice to London in 1910, and was called upon to give expert advice to the framers of the 1911 'National Insurance Bill'. In 1912, after the bill had become law, he was invited to become chief actuary to the national health insurance joint committee (giving up his lucrative private practice in order to do so), and played a major part in steering the new scheme through its early years. During the First World War he gave statistical advice on innumerable issues to many government departments, most notably the Ministry of Shipping. 
In 1917 Watson was appointed to the newly created post of government actuary. Ostensibly this position was necessitated by the development of national insurance, but its creation was also symptomatic of the Treasury's desire to impose greater control over public policy. (Watson's office was located in the Treasury, and in the inter-war years no policy proposal could proceed to legislation without the actuary's approval.) Watson was completely in accord with the Treasury's fiscal rectitude, and politicians found that their more exotic proposals were quickly squashed: as one official put it, Watson could be 'a little difficult, but more actuarial than awkward' (Dilks, 414). During his nineteen years as government actuary Watson served on numerous important official committees (including the 1924-6 royal commission on national health insurance), was a key figure in the planning behind the 1925 contributory pension scheme, and advised on many other social policies. He also played a part in the centralization of social security policy that took place in the inter-war years. Apart from one notable mistake in under-predicting the level of unemployment in the 1920s (with serious consequences for the solvency of the unemployment insurance scheme) Watson's judgement was regarded as impeccable. He was knighted in 1915, created KCB in 1920, and was president of the Institute of Actuaries from 1920 to 1922. 
On a personal level Watson was slightly unprepossessing in appearance. One associate affectionately portrayed him as 'a short, almost insignificant man, bald, a roundish face, sandy moustache, eyes that squinted so that it was hard to guess where they were looking or to whom he was speaking' ('The Times', 12 May 1936). His undemonstrative and courteous manner was accompanied by a quiet voice; but this unassuming exterior concealed a firm resolve and powerful personality. He always impressed his colleagues by his acute intelligence, linguistic skills, and formidable ability to interpret the most complex of statistical tables at a glance. Watson never enjoyed robust health, and worked excessively hard at his official duties. He died unexpectedly on 7 May 1936 at his home, 16 Castello Avenue, Putney, London. His remains were cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 11 May. On his death many tributes were paid to his remarkable abilities as a senior civil servant and expert actuary. What is less well known is Watson's enormous influence on social policy making in the inter-war years, quietly exerted within the portals of Whitehall. 


@@@@@


doc= 63864


Hale, Cicely Bertha (1884-1981), suffragette and health visitor, was born on 5 September 1884 at 8 Sussex Gardens, Paddington, London, the youngest of the five surviving children of Charles Douglas Bowdich Hale (1850-1927), a general practitioner, and his wife, Bertha Maria, 'nee' Poole (1840-1937). When Cicely was seven the family moved to a large house in Sussex Place near by. A timid child, she felt inadequate and unloved, and was close only to her protective next sister, Betsy. Taught by their mother, then by governesses, in their late teens the girls were sent to the ladies' department of King's College in Kensington, headed by Lilian Faithfull. They also attended 'the Gym' run by the Misses Bear, where fellow students included several princesses. Because Dr Hale had treated high school girls whose health had allegedly suffered from overwork, he forbade his daughters to undertake more than four hours of classes a day. Despite a broad cultural education, including theatregoing and continental travel, Cicely Hale always felt disadvantaged by her lack of formal schooling. She resented having to wait on her brothers as a child, and in later life she came to resent the way the daughters' education was thought less important than the sons'. 
Hale trained as a secretary and, after an uncongenial first post, went in 1908 as assistant to Mary Home in the information department of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), the result of hearing Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst speak in Hyde Park. There she provided a news-cutting and research service, learned to typeset 'The Suffragette', and, in 1912, took charge of the department. Though she experienced many police raids, she was never arrested. Concern for her father's reputation restrained her militancy, so that she felt guilty at having given less than her colleagues. 
After the outbreak of the First World War, Hale continued to typeset 'The Suffragette' (renamed 'The Britannia') until 1916 when her father's retirement deprived her of both home and allowance. Her experience in the WSPU greatly boosted her self-confidence. Recognizing that without qualifications she could not obtain interesting work or a reasonable salary, she decided to study for the health visitor's certificate of the Royal Sanitary Institute (training at the Infant Welfare Clinic at Salisbury Street, Marylebone) and the certificate of the Central Midwives' Board (at the General Lying-In Hospital in York Road, Waterloo, and in Camberwell). She partly financed her studies by acting as Dr Christine Murrell's secretary. 
After six months at the maternity almoners' office at the London Hospital in Whitechapel, working with Russian and Polish Jewish mothers, Hale returned to the Salisbury Street clinic as health visitor superintendent, a post she held for sixteen years. As a sideline she answered letters from customers of Glaxo Laboratories about their baby products. In 1918 she rented rooms in Ormonde Terrace, facing Primrose Hill, where, in 1920, Ann Campbell moved next door. Campbell, a pioneer policewoman who became chief inspector of the Women's Auxiliary Police Service, shared her life for twenty years. They lived together in a flat in Dorset Square, Marylebone, holidaying abroad every year. 
In 1934 Hale moved to a health visitor's post in Littlehampton to be nearer her mother; on her mother's death, in 1937, she returned to London. From the Holland Park flat she shared with Campbell she conducted the 'Baby circle' for the 'Woman's Own', writing a weekly column and answering an enormous correspondence. When war broke out, Hale and Campbell moved to Oxford, where Campbell died in 1941. To fill the gap in her life, Hale wrote 'Can I Help you with Baby?', which went into three editions. She returned to London in 1943, but took a flat in Littlehampton in 1944 and lived there half the week. When a new management took the 'Woman's Own' up-market she gave up the 'Baby circle' after nine years and retired to Littlehampton in 1946. 
In 1947 Hale met Mary Cuningham Chater (1896-1990), music adviser to the Girl Guides Association, and began a new career. As division secretary to the Arun Valley Guides, she helped to assemble the 'International Song Books', ran a Brownie pack, and experienced camping for the first time, acting as camp nurse for three summers. She finally retired in 1968, aged eighty-four. She shared Mary Chater's home in St Winefride's Road, Littlehampton, from 1950 to 1965, when they took adjoining flats on South Terrace. At her death she was living at Kenwith, St Winefride's Road. 
After the publication of her memoir 'A Good Long Time' (1975), Hale found herself in demand, as one of the few suffragettes still alive, as a speaker in schools, on radio, and on television. In the book she emerges as a person of progressive views, a tolerant, interested observer of society, whose self-esteem, damaged in childhood, had been amply repaired by professional and personal fulfilment. The pages reveal no sense of irony or self-consciousness that her life's work consisted in advising others about things she had not herself experienced, or that she lived with women rather than husband and children. 
Cicely Hale died on 28 May 1981 of pneumonia and lung abscesses at 43 Glenville Road, Rustingdon, Sussex, after a 'good long' life of ninety-six years. Her obituary in 'The Times' noted that 'Her courage, kindness and enterprise made her a delightful friend and a much loved aunt of numerous nephews and nieces of three generations'. 


@@@@@


doc= 63865


Gray, Samuel (bap. 1693?, d. 1766), seedsman, may have been the Samuel Gray baptized on 28 January 1693 at St Giles Cripplegate, London, but A. E. Gunther, in 'A Century of Zoology at the British Museum' gives his birth date as 1694. Very little is known of Gray's life other than his success in running the family-owned seed business at the Black Boy in Pall Mall, London. He inherited the company from his father, also Samuel Gray, but seems to have been the more active in developing business. He bought a garden at Tettlefields, Westminster, and lived there, bequeathing it in turn to his eldest son, along with the Black Boy premises and business concerns, at his death in 1766. The house at Tettlefields was pulled down in 1828 when Carlton House was built. The company traded extensively with the Netherlands and at some point Gray expanded his interests to include a mill on the River Ravensbourne, near Deptford, later called Armoury Mill, where he introduced the commercial novelty of ground mustard (mustard flour). Before then, mustard seeds were crushed with a pestle and mortar. His firm subsequently achieved something of a mustard monopoly. The mill also produced cut glass for domestic and decorative use. 
On 6 December 1730 at Aspeden, Hertfordshire, Gray married Juliana Kelly, who outlived him, dying in 1774. Their first child was Juliana (1734-1811), who remained unmarried, then came Samuel and Edward Whitaker Gray, both of whom became distinguished naturalists. 


@@@@@


doc= 63866


Samuel Gray (1739-1771), seedsman and botanical writer, worked in the family firm and carried on the business after his father's death. In 1760 he translated parts of Linnaeus's 'Philosophica botanica', which was published as 'An Introduction to Botany' under James Lee's name. On 7 May 1761 at St James, Westminster, he married Frances Wade (1738-1801), whose father was a picture dealer in Maiden Lane, Covent Garden. The couple had four children in quick succession, only one of whom survived, a sickly boy called Samuel Frederick Gray (1766-1828). Samuel Gray died unexpectedly in 1771, leaving all the family property to his younger brother, who afterwards became keeper of natural curiosities at the British Museum at Montague House from 1787. Gray's wife, Frances, was consequently left with very little money on which to bring up their son. 


@@@@@


doc= 63868


Bull, Amy Maud (1877-1953), suffragist, was born at Great Holland Hall, Essex, on 16 July 1877, the daughter of a farmer, Charles Thompson Hicks (1838-1892), and his wife, Lilian Martha, 'nee' Smith (1853-1924). The family included another daughter, Beatrice, and a son, Charles, who died in the First World War. Amy Hicks was educated privately and at North London Collegiate School, before going up to Girton College, Cambridge, in 1895 to read classics. She graduated in 1899 with a first-class degree, having been awarded the college's Agnata Butler prize in 1897 and 1898 and the Therese Montefiore memorial prize in 1899. She was a visiting lecturer at Westfield College in 1900-01, class mistress at Belvedere High School, Liverpool, from 1901 to 1904, and a fellow of Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania in 1904-5. 
Amy Hicks's mother, brought up by a father who 'was a great believer in woman's capability, and trained both his daughters to manage their own affairs and depend on their own judgment just as carefully and thoroughly as he trained his sons' ('The Vote', 2 April 1910), had worked for many years with the Charity Organization Society and as a school manager, both in East Anglia and then in north St Pancras, and for the suffrage cause from the early 1880s. By 1902 both mother and daughter were members of the Central Society for Women's Suffrage. In December 1906 they joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) on the occasion of the banquet given by the constitutional suffrage society at the Savoy to celebrate the release from prison of the first militant suffragettes, but left that organization in October 1907 to join the newly founded Women's Freedom League (WFL). Amy Hicks had become the WFL's literary secretary by 1909. In July of that year she was imprisoned for three weeks on a charge of obstruction. In 1910 she both gave support to the New Constitutional Society for Women's Suffrage and rejoined the WSPU. In 1910 Amy Hicks was a member of the committee of the Tax Resistance League and in November of that year was arrested, with her mother, during the struggles with the police in Parliament Square on 'black Friday'. In March 1912 she was imprisoned for four months after taking part in the WSPU's window-smashing campaign in the West End of London. She spent time both in Holloway and Aylesbury, for a period in solitary confinement, went on hunger strike, and was forcibly fed. She was considered by the Home Office to be one of the ringleaders of the hunger strike at Aylesbury. On 27 May 1913 Amy Hicks was, with Sylvia Pankhurst, a founder of the East London Federation of the WSPU. With her mother she later became a member of the United Suffragists. During the First World War Amy Hicks joined the Women's Volunteer Reserve (Green Corps), which had been founded by Evelina Haverfield, a fellow suffragette. 
On 4 August 1927 at St Peter's Church, Belsize Park, Amy Hicks married a widower, John Major Bull (1858/9-1944), who had been a clerical officer in the War Office, and was the son of Archibald Bull, accountant. There were no children of the marriage. Amy Bull served as a rural district councillor in Chelmsford from 1927 to 1930, and lectured to Women's Institutes on the production and preservation of home-grown food. She was made an MBE some time before 1948. She died of pneumonia at her home, General's Orchard, Little Baddow, near Chelmsford, on 11 February 1953. In her will she left $1000 each to Girton College and to the National Trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 63869


Holme, Vera Louise (1881-1969), actress and suffragette, was born on 29 August 1881 at 6 Lulworth Road, Birkdale, Lancashire, the daughter of Richard Holme, a timber merchant, and his wife, Mary Louisa ('nee' Crowe). Nothing is known for certain of her education; she may have spent some of her youth in a convent school in France. She was an accomplished violinist and singer and by 1908 was a member of the chorus of the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company. Vera Holme became involved in the militant women's suffrage movement, joining the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) and, in 1908, the Actresses' Franchise League. Sylvia Pankhurst described her as 'a noisy, explosive young person, frequently rebuked by her elders for lack of dignity' (Pankhurst, 225). 
The 7 May 1909 issue of 'Votes for Women', the WSPU's weekly paper, contained a poem, 'An Organ Record', written by Vera Holme to commemorate her escapade on 2 May, when, with another suffragette, she hid after an evening concert inside the organ in the Colston Hall, Bristol, staying there all night and the next day in order to call out 'Votes for women' during the course of a meeting being held by a government minister that evening. She was an adept horsewoman and appeared, mounted, as a marshal at many WSPU demonstrations. In late 1909 she became chauffeur to the leaders of the WSPU, Mrs Pankhurst and Mrs Pethick-Lawrence, wearing a striking uniform in the WSPU colours, with a smart peaked cap, decorated with her RAC badge of efficiency. Her hair was now cut decidedly short and in November 1909 she appeared as Hannah Snell, the woman who went to war disguised as a soldier, in Cicely Hamilton's 'Pageant of Great Women', a propaganda play staged by the suffrage societies. In November 1911 Vera Holme was sentenced to five days' imprisonment on a charge of stone-throwing; this appears to have been her only prison sentence. Through the suffrage movement she met and became a very close friend of the Hon. Evelina Haverfield, with whom she lived in Devon from 1911. It was probably about this time that she acquired the nickname Jack or Jacko. 
On the outbreak of the First World War Vera Holme joined the Women's Volunteer Reserve, and was commissioned a major on 1 October 1914. She served in the transport unit of the Scottish Women's Hospital from 1915 to 1916, in charge of horses and trucks, working with Mrs Haverfield. In October 1917 Vera Holme was entrusted by Dr Elsie Inglis with the details of a report on the situation of the Serb army at the Romanian front. She and another member of the Scottish Women's Hospital team were instructed when they returned to England to present the full report in person to Lord Robert Cecil of the Foreign Office and Lord Derby, the secretary of state for war. After the end of the war and the death of Evelina Haverfield, who left her a small annuity, Vera Holme was the administrator of the Haverfield Fund for Serbian Children. She kept in touch with Serbian friends and visited the country again in 1934. She lived in Scotland, at Allt Griannach, Lochearnhead, Perthshire, and was associated with the artistic set that centred on Kirkcudbright. Its leader, Jessie M. King, designed a most appropriate book-plate for her, depicting an armoured Joan of Arc figure with the legend 'O Freedom Beautiful Beyond Compare Thy Kingdom is Established', presumably marking women's emancipation. She was twice painted by the Edinburgh artist Dorothy Johnstone. Vera Holme had been an acting member of the Pioneer Players from 1914 to 1915 and from 1917 to 1920, and remained a lifelong friend of Edith Craig, the daughter of Ellen Terry, for many years helping to stage the annual Ellen Terry memorial performance in the Barn Theatre at Smallhythe in Kent. Vera Holme died at 50 St Andrew's Drive, Glasgow, on 1 January 1969 of renal failure and arteriosclerosis. 


@@@@@


doc= 63871


Hallinan, Hazel Hunkins (1890-1982), campaigner for women's rights, was born on 6 June 1890 at Aspen, Colorado, in the United States, the only daughter of Lewis Hunkins, civil war veteran, jeweller, and watchmaker, and Ann Whittingham, an English emigree. Hazel Hunkins was brought up in Billings, Montana. She later reflected that it was an early experience at the Episcopalian Church Sunday school which had provided her with her first awareness of gender difference. She recalled listening to a reading of 'Genesis' and her dejection at the information that 'it only took a rib to make me while Adam was made in the image of God'. She later concluded that 'In circumstances such as these little girls have from time immensurable been given a sense of inferiority' (SPG/HHH/M23 Fawcett Library). However, there was nothing inferior about Hunkins's scholastic achievements: she graduated from Vassar College in 1913 with an excellent degree in chemistry. She went on to lecture chemistry to freshmen at the University of Missouri for three years, with special reference to agricultural economics, and began her master's degree in chemistry. Prejudice at the university denied her promotion, despite her having higher qualifications than her male colleagues. Her professional ambitions were thwarted and her studies interrupted by traditional social expectations which compelled her to return home to nurse her critically ill mother. To relieve the tedium of this restricted domestic life she applied for a chemistry teaching post at Billings high school but was informed that only men would be considered for the post. However, she accepted a botany and geography position. Her experience of female subordination was endorsed when she attempted to gain employment as an industrial chemist. Her applications to chemistry laboratories throughout the country resulted in over 200 rejections: in every case the explanation offered was that they did not employ female chemists. She was twenty-six years old and desperate to make her contribution to society and be independent. 
Such accumulated frustration was to find release when in the summer of 1916 Hunkins met Anna Louise Rowe, a member of the National Woman's Party (NWP), who was in Billings to establish NWP branches across Montana at the behest of the party's leader, Alice Paul. Hunkins's life as a political activist began with her organizing Billings's own NWP branch, becoming Montana state chair of the National Woman's Party, travelling around the state speaking at public meetings. But when the Democratic Party blocked the proposed equality legislation for women, NWP members concentrated all efforts on picketing the White House in Washington. Hunkins joined them. The women were subjected to physical violence and verbal abuse from crowds and police alike, while they stood silently holding their banners. To the horror of her family, from June 1917 Hunkins served several gaol sentences and took part in prison hunger strikes. She and her fellow women protesters claimed that as American citizens they were being held by their government as political prisoners. 
It was soon after her final release from prison that Hunkins met Charles Thomas Hallinan (died 1971) at a pacifist meeting where he was a speaker. Hunkins went to England in July 1920 to carry out research on the co-operative movement for the American Railway Brotherhood, and Charles Hallinan travelled there in November as the financial editor of United Press International. Hunkins and Hallinan then lived together in London and had four children. At the end of the 1920s they married. In this same spirit of independence Hunkins Hallinan adamantly declared that 'I have never in my life called myself Mrs Charles Hallinan. I have always had my own name' (Spender, 25). 
During the course of her research on the co-operative movement, Hunkins Hallinan attended lectures at the London School of Economics to improve her knowledge of political and economic issues and was a member of the 1917 Club and attended Fabian socials. In London, she re-established her commitment to women's rights by joining the Six Point Group (SPG) in 1922. The SPG was a non-party political group formed in 1921 by Lady Rhondda (Margaret Haig) and its membership consisted of former militant suffragettes who were interested in practical action for social, economic, and political equality for women. During the 1920s and 1930s Hunkins Hallinan's friends numbered many of the leading feminists of the day including Crystal Eastman, Dora Russell, and Vera Brittain. 
Hunkins Hallinan had various full- and part-time posts which utilized her economic and research experience. In London she became a sub-editor of the 'Statesman's Yearbook' and was society correspondent of the 'Chicago Tribune' for fourteen years. Having been the SPG's honorary secretary for some time, during the 1950s Hunkins Hallinan became its chair and was prominent in the key campaigns of the period relating to women's employment rights, particularly equal pay and promotion rights. Her concern was not restricted to professional women, but included married women who were trying to combine work with family responsibilities. She was also a member of the Married Women's Association, although her perception of those family responsibilities was likely to have been somewhat limited by her class (she had sons at Oxford and Gordonstoun). By 1917 she was a member of the all-party parliamentary equal rights group which did much valuable groundwork for the anti-discrimination legislation of the 1970s. Birth control and abortion rights were also major interests and she worked with the Abortion Law Reform Association from the end of the 1960s. 
Hunkins Hallinan had great admiration for the vitality of the new women's liberation movement. She had sustained her links with America through visits and speaking trips, but in 1973 she bridged the divide between the first and second waves of the women's movement by contacting the recently established National Organization for Women (NOW) in America. In a letter to NOW she declared that her twenty years as chairman of the SPG meant that 'My very modest distinction is that I am the only American woman who has achieved the chairmanship of a national organisation (British) without having climbed to that office through marriage to an English title!' (SPG:M19 Fawcett Library). It should be remembered, however, that by 1971 the SPG's membership had fallen to a modest 122. In 1977 Hunkins Hallinan marched with the NOW demonstration in Washington in support of the 'Equal Rights Amendment' (first proposed in 1923 by her friend Alice Paul, at whose 1977 memorial day service she delivered the address) and was guest of honour at the White House when President Carter signed a women's equality day proclamation. 
The early professional rebuffs Hunkins Hallinan experienced undoubtedly contributed to what her son Mark described as 'a very forceful personality'. Her friend of fifty years Muriel Gray pointed out the contrast between her being 'tremendously courageous and very gutsy' and her 'very small, feminine and pretty' appearance. An SPG colleague recalled that 'She was a most energetic person and very determined. If she wanted to do a thing, she carried it through' ('Ham & High'). Although she wrote numerous articles for magazines and newspapers, as well as a children's history of the United States, her most significant publishing contribution was to edit 'In her Own Right', a 1968 SPG book on the successes and remaining problems of women's emancipation. 
Hazel Hunkins Hallinan died, aged ninety-one, of respiratory failure at her home, 15B Belsize Park Gardens in north London on 17 May 1982. Her body was returned to Billings, Montana, for burial next to her parents and husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 63872


Jamieson, Christina (1864-1942), writer and suffragist, was born on 30 June 1864 at Cruisdale, Sandness, Shetland, the second of the seven children of Robert Jamieson (1827-1899), schoolmaster, and Barbara Laing (1838-1923), daughter of a schoolmaster and land surveyor. Jamieson received her education at the school in Sandness, where her father was headmaster, and she acted for a while as a pupil teacher there. Several of her brothers went on to become eminent academics on the mainland, but she remained in Shetland for most of her life. 
Robert Jamieson was a contributor of articles and stories to 'The Scotsman', and his daughter followed suit. In the late 1890s she began to write short stories and factual pieces for weekly and other papers, sometimes under the 'nom de plume' John Cranston. These writings were usually about her native islands, and often had a strong antiquarian content. She continued to write throughout her life, often in a robust Shetland dialect. 
When Robert Jamieson died in 1899, Jamieson and her mother moved to Lerwick. They eventually lived in Twagios House, a large eighteenth-century building at the south side of the town, and for several years Jamieson used it as a base for her suffragist activities. She helped to found the Shetland Women's Suffrage Society in 1909 and guided its affiliation to the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. She designed a local banner, and helped to carry it in processions as far afield as London. Her other main contribution to the movement was literary and oratorical: she wrote numerous pro-suffrage items for the local press, lectured on the movement's history to the Lerwick Literary and Debating Society in March 1909, and published a pamphlet based on the lecture ('Sketch of Votes for Women', 1909). In 1910 she wrote a moving article on the economic and emotional plight of the women of Shetland ('Shetland Times', 22 and 29 January 1910). 
Jamieson's party political adherence is unknown, but she was often friendly to unpopular causes. About 1900 she wrote an essay with sympathetic remarks about pro-Boers (Shetland Archives, MS D.18/32/23), and she befriended and assisted local socialists in the inter-war period. In the 1920s and 1930s she shared Twagios House with her nephew Bertie Jamieson, an active communist. During the First World War she played an important and, as far as her sex was concerned, unique part in public life in the islands: in 1916 she became a member of Lerwick school board, and in 1918 she became interim chairman of it. She was also a member of the county committee on secondary education, and eventually of the education authority. In all these forums she was a forthright speaker. 
In her later years Jamieson devoted her attention to antiquarian and folklore matters. In 1930 she founded the Shetland Folklore Society, which specialized in recreating old Shetland dances for audiences in Lerwick and throughout the islands. Jamieson's kitchen at Twagios was the site of many of these performances. In 1931 she encouraged the education authority to prepare a 'Shetland Book' for local scholars (a project which came to fruition in 1967). With the antiquarian E. S. Reid Tait, and with the assistance of her nephew Bertie Jamieson, she transcribed for publication extracts from the old kirk session minutes of her native parish of Walls and Sandness. These were published as 'The Hjaltland Miscellany', volumes 2 and 3 (1937 and 1939); volume 2 contains superb introductory essays by Jamieson. Jamieson had emigrated to New Zealand in 1935 to live with a brother, in a fruitless search for relief from asthma. She died at Nelson, New Zealand, on 23 March 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 63874


Ker, Alice Jane Shannan Stewart (1853-1943), doctor and suffragette, was born on 2 December 1853 at Deskford, Cullen, Banffshire, the eldest child of the Revd William Turnbull Ker (1824-1885), minister of the Free Church of Scotland, and his wife, Margaret Millar, 'nee' Stevenson (1826-1900), daughter of James Cochran Stevenson, chemical manufacturer and Liberal MP for South Shields. Her mother's unmarried sisters Elisa, Flora, and Louisa lived in Edinburgh where they were involved in a wide range of social, political, and feminist concerns, their home forming an unofficial centre for the early women's suffrage movement, and, while little is known of Alice's early childhood or her education, she was very close to the Stevenson aunts who, along with her mother, encouraged her to take up a profession. 
Through her aunts Alice became acquainted with Sophia Jex-Blake and her student contemporaries at about the time that they were bringing an action against Edinburgh University, attempting to force the institution to permit women to graduate as medical doctors. By 1872 Alice had enrolled at Edinburgh and was taking a variety of classes including anatomy and physiology. In 1873 the university successfully appealed against Jex-Blake's action, effectively closing its doors on women medics. Alice then moved to London to study at the London School of Medicine for Women where she was a strong student, winning prizes in chemistry, materia medica, and practice of medicine. As the school's qualifications were not recognized by the medical register at this time she sat examinations at the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland, the route taken by many female medical pioneers. Alice then spent a further period studying in Boston, USA, and in Bern, Switzerland. She was accepted onto the medical register in 1879, only the thirteenth woman to be so recognized. 
Details of Alice's early medical career are sparse, but it is known that she spent some time at the Children's Hospital in Birmingham where she was promoted to senior medical officer in 1881. She also published a book, 'Lectures to Women nos. 1-3' (1883), which gave pragmatic advice on a number of medical questions. By 1887 she had returned to Edinburgh and was attempting to establish her own medical practice. This work was interrupted by her marriage, in December 1888, to Edward Stewart Ker (1839-1907), a distant cousin who was sole partner in the firm of Stewart Ker & Son, merchants of Liverpool, and the couple moved to Birkenhead. There, Alice was able to establish a name for herself as one of only two women doctors in the area and was appointed to a variety of positions including honorary medical officer to the Wirral Hospital for Sick Children and honorary medical officer at Birkenhead Lying-In Hospital. She published her second medical book, 'Motherhood: a Book for every Woman' (1891), which gave practical and straightforward medical information on confinement and child rearing. She also built up a successful general practice which she ran from the family home at Grange Road. With her husband, she became a well-known figure in local society, enjoying invitations to many of the major parties of the Liverpool 'season'. But she retained an active interest in social questions, especially those relating to women, and became involved in the Women's Local Government Association as well as the RSPCA and the anti-vivisection movement. The couple were also regular attenders at several Anglican churches in Birkenhead. 
Alice managed to combine motherhood with her career and voluntary activities. Her first child, Stewart, was born in 1889 but died at the age of sixteen months to the great distress of both parents. Two daughters, Margaret Louise ('b'. 1892) and Mary Dunlop ('b'. 1896) followed, both of whom survived. Edward took a full part in the upbringing of his daughters, delighting in pram pushing and family walks, and taking the girls to church. Alice continued her busy professional life with the minimum of domestic help, getting up in the middle of the night to feed or soothe her children, and often taking them with her on her rounds. 
In 1907 Edward unexpectedly died. He and Alice had been a devoted couple, sharing many interests and delighting in their young family, and his death was a heavy blow. It also left Alice with some spare leisure time, which she filled by increasing her involvement in women's politics. Since her student days she had been a supporter of the idea of women's suffrage, and was a member of the rather sedate Birkenhead Women's Suffrage Society, affiliated to the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS). She became chairman of this group in 1908 but was increasingly frustrated by their gradualist tactics and in the autumn of 1909 switched her allegiance, joining the Liverpool branch of the militant Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). Alice supported a number of militant protests in Liverpool and acted as unofficial WSPU doctor to hunger strikers in Walton gaol. As well as participating in demonstrations and selling 'Votes for Women' in Liverpool's main shopping streets (which she often did in between visiting patients) Alice was also keen to demonstrate the extent of her commitment through participation in higher levels of militancy. In April 1912 she travelled to London with other members of the Liverpool WSPU to participate in a mass window-smashing raid, smashing windows at Harrods store. Unusually she was offered bail, but declined and was sent to Holloway for two months, where she participated in the hunger strike. During her imprisonment she was emotionally sustained by the support of her WSPU friends, and also by her daughters, who were becoming increasingly involved in 'the cause' themselves. Margaret followed her mother's example in November 1912 and was sent to Walton gaol for setting fire to a pillar box in Liverpool. Alice applauded her actions but privately worried that they threatened Margaret's place at Liverpool University and personally appealed to the vice-chancellor to readmit her daughter. 
Alice's fears that her more extreme suffrage activities would lead to the family being forced out of Birkenhead proved unfounded, and she continued her general practice after her release, although by this stage it was diminishing largely owing to a combination of her external commitments and her age. Since her husband's death she had gradually cut her association with the Anglican church in favour of unitarianism and also theosophy which was playing an increasingly important role in her life. In 1914 the family moved from Birkenhead to Wavertree garden suburb, outside Liverpool. Alice became a regular attender at the Liverpool theosophical lodge and was elected to its executive committee. Although she made no real attempt to build up a new medical practice she continued to see some patients, especially attending births. Liverpool WSPU effectively ceased functioning at the outbreak of war, but Alice continued some suffrage activities through the United Suffragists, serving as vice-president of the Liverpool branch. She also briefly worked again with some of her old NUWSS colleagues through the Women's War Service Bureau, for which she ran a series of popular classes in first aid techniques. 
In the spring of 1916 the family left Liverpool to live in London. It is unclear exactly why they took this step, although there was some general migration from the city during the First World War. Wartime travel was also difficult, and in London Alice and Margaret were more easily able to visit Mary, now studying at Cambridge. The London base allowed Alice to participate more in theosophy at a national level. She became a familiar figure at the society's national headquarters and a keen attender of several London lodges, becoming chair of the Garden Suburb lodge near Hampstead in 1921. She also reactivated her medical career with great vigour, working long hours at a number of school clinics and infant welfare centres until after the end of the war. In the early 1920s she finally relinquished her medical work and went into retirement. For her this was not synonymous with inactivity and she continued to lecture enthusiastically for the Theosophical Society in London and sometimes further afield in Britain for the next two decades. She also retained links with feminism and was honorary secretary of Hendon women's council. In retirement she lived mainly in north London, first with Mary and a companion of Mary's, Olive Foot, and then with Margaret and her companion Muriel Whiteman. Both of her daughters were schoolteachers, and Alice maintained a lively interest in their careers. In her final years she was increasingly housebound, but paid strong attention to current affairs via the radio. She died on 20 March 1943 in her ninetieth year. 


@@@@@


doc= 63876


Moullin, Edith Ruth Mansell (1858/9-1941), suffragette and pacifist, was the daughter of Anne ('nee' Lloyd) and David Collet Thomas, merchant and shipowner. Her social conscience was evident from her youth onwards: on leaving school she did 'slum work' in Bethnal Green. She helped in a soup kitchen during the dockers' strike and was a founder member of the Anti-Sweating League. She once commented that 'my career has been one long record of a supporter of unpopular causes' (E. R. M. Moullin to Edith How Martyn, 6 Sept 1935, Suffragette Fellowship Collection, 57.116/79). On 20 August 1885 she married Charles William Mansell Moullin (1851-1940), a surgeon at the London Hospital. The couple were firm advocates of women doctors and of women's suffrage. Charles was a vice-president of the Men's League for Women's Suffrage. Edith Mansell Moullin belonged to several suffrage societies: the Women's Freedom League, Women's Social and Political Union until 1913, and the Church League for Women's Suffrage -- she had already been honorary treasurer of the Church Socialist League. 
Proud of her Welsh parentage, Edith Mansell Moullin organized the Welsh contingent in the suffrage coronation procession of 1911. From this she founded a unique organization based in London dedicated to uniting Welsh people of differing viewpoints to work for women's enfranchisement, the Cymric Suffrage Union. Edith became its vice-president. Small, dark-haired, and passionate in her commitments, she did not draw neat distinctions between her public and personal life. Typically, the family's home in fashionable Wimpole Street was the society's headquarters. There were a few branches in Wales and she went on several speaking tours in north Wales. 
The Liberal government's announcement of a manhood suffrage measure which effectively threatened the 'Conciliation Bill', presaged renewed suffrage militancy in November 1911. Edith sat on the platform with Mrs Pankhurst and Mrs Pethick Lawrence at the Caxton Hall meeting which preceded a demonstration in Parliament Square. She was one of 223 arrested. Charged with trying to break through the police cordon, she denied attempting to disturb the peace, claiming that the police were obstructing her. She spent five days in Holloway. Her suffrage society disbanded and regrouped in October 1912 as the more militant Forward Cymric Suffrage Union (FCSU). Edith was its honorary organizer. It obliged members to put women's suffrage before any other cause, to work for no other political party, and to oppose any government refusing votes for women. Members met regularly at Alan's Tea Rooms, Oxford Circus, and held 'at homes' at Wimpole Street where their hostess carefully cultivated a sense of Welshness via speeches and song. Edith's home also became the centre for a 'Cat and Mouse' committee to aid suffrage prisoners suffering under the 'Prisoners (Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act'. This act enabled ailing hunger strikers to be released then imprisoned on recovery. Representatives of many suffrage societies attended. Charles Mansell Moullin had already spoken and written against forcible feeding. Edith commented that although she and her husband had lost 'many so-called friends' because of their strong views, she had 'made many more loyal and dear comrades' (E. R. M. Moullin to Edith How Martyn, 6 Sept 1935, Suffragette Fellowship Collection, 57.116/79). 
The FCSU continued in wartime. Proceeds from its sales of work relieved distress among Welsh women and children. In October 1914 Edith and Dr Helena Jones launched an appeal to help thirty-six Welsh wives of imprisoned Germans who had been working in Welsh mines. The wives were not receiving relief as they were not considered to be British subjects. By 1916 ill health forced Edith to resign from her FCSU post. She had become a pacifist and well into her seventies would expend her energies in this cause. She was involved with the Society for Cultural Relations with the USSR, which she chaired from 1931. Edith was also a voluntary helper at St Dunstan's, the centre founded by the blind newspaper magnate Sir Arthur Pearson where blindness was treated as a challenge rather than as an affliction. In 1930 she wrote an appreciation of her old friend Emily Wilding Davison. It had been Charles Mansell Moullin who had performed the unsuccessful emergency operation on Davison after she had thrown herself in front of the king's horse at the 1913 Derby. 
Charles Mansell Moullin died aged eighty-nine in 1940. Edith died the following year on 5 March at 2 Cottesmore Court, Stanford Road, Kensington, the London home of their only child, Oswald. She was eighty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 63877


Griffith, Moses (bap. 1699, d. 1785), physician, son of the Revd Edward Griffith and his wife, Elizabeth, was baptized at Melbourn, Cambridgeshire, and was apprenticed to Edward Sayer, an apothecary of Norwich, in 1712. He married Elizabeth Guyon (1701x3-1774) in 1724; they had a son, Guyon (1730-1784), who was admitted as a student in Leiden in 1744 and was rector of St Mary-at-Hill, Middlesex, between 1763 and 1784. Griffith practised in London before moving to Colchester in 1768. He died at his house in Head Street, Colchester, on 1 March 1785, and was commemorated by a slab in St Peter's Church, Colchester. 
Griffith is most probably the author of 'Practical observations on the cure of hectic and SLOW fevers, and the pulmonary consumption, to which is added a method of treating several kinds of internal haemorrhages' (1776). In the introduction to this work Griffith mentions that he has been retired about eight years and that he has had consultations with Colin Hossack, a Colchester physician. 
Another physician of the same name was 
Neither of the above should be confused with the artist Moses Griffith ('fl'. 1769-1809), who assisted the naturalist and traveller Thomas Pennant on some of his tours. 


@@@@@


doc= 63878


Porter, Muriel Lilah Matters- (1877-1969), suffragist and feminist, was born on 12 November 1877 in Adelaide, South Australia, the daughter of John Leonard Matters, a cabinet-maker, and his wife, Emma Alma Harburton. Educated at Adelaide high school, she ascribed an early interest in women's suffrage later in life to reading Ibsen's 'Doll's House' at fourteen: 'I shall never forget my joy in finding that the sentiments I had always vaguely but keenly felt had been put into words, forcible, majestic, dignified' ('The Vote', 19 Feb 1910, 196). She took a degree in music and became a professional actress and elocution teacher, and toured Australia and New Zealand. She seems also to have had radical political connections. In 1906 she came to Britain, initially for her musical career, but with an introduction to the anarchist circle centred on the exiled Prince Peter Kropotkin. 
Muriel Matters rapidly became involved in the campaign for women's suffrage. Early in 1906 she was already attending meetings of the newly militant Women's Social and Political Union in Caxton Hall, London, being particularly impressed by the radicalism of Charlotte Despard. In 1907 she followed Despard into the breakaway Women's Freedom League and became one of its most visible activists. In the spring and summer of 1908 she took part in a league caravan tour of Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, holding meetings often so lively that the women had to seek police protection. On 28 October 1908 she and Helen Fox were in the ladies' gallery of the House of Commons, then enclosed from the rest of the chamber by a metal grille, a standing affront to campaigners for women's rights. The two women interrupted the business of the house by demonstrating for women's suffrage; when officials made attempts to remove them, it was discovered that they had chained and padlocked themselves to the grille in such a way that in order to remove them the grille would have to be removed as well. They were taken to committee room no. 15, where their chains were filed off and they were ejected. Muriel Matters then went round to join the demonstration taking place in front of the houses of parliament, where she was arrested on a charge of disorderly conduct and imprisoned for a month. On 17 February 1909, the day parliament returned from recess, she hired a pilot and an airship, which she had painted with the words 'Votes for Women' and in which she flew from the Welsh Harp, Hendon, at heights of up to 3500 feet over central London, especially over the houses of parliament, scattering leaflets as she went. 
Muriel Matters was later appointed Women's Freedom League organizer for south Wales, based in Carmarthen. During the first general election campaign of 1910 she moved her activities to Lloyd George's constituency of Dwyfor in north Wales. Later in 1910 she went back to Australia for about three months. By 1911 she was campaigning once more, this time in Buckinghamshire, on behalf of the Women's Tax Resistance League. She became increasingly interested in labour politics, in 1913 giving active support to relief work on behalf of families of those involved in the Dublin lock-out. In October 1913 she helped to persuade the National Federation of Mineworkers to declare in favour of women's suffrage; in this she was speaking for the constitutional National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, rather than for the Women's Freedom League. By this time she was also involved with the New Constitutional Society for Women's Suffrage and the Church League for Women's Suffrage. 
On the outbreak of war in August 1914 the suffrage societies effectively stopped campaigning, and on 15 October Muriel Matters married William Arnold Porter (1870?-1949), a dentist, who had apparently proposed to her during the previous three years, despite his doubts about her suffrage activities; there were no children. Subsequently known as Mrs Matters-Porter, she none the less continued her political commitment and became organizing secretary of the British Committee of the International Council of Women, which in April 1915 was trying to overcome government refusal of permission to attend the International Woman Suffrage Alliance Congress in The Hague. She did manage to travel to Spain, where she trained under Maria Montessori; she returned to London to help run Sylvia Pankhurst's school attached to the Mother's Arms in Bow. In July 1916 she joined the Women's Peace Crusade in Glasgow, and after the war she spoke at meetings of the Glasgow branch of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. By this stage she was also active in the British Dominions Woman Suffrage Union. 
By 1924 Muriel Matters-Porter and her husband were living in Hastings, where she stood unsuccessfully as Labour Party candidate in that year's general election. Montessori had alerted her to the way an unfavourable environment hinders education, and for her the most important issue had become the housing of the people, though she also favoured improving women's conditions through mechanizing the home ('The Vote', 12 Sept 1924, 289). In June 1926 she took part in the Peacemakers' Pilgrimage, together with a number of other members of the Women's Freedom League. Subsequently she seems to have become less politically involved, devoting much of her energies to lecturing and travelling widely. Her husband died in 1949, and Muriel Matters-Porter died of pneumonia at St Anthony's, 82-4 West Hill Road, St Leonards, east Sussex, on 17 November 1969. She was buried at Hastings borough crematorium on 24 November. Her relatives in Australia were unable to attend her funeral there; however, members of the Suffragette Fellowship were present, witnessing to her importance in the women's movement. 


