@@@@@


doc= 63879


Moore, Eva (1868-1955), actress and suffragist, was born on 9 February 1868 at 67 Preston Street, Brighton, the eighth of ten children of Edward Henry Moore, a chemist, and his wife, Emily Strachan. She was educated in Miss Pringle's school in Brighton and went to Liverpool to study gymnastics and dancing under Madame Michau. She returned to Brighton to teach dancing, and one of her pupils was the young Winston Churchill. Eva was given her first professional role by Tom Thorne at the Vaudeville Theatre in London in a play called 'Partners', a comedy drama by Robert Buchanan. Her sisters Jessie and Decima were to join her on the stage. In 1890 Arthur Pinero gave her a part as the countess of Drumdurris in his play 'The Cabinet Minister' at the Court Theatre. Emboldened by money they had won in a bet at the races, on 19 November 1891 Eva married the Irish actor and playwright Henry Vernon Esmond (1869-1922), son of Richard George Jack, a physician and surgeon. Her husband's real name was Harry Esmond Jack. They had three children: a baby, Lynette, who did not survive, and Jack and Jill Esmond, who both made careers in the theatre. 
Eva Moore was an active suffragist and a founder and vice-president of the Actresses' Franchise League, a non-party grouping of actresses working for votes for women, formed in 1908. She did not go to prison but had the deepest respect for women who did. A familiar figure marching in the suffrage processions in London with contingents of other well-known actresses including Cissy Loftus, May Whitty, and Lena Ashwell, she was called as a witness when Emmeline Pankhurst was on trial. However, she resigned from the Actresses' Franchise League when members took exception to her acting in a sketch written by her husband called 'Her Vote', in which the heroine was shown to prefer kisses to votes. 
When the First World War broke out the Women's Emergency Corps was formed, with the actress-manager Gertrude Kingston lending the Little Theatre as its premises. Eva Moore played at the Vaudeville Theatre in the evening and worked as a volunteer at the Little Theatre during the day. Members of the Actresses' Franchise League also founded the British Women's Hospital in 1914. In the following year she met the 'Women of Pervyse', Mairi Chisholm and Elsie Knocker. An appeal Eva Moore made at a Birmingham theatre raised 1500 balaclava helmets; another appeal raised thousands of sandbags. In 1918, when the Germans were making their last big offensive, she paid a visit to Belgian trenches to see the dressing station at Pervyse. She was one of a delegation who presented to the queen a cheque for $50,000 raised for the British hospital. Five of the Moore sisters worked for the British war effort at home and abroad and all received decorations for their services. Moore was honoured with the ordre de la Reine Elisabeth. After the war she toured the battlefields of France and Belgium and also visited Germany. 
Although many touring companies were disbanded at the beginning of the First World War, Eva Moore and her husband carried on performing. In 1914 she went to New York to play the title role in his play 'Eliza Comes to Stay', which was poorly received, and in the following year they visited Ireland. In 1918 Eva Moore played Mrs Culver in Arnold Bennett's play 'The Title', at the Royalty Theatre under the direction of J. E. Vedrenne, then stayed on at that theatre to take the part of Mrs Etheridge in W. Somerset Maugham's 'Caesar's Wife' and the title role in 'Mumsie'. In 1920 she joined the Trans-Canada Company, which took British plays and actors across Canada in a tour of forty-eight towns and cities. 
Eva Moore was one of the best-known actresses of her day. Between 1887 and 1923, when her book of reminiscences 'Exits and Entrances' was published, she acted in approximately ninety plays, thirteen of which were written by her husband. The two appeared together in fourteen plays. Eva Moore had parts in a number of films, including 'Flames of Passion', 'Of Human Bondage', and 'La vie parisienne'. She visited Berlin to act in 'Chu Chin Chow' and went to Hollywood in 1942 before returning to Britain in 1945. Her friends included W. S. Gilbert, Sir Herbert Tree, Sir Henry Irving, Anthony Hope, Clemence Dane, Marie Loftus, and Marie Lloyd. She retired from the theatre in 1945. In the latter part of her life Apple Porch, Henley Road, Bisham, Maidenhead, Berkshire, was her home; she died there of myocardial degeneration on 27 April 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 63880


Munro, Anna Gillies Macdonald (1881-1962), campaigner for women's suffrage and magistrate, was born at 32 Gladstone Street, Glasgow, on 4 October 1881, the elder daughter of Evan Macdonald Munro ('c'.1854-1913), schoolmaster of Edinburgh, and his wife, Margaret Ann MacVean (1858-1892) of Glengilp, Knapdale, Argyll. The family lived in Edinburgh until the death of Anna's mother in 1892, when Anna, with her sister, Eva, was taken to live at Venturefair House, Townhill, Dunfermline, the home of Revd Jacob Primmer, a Church of Scotland minister whose wife was Evan Munro's sister. 
As a young woman Anna Munro became involved in social work among the working classes in London through the Wesleyan Methodist Sisters of the People, which she joined because she admired their socialist ideals rather than out of religious conviction. It is ironic that when she later became president of this movement her duties included conducting services of worship, as she had all but abandoned any church connection on moving south. It was while working in London's East End that she became aware of the activities of the women's suffrage movement. She joined the Women's Social and Political Union and founded its Dunfermline branch in 1906. She later followed her friend Teresa Billington-Greig into the Women's Freedom League (WFL), becoming her private secretary in 1907. In January 1908 she was imprisoned in Holloway for six weeks for her part in demonstrations outside the home of the cabinet minister Richard Haldane. From 1908 to 1912 she served as organizing secretary for the Women's Freedom League Scottish council. She helped organize an annual holiday campaign, aimed at reaching the Glasgow workers as they enjoyed their summer holidays on the Clyde coast. Setting up summer headquarters of the WFL in Rothesay on the island of Bute, they then held meetings at Dunoon, Kirn, and Largs. She also helped organize the 1911 census protest, whereby members of the WFL encouraged women to refuse to participate in the census -- on the principle of 'no taxation without representation'. In 1912 Anna Munro was one of four members of the WFL who marched the entire route of the Women's Freedom League Edinburgh-London march. She addressed the rallies in Edinburgh and London at both ends of the route. 
In addition to her Scottish campaigning, Anna Munro also travelled in rural areas of England in a horse-drawn caravan, conducting open-air meetings from the tailboard. She apparently displayed great eloquence, speaking entirely without notes, and addressing large gatherings. She was a tall, elegant, attractive woman, and was apparently admired by many of the men who attended the meetings, although she made it her policy not to reply to any letters she received from men. However, following one of her meetings at Thatcham, near Reading, she received a letter from Sidney Ashman, who had been present at the meeting with his sisters. She agreed to meet, mistakenly thinking that 'Sidney' was one of the sisters whom she had spoken to at the meeting. Romance blossomed, and the couple were married on 4 April 1913 at Wandsworth register office, London. They set up home in the Reading area, where Sidney was beginning to build up a business in road haulage. Shortly after their marriage Anna Munro was imprisoned for her part in holding an illegal suffrage meeting in Hyde Park. Their two children, a son and a daughter, were born while they were living in their first home at Park Farm, Thatcham. They lived at Aldermaston, from 1923 until 1929 when they bought their own home, Venturefair, at Padworth, near Reading. Throughout her married life Anna Munro continued to campaign for women's rights, remaining active in the WFL right up until its disbanding in 1961. Although she and her husband had adopted the surname Munro-Ashman on their marriage, Anna continued to be known as Anna Munro in all her WFL activities. This was a conscious choice, made so as not to jeopardize her husband's growing business. She also chose not to stand for parliament on the grounds that it might interfere with her husband's business, and because it would mean her being away from her children too much. Although she was a dedicated socialist, she seems to have had the ability to hold her socialist views comfortably alongside her upper-middle-class standing. She was not on visiting terms with the local 'gentry', and was much more comfortable in the company of the working-class people of Beenham, a mining village near Reading, among whom she campaigned during elections, taking them to the polls in her Daimler motor car. One of her greatest rivals was J. H. Benyan of Englefield Manor, a leading local landowner, who publicly opposed her being made a magistrate. He is reported to have said that this would happen only 'over his dead body', and she was not in fact appointed a magistrate until after his death in 1935. She served as a magistrate until the late 1950s, retiring from the bench only when she was forced to do so because of hearing difficulties. 
Anna Munro was a supporter of the temperance movement and president of the National British Total Abstinence Movement, and her parties were noted for the non-alcoholic cocktails which she very expertly created. In later life she served on various local committees, and as both chairman and president of the local Labour Party. She also campaigned against compulsory vaccination. Her own children had not been vaccinated because she was opposed, not to vaccination itself, but to compulsion in any form. She encouraged her own children in their chosen careers, her son as a doctor and her daughter as an almoner at the local hospital. On 11 September 1962 Anna Munro suffered a heart attack and died that day at her home at Venturefair, Padworth. Having left instructions in her will, she was cremated at Reading crematorium. She was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 63881


Newsome, Stella Winifred (1889-1969), women's activist, was born on 28 July 1889 at 3 Museum Terrace, Leicester, the daughter of George Newsome (1841-1909), wholesale grocer, and his wife, Caroline Louisa Rice ('b'. 1859). Little is known of her childhood and education, though by profession she was a schoolteacher. Newsome's life was shaped by her twin commitment to campaigning for women's equality and creating a historic record of feminist activity. She became involved in the Leicester branch of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) about 1911. Under the direction of its local organizer, Margaret West, she took part in militant activities, setting light to pillar boxes and raiding golf courses. Like other members of the WSPU she was angered by the halt to suffrage activity during the First World War and disapproved of Christabel Pankhurst's jingoism. As a result she left the union. 
About 1916 Newsome moved to London and may have worked with the Borough branch of the United Suffragists. She went on to join the Women's Freedom League, and became secretary to its mid-London branch. In the 1930s she served on its executive committee, and between 1954 and 1958 was honorary secretary to the organization. After the extension of the franchise in 1918 Newsome campaigned to secure a new position for women based on economic and social equality. In November 1920 the National Federation of Women Teachers called a demonstration on the issue of equal pay for equal work: Newsome was a member and, in the run-up to the march, spoke on the issue to London women's organizations. She was not a high-profile activist, but worked hard behind the scenes. For many years she was an executive member of the Six Point Group, and focused particularly on broadening the educational opportunities of girls. 
From the mid-1940s to her death, Newsome was secretary to the Suffragette Fellowship and effectively its archivist. She placed high value on documenting the movement and commemorating its participants. In 1954, with Edith How-Martyn and Elsa Gye, she compiled the commemorative roll of honour to suffragette prisoners. She was secretary to the Pethick-Lawrence Portrait Fund, and contributed many suffragette obituaries to 'Calling All Women' -- the fellowship's journal. As part of the celebrations marking the fiftieth anniversary of the Women's Freedom League she wrote an account of its history: 'Women's Freedom League, 1907-1957' (1957). 
Newsome was active right up until her premature death. Shortly after the fellowship celebrated her eightieth birthday she was involved in a road accident from which she never regained consciousness. She died unmarried on 11 November 1969 at her home, 26 West End Lane, West Hampstead, London, and was cremated at Golders Green on 24 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 63882


Parker, Frances Mary (1875-1924), militant suffragette, was born in Little Roderick, Kurow, Otago, New Zealand, on 24 December 1875, one of the five children of Harry Rainy Parker (1837-1912), JP, of Rotheley Temple, Leicestershire, and his wife, Frances Emily Jane Kitchener (died 1925). Her mother (always known as Millie) was the sister of Horatio Herbert Kitchener, first Earl Kitchener, and he paid for his niece's education at Newnham College, Cambridge. Fanny Parker entered Newnham in 1896 and obtained an ordinary degree in 1899. She was a 'repetrice' at a French school from 1899 to 1902 and thereafter for several years a visiting teacher in Auckland, New Zealand. 
Fanny Parker became involved in the women's suffrage movement in 1908. She took part in a demonstration, was arrested for obstruction, and endured six weeks' imprisonment in Holloway. In 1909 she was a speaker for the Scottish Universities Women's Suffrage Union; in 1910 she organized their caravan tour; and in 1911 she was their delegate to the International Suffrage Convention at Stockholm. In January 1912 she became an organizer for the Pankhurst-led militant suffrage organization, the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), for Glasgow and the west of Scotland. The WSPU initiated a window-smashing raid in London in March of that year, and Fanny Parker took part. She was sentenced to four months in Holloway, went on hunger strike, and was forcibly fed. 
In October 1912 Fanny Parker became WSPU organizer for Dundee, where she was an indefatigable worker; scarcely a week went by without her writing letters to the press and addressing meetings of all kinds. In November she was arrested for breaking a window; she was released from prison after a three-day hunger strike. In December she was one of several suffragettes who smuggled themselves into the Music Hall, Aberdeen, with the intention of causing a disturbance at Lloyd George's meeting; on that occasion she was on hunger strike for five days before release. Lord Kitchener was 'disgusted' when he learned of his niece's involvement in the movement. 'Whatever her feelings on the subject may be,' he wrote to his sister, 'I cannot help thinking she might have some consideration for her family' (Royle, 248). Ethel Moorhead, who became a close friend of hers at this time, said that she was 'small and looked innocent and disarming with her charming looks, brown eyes, and silky hair. But she had an exquisite 'madness', -- daring, joyous, vivid, strategic' (Moorhead, 264). 
By 1914 militancy had escalated into violence, and suffragettes all over Britain were burning down and blowing up buildings. Buildings of national or symbolic importance were obvious targets, and therefore a watchman was on duty at Robert Burns's cottage in Alloway when Fanny Parker and another suffragette attempted to set fire to it in July of that year. She 'allowed herself to be taken that her comrade [Ethel Moorhead] might escape' ('This Quarter', no. 1) and was arrested, giving her name as Janet Arthur. She created a fuss when charged at Ayr sheriff court, denying that the court had any jurisdiction over her, yet while there she also showed her sympathy for a woman who had been sentenced to pay a fine of $1 or undergo ten days' imprisonment for receiving stolen goods, eventually paying her fine. 
Janet Arthur immediately put the prison commissioners and Scottish Office in a quandary by going on hunger and thirst strike. She was a prisoner on remand, but if she were to be released the chances of recapturing her were slight. The authorities wanted to send her to a nursing home, but she refused to go. After six days of hunger and thirst strike she was transferred to Perth prison where forcible feeding of suffragettes was taking place. Her family heard rumours about her condition, and her brother Captain Parker went up from London and favourably impressed the Scottish Office ministers, particularly as the captain had 'no sympathy with his sister's views' (NA Scot., HH16/43). Nevertheless, Fanny Parker was forcibly fed and, when she was unable to retain food, an attempt was made to feed her by the rectum, resulting in bruising of the genital area as well. She was released to a nursing home in a state of collapse but still managed to escape before her trial. However, war broke out on 4 August, militancy was suspended, and there was an amnesty for suffragettes. 
After the outbreak of war Fanny Parker was recruited by the other militant suffrage society, the Women's Freedom League, to head their new organization which found suitable jobs for women and made sure those women were not exploited. Subsequently she followed the family's military tradition, being appointed deputy controller in the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps (subsequently Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps) in June 1917. She was twice mentioned in dispatches and was appointed a military OBE. Fanny Parker died on 19 January 1924 in Arcachon, near Bordeaux, France, where Ethel Moorhead and her protege, Ernest Walsh, were living. By her will, of which Janie Allan was executor, apart from a small bequest to her sister, Fanny Parker left all her property to Ethel Moorhead 'in grateful remembrance for her care and love'. The first issue of 'This Quarter', funded by the bequest, contains a poem and the reproduction of two paintings by Fanny Parker. 
Fanny Parker epitomized the articulate, well-educated, wholly committed suffragette, who at the beginning of the campaign in Edwardian Britain believed that reasoned argument would win women the vote, but subsequently became convinced that only violent methods would prevail. As a consequence she suffered the horrors of forcible feeding of a particularly brutal nature, but she also formed a close friendship which was apparently the most important thing to her at the end of her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 63883


Phillips, Mary Elizabeth (1880-1969), suffragette and feminist, was born on 15 July 1880 in St Mary Bourne, Hampshire, the daughter of William Fleming Phillips, a doctor who worked in Glasgow and encouraged her to join the suffrage campaign, and his wife, Louisa Elizabeth, 'nee' Sims (died 1912). In 1904 she was engaged as a paid organizer for the Glasgow and West of Scotland Association for Women's Suffrage, founded in 1902. When the Pankhurst-led Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) burst on the scene she was rapidly converted to 'militancy' and resigned her position as organizing secretary of the Glasgow Association in March 1907. Later she said that her period of work for a non-militant society made her aware of the futility of such methods. 
Mary Phillips was one of the first suffragettes from Scotland to be imprisoned in Holloway after a demonstration in the precincts of the House of Commons in February 1908. In April of that year she wrote to Annot Robinson, who had also been in Holloway, that she had found imprisonment a 'peaceful time, with no worry... One had nothing but affectionate farewells to remember of the friends outside, & nothing but love to cheer one from one's fellow-prisoners' (Phillips to Robinson, 9 April 1908, Annot Robinson MSS). Mary took part in another London demonstration in July 1908 and was sentenced to three months in Holloway, making her the longest-serving suffragette prisoner. On her release the WSPU organized a 'fine Scottish welcome' for her, with tartan and bagpipes. She was very moved and, when they sang 'Scots wha hae wi' Wallace bled', she thought of her national hero's defiance and asked, 'Shall not we, as Scottish women, make this an occasion for strengthening tenfold our determination to defy the Government?' (Leneman, 67). In June 1908 she became a paid organizer for the WSPU. 
Between 1907 and 1909 Mary Phillips wrote the women's column for 'Forward', the lively socialist newspaper founded by Tom Johnston in 1906. But she found the pace of events too slow in Scotland, and was thoroughly disillusioned when Winston Churchill (against whom the suffragettes had vigorously campaigned) won the safe seat of Dundee in 1908. In any case, as a paid WSPU organizer, she had to go where she was sent, and she was based at various times in Plymouth, Newcastle, Reading, and Liverpool. Naturally she took part in the great processions organized by the WSPU, and she was a speaker in the massive Hyde Park demonstrations in 1908 and 1910. 
In July 1909 Mary Phillips was arrested for interrupting a meeting in Exeter, was sentenced to seven days' imprisonment, went on hunger strike, and was released after three days. In November of that year she wrote to Christabel Pankhurst that she would like to take part in further militant activity and court prison for the cause, but Christabel Pankhurst forbade this, writing that it was up to her to organize the voluntary workers for such protests. 
Between 1910 and 1912 Mary Phillips organized campaigns throughout the north of England. In July 1912 she was arrested in Chester, but her fine was paid without her consent. Her parents had moved to Cornwall, and after her mother's death in December 1912 she returned to her father in Falmouth. Although over the years she had received many letters of praise and affection from Christabel Pankhurst (and a salary rise in April 1912), in July 1913 she was abruptly dismissed from her position as organizer in Plymouth with four weeks' salary in lieu of notice. A letter from Christabel Pankhurst advised her that headquarters had always felt 'that you are not effective as a district organiser'. Her papers do not reveal any reason for this 'volte face'. 
Mary Phillips immediately went to work (as Mary Paterson) for Sylvia Pankhurst's East London Federation of Suffragettes. From 1915 until February 1916 she worked as an organizer in south London for the United Suffragists. Subsequently she worked in succession for the New Constitutional Society for Women's Suffrage, the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, and the Save the Children Fund. From 1928 until 1955 she was editor of a daily news service for the brewing trade and after she retired she worked with the publications department of the National Council of Social Service. 
Mary Phillips was a lifelong member of the Six Point Group. Her politics remained very left-wing. She was involved with the Suffragette Fellowship and for a period of time about 1934 was the fellowship's custodian. About 1956, fearing that memories of the struggle for the vote were fading, Mary Phillips wrote a pamphlet entitled 'The Militant Suffrage Campaign in Perspective', in which she asked: 'can it really be true that, in a civilised country with a democratic form of government, so much time had to be wasted, such stupendous efforts made, so much suffering endured, to correct such an obvious anomaly as the exclusion from full citizenship of more than half the adult population? (Phillips, 15)' She died at the Hovedene Hotel, 15/17 The Drive, Hove, Sussex, on 21 June 1969, and was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 63884


Pine, Catherine Emily (1864-1941), nurse and women's rights worker, was born at 10 Ashford Road, Maidstone, on 7 May 1864, the daughter of Robert Pine, a corn merchant, and his wife, Anne Brett. Despite prolonged absences at various times, she seems to have maintained a Kentish connection throughout her life. Nothing is known of her childhood and youth. At the age of twenty-nine she undertook nursing training, registering as a probationer at St Bartholomew's, London. Although she failed her first-year examinations in May 1895, she retook them successfully in October 1895, and was awarded her certificate a year later. In February 1897 she was appointed staff nurse, being promoted to house sister in 1900, and later sister in charge of the nurses' home. She remained at St Bartholomew's until June 1907, when she left to start a clinic in Pembridge Gardens, Notting Hill, London, in partnership with Gertrude Townend, who had also gained her nursing qualifications at St Bartholomew's before moving to the Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children. 
The clinic had immediate connections with the women's suffrage movement. With the increase in suffrage militancy, it became a recuperation centre for suffragettes recovering from hunger striking and forcible feeding. Sister Pine's increasingly close relationship with Emmeline Pankhurst led to Emmeline's son Harry being sent to the clinic, where he died of poliomyelitis in 1910. By this time sisters Pine and Townend were becoming deeply implicated in the lawbreaking aspect of the militant action of the Women's Social and Political Union; for example, in March 1912, they helped Christabel Pankhurst escape from arrest by providing her with a nurse's uniform and access to a friend's house, and similarly aided Sylvia Pankhurst when she was secretly setting out to visit Christabel in Paris. Above all, together with Dr Flora Murray, they cared for Emmeline Pankhurst when she was out of prison recovering from the effects of hunger striking. Sister Pine in particular virtually became part of the Pankhurst household. 
In the First World War, Emmeline Pankhurst attempted to set an example of care by adopting four female 'war babies', who were in fact placed in the care of Sister Pine at a house in London rented by Emmeline Pankhurst, first in Mecklenburgh Square, then at 50 Clarendon Road, Holland Park: their names were Kathleen King, Mary Gordon, Joan Pembridge, and Elizabeth (Betty) Tudor; Betty was later adopted by Christabel and given the name of Aurea Pankhurst. At this time the eminent physician Chetham Strode became a friend of the household, although (according to Dame Ethel Smyth) Sister Pine's down-to-earth remedies proved more efficacious than his sophisticated ones on at least one occasion. 
In 1917 the household moved to Tower Cressy, a large house on Campden Hill, not far from Holland Park. Emmeline Pankhurst, possibly on the advice of Christabel, introduced the Montessori system for educating the girls, a programme for which the traditionally minded Sister Pine, charged with implementing it, seems to have had little sympathy. The girls certainly appeared to find 'Aunt Kate' very strict. In 1919 the household moved to a cottage in Peaslake, Surrey, and later in the year Emmeline travelled to North America taking Sister Pine with her. They were later joined by Kathleen, Mary, and Joan, and in 1921 by Christabel and Aurea. While Emmeline toured Canada and the United States lecturing, Sister Pine and the girls lived in Canada, first in Victoria, British Columbia, then in Toronto. 
In 1923 Sister Pine returned to Britain for good. She had kept up her professional training, and when the state register of nurses was introduced in 1922, she was among the earliest to join. She was registered as holding a post at the Cottage Hospital, Herne Bay, Kent. 
From this time again nothing seems to be known of Sister Pine's life; she attended Emmeline Pankhurst's funeral in July 1928, and then dropped out of sight. She died of a stroke at St Neot's, Finsbury Extra, Rochester, Kent, on 14 August 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 63885


Reeves, Marian (1879-1961), feminist activist, was born on 19 February 1879 at 17 Victoria Terrace, Lewisham, London, the daughter of Albert Reeves, a carpenter, and his wife, Emily Hooper Pratt. No records of her early life appear to have survived, but by the time of the First World War she had become active in the feminist movement. Of particular note was her involvement with the Women's Freedom League, the militant suffragist society which under the leadership of Charlotte Despard had in 1907 broken away from the Pankhurst-dominated Women's Social and Political Union; by 1914 it had developed into a body campaigning on a wide range of feminist issues apart from the vote, which it continued to do until its demise in 1961. Marian Reeves was not involved in the initial years of the league (which she later regretted); she joined the league in 1909, and was a member of the Clapham branch, but by 1918 she was already secretary of its Kensington branch. Later she was elected to its national executive and eventually became the league's last president. 
In the 1920s Marian Reeves was involved with the Minerva Publishing Company, the Women's Freedom League's publishing branch, and about 1924 she took over the running of the Minerva Club in Brunswick Square, in the Bloomsbury area of London. This residential club had been established by Dr Elizabeth Knight and Mrs Fisher in 1920 as a social centre for members of the Women's Freedom League, and it became the league's headquarters when the lease on the league's own premises at 144 High Holborn ran out in the 1950s. Here she organized many social and fund-raising activities for the league, and for visitors, particularly women from overseas. 
Especially notable were her 'tea and politics meetings' (which later became 'supper meetings') when parliament was in session in order to give women (and men) an opportunity to discuss current legislation, and the birthday parties held for Mrs Despard until her death in 1939, for which Mrs Despard came over from her home in Ireland. Marian Reeves's hospitality to feminists of all persuasions at the Minerva Club earned her the sobriquet 'the hostess of the women's movement'. 
Marian Reeves also became something of a Bloomsbury figure, including among her friends George Bernard Shaw, Jawaharlal Nehru, E. M. Forster, Harriet Cohen, and Emmeline and Frederick Pethick-Lawrence. She also championed the cause of the small hotels and boarding-houses, then so abundant in Bloomsbury, especially during the Second World War. These businesses had been damaged not only by bombing but by the evacuation of many of their tenants, and Marian Reeves founded the London Emergency Apartment Keepers' Society (known by its initials), which campaigned successfully for the suspension of their rent and rates for the duration of the war. 
Marian Reeves was active in a number of other feminist organizations besides the Women's Freedom League, including the Nationality of Married Women Committee, the Equal Pay Campaign Committee, and the Women Peers Committee. She was also a soroptimist. She served on the executive of the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene (campaigning against state regulation of prostitution), on the committee of the Open Door Council (campaigning against legislation that restricted women's right to work in certain occupations), and on the women's advisory council of the United Nations Association. She was an early vice-chairman of the British Commonwealth League, and later of the Status of Women Committee. She felt a special commitment to the International Alliance of Women, whose congresses she regularly attended. In 1961, although in poor health, she visited Dublin for the alliance's congress, and while there placed flowers from the Women's Freedom League on the grave of Charlotte Despard in Glasnevin cemetery. A few days later, on an excursion by motor coach to Killarney on 30 August 1961, she collapsed and died at the railway station, Killarney. Her body was brought back from Ireland for cremation at the Golders Green crematorium on 5 September. 
Marian Reeves had never married, devoting herself entirely to the women's cause. Her friend Kate O'Brien saw Marian Reeves as 'a 'citizen', with a highly developed civic sense' and 'a walking manifestation of Voltaire's maxim: 'I hate what you are saying, but I will die for your right to say it'' ('The Times', 1 Sept 1961). However, despite her sustained efforts on its behalf, the Women's Freedom League's numbers had been declining noticeably, especially after the Second World War, and in October 1961, deprived at last of her guiding hand, it finally voted itself out of existence. 


@@@@@


doc= 63887


Brown, Myra Eleanor Sadd (1872-1938), women's rights activist and internationalist, was born on 3 October 1872 in Maldon, Essex, the tenth of eleven children of John Granger Sadd and Mary Ann Price. The family ran a firm of timber merchants and processors in Maldon, and were noted for their innovative ideas: the firm owned what is believed to be the first traction engine in Essex, which caused some local controversy, with fears of damage to bridges and frightening livestock. They also built an electric power station to supply the factory, and eventually the town. 
Myra Sadd was educated privately at a school in Colchester. One of her interests was cycling; through this she met Ernest Brown (1868-1931), a co-founder of a firm supplying bicycle parts, whom she married on 21 July 1896. An interesting feature of the wedding was the colour scheme of purple, white, and green, twelve years later to become the suffragette colours, which might be seen as foretelling the future of Myra Sadd Brown (like many couples of progressive convictions at this time, Myra and Ernest combined their surnames). The couple moved to London, first to Finsbury Park, then to Hampstead. They had three daughters and one son. The firm of Brown Brothers rapidly met with success and diversified into electrical appliances and motor car manufacture, assuring Myra Sadd Brown of a degree of independence. 
Myra Sadd Brown came from a progressive and independent-minded Congregationalist background; later in life she became a Christian Scientist. She had a keen interest in artistic matters. She was an enthusiastic follower of George Bernard Shaw's plays, and had a number of artistic acquaintances, including William Somerville, Henry Holliday, and Jessie Mothersole; she was even described as keeping a salon. However, her most enduring mark has been as a women's rights activist. Her convictions date back before her marriage; she is believed to have bought a small cottage in order to claim the vote as a ratepayer. She also became a poor-law guardian for Hackney. She was very active in the women's suffrage movement; she became a member of the militant Women's Social and Political Union, being arrested and imprisoned in 1912, on which occasion she went on hunger strike and was forcibly fed. She was a keen propagandist for the suffrage cause, her letters appearing in such periodicals as the 'Christian Commonwealth'. Later, she was associated with Sylvia Pankhurst's East London Federation of Suffragettes; her eldest daughter, Myra Stedman, recollected being recruited to stand on street corners selling the 'Woman's Dreadnought'. She would invite bus loads of east London women to visit her house near Maldon. 
Myra Sadd Brown was also genuinely interested in other cultures and other countries. She regretted her lack of knowledge of foreign languages, and insisted on her children learning French and German. On several occasions she went with her husband, whose heart had been weakened by rheumatic fever in childhood, to winter in Italy and Egypt. After the First World War she became an active member of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance (later the International Alliance of Women). She travelled widely in Europe to conferences, usually accompanied by her eldest daughter. 
Another major interest was the evolving Commonwealth. As early as 1923 Myra Sadd Brown had been involved in meetings which in 1925 led to the formation of the British Commonwealth League (later the Commonwealth Countries League), a feminist organization devoted to the upholding of women's rights in Commonwealth countries. She became treasurer of the league, less because of her skill at double entry bookkeeping than because of her ability to use her funds to guarantee the lease on the league's premises. 
Myra Sadd Brown's husband died of rheumatic heart disease in 1931. In 1937 she went on an extended visit to south-east Asia, to be present at the birth of her second grandchild, and extended the tour to visit Angkor Wat and Malaya. She continued the journey to Hong Kong, planning to return via the Trans-Siberian Railway, but suffered a stroke on the way, and died in Kowloon Hospital, Hong Kong, on 13 April 1938. She was cremated the following day at the Hindoo crematory, Happy Valley, Hong Kong. 
As a memorial, the British Commonwealth League established the Sadd Brown Library of material on women in the Commonwealth as part of the then Women's Service Library (now the Women's Library). Her active interest in the Commonwealth Countries League, and the International Alliance of Women, has been maintained first by her daughter Myra Stedman, and subsequently by her granddaughter, Diana Dollery, both of whom have been closely involved in the development of the Sadd Brown Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 63890


Sproson, Emma (1867-1936), suffragist and local politician, was born on 13 April 1867 at Pikehelve Street, West Bromwich, one of the seven children of John Lloyd, canal boat builder, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Johnson. Her father drank heavily and she had a childhood of extreme poverty. In the mid-1870s the family settled in Wolverhampton. Emma had little formal schooling and joined the casual labour market at the age of eight: picking coal from the pit mounds and running errands. A year later she left home to enter the household of a local milkwoman where she helped with the cooking, cleaning, and evening delivery, though she did attend school four days a week. In 1880 she obtained a full-time position that combined shop work with domestic service. Later she was dismissed without a reference when she reported that her mistress's brother had made sexual advances towards her. Now unemployed, Emma moved to Lancashire to find work. About that time she began teaching in a Sunday school and was introduced to the church debating society. 
Emma Lloyd's first experience of public speaking came at a church debate; her second was during a parliamentary campaign by Lord Curzon. This incident was the defining moment in her conversion to women's suffrage. Curzon refused to answer her question because 'she was a woman and did not have the vote' (MS autobiographical notes). By 1895 she had returned to Wolverhampton with enough money to buy a business for herself and her mother. It seems likely that this was a shop in the front room of their house. In this period Emma enrolled in the Independent Labour Party (ILP). On 1 August 1896 she married Frank Sproson, postman and secretary of the Wolverhampton branch of the ILP. The couple had four children, of whom three survived: two sons, Frank ('b'. 1899) and George ('b'. 1906), and a daughter, Chloris ('b'. 1897), who became profoundly deaf. 
In 1906 Frank Sproson was instrumental in securing the services of Emmeline Pankhurst, founder of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), to address a meeting of the Wolverhampton ILP on 28 October. On that occasion Mrs Pankhurst stayed at the Sprosons' home and Emma Sproson chaired the meeting. In the first half of 1907 she took part in a series of meetings in London halls and parks. For instance, on 13 February she attended the meeting at Caxton Hall and was among those arrested on the green at Westminster Abbey. Her host in London, Frederick Pethick Lawrence, stood as surety for her and she was bailed to appear before the magistrates on 14 February. From the options of a 20's'. fine or fourteen days' imprisonment, she elected to go to prison. The following month she travelled to London to join another suffrage march from Caxton Hall to parliament. In the confusion she was arrested and sentenced to a fine or a one-month prison sentence. While in Holloway, she was visited by Christabel Pankhurst, and on 20 April she participated in a public luncheon organized by the WSPU to celebrate the release of the militants. Press reports of Emma Sproson's activities in the spring and summer of 1907 show that she was in demand as a speaker. For example, shortly after her release from prison she featured alongside Jennie Baines, a working-class organizer for the WSPU, at a meeting in Wolverhampton market place. Later that same year she went on to tour the Black Country on behalf of the WSPU. 
Disillusioned with the increasingly autocratic leadership style of the Pankhursts, Emma Sproson subsequently defected from the WSPU to join the Women's Freedom League (WFL). By February 1908 she was a hard-working member of the national executive committee of the league, following an exhausting itinerary of public speaking up and down the country. In 1911 she served two terms of imprisonment in Stafford gaol for the offence of keeping a dog without a licence, carrying out the WFL policy of 'no taxation without representation'. This time she staged a hunger strike and won the right to be reclassified as a political prisoner. In 1912 she resigned from the WFL, in protest at Charlotte Despard's autocratic style of leadership. Thereafter she devoted herself to local politics. Emma Sproson contested two unsuccessful local elections on behalf of the Labour Party in 1919 and 1920, but in 1921 she was elected councillor for Dunstall ward. The first woman councillor in Wolverhampton, she served on the public health committee and the subcommittees that dealt with mental health and homes for unmarried mothers. In the autumn of 1922 she provoked uproar among her colleagues when she exposed financial irregularities in the administration of the local fever hospital. Yet the official report exonerated the officials involved and Emma was removed from the hospital committee and the health committee. She was also censured by the Labour Party. In retaliation she published her own version of events in a pamphlet entitled 'Fever Hospital Inquiry -- Facts v. Fairy Tales'. In November 1924 she fought a successful by-election but she failed to retain her seat when she stood as an independent in 1927. She attended the annual conference of the ILP in 1924 and again in 1926. Latterly her hearing became severely impaired and public work was increasingly difficult. Emma Sproson died at home, 56 Castlecroft Road, Tettenhall, Staffordshire, on 22 December 1936; she was survived by her husband. Emma Sproson's working-class, midlands-based career provides a vivid counterbalance to the view of the women's suffrage movement which portrays it as predominantly bourgeois and London-centred. 


@@@@@


doc= 63892


Catesby family (per. c.1340-1505), gentry, came originally from a tenant family of Flecknoe, east Warwickshire. It was William [i] Catesby (d. 1383) and his son John [i] Catesby (d. 1404/5) whose land acquisitions started its rise into the front rank of local families. There were numbers of properties in Coventry, a town with which both William and John had strong ties, but most of the new land lay in east Warwickshire or the neighbouring counties of Leicestershire and Northamptonshire, especially the latter. It came by both purchase and marriage: William to Joan, daughter and heir of William Radbourne of Radbourne, and John to Emma, daughter and heir of Robert Cranford of Ashby St Ledgers, Northamptonshire. William, possibly a lawyer, had a lengthy official career from 1339, notably as MP for Warwickshire and escheator for several midland counties. John, definitely a lawyer, was JP in Warwickshire almost continuously from 1377. He too was steward of Coventry, to Edward, the Black Prince, as earl of Chester, but by 1389 he was close to Thomas Beauchamp, the appellant earl of Warwick. Warwick's support was important to Catesby in the protracted but eventually successful dispute over Ladbroke Manor, Warwickshire, between 1383 and 1399 and he narrowly evaded punishment when Richard II took his revenge on the appellants in 1397-9. From the time of John [i] the family divided its interests between Warwickshire and Northamptonshire. Initially there was a residence in each, at Ladbroke and Ashby respectively, but Ladbroke was eventually abandoned, probably under John [ii]. The changing balance of the estate is indicated by John [i]'s appointment as JP in Northamptonshire from 1392. 
John's eldest son, William [ii], died in 1407 or 1408 leaving John's second son, John [ii] Catesby (d. 1437), as heir. This accident complicated the structure of the estate, as John [ii]'s future had already been secured by marriage to Margaret, granddaughter and heir of Richard Mountfort of Lapworth. Lapworth was in west Warwickshire, a long way from the area where the Catesbys had been so successfully building a compact estate. Some rationalization was achieved by giving peripheral manors to a third brother, Robert, founder of the line of Catesbys of Hopsford, Warwickshire, while the marriage of John [ii]'s heir, Sir William [iii] Catesby (d. 1478/9), to Philippa, the coheir of Bishopestone of Bishopton, Warwickshire, eventually brought lands that made the west Warwickshire estate geographically more coherent, including a second manor at Lapworth. John [ii], also a lawyer, followed his father into the service of the earls of Warwick, being retained by Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, by 1417, although he seems to have been less central to the earl's affairs than some of the other Warwickshire gentry. This was perhaps because the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire border was not an area where Warwick had much direct influence. In fact John [ii]'s record as local officer shows that by the accession of Henry VI he was more a Northamptonshire than a Warwickshire man and, although he did have dealings with the dense local network around Lapworth, he was a key figure in the network that ran down the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire borders. If John's career was a relatively quiet one, this is a measure of his success: he contrived to avoid both political miscalculation and extended litigation. 
William [iii] was still a minor at his father's death and was placed in the wardship of John Norreys of Berkshire, a rising member of the royal household. This was doubtless why Catesby himself was a king's esquire by 1442. By 1447-8 he was linked to John Talbot, first earl of Shrewsbury; these ties with the crown and the Talbots were to be a constant in his political life until 1461, and in 1453 he married as his second wife Joan, daughter of Sir Thomas Barre and Shrewsbury's niece. In 1449 he was made KB, the first of the family to be knighted. From 1443 he also served the king in all the major local offices. That he served in Warwickshire as well as Northamptonshire shows how the balance of the family's interests was shifting back across the border, chiefly because the death of William's Bishopestone father-in-law in 1444 had increased its Warwickshire weighting. Catesby avoided involvement in local upheavals in the 1450s and never entirely cut himself off from local associates linked to the Yorkists. Thus, although he may have fought for Henry VI at Towton -- his uncle, Robert, did -- and he was attainted by the Yorkists in 1461 and briefly in exile, he was soon pardoned and able to return. 
In the 1460s, no longer attached to the royal household, Sir William became a substantial and fairly divisive force in local politics. He found himself at odds with various local landowners, most notably with John Brome of Baddesley Clinton, another former member of the Lancastrian household, who held one of the other manors at Lapworth, to which William now laid claim. William had clearly decided to make more of his west Warwickshire lands and he even established a residence at Lapworth. As Warwick's affinity crumbled around him in the early 1460s ['see 'Mountford family], the earl struck up a surprising relationship with this former Lancastrian, who may indeed have gone north with him to fight Lancastrian resistance in 1463-4, and he supported him in his efforts to get Lapworth, while Brome gravitated towards the dissident group around Simon Mountford, Warwick's nominal retainer. In 1465-6 Catesby's return to respectability was completed with his reappointment as JP. In 1466 the Lapworth issue was settled by an arbitration that gave him the manor. The combination of his new patron, Warwick, and his old one, Henry VI, proved irresistible at the readeption and he was sheriff of Northamptonshire during Henry VI's brief second reign. He was again pardoned after this further misadventure and, perhaps chastened by this second near disaster, seems to have lived out a quiet old age, although he died in harness as sheriff of Northamptonshire. 
It was William's son, William Catesby (d. 1485), the notorious servant of Richard III, who took the family to its greatest political heights and almost to destruction. The mostly dubious land acquisitions he made in and around Northamptonshire under Richard caused him to refocus the estate back towards east Warwickshire and Northamptonshire, although he was local officer in several midland counties, including Warwickshire. His son George Catesby (c.1473-1505), who was given livery of his mother's Zouche lands in 1495, had his attainder reversed and was partially restored in 1496. George's marriage to Richard Empson's daughter Elizabeth must have helped his cause. The family thrived during the sixteenth century, especially in the lifetime of George's second son and heir Sir Richard Catesby (died 1553), who was knight of the shire for Warwickshire in 1539 and 1553, and in the 1540s served twice as sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire and once as sheriff of Northamptonshire. He was knighted in 1542. The recusancy of Richard's grandson and heir Sir William Catesby (1547-1598) brought financial pressure and exclusion from office, but it was only the involvement of William's son Robert Catesby in the Gunpowder Plot, and his consequent forfeiture, that brought ruin upon the family. 
Because of this confiscation, the Catesby records came into crown hands, which is why so many of them survive, although the archive was unfortunately broken up by the Public Record Office. In particular, the estate accounts are unusually good for a fifteenth-century gentry family. They reveal the Catesbys as painstaking managers and exploiters, who developed a centralized accounting and purchase system, especially as the properties became more widespread, and paid careful attention to the rentier side of the economy. But what differentiates them from most of the middling and upper gentry in the fifteenth century was their exploitation of the commercial possibilities of livestock farming well before the pastoral boom at the end of the century. They kept a flock for commercial wool production in the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire region, which was later to be a major centre for sheep farming, while in the 1460s and 1470s William [iii] began to graze cattle for the market, using the lands at Lapworth, which was in good cattle-raising country. In the family's use of its estate's resources, for both consumption and sale, there was specialization and careful integration which became especially marked right across the estate under William [iii]. 
For a rising family the Catesbys were surprisingly uninterested in making new religious foundations, perhaps because they inherited chantries on at least two of their acquired estates. They contributed to a bell-tower and bells for Ladbroke church but, as their residence moved to Ashby, so did their religious interests and it seems that, from at least John [ii], it was here that family members were buried. 
The history of the family is of steady, careful ascent, accompanied by land acquisition and by careful husbanding and exploitation of the resources of the estate. On the way, cadet branches were established at Althorp, Northamptonshire, and Marston Waver, Warwickshire, as well as the one at Hopsford. Sir John Catesby (d. 1487), justice of the common pleas, may have been related to the main line of the family -- he was known as 'uncle' to William (died 1485) -- though in what degree is not known. He is almost certainly not identical with John Catesby of Althorp (died 1486). Only occasionally was the family put in jeopardy by the political upheavals that could always endanger a high-profile family on the make. By the later years of William [iii] the Catesbys were a leading midland family that needed to do no more than maintain its position, and William's expert deployment of the resources of the entire estate meant that they were particularly favourably placed to do so. The inability of his son to resist the allure of still greater wealth and power in the service of Richard III, which would have been more appropriate at an earlier phase in the Catesbys' rise, was thus as foolish as it was almost disastrous. The arms of the Catesby family were argent two lions passant sable crowned or. 


@@@@@


doc= 63894


Catesby family (per. c.1340-1505), gentry, came originally from a tenant family of Flecknoe, east Warwickshire. It was William [i] Catesby (d. 1383) and his son John [i] Catesby (d. 1404/5) whose land acquisitions started its rise into the front rank of local families. There were numbers of properties in Coventry, a town with which both William and John had strong ties, but most of the new land lay in east Warwickshire or the neighbouring counties of Leicestershire and Northamptonshire, especially the latter. It came by both purchase and marriage: William to Joan, daughter and heir of William Radbourne of Radbourne, and John to Emma, daughter and heir of Robert Cranford of Ashby St Ledgers, Northamptonshire. William, possibly a lawyer, had a lengthy official career from 1339, notably as MP for Warwickshire and escheator for several midland counties. John, definitely a lawyer, was JP in Warwickshire almost continuously from 1377. He too was steward of Coventry, to Edward, the Black Prince, as earl of Chester, but by 1389 he was close to Thomas Beauchamp, the appellant earl of Warwick. Warwick's support was important to Catesby in the protracted but eventually successful dispute over Ladbroke Manor, Warwickshire, between 1383 and 1399 and he narrowly evaded punishment when Richard II took his revenge on the appellants in 1397-9. From the time of John [i] the family divided its interests between Warwickshire and Northamptonshire. Initially there was a residence in each, at Ladbroke and Ashby respectively, but Ladbroke was eventually abandoned, probably under John [ii]. The changing balance of the estate is indicated by John [i]'s appointment as JP in Northamptonshire from 1392. 
John's eldest son, William [ii], died in 1407 or 1408 leaving John's second son, John [ii] Catesby (d. 1437), as heir. This accident complicated the structure of the estate, as John [ii]'s future had already been secured by marriage to Margaret, granddaughter and heir of Richard Mountfort of Lapworth. Lapworth was in west Warwickshire, a long way from the area where the Catesbys had been so successfully building a compact estate. Some rationalization was achieved by giving peripheral manors to a third brother, Robert, founder of the line of Catesbys of Hopsford, Warwickshire, while the marriage of John [ii]'s heir, Sir William [iii] Catesby (d. 1478/9), to Philippa, the coheir of Bishopestone of Bishopton, Warwickshire, eventually brought lands that made the west Warwickshire estate geographically more coherent, including a second manor at Lapworth. John [ii], also a lawyer, followed his father into the service of the earls of Warwick, being retained by Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, by 1417, although he seems to have been less central to the earl's affairs than some of the other Warwickshire gentry. This was perhaps because the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire border was not an area where Warwick had much direct influence. In fact John [ii]'s record as local officer shows that by the accession of Henry VI he was more a Northamptonshire than a Warwickshire man and, although he did have dealings with the dense local network around Lapworth, he was a key figure in the network that ran down the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire borders. If John's career was a relatively quiet one, this is a measure of his success: he contrived to avoid both political miscalculation and extended litigation. 
William [iii] was still a minor at his father's death and was placed in the wardship of John Norreys of Berkshire, a rising member of the royal household. This was doubtless why Catesby himself was a king's esquire by 1442. By 1447-8 he was linked to John Talbot, first earl of Shrewsbury; these ties with the crown and the Talbots were to be a constant in his political life until 1461, and in 1453 he married as his second wife Joan, daughter of Sir Thomas Barre and Shrewsbury's niece. In 1449 he was made KB, the first of the family to be knighted. From 1443 he also served the king in all the major local offices. That he served in Warwickshire as well as Northamptonshire shows how the balance of the family's interests was shifting back across the border, chiefly because the death of William's Bishopestone father-in-law in 1444 had increased its Warwickshire weighting. Catesby avoided involvement in local upheavals in the 1450s and never entirely cut himself off from local associates linked to the Yorkists. Thus, although he may have fought for Henry VI at Towton -- his uncle, Robert, did -- and he was attainted by the Yorkists in 1461 and briefly in exile, he was soon pardoned and able to return. 
In the 1460s, no longer attached to the royal household, Sir William became a substantial and fairly divisive force in local politics. He found himself at odds with various local landowners, most notably with John Brome of Baddesley Clinton, another former member of the Lancastrian household, who held one of the other manors at Lapworth, to which William now laid claim. William had clearly decided to make more of his west Warwickshire lands and he even established a residence at Lapworth. As Warwick's affinity crumbled around him in the early 1460s ['see 'Mountford family], the earl struck up a surprising relationship with this former Lancastrian, who may indeed have gone north with him to fight Lancastrian resistance in 1463-4, and he supported him in his efforts to get Lapworth, while Brome gravitated towards the dissident group around Simon Mountford, Warwick's nominal retainer. In 1465-6 Catesby's return to respectability was completed with his reappointment as JP. In 1466 the Lapworth issue was settled by an arbitration that gave him the manor. The combination of his new patron, Warwick, and his old one, Henry VI, proved irresistible at the readeption and he was sheriff of Northamptonshire during Henry VI's brief second reign. He was again pardoned after this further misadventure and, perhaps chastened by this second near disaster, seems to have lived out a quiet old age, although he died in harness as sheriff of Northamptonshire. 
It was William's son, William Catesby (d. 1485), the notorious servant of Richard III, who took the family to its greatest political heights and almost to destruction. The mostly dubious land acquisitions he made in and around Northamptonshire under Richard caused him to refocus the estate back towards east Warwickshire and Northamptonshire, although he was local officer in several midland counties, including Warwickshire. His son George Catesby (c.1473-1505), who was given livery of his mother's Zouche lands in 1495, had his attainder reversed and was partially restored in 1496. George's marriage to Richard Empson's daughter Elizabeth must have helped his cause. The family thrived during the sixteenth century, especially in the lifetime of George's second son and heir Sir Richard Catesby (died 1553), who was knight of the shire for Warwickshire in 1539 and 1553, and in the 1540s served twice as sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire and once as sheriff of Northamptonshire. He was knighted in 1542. The recusancy of Richard's grandson and heir Sir William Catesby (1547-1598) brought financial pressure and exclusion from office, but it was only the involvement of William's son Robert Catesby in the Gunpowder Plot, and his consequent forfeiture, that brought ruin upon the family. 
Because of this confiscation, the Catesby records came into crown hands, which is why so many of them survive, although the archive was unfortunately broken up by the Public Record Office. In particular, the estate accounts are unusually good for a fifteenth-century gentry family. They reveal the Catesbys as painstaking managers and exploiters, who developed a centralized accounting and purchase system, especially as the properties became more widespread, and paid careful attention to the rentier side of the economy. But what differentiates them from most of the middling and upper gentry in the fifteenth century was their exploitation of the commercial possibilities of livestock farming well before the pastoral boom at the end of the century. They kept a flock for commercial wool production in the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire region, which was later to be a major centre for sheep farming, while in the 1460s and 1470s William [iii] began to graze cattle for the market, using the lands at Lapworth, which was in good cattle-raising country. In the family's use of its estate's resources, for both consumption and sale, there was specialization and careful integration which became especially marked right across the estate under William [iii]. 
For a rising family the Catesbys were surprisingly uninterested in making new religious foundations, perhaps because they inherited chantries on at least two of their acquired estates. They contributed to a bell-tower and bells for Ladbroke church but, as their residence moved to Ashby, so did their religious interests and it seems that, from at least John [ii], it was here that family members were buried. 
The history of the family is of steady, careful ascent, accompanied by land acquisition and by careful husbanding and exploitation of the resources of the estate. On the way, cadet branches were established at Althorp, Northamptonshire, and Marston Waver, Warwickshire, as well as the one at Hopsford. Sir John Catesby (d. 1487), justice of the common pleas, may have been related to the main line of the family -- he was known as 'uncle' to William (died 1485) -- though in what degree is not known. He is almost certainly not identical with John Catesby of Althorp (died 1486). Only occasionally was the family put in jeopardy by the political upheavals that could always endanger a high-profile family on the make. By the later years of William [iii] the Catesbys were a leading midland family that needed to do no more than maintain its position, and William's expert deployment of the resources of the entire estate meant that they were particularly favourably placed to do so. The inability of his son to resist the allure of still greater wealth and power in the service of Richard III, which would have been more appropriate at an earlier phase in the Catesbys' rise, was thus as foolish as it was almost disastrous. The arms of the Catesby family were argent two lions passant sable crowned or. 


@@@@@


doc= 63895


Catesby family (per. c.1340-1505), gentry, came originally from a tenant family of Flecknoe, east Warwickshire. It was William [i] Catesby (d. 1383) and his son John [i] Catesby (d. 1404/5) whose land acquisitions started its rise into the front rank of local families. There were numbers of properties in Coventry, a town with which both William and John had strong ties, but most of the new land lay in east Warwickshire or the neighbouring counties of Leicestershire and Northamptonshire, especially the latter. It came by both purchase and marriage: William to Joan, daughter and heir of William Radbourne of Radbourne, and John to Emma, daughter and heir of Robert Cranford of Ashby St Ledgers, Northamptonshire. William, possibly a lawyer, had a lengthy official career from 1339, notably as MP for Warwickshire and escheator for several midland counties. John, definitely a lawyer, was JP in Warwickshire almost continuously from 1377. He too was steward of Coventry, to Edward, the Black Prince, as earl of Chester, but by 1389 he was close to Thomas Beauchamp, the appellant earl of Warwick. Warwick's support was important to Catesby in the protracted but eventually successful dispute over Ladbroke Manor, Warwickshire, between 1383 and 1399 and he narrowly evaded punishment when Richard II took his revenge on the appellants in 1397-9. From the time of John [i] the family divided its interests between Warwickshire and Northamptonshire. Initially there was a residence in each, at Ladbroke and Ashby respectively, but Ladbroke was eventually abandoned, probably under John [ii]. The changing balance of the estate is indicated by John [i]'s appointment as JP in Northamptonshire from 1392. 
John's eldest son, William [ii], died in 1407 or 1408 leaving John's second son, John [ii] Catesby (d. 1437), as heir. This accident complicated the structure of the estate, as John [ii]'s future had already been secured by marriage to Margaret, granddaughter and heir of Richard Mountfort of Lapworth. Lapworth was in west Warwickshire, a long way from the area where the Catesbys had been so successfully building a compact estate. Some rationalization was achieved by giving peripheral manors to a third brother, Robert, founder of the line of Catesbys of Hopsford, Warwickshire, while the marriage of John [ii]'s heir, Sir William [iii] Catesby (d. 1478/9), to Philippa, the coheir of Bishopestone of Bishopton, Warwickshire, eventually brought lands that made the west Warwickshire estate geographically more coherent, including a second manor at Lapworth. John [ii], also a lawyer, followed his father into the service of the earls of Warwick, being retained by Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, by 1417, although he seems to have been less central to the earl's affairs than some of the other Warwickshire gentry. This was perhaps because the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire border was not an area where Warwick had much direct influence. In fact John [ii]'s record as local officer shows that by the accession of Henry VI he was more a Northamptonshire than a Warwickshire man and, although he did have dealings with the dense local network around Lapworth, he was a key figure in the network that ran down the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire borders. If John's career was a relatively quiet one, this is a measure of his success: he contrived to avoid both political miscalculation and extended litigation. 
William [iii] was still a minor at his father's death and was placed in the wardship of John Norreys of Berkshire, a rising member of the royal household. This was doubtless why Catesby himself was a king's esquire by 1442. By 1447-8 he was linked to John Talbot, first earl of Shrewsbury; these ties with the crown and the Talbots were to be a constant in his political life until 1461, and in 1453 he married as his second wife Joan, daughter of Sir Thomas Barre and Shrewsbury's niece. In 1449 he was made KB, the first of the family to be knighted. From 1443 he also served the king in all the major local offices. That he served in Warwickshire as well as Northamptonshire shows how the balance of the family's interests was shifting back across the border, chiefly because the death of William's Bishopestone father-in-law in 1444 had increased its Warwickshire weighting. Catesby avoided involvement in local upheavals in the 1450s and never entirely cut himself off from local associates linked to the Yorkists. Thus, although he may have fought for Henry VI at Towton -- his uncle, Robert, did -- and he was attainted by the Yorkists in 1461 and briefly in exile, he was soon pardoned and able to return. 
In the 1460s, no longer attached to the royal household, Sir William became a substantial and fairly divisive force in local politics. He found himself at odds with various local landowners, most notably with John Brome of Baddesley Clinton, another former member of the Lancastrian household, who held one of the other manors at Lapworth, to which William now laid claim. William had clearly decided to make more of his west Warwickshire lands and he even established a residence at Lapworth. As Warwick's affinity crumbled around him in the early 1460s ['see 'Mountford family], the earl struck up a surprising relationship with this former Lancastrian, who may indeed have gone north with him to fight Lancastrian resistance in 1463-4, and he supported him in his efforts to get Lapworth, while Brome gravitated towards the dissident group around Simon Mountford, Warwick's nominal retainer. In 1465-6 Catesby's return to respectability was completed with his reappointment as JP. In 1466 the Lapworth issue was settled by an arbitration that gave him the manor. The combination of his new patron, Warwick, and his old one, Henry VI, proved irresistible at the readeption and he was sheriff of Northamptonshire during Henry VI's brief second reign. He was again pardoned after this further misadventure and, perhaps chastened by this second near disaster, seems to have lived out a quiet old age, although he died in harness as sheriff of Northamptonshire. 
It was William's son, William Catesby (d. 1485), the notorious servant of Richard III, who took the family to its greatest political heights and almost to destruction. The mostly dubious land acquisitions he made in and around Northamptonshire under Richard caused him to refocus the estate back towards east Warwickshire and Northamptonshire, although he was local officer in several midland counties, including Warwickshire. His son George Catesby (c.1473-1505), who was given livery of his mother's Zouche lands in 1495, had his attainder reversed and was partially restored in 1496. George's marriage to Richard Empson's daughter Elizabeth must have helped his cause. The family thrived during the sixteenth century, especially in the lifetime of George's second son and heir Sir Richard Catesby (died 1553), who was knight of the shire for Warwickshire in 1539 and 1553, and in the 1540s served twice as sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire and once as sheriff of Northamptonshire. He was knighted in 1542. The recusancy of Richard's grandson and heir Sir William Catesby (1547-1598) brought financial pressure and exclusion from office, but it was only the involvement of William's son Robert Catesby in the Gunpowder Plot, and his consequent forfeiture, that brought ruin upon the family. 
Because of this confiscation, the Catesby records came into crown hands, which is why so many of them survive, although the archive was unfortunately broken up by the Public Record Office. In particular, the estate accounts are unusually good for a fifteenth-century gentry family. They reveal the Catesbys as painstaking managers and exploiters, who developed a centralized accounting and purchase system, especially as the properties became more widespread, and paid careful attention to the rentier side of the economy. But what differentiates them from most of the middling and upper gentry in the fifteenth century was their exploitation of the commercial possibilities of livestock farming well before the pastoral boom at the end of the century. They kept a flock for commercial wool production in the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire region, which was later to be a major centre for sheep farming, while in the 1460s and 1470s William [iii] began to graze cattle for the market, using the lands at Lapworth, which was in good cattle-raising country. In the family's use of its estate's resources, for both consumption and sale, there was specialization and careful integration which became especially marked right across the estate under William [iii]. 
For a rising family the Catesbys were surprisingly uninterested in making new religious foundations, perhaps because they inherited chantries on at least two of their acquired estates. They contributed to a bell-tower and bells for Ladbroke church but, as their residence moved to Ashby, so did their religious interests and it seems that, from at least John [ii], it was here that family members were buried. 
The history of the family is of steady, careful ascent, accompanied by land acquisition and by careful husbanding and exploitation of the resources of the estate. On the way, cadet branches were established at Althorp, Northamptonshire, and Marston Waver, Warwickshire, as well as the one at Hopsford. Sir John Catesby (d. 1487), justice of the common pleas, may have been related to the main line of the family -- he was known as 'uncle' to William (died 1485) -- though in what degree is not known. He is almost certainly not identical with John Catesby of Althorp (died 1486). Only occasionally was the family put in jeopardy by the political upheavals that could always endanger a high-profile family on the make. By the later years of William [iii] the Catesbys were a leading midland family that needed to do no more than maintain its position, and William's expert deployment of the resources of the entire estate meant that they were particularly favourably placed to do so. The inability of his son to resist the allure of still greater wealth and power in the service of Richard III, which would have been more appropriate at an earlier phase in the Catesbys' rise, was thus as foolish as it was almost disastrous. The arms of the Catesby family were argent two lions passant sable crowned or. 


@@@@@


doc= 63896


Catesby family (per. c.1340-1505), gentry, came originally from a tenant family of Flecknoe, east Warwickshire. It was William [i] Catesby (d. 1383) and his son John [i] Catesby (d. 1404/5) whose land acquisitions started its rise into the front rank of local families. There were numbers of properties in Coventry, a town with which both William and John had strong ties, but most of the new land lay in east Warwickshire or the neighbouring counties of Leicestershire and Northamptonshire, especially the latter. It came by both purchase and marriage: William to Joan, daughter and heir of William Radbourne of Radbourne, and John to Emma, daughter and heir of Robert Cranford of Ashby St Ledgers, Northamptonshire. William, possibly a lawyer, had a lengthy official career from 1339, notably as MP for Warwickshire and escheator for several midland counties. John, definitely a lawyer, was JP in Warwickshire almost continuously from 1377. He too was steward of Coventry, to Edward, the Black Prince, as earl of Chester, but by 1389 he was close to Thomas Beauchamp, the appellant earl of Warwick. Warwick's support was important to Catesby in the protracted but eventually successful dispute over Ladbroke Manor, Warwickshire, between 1383 and 1399 and he narrowly evaded punishment when Richard II took his revenge on the appellants in 1397-9. From the time of John [i] the family divided its interests between Warwickshire and Northamptonshire. Initially there was a residence in each, at Ladbroke and Ashby respectively, but Ladbroke was eventually abandoned, probably under John [ii]. The changing balance of the estate is indicated by John [i]'s appointment as JP in Northamptonshire from 1392. 
John's eldest son, William [ii], died in 1407 or 1408 leaving John's second son, John [ii] Catesby (d. 1437), as heir. This accident complicated the structure of the estate, as John [ii]'s future had already been secured by marriage to Margaret, granddaughter and heir of Richard Mountfort of Lapworth. Lapworth was in west Warwickshire, a long way from the area where the Catesbys had been so successfully building a compact estate. Some rationalization was achieved by giving peripheral manors to a third brother, Robert, founder of the line of Catesbys of Hopsford, Warwickshire, while the marriage of John [ii]'s heir, Sir William [iii] Catesby (d. 1478/9), to Philippa, the coheir of Bishopestone of Bishopton, Warwickshire, eventually brought lands that made the west Warwickshire estate geographically more coherent, including a second manor at Lapworth. John [ii], also a lawyer, followed his father into the service of the earls of Warwick, being retained by Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, by 1417, although he seems to have been less central to the earl's affairs than some of the other Warwickshire gentry. This was perhaps because the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire border was not an area where Warwick had much direct influence. In fact John [ii]'s record as local officer shows that by the accession of Henry VI he was more a Northamptonshire than a Warwickshire man and, although he did have dealings with the dense local network around Lapworth, he was a key figure in the network that ran down the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire borders. If John's career was a relatively quiet one, this is a measure of his success: he contrived to avoid both political miscalculation and extended litigation. 
William [iii] was still a minor at his father's death and was placed in the wardship of John Norreys of Berkshire, a rising member of the royal household. This was doubtless why Catesby himself was a king's esquire by 1442. By 1447-8 he was linked to John Talbot, first earl of Shrewsbury; these ties with the crown and the Talbots were to be a constant in his political life until 1461, and in 1453 he married as his second wife Joan, daughter of Sir Thomas Barre and Shrewsbury's niece. In 1449 he was made KB, the first of the family to be knighted. From 1443 he also served the king in all the major local offices. That he served in Warwickshire as well as Northamptonshire shows how the balance of the family's interests was shifting back across the border, chiefly because the death of William's Bishopestone father-in-law in 1444 had increased its Warwickshire weighting. Catesby avoided involvement in local upheavals in the 1450s and never entirely cut himself off from local associates linked to the Yorkists. Thus, although he may have fought for Henry VI at Towton -- his uncle, Robert, did -- and he was attainted by the Yorkists in 1461 and briefly in exile, he was soon pardoned and able to return. 
In the 1460s, no longer attached to the royal household, Sir William became a substantial and fairly divisive force in local politics. He found himself at odds with various local landowners, most notably with John Brome of Baddesley Clinton, another former member of the Lancastrian household, who held one of the other manors at Lapworth, to which William now laid claim. William had clearly decided to make more of his west Warwickshire lands and he even established a residence at Lapworth. As Warwick's affinity crumbled around him in the early 1460s ['see 'Mountford family], the earl struck up a surprising relationship with this former Lancastrian, who may indeed have gone north with him to fight Lancastrian resistance in 1463-4, and he supported him in his efforts to get Lapworth, while Brome gravitated towards the dissident group around Simon Mountford, Warwick's nominal retainer. In 1465-6 Catesby's return to respectability was completed with his reappointment as JP. In 1466 the Lapworth issue was settled by an arbitration that gave him the manor. The combination of his new patron, Warwick, and his old one, Henry VI, proved irresistible at the readeption and he was sheriff of Northamptonshire during Henry VI's brief second reign. He was again pardoned after this further misadventure and, perhaps chastened by this second near disaster, seems to have lived out a quiet old age, although he died in harness as sheriff of Northamptonshire. 
It was William's son, William Catesby (d. 1485), the notorious servant of Richard III, who took the family to its greatest political heights and almost to destruction. The mostly dubious land acquisitions he made in and around Northamptonshire under Richard caused him to refocus the estate back towards east Warwickshire and Northamptonshire, although he was local officer in several midland counties, including Warwickshire. His son George Catesby (c.1473-1505), who was given livery of his mother's Zouche lands in 1495, had his attainder reversed and was partially restored in 1496. George's marriage to Richard Empson's daughter Elizabeth must have helped his cause. The family thrived during the sixteenth century, especially in the lifetime of George's second son and heir Sir Richard Catesby (died 1553), who was knight of the shire for Warwickshire in 1539 and 1553, and in the 1540s served twice as sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire and once as sheriff of Northamptonshire. He was knighted in 1542. The recusancy of Richard's grandson and heir Sir William Catesby (1547-1598) brought financial pressure and exclusion from office, but it was only the involvement of William's son Robert Catesby in the Gunpowder Plot, and his consequent forfeiture, that brought ruin upon the family. 
Because of this confiscation, the Catesby records came into crown hands, which is why so many of them survive, although the archive was unfortunately broken up by the Public Record Office. In particular, the estate accounts are unusually good for a fifteenth-century gentry family. They reveal the Catesbys as painstaking managers and exploiters, who developed a centralized accounting and purchase system, especially as the properties became more widespread, and paid careful attention to the rentier side of the economy. But what differentiates them from most of the middling and upper gentry in the fifteenth century was their exploitation of the commercial possibilities of livestock farming well before the pastoral boom at the end of the century. They kept a flock for commercial wool production in the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire region, which was later to be a major centre for sheep farming, while in the 1460s and 1470s William [iii] began to graze cattle for the market, using the lands at Lapworth, which was in good cattle-raising country. In the family's use of its estate's resources, for both consumption and sale, there was specialization and careful integration which became especially marked right across the estate under William [iii]. 
For a rising family the Catesbys were surprisingly uninterested in making new religious foundations, perhaps because they inherited chantries on at least two of their acquired estates. They contributed to a bell-tower and bells for Ladbroke church but, as their residence moved to Ashby, so did their religious interests and it seems that, from at least John [ii], it was here that family members were buried. 
The history of the family is of steady, careful ascent, accompanied by land acquisition and by careful husbanding and exploitation of the resources of the estate. On the way, cadet branches were established at Althorp, Northamptonshire, and Marston Waver, Warwickshire, as well as the one at Hopsford. Sir John Catesby (d. 1487), justice of the common pleas, may have been related to the main line of the family -- he was known as 'uncle' to William (died 1485) -- though in what degree is not known. He is almost certainly not identical with John Catesby of Althorp (died 1486). Only occasionally was the family put in jeopardy by the political upheavals that could always endanger a high-profile family on the make. By the later years of William [iii] the Catesbys were a leading midland family that needed to do no more than maintain its position, and William's expert deployment of the resources of the entire estate meant that they were particularly favourably placed to do so. The inability of his son to resist the allure of still greater wealth and power in the service of Richard III, which would have been more appropriate at an earlier phase in the Catesbys' rise, was thus as foolish as it was almost disastrous. The arms of the Catesby family were argent two lions passant sable crowned or. 


@@@@@


doc= 63897


Watson, Edith Mary (1888-1966), suffragist and police officer, was born on 6 November 1888, in the infirmary, Hackney union workhouse, the illegitimate daughter of Martha Wall, a domestic servant. With her mother and stepfamily, Edith lived in Marylebone, helping with her mother's sweated labour, sewing buttons on shirts. She was educated at Bell Street board school and Hampden Gurney School. Leaving school at fourteen she travelled to South Africa as a children's nurse, later becoming a Salvation Army captain. At this time she was attacked and almost raped by a fellow officer, a decisive factor in her views on sexual violence. Chestnut-haired and tall, she married Ernest John Watson (1883-1969), a Post Office sorter, on 1 February 1912; they were divorced about 1926. Their only child, Bernard John Watson, was born on 29 July 1919. 
Returning to England in 1909, Edith Watson abandoned her religious beliefs, became interested in socialist politics, and joined the Social Democratic Federation. She soon became involved in the Edwardian suffrage campaign and in 1911 enlisted in the Women's Freedom League, a militant, non-violent suffrage society. She was imprisoned for chaining herself to the doors of Marylebone magistrates' court and wrote a column for the 'Daily Herald', 'Sketches in green, gold and white' (the Women's Freedom League colours) for a time. She was particularly concerned about the treatment of women in the judicial system and outraged at the ways in which victims of domestic violence, sexual harassment, and abuse were treated in court. She felt very strongly that the legal system was weighted in favour of the perpetrators of violence, rape, and incest, that crimes against women were punished more leniently than crimes involving property, and that the experiences of women and girls were discounted. For three years from 1912, using the Women's Freedom League journal, 'The Vote', she recorded details about cases of domestic violence, sexual abuse, and harassment and compared their sentences with those handed down for other crimes. Patchy and inconsistent as the methods were, the work was an early attempt to quantify and analyse intractable social problems, hitherto withheld from the public domain. This all added to the demand for a judicial system fairer to women and for women to serve throughout police and judicial systems. 
When the First World War began in 1914, Edith Watson and her colleague Nina Boyle (Constance Antonina Boyle, suffrage campaigner and writer, later a founder member of the Save the Children Fund) started a women's police service under Women's Freedom League auspices. Adapting late-Victorian morality campaigners' use of volunteer patrols to rid the streets of prostitutes, Watson and Boyle aimed to protect women's interests and guarantee their rights of access to public space. Edith Watson was the first woman to wear a police uniform, designed by Boyle -- 'a useful blue serge Norfolk jacket with pockets, straw Panama hat with blue ribbon and white armlet' ('The Vote', 10, 252, 21 Aug 1914, 286). As the war progressed and military activity disrupted civilian life, other groups, similar to the volunteers though with rather more repressive attitudes, emerged and amalgamated with the women's volunteer police. Generally unpopular with regular police services, the volunteers patrolled the streets assisting women and children. Other tasks included supervising servicemen's wives and ensuring curfews were obeyed, which led to disagreement about whether women police should be used to preserve women's rights or to service the state. Ultimately, despite the original aims, women police were mainly used by the authorities to control the behaviour of working-class females. By 1915 Boyle and Watson acknowledged that their vision of a feminist framework to policing was untenable and relinquished their claims on the women police volunteers, most of whom became part of the renamed Women's Police Service, which continued in an uneasy relationship with official police bodies. It was not until 1923 that women police were officially sanctioned and given powers of arrest. 
Active in the Independent Labour Party for many years, Edith Watson was a branch secretary in Marylebone and an election agent, standing unsuccessfully at local council elections. She helped union efforts to improve working conditions in mental hospitals, disguising herself as a nurse to obtain evidence. For many years she campaigned for the Divorce Law Reform Union -- a small but vocal pressure group. In the early 1930s Nina Boyle had investigated the cruelties inherent in the practice of female genital mutilation, demanding its abolition in countries under British rule. One of Edith Watson's last campaigns was to publicize and criticize the practice in Kenya in the 1950s. She died in a nursing home at 3 St Botolph's Road, Worthing, Sussex, on 25 March 1966. Born illegitimate and poor, the victim of sexual harassment, a divorced lone parent, Edith Watson voiced the experiences of such women, campaigning on their behalf for over forty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 63898


Catesby family (per. c.1340-1505), gentry, came originally from a tenant family of Flecknoe, east Warwickshire. It was William [i] Catesby (d. 1383) and his son John [i] Catesby (d. 1404/5) whose land acquisitions started its rise into the front rank of local families. There were numbers of properties in Coventry, a town with which both William and John had strong ties, but most of the new land lay in east Warwickshire or the neighbouring counties of Leicestershire and Northamptonshire, especially the latter. It came by both purchase and marriage: William to Joan, daughter and heir of William Radbourne of Radbourne, and John to Emma, daughter and heir of Robert Cranford of Ashby St Ledgers, Northamptonshire. William, possibly a lawyer, had a lengthy official career from 1339, notably as MP for Warwickshire and escheator for several midland counties. John, definitely a lawyer, was JP in Warwickshire almost continuously from 1377. He too was steward of Coventry, to Edward, the Black Prince, as earl of Chester, but by 1389 he was close to Thomas Beauchamp, the appellant earl of Warwick. Warwick's support was important to Catesby in the protracted but eventually successful dispute over Ladbroke Manor, Warwickshire, between 1383 and 1399 and he narrowly evaded punishment when Richard II took his revenge on the appellants in 1397-9. From the time of John [i] the family divided its interests between Warwickshire and Northamptonshire. Initially there was a residence in each, at Ladbroke and Ashby respectively, but Ladbroke was eventually abandoned, probably under John [ii]. The changing balance of the estate is indicated by John [i]'s appointment as JP in Northamptonshire from 1392. 
John's eldest son, William [ii], died in 1407 or 1408 leaving John's second son, John [ii] Catesby (d. 1437), as heir. This accident complicated the structure of the estate, as John [ii]'s future had already been secured by marriage to Margaret, granddaughter and heir of Richard Mountfort of Lapworth. Lapworth was in west Warwickshire, a long way from the area where the Catesbys had been so successfully building a compact estate. Some rationalization was achieved by giving peripheral manors to a third brother, Robert, founder of the line of Catesbys of Hopsford, Warwickshire, while the marriage of John [ii]'s heir, Sir William [iii] Catesby (d. 1478/9), to Philippa, the coheir of Bishopestone of Bishopton, Warwickshire, eventually brought lands that made the west Warwickshire estate geographically more coherent, including a second manor at Lapworth. John [ii], also a lawyer, followed his father into the service of the earls of Warwick, being retained by Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, by 1417, although he seems to have been less central to the earl's affairs than some of the other Warwickshire gentry. This was perhaps because the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire border was not an area where Warwick had much direct influence. In fact John [ii]'s record as local officer shows that by the accession of Henry VI he was more a Northamptonshire than a Warwickshire man and, although he did have dealings with the dense local network around Lapworth, he was a key figure in the network that ran down the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire borders. If John's career was a relatively quiet one, this is a measure of his success: he contrived to avoid both political miscalculation and extended litigation. 
William [iii] was still a minor at his father's death and was placed in the wardship of John Norreys of Berkshire, a rising member of the royal household. This was doubtless why Catesby himself was a king's esquire by 1442. By 1447-8 he was linked to John Talbot, first earl of Shrewsbury; these ties with the crown and the Talbots were to be a constant in his political life until 1461, and in 1453 he married as his second wife Joan, daughter of Sir Thomas Barre and Shrewsbury's niece. In 1449 he was made KB, the first of the family to be knighted. From 1443 he also served the king in all the major local offices. That he served in Warwickshire as well as Northamptonshire shows how the balance of the family's interests was shifting back across the border, chiefly because the death of William's Bishopestone father-in-law in 1444 had increased its Warwickshire weighting. Catesby avoided involvement in local upheavals in the 1450s and never entirely cut himself off from local associates linked to the Yorkists. Thus, although he may have fought for Henry VI at Towton -- his uncle, Robert, did -- and he was attainted by the Yorkists in 1461 and briefly in exile, he was soon pardoned and able to return. 
In the 1460s, no longer attached to the royal household, Sir William became a substantial and fairly divisive force in local politics. He found himself at odds with various local landowners, most notably with John Brome of Baddesley Clinton, another former member of the Lancastrian household, who held one of the other manors at Lapworth, to which William now laid claim. William had clearly decided to make more of his west Warwickshire lands and he even established a residence at Lapworth. As Warwick's affinity crumbled around him in the early 1460s ['see 'Mountford family], the earl struck up a surprising relationship with this former Lancastrian, who may indeed have gone north with him to fight Lancastrian resistance in 1463-4, and he supported him in his efforts to get Lapworth, while Brome gravitated towards the dissident group around Simon Mountford, Warwick's nominal retainer. In 1465-6 Catesby's return to respectability was completed with his reappointment as JP. In 1466 the Lapworth issue was settled by an arbitration that gave him the manor. The combination of his new patron, Warwick, and his old one, Henry VI, proved irresistible at the readeption and he was sheriff of Northamptonshire during Henry VI's brief second reign. He was again pardoned after this further misadventure and, perhaps chastened by this second near disaster, seems to have lived out a quiet old age, although he died in harness as sheriff of Northamptonshire. 
It was William's son, William Catesby (d. 1485), the notorious servant of Richard III, who took the family to its greatest political heights and almost to destruction. The mostly dubious land acquisitions he made in and around Northamptonshire under Richard caused him to refocus the estate back towards east Warwickshire and Northamptonshire, although he was local officer in several midland counties, including Warwickshire. His son George Catesby (c.1473-1505), who was given livery of his mother's Zouche lands in 1495, had his attainder reversed and was partially restored in 1496. George's marriage to Richard Empson's daughter Elizabeth must have helped his cause. The family thrived during the sixteenth century, especially in the lifetime of George's second son and heir Sir Richard Catesby (died 1553), who was knight of the shire for Warwickshire in 1539 and 1553, and in the 1540s served twice as sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire and once as sheriff of Northamptonshire. He was knighted in 1542. The recusancy of Richard's grandson and heir Sir William Catesby (1547-1598) brought financial pressure and exclusion from office, but it was only the involvement of William's son Robert Catesby in the Gunpowder Plot, and his consequent forfeiture, that brought ruin upon the family. 
Because of this confiscation, the Catesby records came into crown hands, which is why so many of them survive, although the archive was unfortunately broken up by the Public Record Office. In particular, the estate accounts are unusually good for a fifteenth-century gentry family. They reveal the Catesbys as painstaking managers and exploiters, who developed a centralized accounting and purchase system, especially as the properties became more widespread, and paid careful attention to the rentier side of the economy. But what differentiates them from most of the middling and upper gentry in the fifteenth century was their exploitation of the commercial possibilities of livestock farming well before the pastoral boom at the end of the century. They kept a flock for commercial wool production in the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire region, which was later to be a major centre for sheep farming, while in the 1460s and 1470s William [iii] began to graze cattle for the market, using the lands at Lapworth, which was in good cattle-raising country. In the family's use of its estate's resources, for both consumption and sale, there was specialization and careful integration which became especially marked right across the estate under William [iii]. 
For a rising family the Catesbys were surprisingly uninterested in making new religious foundations, perhaps because they inherited chantries on at least two of their acquired estates. They contributed to a bell-tower and bells for Ladbroke church but, as their residence moved to Ashby, so did their religious interests and it seems that, from at least John [ii], it was here that family members were buried. 
The history of the family is of steady, careful ascent, accompanied by land acquisition and by careful husbanding and exploitation of the resources of the estate. On the way, cadet branches were established at Althorp, Northamptonshire, and Marston Waver, Warwickshire, as well as the one at Hopsford. Sir John Catesby (d. 1487), justice of the common pleas, may have been related to the main line of the family -- he was known as 'uncle' to William (died 1485) -- though in what degree is not known. He is almost certainly not identical with John Catesby of Althorp (died 1486). Only occasionally was the family put in jeopardy by the political upheavals that could always endanger a high-profile family on the make. By the later years of William [iii] the Catesbys were a leading midland family that needed to do no more than maintain its position, and William's expert deployment of the resources of the entire estate meant that they were particularly favourably placed to do so. The inability of his son to resist the allure of still greater wealth and power in the service of Richard III, which would have been more appropriate at an earlier phase in the Catesbys' rise, was thus as foolish as it was almost disastrous. The arms of the Catesby family were argent two lions passant sable crowned or. 


@@@@@


doc= 63900


Whately, (Mary) Monica (1889-1960), campaigner for women's rights and civil liberties, was born on 30 November 1889 at 16 Trebovir Road, Brompton, London, the eldest daughter of Major Reginald Pepys Whately ('b'. 1860), officer with the Royal Sussex regiment, and Maude Isabel, a singer, daughter of Thomas John Davis, Church of England clergyman. She was a great-great-niece of Archbishop Whately, and her parents converted to Catholicism in 1899. She was educated at home and at the London School of Economics, where she studied politics and world affairs. Family wealth made her financially independent, with the time and means to travel extensively throughout her life, gathering information and contacts to promote a wide range of political and humanitarian causes. She was an internationalist in the best sense of that term, and a prodigious worker for the issues she believed in, both at home and abroad. 
Monica Whately came of age politically within the militant suffragette movement, where she developed a talent for publicity and public speaking. In 1912, with her mother, she became a founder member of the Catholic Women's Suffrage Society, and honorary treasurer and secretary of its post-1918 successor, the St Joan's Social and Political Union. However, her independent views and strong feminism were more suited to the nascent Six Point Group, an organization of mainly younger activists such as Vera Brittain and Dorothy Evans, formed in 1921. Its vigorous promotion of equal rights for women was based on a conception of equality that sought to diminish the social consequences of sexual difference. Monica represented the group on the domestic and international fronts over the next four decades. She was its delegate to the World Conference of Women Against War and Fascism in Paris in 1933, and for many years, with other members of the group, lobbied the League of Nations for an equal-rights treaty, which was finally incorporated into the United Nations charter in 1945. Between the wars she campaigned across a number of organizations and issues, and was an active member of the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship until the split of 1926-7, when she sided with those on the executive who unsuccessfully opposed the ascendancy of new feminism. She was particularly concerned with women's employment rights and the economic position of married women, which came under attack in the early 1930s and which underpinned the work of the Open Door Council, for which she was honorary treasurer. She organized a well-publicized picket of Austin Motors in 1933 after its chairman called for male workers to replace female as a remedy for unemployment. 
It was chiefly Monica Whately's involvement with the Open Door Council and its outspoken resistance to protective legislation for women workers which brought her into conflict with the Labour Party leadership. Politically ambitious, she stood three times for parliament (1929, 1931, 1936), albeit as an Independent Labour Party (ILP) candidate because the national executive committee refused to endorse her. She made common cause with left-wing, mainly ILP feminists within the women's sections, including Frida Laski, Dorothy Jewson, and Dora Russell, refusing to toe the party line and working with other organizations at a time when this was frowned upon. She had more success as a local councillor, standing against Oswald Mosley and winning the London county council (LCC) ward of Limehouse in 1937. In addition to serving on the management committees of schools and hospitals, she campaigned vigorously against the marriage bar: the LCC ban on married midwives was lifted in 1940, largely through her efforts. During the Second World War she worked for the Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Information, and Save the Children. In the 1940s she became involved with the Equal Pay Campaign Committee and Women for Westminster. Her experience of party politics, however, convinced her of the continuing need for autonomous feminist action, and she successfully resisted an attempt to merge the latter with the Six Point Group. She represented the group on both the National Council for Civil Liberties and the National Assembly of Women in the 1950s, and served as its chairwoman until her death. 
International work was an important cornerstone of Monica Whately's life. Famine relief effort in the early 1920s in central and eastern Europe led to an involvement with Save the Children. Like many of her generation she was active in peace work, as a member of the Peace Army and the No More War Movement, and as a speaker for the League of Nations Union. This was coupled with a deep concern to uphold civil liberties and democracy as fascism gathered pace. She worked closely with the British Campaign Against War and Fascism, and a visit to Nazi Germany in 1934 to seek legal redress for women imprisoned without trial alerted her to the evils of the Nazi regime. Throughout the 1930s she spoke and wrote on this subject, and with Jewish and other groups organized a boycott of goods made in Germany. She made several visits to Spain during the civil war and under Franco, and also travelled beyond Europe, developing a deep interest in movements for colonial freedom. In 1931 and 1934 she visited India, met Gandhi, and was a signatory to the India League delegation report which investigated the effects of British imperialism and the causes of Indian nationalism. She journeyed to the USA and to South Africa -- the latter being a prelude to her involvement with the South African Committee for Colonial Freedom in the 1930s and anti-apartheid work after the war. One of her last trips was to revolutionary China, where she observed the status of women and conditions of life for working people. 
A flamboyant figure, remembered years later for her cropped hair, black clothes, and sweeping black cloak with its red lining, Monica Whately had presence and tremendous energy. Hazel Hunkins Hallinan, who knew her in the Six Point Group, once remarked that she 'splashed her talents around' (Harrison interview). The cross-fertilization that came from working across many campaigns made her a lively maverick and a useful conduit of ideas, albeit one who 'just missed greatness' (ibid.). Her career might seem to epitomize the dissipation of energy which fragmented the inter-war women's movement. But it was precisely because she channelled her feminism into many diverse campaigns and issues that she showed its relevance to all the key movements of the twentieth century. She died on 12 September 1960 at 35 Amherst Road, London. There was no funeral, but characteristically she donated her body to the Middlesex Hospital for medical research and her eyes to Moorfield Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 63902


Yates, Rose Emma Lamartine (1875-1954), women's activist, was born on 23 February 1875 at 33 Dalyell Road, Lambeth, London, the youngest daughter of the three children of Marie Elphege Bertoni Victor Janau ('b'. 1847), teacher of foreign languages, and his wife, Marie Pauline (1841-1909). Both her parents were born in France and became naturalized British subjects. Yates was schooled privately in Truro, Cornwall. Her education continued at Royal Holloway College and the University of Oxford, where she studied modern languages and philology. In 1900 she married Thomas Lamartine Yates (1849-1929), a solicitor, and eight years later gave birth to their only child, Paul. Both were passionate cyclists, touring Europe in the early years of their marriage, and were active members of the Cyclists' Touring Club. Within the club Yates was a leading figure in the reform party and in 1908 was the first woman elected to its council. She resigned her seat in 1915. 
Yates's involvement with the women's suffrage campaign, in which her husband supported her, began in 1909. On 24 February she was arrested while on a deputation to the House of Commons. At her trial, where she was sentenced to one month's imprisonment in Holloway gaol, she made an impassioned defence of her actions: 'every woman must have the courage of her convictions, and not slink back when she has taken her first step' ('Votes for Women', 5 March 1909, 407). It was a sentiment that informed Yates's life. By 1910 she was honorary secretary of the Wimbledon Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) and under her leadership it became one of the most prosperous branches in the organization. Between 1910 and 1914 she addressed meetings across London and nationally, notably delivering a speech at the 1910 massive demonstration in Hyde Park. Throughout this period she was a contributor to the 'Wimbledon Borough News', where she made regular propaganda for the cause. Yates made little distinction between her private and public worlds. Her house -- Dorset Hall in Merton -- was both home and refuge: suffragettes convalesced there after periods of imprisonment. Even her enthusiasm for gardening -- she was a member of the Royal Horticultural Society -- was utilized for the cause. She planted a section of her garden in WSPU colours. 
Yates was a committed member of the union, though not an uncritical follower. Her political sympathies lay with the left of the movement and she shared friendships with socialist suffragettes Mary Gawthorpe, Elinor Penn Gaskell, and Emily Wilding Davison -- an old college friend. Her open dissent was provoked by the decision to suspend militant activity at the outbreak of the First World War. She saw no reason for campaigning to stop, and objected to the transformation of the union into a pro-war organization. In October 1915 Yates chaired a meeting protesting against using the union's name for non-suffrage activity and a year later supported the formation of 'Suffragettes of the WSPU'. Although linked with the left, it seems that Yates never joined a political party. In 1919 she contested, as an independent, the London county council seat of North Lambeth. Elected on a reform programme, she spent three years championing equal pay, increased public housing, and the provision of nursery education. 
Yates was instrumental in building an archive of the suffrage campaign, and in 1939 opened the Women's Record House in Great Smith Square, London. The premises were destroyed during the Second World War. Some of its records were rescued and form part of the Suffragette Fellowship collection in the Museum of London. 
Yates died of colon cancer on 5 November 1954, at her home, 11 Bede House, Manor Fields, Wandsworth, London. She was survived by her son. 


@@@@@


doc= 63903


King, (Hubert) Raymond (1897-1983), head teacher, was born at 72 Jarratt Street, Doncaster, Yorkshire, on 25 December 1897, the son of Harry King, a railway clerk, and his wife, Emily Howard. He attended King Edward VI School in East Retford, Nottinghamshire, until the age of eighteen, when he left to join the army. He served with distinction on the western front, where he was awarded the Military Medal, the Belgian Croix de Guerre, and the Distinguished Conduct Medal. He refused to be commissioned as an officer, preferring to remain among the men, but accepted the rank of temporary company sergeant-major. 
In 1919 King entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he took a first class in part one of the historical tripos and studied English during his third year, gaining a second. After graduating in 1922 he completed a one-year teacher training course based at the Cambridge University education department and successfully submitted a thesis for the university diploma in education. He completed his teaching practice at Westminster School and, in 1923, was appointed to the staff of Portsmouth grammar school. Just three years later, at the age of twenty-eight, he was appointed headmaster of Scarborough high school, a selective grammar school, where he introduced a system of regular 'diligence' assessments, based upon pupils' effort and improvement rather than attainment. In 1932 he moved to London to become headmaster of Wandsworth Boys' Grammar School. He was to remain at the school until his retirement in 1963. During this period, however, the character of the school dramatically changed from that of a three-form selective entry institution to one of the largest comprehensive schools in England. 
During the 1920s and 1930s King became aware of arguments for widening access to secondary education, such as those set out in R. H. Tawney's pamphlet for the Labour Party, 'Secondary Education for All' (1922), and in the 1926 Hadow report, 'The Education of the Adolescent'. A number of teacher unions, including King's own association, the Incorporated Association of Head Masters, went further by challenging the principle of eleven-plus selection and supporting the establishment of secondary 'multilateral' or 'comprehensive' schools. For a period King kept an open mind about these questions, but during the Second World War, when the staff and boys of the Wandsworth school were evacuated to several scattered centres in the Surrey countryside, he became an active participant in many debates concerning post-war educational reconstruction. In 1942 King and three other London county council (LCC) grammar school head teachers published 'A Democratic Reconstruction of Education', a 15,000-word pamphlet, which directly led to the founding of the Conference for the Democratic Reconstruction of Education. King was the first chairman of this organization, which called for the absorption of public schools into local systems of education and the introduction of comprehensive education. The enthusiasm of the conference for comprehensive schooling was shared by another organization chaired by King, the English New Education Fellowship (ENEF). In 1950 King was the unattributed author of a widely circulated ENEF pamphlet, simply entitled 'The Comprehensive School'. 
Although in 1947 the LCC committed itself, in the London school plan, to the long-term development of a fully comprehensive system, early progress depended upon the co-operation of liberal-minded grammar school heads such as King. Acting largely on his own initiative, rather than following instructions from County Hall, King modified Wandsworth's pupil intake to include boys who had not originally been selected for a grammar school education from age eleven. After successfully absorbing a group of boys from the junior technical branch of the Brixton School of Building in 1947, a further non-grammar form was introduced in the following year. By 1955 there were three such non-selective first-year groups in addition to the cohort of boys who had entered the school as a result of passing the eleven-plus examination. In order to advance along the lines indicated in the London school plan, the LCC then announced that Wandsworth would become one of five showpiece comprehensives which had formerly been grammar schools. King relished the challenges associated with the transition to a comprehensive school and, with the support of his staff and governors, prepared for the amalgamation with a local technical school in the autumn of 1956. 
Wandsworth comprehensive school was a vast, fifteen-form entry institution, attended by some 2130 boys. In terms of organization, like many large urban comprehensives, the lower and upper schools were located in separate buildings and a 'house' grouping system, for which King was a great enthusiast, operated throughout the school. Predictably, after 1956 he was in great demand as a public speaker and commentator. In 1958 he joined the editorial board of 'Forum', a journal founded by Robin Pedley, Brian Simon, and Jack Walton for the purpose of promoting comprehensive education. King wrote regularly for 'Forum' and in 1964, having retired from Wandsworth, he became chair of the editorial board. 
King was also active at an international level. Before the Second World War he was an enthusiastic youth hosteller and arranged exchanges with schools in Germany and Sweden. In 1945 he represented Rotary International at a conference of UNESCO. Later he served as education adviser to the United Kingdom National Commission for UNESCO, and from 1947 to 1961 he chaired its textbooks sub-committee. He continued to attend European conferences into his eighties. Latterly he lived at New Malden, Surrey. King died at Kingston Hospital, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 21 March 1983, leaving a widow, Mary, herself an active member of the ENEF, and a son, Lionel. 


@@@@@


doc= 63904


Mountford family (per. c.1370-1495), gentry, of late medieval Warwickshire, was descended from Sir John Mountford, an illegitimate son of Peter, third Baron Montfort of Beaudesert, Warwickshire, who died 'c'.1369 without any direct legitimate heirs, and Laura Ullenhall. To the four manors his father diverted to him from the legitimate line Sir John was able to add another three by his marriage to Joan, heir of Clinton of Coleshill. This large and valuable north Warwickshire manor became the centre of an estate located primarily in that region. John's son, Baldwin Mountford (d. 1386), married Margaret, daughter of a neighbour, John, Baron Clinton of Maxstoke. By 1384 he was in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, the lord of Kenilworth in central Warwickshire, and he died in Spain on Gaunt's service. The early death, about 1394, of his elder son, John, meant that his effective heir was his second son, Sir William Mountford (d. 1452). Both sons were in turn under the guardianship of Richard II's henchman William Bagot but William seems to have avoided his guardian's difficulties in 1399 and by 1407 had made the marriage that took the family into the front rank of the Warwickshire gentry and brought the last of their major land acquisitions. This match, with Margaret, sole heir of Sir John Peche, brought him a further ten Warwickshire manors, mostly in the central and south-eastern parts of the county, and made him its single greatest gentry landowner, worth at least $300 a year in 1417. But even more important in making the family exceptionally influential in Warwickshire was the fact that, unusually, most of its lands were concentrated in this county. 
William's early career, however, was marked by a certain amount of unruliness and some difficulties in securing his inheritance. Notably, he became engaged in prolonged litigation for parts of the Montfort of Beaudesert estate, a dispute that came to a head under Henry V. That it was resolved in 1417 by compromise was due largely to the firm national control of Henry V and local control of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick. The Mountfords had already had some more tenuous links with the earls but, after an earlier association with William, Lord Astley, of Astley in north Warwickshire, William Mountford became Beauchamp's close associate. He served in his retinue in France in 1415 and again in 1417-21 (he was knighted during this campaign), 1421-2, 1430-31, and 1437-9. At home he was said to be the earl's 'chief counsellor', receiving the large annuity of 40 marks, and was one of the pivotal figures in the powerful network focused on Beauchamp that knitted Warwickshire together during this period. His links with Beauchamp account for his offices in the county, the first of the family to be consistently among the official elite. He held all the major local offices and was appointed the earl's deputy in his Worcestershire shrievalty. During this period he was able to establish his eldest son, Sir Baldwin Mountford (c.1412-1474/5), at the Peche manor of Hampton in Arden and marry him to the sister of Sir Richard Vernon of Haddon, a leading Derbyshire landowner ['see under 'Vernon family]. 
After Warwick's death in 1439 Sir William Mountford was one of several custodians of the Warwick lands during the minority of the earl's son Henry. The others included members of Henry VI's household and, through these, Mountford acquired links to the court. These he proposed to exploit to disinherit his family by his first wife in favour of the sons of his second wife, Joan, daughter of William Alderwyche and widow of William Brokesby. Sir Edmund Mountford (d. 1494), the eldest son of the second marriage, was in France with his father in 1438, an esquire of the household by 1444, and MP for Warwickshire in 1447. Meanwhile Baldwin, a knight by 1437, received no royal favour and had to wait until 1449 for his first local office. By a series of miscalculations, the new earl of Warwick, Richard Neville, who succeeded Henry's infant daughter in 1449, alienated William and Edmund, with the result that these two looked for protection to Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham (who had bought the Clinton property at Maxstoke in 1438), while Baldwin looked to Warwick. After William's death in 1452 the Mountford dispute became increasingly central to Warwickshire politics, helping to cause the breach between Warwick and the royal court -- in which Edmund was now an influential figure -- and becoming the focal point of the struggle for control of the county between Warwick and Buckingham. After Queen Margaret's coup in late 1456 Edmund was able to strike and he forced a series of releases from Baldwin and Baldwin's eldest son, Sir Simon Mountford (d. 1495). However, even with the royal court at Coventry, it seems that Edmund could not establish himself as legitimate heir in the eyes of the Warwickshire gentry, who still preferred Baldwin as an associate. Edmund, who was a knight by mid-1459, remained conspicuously loyal to Henry VI, allegedly sheltering him at Coleshill after the battle of Blore Heath. He was attainted, went into exile with the Lancastrian royal family after the battle of Towton in 1461, and continued to fight for them until he left permanently for France with Queen Margaret in 1464. 
The Yorkist accession gave outright victory to the senior line. Sir Baldwin immediately entered the church, styling himself thereafter 'knight and priest', and took almost no further part in worldly affairs. Simon, who had been knighted by 1461, and had been retained by Warwick in 1456-7, should by rights have succeeded to his grandfather's position in the Warwick affinity. However, although his tenure of local office and links with other members of the affinity in the early 1460s suggested that this was to be the case, he soon contrived to fall out with Warwick. While the earl was mostly away on the king's business, Simon gathered to himself a group of dissidents within the Warwick affinity, some of them in dispute with close servants of the earl. Simon's influence spread southwards through the county. As it did so, he found the marriage alliance made in the 1450s with the daughter of Sir Richard Verney of Compton Verney in south Warwickshire, himself an adept exploiter of discord among local nobles, especially useful. In 1465 the rising levels of tension climaxed in an affray in which a servant of one of Warwick's closest followers was killed. Warwick, just back from the north with the captive Henry VI, had already removed Simon from the commission of the peace and the earl was soon in Warwickshire as head of an oyer and terminer commission into the affair. But he remained largely ineffectual in Warwickshire and deteriorating relations with the king soon forced him to come to terms with the Warwickshire dissidents. Even this did not prevent Simon's taking William Hastings's fee in 1469-70 and fighting for Edward IV at Tewkesbury. Indeed, that Edmund still had hopes of returning with the restored Henry VI and recovering the Mountford estates was a strong incentive to Simon to stick with the Yorkists. 
Under the duke of Clarence, who succeeded to the Warwick lands in 1471, Simon repeated the 'cuckoo in the nest' pattern but on a grander scale. Emboldened by Clarence's failure to establish effective lordship in the midlands, Simon began to act as a major local political force. The royal grant of the constableship of Kenilworth Castle in 1475 and further efforts to secure the rest of the Montfort lands in 1476 indicate the scope of his ambitions. In 1475 he went to France on Edward IV's expedition and his indenting for sixty-five fighting men reveals the sort of power he had at his disposal. But his attempt on the Montfort lands came to nothing and from 1478, once Edward IV had taken over Clarence's lands and local political leadership, Simon found his wings severely clipped. He remained a pivotal figure in local society and politics and a consistent local office holder but he no longer dared to try to create an independent power base. The return and pardon in 1474 of Edmund, who was restored to a single Mountford manor (Remenham, Berkshire), were also incentives to good behaviour. Like most Warwickshire gentry, Simon kept his head well down under Richard III and, despite the reversal of Edmund's attainder after Henry VII's victory in 1485, Simon had no difficulty in being accepted as a loyal subject and local officer and indeed was present at the creation of the future Henry VIII as duke of York in 1494. 
As the politics of Warwickshire and the counties to the north became ever more disturbed from 1487, however, Simon found it increasingly difficult to hold his own in local affairs. Unlike several of the other more prominent gentry of north Warwickshire and the north midlands, he was a law-abiding member of the local official establishment, most of whom came from the south of the county. Growing tension between the more orderly south Warwickshire gentry, most of them not favoured by the king, and the disorderly north Warwickshire and north-midlands gentry, many of whom were close to the king, led to a confrontation at the sessions of the peace in 1494, in which Simon was actively involved, standing up for the south against the north. These developments may lie behind Simon's implication in the alleged treason plot on behalf of Perkin Warbeck in January 1495 and his execution in February. Although the Henry Mountford who was part of Warbeck's invasion force later that year was probably Simon's son, and Simon may have viewed with foreboding his own alienation from his immediate neighbours and proximity of his half-uncle Edmund to the king, it would have been uncharacteristic of him to have committed treason after such a sure-footed tread through decades of political turmoil. His execution may simply have been the king's exasperated response to the turmoil in the midlands, especially since the worst offenders were people whose importance to him was such that he could not touch them. Simon's confiscated lands were divided among Simon Digby, the earl of Kildare, and Henry VII's close aide, Reynold Bray, who also succeeded to Edmund's manor of Remenham when Edmund died, apparently unmarried, in 1494. Although Simon's heir, Thomas, was partially restored in 1504, Coleshill remained with the Digbys; the family never reattained its former eminence and disposed of its remaining Warwickshire estates in the early seventeenth century. From the time at which they acquired the Peche lands, the Mountfords were an immense presence in the political life of Warwickshire; whether this was used for good or ill depended largely on the ability of the earls of Warwick and, from 1478, of the king, but from the 1460s Simon may be seen as the harbinger of that independent gentry power which arguably began to emerge in England during the political crises of the fifteenth century. 
The family owned the advowson at Ilmington, one of their Warwickshire manors, and sometimes used it for sons who entered the church, for example Baldwin's full brother, Richard. But their main religious interest was at Coleshill. William's projected chantry there came to nothing, probably because of the prolonged dispute following his death and because Baldwin's entering the church was thought sufficient for the family souls, but family members may well have been responsible for additions to the church. The surviving evidence suggests that, although careful 'rentiers', the Mountfords tended not to exploit other sources of profit. Indeed their wealth, sufficient to set up cadet branches in nearly every generation, ensured that, even in periods of family feuding, no more than careful management was necessary. The family arms were bend of ten pieces or and azure. 


@@@@@


doc= 63905


Mountford family (per. c.1370-1495), gentry, of late medieval Warwickshire, was descended from Sir John Mountford, an illegitimate son of Peter, third Baron Montfort of Beaudesert, Warwickshire, who died 'c'.1369 without any direct legitimate heirs, and Laura Ullenhall. To the four manors his father diverted to him from the legitimate line Sir John was able to add another three by his marriage to Joan, heir of Clinton of Coleshill. This large and valuable north Warwickshire manor became the centre of an estate located primarily in that region. John's son, Baldwin Mountford (d. 1386), married Margaret, daughter of a neighbour, John, Baron Clinton of Maxstoke. By 1384 he was in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, the lord of Kenilworth in central Warwickshire, and he died in Spain on Gaunt's service. The early death, about 1394, of his elder son, John, meant that his effective heir was his second son, Sir William Mountford (d. 1452). Both sons were in turn under the guardianship of Richard II's henchman William Bagot but William seems to have avoided his guardian's difficulties in 1399 and by 1407 had made the marriage that took the family into the front rank of the Warwickshire gentry and brought the last of their major land acquisitions. This match, with Margaret, sole heir of Sir John Peche, brought him a further ten Warwickshire manors, mostly in the central and south-eastern parts of the county, and made him its single greatest gentry landowner, worth at least $300 a year in 1417. But even more important in making the family exceptionally influential in Warwickshire was the fact that, unusually, most of its lands were concentrated in this county. 
William's early career, however, was marked by a certain amount of unruliness and some difficulties in securing his inheritance. Notably, he became engaged in prolonged litigation for parts of the Montfort of Beaudesert estate, a dispute that came to a head under Henry V. That it was resolved in 1417 by compromise was due largely to the firm national control of Henry V and local control of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick. The Mountfords had already had some more tenuous links with the earls but, after an earlier association with William, Lord Astley, of Astley in north Warwickshire, William Mountford became Beauchamp's close associate. He served in his retinue in France in 1415 and again in 1417-21 (he was knighted during this campaign), 1421-2, 1430-31, and 1437-9. At home he was said to be the earl's 'chief counsellor', receiving the large annuity of 40 marks, and was one of the pivotal figures in the powerful network focused on Beauchamp that knitted Warwickshire together during this period. His links with Beauchamp account for his offices in the county, the first of the family to be consistently among the official elite. He held all the major local offices and was appointed the earl's deputy in his Worcestershire shrievalty. During this period he was able to establish his eldest son, Sir Baldwin Mountford (c.1412-1474/5), at the Peche manor of Hampton in Arden and marry him to the sister of Sir Richard Vernon of Haddon, a leading Derbyshire landowner ['see under 'Vernon family]. 
After Warwick's death in 1439 Sir William Mountford was one of several custodians of the Warwick lands during the minority of the earl's son Henry. The others included members of Henry VI's household and, through these, Mountford acquired links to the court. These he proposed to exploit to disinherit his family by his first wife in favour of the sons of his second wife, Joan, daughter of William Alderwyche and widow of William Brokesby. Sir Edmund Mountford (d. 1494), the eldest son of the second marriage, was in France with his father in 1438, an esquire of the household by 1444, and MP for Warwickshire in 1447. Meanwhile Baldwin, a knight by 1437, received no royal favour and had to wait until 1449 for his first local office. By a series of miscalculations, the new earl of Warwick, Richard Neville, who succeeded Henry's infant daughter in 1449, alienated William and Edmund, with the result that these two looked for protection to Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham (who had bought the Clinton property at Maxstoke in 1438), while Baldwin looked to Warwick. After William's death in 1452 the Mountford dispute became increasingly central to Warwickshire politics, helping to cause the breach between Warwick and the royal court -- in which Edmund was now an influential figure -- and becoming the focal point of the struggle for control of the county between Warwick and Buckingham. After Queen Margaret's coup in late 1456 Edmund was able to strike and he forced a series of releases from Baldwin and Baldwin's eldest son, Sir Simon Mountford (d. 1495). However, even with the royal court at Coventry, it seems that Edmund could not establish himself as legitimate heir in the eyes of the Warwickshire gentry, who still preferred Baldwin as an associate. Edmund, who was a knight by mid-1459, remained conspicuously loyal to Henry VI, allegedly sheltering him at Coleshill after the battle of Blore Heath. He was attainted, went into exile with the Lancastrian royal family after the battle of Towton in 1461, and continued to fight for them until he left permanently for France with Queen Margaret in 1464. 
The Yorkist accession gave outright victory to the senior line. Sir Baldwin immediately entered the church, styling himself thereafter 'knight and priest', and took almost no further part in worldly affairs. Simon, who had been knighted by 1461, and had been retained by Warwick in 1456-7, should by rights have succeeded to his grandfather's position in the Warwick affinity. However, although his tenure of local office and links with other members of the affinity in the early 1460s suggested that this was to be the case, he soon contrived to fall out with Warwick. While the earl was mostly away on the king's business, Simon gathered to himself a group of dissidents within the Warwick affinity, some of them in dispute with close servants of the earl. Simon's influence spread southwards through the county. As it did so, he found the marriage alliance made in the 1450s with the daughter of Sir Richard Verney of Compton Verney in south Warwickshire, himself an adept exploiter of discord among local nobles, especially useful. In 1465 the rising levels of tension climaxed in an affray in which a servant of one of Warwick's closest followers was killed. Warwick, just back from the north with the captive Henry VI, had already removed Simon from the commission of the peace and the earl was soon in Warwickshire as head of an oyer and terminer commission into the affair. But he remained largely ineffectual in Warwickshire and deteriorating relations with the king soon forced him to come to terms with the Warwickshire dissidents. Even this did not prevent Simon's taking William Hastings's fee in 1469-70 and fighting for Edward IV at Tewkesbury. Indeed, that Edmund still had hopes of returning with the restored Henry VI and recovering the Mountford estates was a strong incentive to Simon to stick with the Yorkists. 
Under the duke of Clarence, who succeeded to the Warwick lands in 1471, Simon repeated the 'cuckoo in the nest' pattern but on a grander scale. Emboldened by Clarence's failure to establish effective lordship in the midlands, Simon began to act as a major local political force. The royal grant of the constableship of Kenilworth Castle in 1475 and further efforts to secure the rest of the Montfort lands in 1476 indicate the scope of his ambitions. In 1475 he went to France on Edward IV's expedition and his indenting for sixty-five fighting men reveals the sort of power he had at his disposal. But his attempt on the Montfort lands came to nothing and from 1478, once Edward IV had taken over Clarence's lands and local political leadership, Simon found his wings severely clipped. He remained a pivotal figure in local society and politics and a consistent local office holder but he no longer dared to try to create an independent power base. The return and pardon in 1474 of Edmund, who was restored to a single Mountford manor (Remenham, Berkshire), were also incentives to good behaviour. Like most Warwickshire gentry, Simon kept his head well down under Richard III and, despite the reversal of Edmund's attainder after Henry VII's victory in 1485, Simon had no difficulty in being accepted as a loyal subject and local officer and indeed was present at the creation of the future Henry VIII as duke of York in 1494. 
As the politics of Warwickshire and the counties to the north became ever more disturbed from 1487, however, Simon found it increasingly difficult to hold his own in local affairs. Unlike several of the other more prominent gentry of north Warwickshire and the north midlands, he was a law-abiding member of the local official establishment, most of whom came from the south of the county. Growing tension between the more orderly south Warwickshire gentry, most of them not favoured by the king, and the disorderly north Warwickshire and north-midlands gentry, many of whom were close to the king, led to a confrontation at the sessions of the peace in 1494, in which Simon was actively involved, standing up for the south against the north. These developments may lie behind Simon's implication in the alleged treason plot on behalf of Perkin Warbeck in January 1495 and his execution in February. Although the Henry Mountford who was part of Warbeck's invasion force later that year was probably Simon's son, and Simon may have viewed with foreboding his own alienation from his immediate neighbours and proximity of his half-uncle Edmund to the king, it would have been uncharacteristic of him to have committed treason after such a sure-footed tread through decades of political turmoil. His execution may simply have been the king's exasperated response to the turmoil in the midlands, especially since the worst offenders were people whose importance to him was such that he could not touch them. Simon's confiscated lands were divided among Simon Digby, the earl of Kildare, and Henry VII's close aide, Reynold Bray, who also succeeded to Edmund's manor of Remenham when Edmund died, apparently unmarried, in 1494. Although Simon's heir, Thomas, was partially restored in 1504, Coleshill remained with the Digbys; the family never reattained its former eminence and disposed of its remaining Warwickshire estates in the early seventeenth century. From the time at which they acquired the Peche lands, the Mountfords were an immense presence in the political life of Warwickshire; whether this was used for good or ill depended largely on the ability of the earls of Warwick and, from 1478, of the king, but from the 1460s Simon may be seen as the harbinger of that independent gentry power which arguably began to emerge in England during the political crises of the fifteenth century. 
The family owned the advowson at Ilmington, one of their Warwickshire manors, and sometimes used it for sons who entered the church, for example Baldwin's full brother, Richard. But their main religious interest was at Coleshill. William's projected chantry there came to nothing, probably because of the prolonged dispute following his death and because Baldwin's entering the church was thought sufficient for the family souls, but family members may well have been responsible for additions to the church. The surviving evidence suggests that, although careful 'rentiers', the Mountfords tended not to exploit other sources of profit. Indeed their wealth, sufficient to set up cadet branches in nearly every generation, ensured that, even in periods of family feuding, no more than careful management was necessary. The family arms were bend of ten pieces or and azure. 


@@@@@


doc= 63906


Mountford family (per. c.1370-1495), gentry, of late medieval Warwickshire, was descended from Sir John Mountford, an illegitimate son of Peter, third Baron Montfort of Beaudesert, Warwickshire, who died 'c'.1369 without any direct legitimate heirs, and Laura Ullenhall. To the four manors his father diverted to him from the legitimate line Sir John was able to add another three by his marriage to Joan, heir of Clinton of Coleshill. This large and valuable north Warwickshire manor became the centre of an estate located primarily in that region. John's son, Baldwin Mountford (d. 1386), married Margaret, daughter of a neighbour, John, Baron Clinton of Maxstoke. By 1384 he was in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, the lord of Kenilworth in central Warwickshire, and he died in Spain on Gaunt's service. The early death, about 1394, of his elder son, John, meant that his effective heir was his second son, Sir William Mountford (d. 1452). Both sons were in turn under the guardianship of Richard II's henchman William Bagot but William seems to have avoided his guardian's difficulties in 1399 and by 1407 had made the marriage that took the family into the front rank of the Warwickshire gentry and brought the last of their major land acquisitions. This match, with Margaret, sole heir of Sir John Peche, brought him a further ten Warwickshire manors, mostly in the central and south-eastern parts of the county, and made him its single greatest gentry landowner, worth at least $300 a year in 1417. But even more important in making the family exceptionally influential in Warwickshire was the fact that, unusually, most of its lands were concentrated in this county. 
William's early career, however, was marked by a certain amount of unruliness and some difficulties in securing his inheritance. Notably, he became engaged in prolonged litigation for parts of the Montfort of Beaudesert estate, a dispute that came to a head under Henry V. That it was resolved in 1417 by compromise was due largely to the firm national control of Henry V and local control of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick. The Mountfords had already had some more tenuous links with the earls but, after an earlier association with William, Lord Astley, of Astley in north Warwickshire, William Mountford became Beauchamp's close associate. He served in his retinue in France in 1415 and again in 1417-21 (he was knighted during this campaign), 1421-2, 1430-31, and 1437-9. At home he was said to be the earl's 'chief counsellor', receiving the large annuity of 40 marks, and was one of the pivotal figures in the powerful network focused on Beauchamp that knitted Warwickshire together during this period. His links with Beauchamp account for his offices in the county, the first of the family to be consistently among the official elite. He held all the major local offices and was appointed the earl's deputy in his Worcestershire shrievalty. During this period he was able to establish his eldest son, Sir Baldwin Mountford (c.1412-1474/5), at the Peche manor of Hampton in Arden and marry him to the sister of Sir Richard Vernon of Haddon, a leading Derbyshire landowner ['see under 'Vernon family]. 
After Warwick's death in 1439 Sir William Mountford was one of several custodians of the Warwick lands during the minority of the earl's son Henry. The others included members of Henry VI's household and, through these, Mountford acquired links to the court. These he proposed to exploit to disinherit his family by his first wife in favour of the sons of his second wife, Joan, daughter of William Alderwyche and widow of William Brokesby. Sir Edmund Mountford (d. 1494), the eldest son of the second marriage, was in France with his father in 1438, an esquire of the household by 1444, and MP for Warwickshire in 1447. Meanwhile Baldwin, a knight by 1437, received no royal favour and had to wait until 1449 for his first local office. By a series of miscalculations, the new earl of Warwick, Richard Neville, who succeeded Henry's infant daughter in 1449, alienated William and Edmund, with the result that these two looked for protection to Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham (who had bought the Clinton property at Maxstoke in 1438), while Baldwin looked to Warwick. After William's death in 1452 the Mountford dispute became increasingly central to Warwickshire politics, helping to cause the breach between Warwick and the royal court -- in which Edmund was now an influential figure -- and becoming the focal point of the struggle for control of the county between Warwick and Buckingham. After Queen Margaret's coup in late 1456 Edmund was able to strike and he forced a series of releases from Baldwin and Baldwin's eldest son, Sir Simon Mountford (d. 1495). However, even with the royal court at Coventry, it seems that Edmund could not establish himself as legitimate heir in the eyes of the Warwickshire gentry, who still preferred Baldwin as an associate. Edmund, who was a knight by mid-1459, remained conspicuously loyal to Henry VI, allegedly sheltering him at Coleshill after the battle of Blore Heath. He was attainted, went into exile with the Lancastrian royal family after the battle of Towton in 1461, and continued to fight for them until he left permanently for France with Queen Margaret in 1464. 
The Yorkist accession gave outright victory to the senior line. Sir Baldwin immediately entered the church, styling himself thereafter 'knight and priest', and took almost no further part in worldly affairs. Simon, who had been knighted by 1461, and had been retained by Warwick in 1456-7, should by rights have succeeded to his grandfather's position in the Warwick affinity. However, although his tenure of local office and links with other members of the affinity in the early 1460s suggested that this was to be the case, he soon contrived to fall out with Warwick. While the earl was mostly away on the king's business, Simon gathered to himself a group of dissidents within the Warwick affinity, some of them in dispute with close servants of the earl. Simon's influence spread southwards through the county. As it did so, he found the marriage alliance made in the 1450s with the daughter of Sir Richard Verney of Compton Verney in south Warwickshire, himself an adept exploiter of discord among local nobles, especially useful. In 1465 the rising levels of tension climaxed in an affray in which a servant of one of Warwick's closest followers was killed. Warwick, just back from the north with the captive Henry VI, had already removed Simon from the commission of the peace and the earl was soon in Warwickshire as head of an oyer and terminer commission into the affair. But he remained largely ineffectual in Warwickshire and deteriorating relations with the king soon forced him to come to terms with the Warwickshire dissidents. Even this did not prevent Simon's taking William Hastings's fee in 1469-70 and fighting for Edward IV at Tewkesbury. Indeed, that Edmund still had hopes of returning with the restored Henry VI and recovering the Mountford estates was a strong incentive to Simon to stick with the Yorkists. 
Under the duke of Clarence, who succeeded to the Warwick lands in 1471, Simon repeated the 'cuckoo in the nest' pattern but on a grander scale. Emboldened by Clarence's failure to establish effective lordship in the midlands, Simon began to act as a major local political force. The royal grant of the constableship of Kenilworth Castle in 1475 and further efforts to secure the rest of the Montfort lands in 1476 indicate the scope of his ambitions. In 1475 he went to France on Edward IV's expedition and his indenting for sixty-five fighting men reveals the sort of power he had at his disposal. But his attempt on the Montfort lands came to nothing and from 1478, once Edward IV had taken over Clarence's lands and local political leadership, Simon found his wings severely clipped. He remained a pivotal figure in local society and politics and a consistent local office holder but he no longer dared to try to create an independent power base. The return and pardon in 1474 of Edmund, who was restored to a single Mountford manor (Remenham, Berkshire), were also incentives to good behaviour. Like most Warwickshire gentry, Simon kept his head well down under Richard III and, despite the reversal of Edmund's attainder after Henry VII's victory in 1485, Simon had no difficulty in being accepted as a loyal subject and local officer and indeed was present at the creation of the future Henry VIII as duke of York in 1494. 
As the politics of Warwickshire and the counties to the north became ever more disturbed from 1487, however, Simon found it increasingly difficult to hold his own in local affairs. Unlike several of the other more prominent gentry of north Warwickshire and the north midlands, he was a law-abiding member of the local official establishment, most of whom came from the south of the county. Growing tension between the more orderly south Warwickshire gentry, most of them not favoured by the king, and the disorderly north Warwickshire and north-midlands gentry, many of whom were close to the king, led to a confrontation at the sessions of the peace in 1494, in which Simon was actively involved, standing up for the south against the north. These developments may lie behind Simon's implication in the alleged treason plot on behalf of Perkin Warbeck in January 1495 and his execution in February. Although the Henry Mountford who was part of Warbeck's invasion force later that year was probably Simon's son, and Simon may have viewed with foreboding his own alienation from his immediate neighbours and proximity of his half-uncle Edmund to the king, it would have been uncharacteristic of him to have committed treason after such a sure-footed tread through decades of political turmoil. His execution may simply have been the king's exasperated response to the turmoil in the midlands, especially since the worst offenders were people whose importance to him was such that he could not touch them. Simon's confiscated lands were divided among Simon Digby, the earl of Kildare, and Henry VII's close aide, Reynold Bray, who also succeeded to Edmund's manor of Remenham when Edmund died, apparently unmarried, in 1494. Although Simon's heir, Thomas, was partially restored in 1504, Coleshill remained with the Digbys; the family never reattained its former eminence and disposed of its remaining Warwickshire estates in the early seventeenth century. From the time at which they acquired the Peche lands, the Mountfords were an immense presence in the political life of Warwickshire; whether this was used for good or ill depended largely on the ability of the earls of Warwick and, from 1478, of the king, but from the 1460s Simon may be seen as the harbinger of that independent gentry power which arguably began to emerge in England during the political crises of the fifteenth century. 
The family owned the advowson at Ilmington, one of their Warwickshire manors, and sometimes used it for sons who entered the church, for example Baldwin's full brother, Richard. But their main religious interest was at Coleshill. William's projected chantry there came to nothing, probably because of the prolonged dispute following his death and because Baldwin's entering the church was thought sufficient for the family souls, but family members may well have been responsible for additions to the church. The surviving evidence suggests that, although careful 'rentiers', the Mountfords tended not to exploit other sources of profit. Indeed their wealth, sufficient to set up cadet branches in nearly every generation, ensured that, even in periods of family feuding, no more than careful management was necessary. The family arms were bend of ten pieces or and azure. 


@@@@@


doc= 63907


Mountford family (per. c.1370-1495), gentry, of late medieval Warwickshire, was descended from Sir John Mountford, an illegitimate son of Peter, third Baron Montfort of Beaudesert, Warwickshire, who died 'c'.1369 without any direct legitimate heirs, and Laura Ullenhall. To the four manors his father diverted to him from the legitimate line Sir John was able to add another three by his marriage to Joan, heir of Clinton of Coleshill. This large and valuable north Warwickshire manor became the centre of an estate located primarily in that region. John's son, Baldwin Mountford (d. 1386), married Margaret, daughter of a neighbour, John, Baron Clinton of Maxstoke. By 1384 he was in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, the lord of Kenilworth in central Warwickshire, and he died in Spain on Gaunt's service. The early death, about 1394, of his elder son, John, meant that his effective heir was his second son, Sir William Mountford (d. 1452). Both sons were in turn under the guardianship of Richard II's henchman William Bagot but William seems to have avoided his guardian's difficulties in 1399 and by 1407 had made the marriage that took the family into the front rank of the Warwickshire gentry and brought the last of their major land acquisitions. This match, with Margaret, sole heir of Sir John Peche, brought him a further ten Warwickshire manors, mostly in the central and south-eastern parts of the county, and made him its single greatest gentry landowner, worth at least $300 a year in 1417. But even more important in making the family exceptionally influential in Warwickshire was the fact that, unusually, most of its lands were concentrated in this county. 
William's early career, however, was marked by a certain amount of unruliness and some difficulties in securing his inheritance. Notably, he became engaged in prolonged litigation for parts of the Montfort of Beaudesert estate, a dispute that came to a head under Henry V. That it was resolved in 1417 by compromise was due largely to the firm national control of Henry V and local control of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick. The Mountfords had already had some more tenuous links with the earls but, after an earlier association with William, Lord Astley, of Astley in north Warwickshire, William Mountford became Beauchamp's close associate. He served in his retinue in France in 1415 and again in 1417-21 (he was knighted during this campaign), 1421-2, 1430-31, and 1437-9. At home he was said to be the earl's 'chief counsellor', receiving the large annuity of 40 marks, and was one of the pivotal figures in the powerful network focused on Beauchamp that knitted Warwickshire together during this period. His links with Beauchamp account for his offices in the county, the first of the family to be consistently among the official elite. He held all the major local offices and was appointed the earl's deputy in his Worcestershire shrievalty. During this period he was able to establish his eldest son, Sir Baldwin Mountford (c.1412-1474/5), at the Peche manor of Hampton in Arden and marry him to the sister of Sir Richard Vernon of Haddon, a leading Derbyshire landowner ['see under 'Vernon family]. 
After Warwick's death in 1439 Sir William Mountford was one of several custodians of the Warwick lands during the minority of the earl's son Henry. The others included members of Henry VI's household and, through these, Mountford acquired links to the court. These he proposed to exploit to disinherit his family by his first wife in favour of the sons of his second wife, Joan, daughter of William Alderwyche and widow of William Brokesby. Sir Edmund Mountford (d. 1494), the eldest son of the second marriage, was in France with his father in 1438, an esquire of the household by 1444, and MP for Warwickshire in 1447. Meanwhile Baldwin, a knight by 1437, received no royal favour and had to wait until 1449 for his first local office. By a series of miscalculations, the new earl of Warwick, Richard Neville, who succeeded Henry's infant daughter in 1449, alienated William and Edmund, with the result that these two looked for protection to Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham (who had bought the Clinton property at Maxstoke in 1438), while Baldwin looked to Warwick. After William's death in 1452 the Mountford dispute became increasingly central to Warwickshire politics, helping to cause the breach between Warwick and the royal court -- in which Edmund was now an influential figure -- and becoming the focal point of the struggle for control of the county between Warwick and Buckingham. After Queen Margaret's coup in late 1456 Edmund was able to strike and he forced a series of releases from Baldwin and Baldwin's eldest son, Sir Simon Mountford (d. 1495). However, even with the royal court at Coventry, it seems that Edmund could not establish himself as legitimate heir in the eyes of the Warwickshire gentry, who still preferred Baldwin as an associate. Edmund, who was a knight by mid-1459, remained conspicuously loyal to Henry VI, allegedly sheltering him at Coleshill after the battle of Blore Heath. He was attainted, went into exile with the Lancastrian royal family after the battle of Towton in 1461, and continued to fight for them until he left permanently for France with Queen Margaret in 1464. 
The Yorkist accession gave outright victory to the senior line. Sir Baldwin immediately entered the church, styling himself thereafter 'knight and priest', and took almost no further part in worldly affairs. Simon, who had been knighted by 1461, and had been retained by Warwick in 1456-7, should by rights have succeeded to his grandfather's position in the Warwick affinity. However, although his tenure of local office and links with other members of the affinity in the early 1460s suggested that this was to be the case, he soon contrived to fall out with Warwick. While the earl was mostly away on the king's business, Simon gathered to himself a group of dissidents within the Warwick affinity, some of them in dispute with close servants of the earl. Simon's influence spread southwards through the county. As it did so, he found the marriage alliance made in the 1450s with the daughter of Sir Richard Verney of Compton Verney in south Warwickshire, himself an adept exploiter of discord among local nobles, especially useful. In 1465 the rising levels of tension climaxed in an affray in which a servant of one of Warwick's closest followers was killed. Warwick, just back from the north with the captive Henry VI, had already removed Simon from the commission of the peace and the earl was soon in Warwickshire as head of an oyer and terminer commission into the affair. But he remained largely ineffectual in Warwickshire and deteriorating relations with the king soon forced him to come to terms with the Warwickshire dissidents. Even this did not prevent Simon's taking William Hastings's fee in 1469-70 and fighting for Edward IV at Tewkesbury. Indeed, that Edmund still had hopes of returning with the restored Henry VI and recovering the Mountford estates was a strong incentive to Simon to stick with the Yorkists. 
Under the duke of Clarence, who succeeded to the Warwick lands in 1471, Simon repeated the 'cuckoo in the nest' pattern but on a grander scale. Emboldened by Clarence's failure to establish effective lordship in the midlands, Simon began to act as a major local political force. The royal grant of the constableship of Kenilworth Castle in 1475 and further efforts to secure the rest of the Montfort lands in 1476 indicate the scope of his ambitions. In 1475 he went to France on Edward IV's expedition and his indenting for sixty-five fighting men reveals the sort of power he had at his disposal. But his attempt on the Montfort lands came to nothing and from 1478, once Edward IV had taken over Clarence's lands and local political leadership, Simon found his wings severely clipped. He remained a pivotal figure in local society and politics and a consistent local office holder but he no longer dared to try to create an independent power base. The return and pardon in 1474 of Edmund, who was restored to a single Mountford manor (Remenham, Berkshire), were also incentives to good behaviour. Like most Warwickshire gentry, Simon kept his head well down under Richard III and, despite the reversal of Edmund's attainder after Henry VII's victory in 1485, Simon had no difficulty in being accepted as a loyal subject and local officer and indeed was present at the creation of the future Henry VIII as duke of York in 1494. 
As the politics of Warwickshire and the counties to the north became ever more disturbed from 1487, however, Simon found it increasingly difficult to hold his own in local affairs. Unlike several of the other more prominent gentry of north Warwickshire and the north midlands, he was a law-abiding member of the local official establishment, most of whom came from the south of the county. Growing tension between the more orderly south Warwickshire gentry, most of them not favoured by the king, and the disorderly north Warwickshire and north-midlands gentry, many of whom were close to the king, led to a confrontation at the sessions of the peace in 1494, in which Simon was actively involved, standing up for the south against the north. These developments may lie behind Simon's implication in the alleged treason plot on behalf of Perkin Warbeck in January 1495 and his execution in February. Although the Henry Mountford who was part of Warbeck's invasion force later that year was probably Simon's son, and Simon may have viewed with foreboding his own alienation from his immediate neighbours and proximity of his half-uncle Edmund to the king, it would have been uncharacteristic of him to have committed treason after such a sure-footed tread through decades of political turmoil. His execution may simply have been the king's exasperated response to the turmoil in the midlands, especially since the worst offenders were people whose importance to him was such that he could not touch them. Simon's confiscated lands were divided among Simon Digby, the earl of Kildare, and Henry VII's close aide, Reynold Bray, who also succeeded to Edmund's manor of Remenham when Edmund died, apparently unmarried, in 1494. Although Simon's heir, Thomas, was partially restored in 1504, Coleshill remained with the Digbys; the family never reattained its former eminence and disposed of its remaining Warwickshire estates in the early seventeenth century. From the time at which they acquired the Peche lands, the Mountfords were an immense presence in the political life of Warwickshire; whether this was used for good or ill depended largely on the ability of the earls of Warwick and, from 1478, of the king, but from the 1460s Simon may be seen as the harbinger of that independent gentry power which arguably began to emerge in England during the political crises of the fifteenth century. 
The family owned the advowson at Ilmington, one of their Warwickshire manors, and sometimes used it for sons who entered the church, for example Baldwin's full brother, Richard. But their main religious interest was at Coleshill. William's projected chantry there came to nothing, probably because of the prolonged dispute following his death and because Baldwin's entering the church was thought sufficient for the family souls, but family members may well have been responsible for additions to the church. The surviving evidence suggests that, although careful 'rentiers', the Mountfords tended not to exploit other sources of profit. Indeed their wealth, sufficient to set up cadet branches in nearly every generation, ensured that, even in periods of family feuding, no more than careful management was necessary. The family arms were bend of ten pieces or and azure. 


@@@@@


doc= 63908


Mountford family (per. c.1370-1495), gentry, of late medieval Warwickshire, was descended from Sir John Mountford, an illegitimate son of Peter, third Baron Montfort of Beaudesert, Warwickshire, who died 'c'.1369 without any direct legitimate heirs, and Laura Ullenhall. To the four manors his father diverted to him from the legitimate line Sir John was able to add another three by his marriage to Joan, heir of Clinton of Coleshill. This large and valuable north Warwickshire manor became the centre of an estate located primarily in that region. John's son, Baldwin Mountford (d. 1386), married Margaret, daughter of a neighbour, John, Baron Clinton of Maxstoke. By 1384 he was in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, the lord of Kenilworth in central Warwickshire, and he died in Spain on Gaunt's service. The early death, about 1394, of his elder son, John, meant that his effective heir was his second son, Sir William Mountford (d. 1452). Both sons were in turn under the guardianship of Richard II's henchman William Bagot but William seems to have avoided his guardian's difficulties in 1399 and by 1407 had made the marriage that took the family into the front rank of the Warwickshire gentry and brought the last of their major land acquisitions. This match, with Margaret, sole heir of Sir John Peche, brought him a further ten Warwickshire manors, mostly in the central and south-eastern parts of the county, and made him its single greatest gentry landowner, worth at least $300 a year in 1417. But even more important in making the family exceptionally influential in Warwickshire was the fact that, unusually, most of its lands were concentrated in this county. 
William's early career, however, was marked by a certain amount of unruliness and some difficulties in securing his inheritance. Notably, he became engaged in prolonged litigation for parts of the Montfort of Beaudesert estate, a dispute that came to a head under Henry V. That it was resolved in 1417 by compromise was due largely to the firm national control of Henry V and local control of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick. The Mountfords had already had some more tenuous links with the earls but, after an earlier association with William, Lord Astley, of Astley in north Warwickshire, William Mountford became Beauchamp's close associate. He served in his retinue in France in 1415 and again in 1417-21 (he was knighted during this campaign), 1421-2, 1430-31, and 1437-9. At home he was said to be the earl's 'chief counsellor', receiving the large annuity of 40 marks, and was one of the pivotal figures in the powerful network focused on Beauchamp that knitted Warwickshire together during this period. His links with Beauchamp account for his offices in the county, the first of the family to be consistently among the official elite. He held all the major local offices and was appointed the earl's deputy in his Worcestershire shrievalty. During this period he was able to establish his eldest son, Sir Baldwin Mountford (c.1412-1474/5), at the Peche manor of Hampton in Arden and marry him to the sister of Sir Richard Vernon of Haddon, a leading Derbyshire landowner ['see under 'Vernon family]. 
After Warwick's death in 1439 Sir William Mountford was one of several custodians of the Warwick lands during the minority of the earl's son Henry. The others included members of Henry VI's household and, through these, Mountford acquired links to the court. These he proposed to exploit to disinherit his family by his first wife in favour of the sons of his second wife, Joan, daughter of William Alderwyche and widow of William Brokesby. Sir Edmund Mountford (d. 1494), the eldest son of the second marriage, was in France with his father in 1438, an esquire of the household by 1444, and MP for Warwickshire in 1447. Meanwhile Baldwin, a knight by 1437, received no royal favour and had to wait until 1449 for his first local office. By a series of miscalculations, the new earl of Warwick, Richard Neville, who succeeded Henry's infant daughter in 1449, alienated William and Edmund, with the result that these two looked for protection to Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham (who had bought the Clinton property at Maxstoke in 1438), while Baldwin looked to Warwick. After William's death in 1452 the Mountford dispute became increasingly central to Warwickshire politics, helping to cause the breach between Warwick and the royal court -- in which Edmund was now an influential figure -- and becoming the focal point of the struggle for control of the county between Warwick and Buckingham. After Queen Margaret's coup in late 1456 Edmund was able to strike and he forced a series of releases from Baldwin and Baldwin's eldest son, Sir Simon Mountford (d. 1495). However, even with the royal court at Coventry, it seems that Edmund could not establish himself as legitimate heir in the eyes of the Warwickshire gentry, who still preferred Baldwin as an associate. Edmund, who was a knight by mid-1459, remained conspicuously loyal to Henry VI, allegedly sheltering him at Coleshill after the battle of Blore Heath. He was attainted, went into exile with the Lancastrian royal family after the battle of Towton in 1461, and continued to fight for them until he left permanently for France with Queen Margaret in 1464. 
The Yorkist accession gave outright victory to the senior line. Sir Baldwin immediately entered the church, styling himself thereafter 'knight and priest', and took almost no further part in worldly affairs. Simon, who had been knighted by 1461, and had been retained by Warwick in 1456-7, should by rights have succeeded to his grandfather's position in the Warwick affinity. However, although his tenure of local office and links with other members of the affinity in the early 1460s suggested that this was to be the case, he soon contrived to fall out with Warwick. While the earl was mostly away on the king's business, Simon gathered to himself a group of dissidents within the Warwick affinity, some of them in dispute with close servants of the earl. Simon's influence spread southwards through the county. As it did so, he found the marriage alliance made in the 1450s with the daughter of Sir Richard Verney of Compton Verney in south Warwickshire, himself an adept exploiter of discord among local nobles, especially useful. In 1465 the rising levels of tension climaxed in an affray in which a servant of one of Warwick's closest followers was killed. Warwick, just back from the north with the captive Henry VI, had already removed Simon from the commission of the peace and the earl was soon in Warwickshire as head of an oyer and terminer commission into the affair. But he remained largely ineffectual in Warwickshire and deteriorating relations with the king soon forced him to come to terms with the Warwickshire dissidents. Even this did not prevent Simon's taking William Hastings's fee in 1469-70 and fighting for Edward IV at Tewkesbury. Indeed, that Edmund still had hopes of returning with the restored Henry VI and recovering the Mountford estates was a strong incentive to Simon to stick with the Yorkists. 
Under the duke of Clarence, who succeeded to the Warwick lands in 1471, Simon repeated the 'cuckoo in the nest' pattern but on a grander scale. Emboldened by Clarence's failure to establish effective lordship in the midlands, Simon began to act as a major local political force. The royal grant of the constableship of Kenilworth Castle in 1475 and further efforts to secure the rest of the Montfort lands in 1476 indicate the scope of his ambitions. In 1475 he went to France on Edward IV's expedition and his indenting for sixty-five fighting men reveals the sort of power he had at his disposal. But his attempt on the Montfort lands came to nothing and from 1478, once Edward IV had taken over Clarence's lands and local political leadership, Simon found his wings severely clipped. He remained a pivotal figure in local society and politics and a consistent local office holder but he no longer dared to try to create an independent power base. The return and pardon in 1474 of Edmund, who was restored to a single Mountford manor (Remenham, Berkshire), were also incentives to good behaviour. Like most Warwickshire gentry, Simon kept his head well down under Richard III and, despite the reversal of Edmund's attainder after Henry VII's victory in 1485, Simon had no difficulty in being accepted as a loyal subject and local officer and indeed was present at the creation of the future Henry VIII as duke of York in 1494. 
As the politics of Warwickshire and the counties to the north became ever more disturbed from 1487, however, Simon found it increasingly difficult to hold his own in local affairs. Unlike several of the other more prominent gentry of north Warwickshire and the north midlands, he was a law-abiding member of the local official establishment, most of whom came from the south of the county. Growing tension between the more orderly south Warwickshire gentry, most of them not favoured by the king, and the disorderly north Warwickshire and north-midlands gentry, many of whom were close to the king, led to a confrontation at the sessions of the peace in 1494, in which Simon was actively involved, standing up for the south against the north. These developments may lie behind Simon's implication in the alleged treason plot on behalf of Perkin Warbeck in January 1495 and his execution in February. Although the Henry Mountford who was part of Warbeck's invasion force later that year was probably Simon's son, and Simon may have viewed with foreboding his own alienation from his immediate neighbours and proximity of his half-uncle Edmund to the king, it would have been uncharacteristic of him to have committed treason after such a sure-footed tread through decades of political turmoil. His execution may simply have been the king's exasperated response to the turmoil in the midlands, especially since the worst offenders were people whose importance to him was such that he could not touch them. Simon's confiscated lands were divided among Simon Digby, the earl of Kildare, and Henry VII's close aide, Reynold Bray, who also succeeded to Edmund's manor of Remenham when Edmund died, apparently unmarried, in 1494. Although Simon's heir, Thomas, was partially restored in 1504, Coleshill remained with the Digbys; the family never reattained its former eminence and disposed of its remaining Warwickshire estates in the early seventeenth century. From the time at which they acquired the Peche lands, the Mountfords were an immense presence in the political life of Warwickshire; whether this was used for good or ill depended largely on the ability of the earls of Warwick and, from 1478, of the king, but from the 1460s Simon may be seen as the harbinger of that independent gentry power which arguably began to emerge in England during the political crises of the fifteenth century. 
The family owned the advowson at Ilmington, one of their Warwickshire manors, and sometimes used it for sons who entered the church, for example Baldwin's full brother, Richard. But their main religious interest was at Coleshill. William's projected chantry there came to nothing, probably because of the prolonged dispute following his death and because Baldwin's entering the church was thought sufficient for the family souls, but family members may well have been responsible for additions to the church. The surviving evidence suggests that, although careful 'rentiers', the Mountfords tended not to exploit other sources of profit. Indeed their wealth, sufficient to set up cadet branches in nearly every generation, ensured that, even in periods of family feuding, no more than careful management was necessary. The family arms were bend of ten pieces or and azure. 


@@@@@


doc= 63914


Throgmorton family (per. 1409-1518), gentry, held land at Fladbury in Throckmorton, Worcestershire, from the late twelfth century. They remained, however, no more than farmers from the bishopric of Worcester until the marriage in 1409 of John Throgmorton (d. 1445) to the coheir of Guy Spine of Coughton, west Warwickshire, greatly enhanced the family's standing. By this match the Throgmortons acquired the manor of Coughton, their first fee simple estate and their first Warwickshire property, and further land in Worcestershire. For much of the fifteenth century the family's history was bound up with that of the earls of Warwick, whose estate, like the Throgmortons', was centred on Warwickshire and Worcestershire. John's father, Thomas (I) Throgmorton (d. 1411), and Thomas's father-in-law, Alexander Besford of Besford, Worcestershire, had both served Thomas Beauchamp, the appellant earl of Warwick, as had John's father-in-law, Guy Spine, and it may well have been the Warwick connection that secured the Spine match for John. But none of the family was ever to be as close or important to the earls as John was to Richard Beauchamp from 1416 to the earl's death in 1439. John's son and heir, Thomas (II) Throgmorton (d. 1472), was a life annuitant and officer of Richard Neville, the eventual heir to the Warwick earldom, but he retained the connections with lords Sudeley and Beauchamp of Powick that his father had forged during the period of Beauchamp minorities from 1439 to 1449, while Thomas (II)'s son and heir, Sir Robert Throgmorton (c.1451-1518), never formalized ties with George, duke of Clarence, the last effective earl of Warwick. While none of John's successors seems to have had the professional legal training that enabled John to found the family's fortunes, both Thomas (II) and Robert apparently knew enough law to be valued as agents by their noble, clerical, and gentry neighbours. In particular, like other associates of the earls of Warwick from the west midlands, members of the family acted as officials to the bishops of Worcester for much of the century. 
Whether close or not to the earls of Warwick, the Throgmortons played a central role in the networks of west-midland gentry which, although they had their own internal dynamics, tended to look to the earls for leadership and then to the earls' successors, the crown. Throgmortons often intermarried with other midland families, like Russell, Gifford, Knightley, and Peyto. Thomas (II) married Margaret, daughter and heir of Robert Onley of Birdingbury, Warwickshire, and Weston Underwood, Buckinghamshire, and, although Robert married Katherine, daughter of William Marrowe, alderman of London, it is significant that Katherine's brother had already married the heiress of another Warwickshire family. 
The family was buying land all through the fifteenth century. John's several purchases included the Warwickshire manor of Spernall in 1441-3, and he was able to secure recognition of the title to Throckmorton as a hereditary fee-farm by the bishop in 1418. Thomas (II)'s most notable purchase was the other half of Coughton from the coheirs, the Tracys, in 1449. By Thomas's death the family owned property in a large number of places in Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, and Buckinghamshire. Although Robert Onley outlived Thomas (II), Robert Throgmorton was eventually to inherit the Onley estates. Despite the importance of Coughton in the family's rise, the greater part of the estate lay in Worcestershire and so, although Throgmortons held all the significant local offices, they tended to serve more often in Worcestershire than Warwickshire until the time of Robert. In 1474 Robert effected a rearrangement with his widowed mother of the lands willed to her for life by his father. By this, he transferred the weight of his interests to Warwickshire and it is no accident that he was the first of the family to serve the king predominantly in Warwickshire nor that he reputedly undertook the substantial rebuilding of Coughton which occurred in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. 
Despite the Throgmortons' high profile in local office and local politics, they contrived to remain largely unscathed by the traumas of fifteenth-century local and national politics. Chiefly this was because they were adept at keeping sufficiently broad connections with the local nobility to be able to find a bolt-hole in times of national trouble and because they were usually remarkably good at keeping out of local disputes in the periods of local disorder caused by weak kingship, ineffective noble leadership, or both. In the late 1450s, when the connection with the earl of Warwick was becoming dangerous, Thomas (II) managed to exploit his link to Sudeley and Beauchamp of Powick to keep in with those around Henry VI and was even made attorney to the prince of Wales in 1457. He was then able to use the Warwick connection to escape any vengeance from the triumphant Yorkists; by 1464 he had been restored to the Worcestershire commission of the peace and in 1465 became a JP in Warwickshire. He evaded official duty during the readeption, while his son managed to serve Edward IV, Richard III, and Henry VII as local officer in quick succession -- and was indeed Henry's first sheriff in Warwickshire. Characteristically avoiding more than a passing implication in the disputes which increasingly convulsed Warwickshire in the first ten years of Henry VII ['see 'Mountford family], Robert eventually became closer to the inner circles of Henry's court than almost any of his west midland neighbours. He was made KB at the creation of the duke of York in 1494 (the first of the family to be knighted), turned out for the king to resist Perkin Warbeck at Blackheath in 1497, and was the recipient of a certain amount of royal favour in the last decade of the reign. The obverse was that, from 1502, he was also caught up in Henry's notorious system of bonds and recognizances. Both the greater proximity to the king and the recognizances are partly attributable to the match made in 1501 for Robert's son and heir, George Throckmorton or Throgmorton, with Katherine, the heir apparent of Sir Nicholas Vaux, one of Henry's closer associates. It was a cadet branch, the Throgmortons of Haresfield, Gloucestershire, that lacked the political acumen of the main line: John (i), Thomas (II)'s younger brother, was executed after fighting for the Lancastrians at Mortimer's Cross in 1461, while John (i)'s son and heir, John (ii), fought for the Lancastrians at Tewkesbury but was later pardoned. 
The Throgmortons' religious dispositions followed the pattern of their political and official activities: concentration on Worcestershire until Robert and thereafter on Coughton. The family burials and chantry at Fladbury ['see 'Throgmorton, John] were complemented by the annuities for chantry priests that Thomas (II) and his widowed mother gave to Evesham and Pershore abbeys in 1448. Robert was probably the first of the family to wish to be buried at Coughton. The chancel of Coughton parish church was under reconstruction when he died and in his will he left precise instructions for the glazing of the east windows. The centrepiece of this detailed and fairly lavish will was a chantry in the church, which was to double as a school to teach the children of Robert's tenants. An elaborate tomb had been prepared for him in Coughton but he died in Rome on his way to the Holy Land. 
The Throgmortons have left little evidence of their estate management but enough to see that they were probably as careful in this as in their other enterprises. Although Thomas (I) bought a salt pit in Worcestershire in 1402 and Thomas (II) enclosed some pasture, the family seems to have operated a mainly 'rentier' economy for most of the century. It helped that, as valued officials of the bishops of Worcester, they were able to build up $240 of rent arrears to the bishopric between 1440 and 1470, nearly all of which was eventually cancelled. It was Robert who was apparently the first to exploit the growing market for wool in the later fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. The exchange with his mother gave him a compact estate, suitable for sheep farming; he added to it by further purchases and exchanges and enclosed pastures as well as woods and parkland. 
Throughout the century the Throgmortons evinced a combination of enterprise and circumspection more readily associated at this time with gentry families in the process of establishing themselves than with those that were already among the leaders of local society, as the family certainly was by the time of John's death. This explains why, unusually, they were able to continue their rise without set-back through three generations in a period that was politically dangerous and, until the late fifteenth century, economically unpromising. It was in the sixteenth century that they lost their ability to keep on the winning side: two sons of Robert, who had been with him in Rome at his death, died at the battle of Pavia in 1525; the family remained steadfastly Catholic after the Reformation and their seat of Coughton was sacked twice during the upheavals of the seventeenth century. Nevertheless, they continued owners of Coughton until the National Trust acquired the house in 1948. The Throgmorton arms were gules, a chevron argent, with three gimel bars sable thereon. 


@@@@@


doc= 63915


Throgmorton family (per. 1409-1518), gentry, held land at Fladbury in Throckmorton, Worcestershire, from the late twelfth century. They remained, however, no more than farmers from the bishopric of Worcester until the marriage in 1409 of John Throgmorton (d. 1445) to the coheir of Guy Spine of Coughton, west Warwickshire, greatly enhanced the family's standing. By this match the Throgmortons acquired the manor of Coughton, their first fee simple estate and their first Warwickshire property, and further land in Worcestershire. For much of the fifteenth century the family's history was bound up with that of the earls of Warwick, whose estate, like the Throgmortons', was centred on Warwickshire and Worcestershire. John's father, Thomas (I) Throgmorton (d. 1411), and Thomas's father-in-law, Alexander Besford of Besford, Worcestershire, had both served Thomas Beauchamp, the appellant earl of Warwick, as had John's father-in-law, Guy Spine, and it may well have been the Warwick connection that secured the Spine match for John. But none of the family was ever to be as close or important to the earls as John was to Richard Beauchamp from 1416 to the earl's death in 1439. John's son and heir, Thomas (II) Throgmorton (d. 1472), was a life annuitant and officer of Richard Neville, the eventual heir to the Warwick earldom, but he retained the connections with lords Sudeley and Beauchamp of Powick that his father had forged during the period of Beauchamp minorities from 1439 to 1449, while Thomas (II)'s son and heir, Sir Robert Throgmorton (c.1451-1518), never formalized ties with George, duke of Clarence, the last effective earl of Warwick. While none of John's successors seems to have had the professional legal training that enabled John to found the family's fortunes, both Thomas (II) and Robert apparently knew enough law to be valued as agents by their noble, clerical, and gentry neighbours. In particular, like other associates of the earls of Warwick from the west midlands, members of the family acted as officials to the bishops of Worcester for much of the century. 
Whether close or not to the earls of Warwick, the Throgmortons played a central role in the networks of west-midland gentry which, although they had their own internal dynamics, tended to look to the earls for leadership and then to the earls' successors, the crown. Throgmortons often intermarried with other midland families, like Russell, Gifford, Knightley, and Peyto. Thomas (II) married Margaret, daughter and heir of Robert Onley of Birdingbury, Warwickshire, and Weston Underwood, Buckinghamshire, and, although Robert married Katherine, daughter of William Marrowe, alderman of London, it is significant that Katherine's brother had already married the heiress of another Warwickshire family. 
The family was buying land all through the fifteenth century. John's several purchases included the Warwickshire manor of Spernall in 1441-3, and he was able to secure recognition of the title to Throckmorton as a hereditary fee-farm by the bishop in 1418. Thomas (II)'s most notable purchase was the other half of Coughton from the coheirs, the Tracys, in 1449. By Thomas's death the family owned property in a large number of places in Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, and Buckinghamshire. Although Robert Onley outlived Thomas (II), Robert Throgmorton was eventually to inherit the Onley estates. Despite the importance of Coughton in the family's rise, the greater part of the estate lay in Worcestershire and so, although Throgmortons held all the significant local offices, they tended to serve more often in Worcestershire than Warwickshire until the time of Robert. In 1474 Robert effected a rearrangement with his widowed mother of the lands willed to her for life by his father. By this, he transferred the weight of his interests to Warwickshire and it is no accident that he was the first of the family to serve the king predominantly in Warwickshire nor that he reputedly undertook the substantial rebuilding of Coughton which occurred in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. 
Despite the Throgmortons' high profile in local office and local politics, they contrived to remain largely unscathed by the traumas of fifteenth-century local and national politics. Chiefly this was because they were adept at keeping sufficiently broad connections with the local nobility to be able to find a bolt-hole in times of national trouble and because they were usually remarkably good at keeping out of local disputes in the periods of local disorder caused by weak kingship, ineffective noble leadership, or both. In the late 1450s, when the connection with the earl of Warwick was becoming dangerous, Thomas (II) managed to exploit his link to Sudeley and Beauchamp of Powick to keep in with those around Henry VI and was even made attorney to the prince of Wales in 1457. He was then able to use the Warwick connection to escape any vengeance from the triumphant Yorkists; by 1464 he had been restored to the Worcestershire commission of the peace and in 1465 became a JP in Warwickshire. He evaded official duty during the readeption, while his son managed to serve Edward IV, Richard III, and Henry VII as local officer in quick succession -- and was indeed Henry's first sheriff in Warwickshire. Characteristically avoiding more than a passing implication in the disputes which increasingly convulsed Warwickshire in the first ten years of Henry VII ['see 'Mountford family], Robert eventually became closer to the inner circles of Henry's court than almost any of his west midland neighbours. He was made KB at the creation of the duke of York in 1494 (the first of the family to be knighted), turned out for the king to resist Perkin Warbeck at Blackheath in 1497, and was the recipient of a certain amount of royal favour in the last decade of the reign. The obverse was that, from 1502, he was also caught up in Henry's notorious system of bonds and recognizances. Both the greater proximity to the king and the recognizances are partly attributable to the match made in 1501 for Robert's son and heir, George Throckmorton or Throgmorton, with Katherine, the heir apparent of Sir Nicholas Vaux, one of Henry's closer associates. It was a cadet branch, the Throgmortons of Haresfield, Gloucestershire, that lacked the political acumen of the main line: John (i), Thomas (II)'s younger brother, was executed after fighting for the Lancastrians at Mortimer's Cross in 1461, while John (i)'s son and heir, John (ii), fought for the Lancastrians at Tewkesbury but was later pardoned. 
The Throgmortons' religious dispositions followed the pattern of their political and official activities: concentration on Worcestershire until Robert and thereafter on Coughton. The family burials and chantry at Fladbury ['see 'Throgmorton, John] were complemented by the annuities for chantry priests that Thomas (II) and his widowed mother gave to Evesham and Pershore abbeys in 1448. Robert was probably the first of the family to wish to be buried at Coughton. The chancel of Coughton parish church was under reconstruction when he died and in his will he left precise instructions for the glazing of the east windows. The centrepiece of this detailed and fairly lavish will was a chantry in the church, which was to double as a school to teach the children of Robert's tenants. An elaborate tomb had been prepared for him in Coughton but he died in Rome on his way to the Holy Land. 
The Throgmortons have left little evidence of their estate management but enough to see that they were probably as careful in this as in their other enterprises. Although Thomas (I) bought a salt pit in Worcestershire in 1402 and Thomas (II) enclosed some pasture, the family seems to have operated a mainly 'rentier' economy for most of the century. It helped that, as valued officials of the bishops of Worcester, they were able to build up $240 of rent arrears to the bishopric between 1440 and 1470, nearly all of which was eventually cancelled. It was Robert who was apparently the first to exploit the growing market for wool in the later fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. The exchange with his mother gave him a compact estate, suitable for sheep farming; he added to it by further purchases and exchanges and enclosed pastures as well as woods and parkland. 
Throughout the century the Throgmortons evinced a combination of enterprise and circumspection more readily associated at this time with gentry families in the process of establishing themselves than with those that were already among the leaders of local society, as the family certainly was by the time of John's death. This explains why, unusually, they were able to continue their rise without set-back through three generations in a period that was politically dangerous and, until the late fifteenth century, economically unpromising. It was in the sixteenth century that they lost their ability to keep on the winning side: two sons of Robert, who had been with him in Rome at his death, died at the battle of Pavia in 1525; the family remained steadfastly Catholic after the Reformation and their seat of Coughton was sacked twice during the upheavals of the seventeenth century. Nevertheless, they continued owners of Coughton until the National Trust acquired the house in 1948. The Throgmorton arms were gules, a chevron argent, with three gimel bars sable thereon. 


@@@@@


doc= 63916


Throgmorton family (per. 1409-1518), gentry, held land at Fladbury in Throckmorton, Worcestershire, from the late twelfth century. They remained, however, no more than farmers from the bishopric of Worcester until the marriage in 1409 of John Throgmorton (d. 1445) to the coheir of Guy Spine of Coughton, west Warwickshire, greatly enhanced the family's standing. By this match the Throgmortons acquired the manor of Coughton, their first fee simple estate and their first Warwickshire property, and further land in Worcestershire. For much of the fifteenth century the family's history was bound up with that of the earls of Warwick, whose estate, like the Throgmortons', was centred on Warwickshire and Worcestershire. John's father, Thomas (I) Throgmorton (d. 1411), and Thomas's father-in-law, Alexander Besford of Besford, Worcestershire, had both served Thomas Beauchamp, the appellant earl of Warwick, as had John's father-in-law, Guy Spine, and it may well have been the Warwick connection that secured the Spine match for John. But none of the family was ever to be as close or important to the earls as John was to Richard Beauchamp from 1416 to the earl's death in 1439. John's son and heir, Thomas (II) Throgmorton (d. 1472), was a life annuitant and officer of Richard Neville, the eventual heir to the Warwick earldom, but he retained the connections with lords Sudeley and Beauchamp of Powick that his father had forged during the period of Beauchamp minorities from 1439 to 1449, while Thomas (II)'s son and heir, Sir Robert Throgmorton (c.1451-1518), never formalized ties with George, duke of Clarence, the last effective earl of Warwick. While none of John's successors seems to have had the professional legal training that enabled John to found the family's fortunes, both Thomas (II) and Robert apparently knew enough law to be valued as agents by their noble, clerical, and gentry neighbours. In particular, like other associates of the earls of Warwick from the west midlands, members of the family acted as officials to the bishops of Worcester for much of the century. 
Whether close or not to the earls of Warwick, the Throgmortons played a central role in the networks of west-midland gentry which, although they had their own internal dynamics, tended to look to the earls for leadership and then to the earls' successors, the crown. Throgmortons often intermarried with other midland families, like Russell, Gifford, Knightley, and Peyto. Thomas (II) married Margaret, daughter and heir of Robert Onley of Birdingbury, Warwickshire, and Weston Underwood, Buckinghamshire, and, although Robert married Katherine, daughter of William Marrowe, alderman of London, it is significant that Katherine's brother had already married the heiress of another Warwickshire family. 
The family was buying land all through the fifteenth century. John's several purchases included the Warwickshire manor of Spernall in 1441-3, and he was able to secure recognition of the title to Throckmorton as a hereditary fee-farm by the bishop in 1418. Thomas (II)'s most notable purchase was the other half of Coughton from the coheirs, the Tracys, in 1449. By Thomas's death the family owned property in a large number of places in Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, and Buckinghamshire. Although Robert Onley outlived Thomas (II), Robert Throgmorton was eventually to inherit the Onley estates. Despite the importance of Coughton in the family's rise, the greater part of the estate lay in Worcestershire and so, although Throgmortons held all the significant local offices, they tended to serve more often in Worcestershire than Warwickshire until the time of Robert. In 1474 Robert effected a rearrangement with his widowed mother of the lands willed to her for life by his father. By this, he transferred the weight of his interests to Warwickshire and it is no accident that he was the first of the family to serve the king predominantly in Warwickshire nor that he reputedly undertook the substantial rebuilding of Coughton which occurred in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. 
Despite the Throgmortons' high profile in local office and local politics, they contrived to remain largely unscathed by the traumas of fifteenth-century local and national politics. Chiefly this was because they were adept at keeping sufficiently broad connections with the local nobility to be able to find a bolt-hole in times of national trouble and because they were usually remarkably good at keeping out of local disputes in the periods of local disorder caused by weak kingship, ineffective noble leadership, or both. In the late 1450s, when the connection with the earl of Warwick was becoming dangerous, Thomas (II) managed to exploit his link to Sudeley and Beauchamp of Powick to keep in with those around Henry VI and was even made attorney to the prince of Wales in 1457. He was then able to use the Warwick connection to escape any vengeance from the triumphant Yorkists; by 1464 he had been restored to the Worcestershire commission of the peace and in 1465 became a JP in Warwickshire. He evaded official duty during the readeption, while his son managed to serve Edward IV, Richard III, and Henry VII as local officer in quick succession -- and was indeed Henry's first sheriff in Warwickshire. Characteristically avoiding more than a passing implication in the disputes which increasingly convulsed Warwickshire in the first ten years of Henry VII ['see 'Mountford family], Robert eventually became closer to the inner circles of Henry's court than almost any of his west midland neighbours. He was made KB at the creation of the duke of York in 1494 (the first of the family to be knighted), turned out for the king to resist Perkin Warbeck at Blackheath in 1497, and was the recipient of a certain amount of royal favour in the last decade of the reign. The obverse was that, from 1502, he was also caught up in Henry's notorious system of bonds and recognizances. Both the greater proximity to the king and the recognizances are partly attributable to the match made in 1501 for Robert's son and heir, George Throckmorton or Throgmorton, with Katherine, the heir apparent of Sir Nicholas Vaux, one of Henry's closer associates. It was a cadet branch, the Throgmortons of Haresfield, Gloucestershire, that lacked the political acumen of the main line: John (i), Thomas (II)'s younger brother, was executed after fighting for the Lancastrians at Mortimer's Cross in 1461, while John (i)'s son and heir, John (ii), fought for the Lancastrians at Tewkesbury but was later pardoned. 
The Throgmortons' religious dispositions followed the pattern of their political and official activities: concentration on Worcestershire until Robert and thereafter on Coughton. The family burials and chantry at Fladbury ['see 'Throgmorton, John] were complemented by the annuities for chantry priests that Thomas (II) and his widowed mother gave to Evesham and Pershore abbeys in 1448. Robert was probably the first of the family to wish to be buried at Coughton. The chancel of Coughton parish church was under reconstruction when he died and in his will he left precise instructions for the glazing of the east windows. The centrepiece of this detailed and fairly lavish will was a chantry in the church, which was to double as a school to teach the children of Robert's tenants. An elaborate tomb had been prepared for him in Coughton but he died in Rome on his way to the Holy Land. 
The Throgmortons have left little evidence of their estate management but enough to see that they were probably as careful in this as in their other enterprises. Although Thomas (I) bought a salt pit in Worcestershire in 1402 and Thomas (II) enclosed some pasture, the family seems to have operated a mainly 'rentier' economy for most of the century. It helped that, as valued officials of the bishops of Worcester, they were able to build up $240 of rent arrears to the bishopric between 1440 and 1470, nearly all of which was eventually cancelled. It was Robert who was apparently the first to exploit the growing market for wool in the later fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. The exchange with his mother gave him a compact estate, suitable for sheep farming; he added to it by further purchases and exchanges and enclosed pastures as well as woods and parkland. 
Throughout the century the Throgmortons evinced a combination of enterprise and circumspection more readily associated at this time with gentry families in the process of establishing themselves than with those that were already among the leaders of local society, as the family certainly was by the time of John's death. This explains why, unusually, they were able to continue their rise without set-back through three generations in a period that was politically dangerous and, until the late fifteenth century, economically unpromising. It was in the sixteenth century that they lost their ability to keep on the winning side: two sons of Robert, who had been with him in Rome at his death, died at the battle of Pavia in 1525; the family remained steadfastly Catholic after the Reformation and their seat of Coughton was sacked twice during the upheavals of the seventeenth century. Nevertheless, they continued owners of Coughton until the National Trust acquired the house in 1948. The Throgmorton arms were gules, a chevron argent, with three gimel bars sable thereon. 


@@@@@


doc= 63920


William [i] Scott (d. 1434) was granted the manor of Combe in Brabourne, Kent, by Peter Combe in 1402. By 1409 he had married his first wife, Joan (died in or before 1425), daughter of Sir John Orlestone (died 1397), and sister of Margaret, wife of William Parker, with whom she became coheir to the Orlestone estate by 1419. The terms of William [i]'s settlement of 1425 with the Parkers suggest that he and Joan had children who did not survive: by this settlement William purchased Joan's moiety and the property of Richard, her deceased brother, thereby bringing to the Scotts the manors of Orlestone (with its advowson) and Capel, Kent, and Stonlink, Sussex. His second wife was Isabel (died 1457?), the youngest daughter of Vincent Finch, or Herbert, of Netherfield, Sussex. William [i] may have fought at Agincourt. He was sheriff of Kent first in 1413; in 1419 he was among those granted the keeping of the temporalities of the see of Rochester, and from the following year he appears on other Kentish commissions; he was escheator for Kent and Middlesex in 1424-5, sheriff of Kent again in 1428 and MP in 1430-31. He was legal counsel to Robert, Lord Poynings. With his kinsman Archbishop Kemp he owned a deer park at Birling. In 1431 he was residing at Combe, with lands at Bircholt, West Hythe, Eastbridge, Worth, Wilmington, Street, Hurst, and Estenhanger, with a total annual rental value well in excess of $23. He is credited with having rebuilt Scot's Hall, and probably also the chapel of the Holy Trinity in Brabourne church, where he directed he should be buried. He died on 5 February 1434. With Isabel he had a son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 63921


William [ii] Scott (1428?-1491), was the founder of the Essex branch of the family. With his wife, Margery, an Essex heiress, he had his heir, John Scott ('b'. 'c'.1456), five other sons -- William [iv], Edward, John, George, and Hugh -- and two daughters -- Joan, wife of Hugh Fenne, and Elizabeth. He was MP for Huntingdon in 1450-51, but he maintained links with his native county: he sat for Rochester in 1455-6, and was on Kentish commissions in the 1450s, as well as being commissioned to defend Winchelsea against the earl of Warwick in December 1459. After Edward IV's accession he was employed on royal service in Essex, while in 1462 he was commissioned to administer the Hungerford lands in the west, and in 1482 he joined Sir John Scott in arraying Kentish troops for the defence of Calais. He was an Essex commissioner under Richard III, and in 1489-90 a Kentish JP and commissioner of array. 
William [ii] Scott lived at his wife's manor of Stapleford and also at Theydon Mount, both in Essex. In addition, at his death on 3 November 1491 he held the Essex manors of Wolfhampton, Ovesham Hall, Margate Guynge, and Great Fordham, and the manor of Woolstan, granted to him by Henry VII after the attainder of the duke of Norfolk. 
Sir John Scott's son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 63922


Stonor family (per. c.1315-c.1500), gentry, was founded by Sir John Stonor (c.1281-1354), chief justice of the common pleas, who raised the Stonors from their status of very minor Oxfordshire landowners. As a result of his successful career, which began about 1315, he was able to buy estates in several counties, notably Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, and Devon, and to begin rebuilding the family residence at Stonor, near Henley, Oxfordshire. Although a few additions to the estate were made later by marriage and purchase, the family property remained essentially as he left it. It was worth nearly $250 under Thomas (I). John had five or six sons, of whom one, Robert, was a canon of Wells, and the eldest was another John, Sir John Stonor (c.1310-1361), who succeeded him in 1354. Although knighted by 1351, John the younger had a curiously anonymous career; the lack of activity at home may have been due to prolonged service abroad, but there is no record of this. His wife is said to have been a daughter of John Wenard of Oxfordshire and he died in 1361. He was succeeded by his son Edmund Stonor (c.1347-1382), who became ward of the countess of Bedford, Edward III's daughter, and received livery in 1365. He was the first of the family to take his full place as a 'country gentleman'; he took part in local transactions and served as sheriff, MP, and JP in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. He was a commissioner for the poll taxes of 1379 and 1380 in Oxfordshire, which may explain the burning of his muniments and the murder of his servant in Hertfordshire during the peasants' revolt of 1381. He seems to have married a sister of Warin de Lisle of Berkshire, and they had three sons, of whom one predeceased his father, and one daughter. 
Edmund's death in 1382 began a lengthy period of almost continuous minorities in the Stonor family. John, the heir, was then about thirteen and died in 1383. His brother and heir Sir Ralph Stonor (c.1368-1394) was also a minor and both in turn were wards of Sir Robert Bealknap, chief justice of the common pleas, and Ralph was given in marriage to Bealknap's daughter Joan. He came of age in 1390, being fortunately too young to share in Bealknap's disgrace at the hands of the appellants in 1388. His only notable action as an adult was to serve on Richard II's Irish expedition of 1394, by which time he was knighted, and he died, probably in Ireland, in that year. Ralph left an infant heir, Gilbert, born in 1393, who died in 1396. By late 1395 Ralph's widow had married Edmund Hampden of Hampden, Buckinghamshire, creating a lasting tie between the two families. 
Ralph's second son, who succeeded his brother, was Thomas (I) Stonor (c.1394-1431). He is the first of the family whose activities are revealed through their letters and papers. From 1403 he was in the custody of Thomas Chaucer of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, son of the poet and a leading Thames valley landowner. Thus began a lengthy family association with the holders of the Chaucer lands and through Chaucer came a connection with Cardinal Beaufort, another power in the region. By 1416 Thomas Stonor was married to Alice, daughter and heir of Thomas Kirby of Horton, Kent, a match that considerably increased the Stonors' rather small estate in that county. Thomas came of age 'c'.1415; he may well have served with Henry V in France in 1419 and 1420, and he played a substantial part in local government, notably as MP and sheriff. He made further improvements to the family home; by the later fifteenth century it was clearly a commodious residence, whose parlours and chambers reflected the new fashion for privacy. It was under Thomas, in the early 1420s, that the protracted dispute with the Fortescues began over the Stonor property of Ermington, Devon, one of those purchased by Justice Stonor. 
Thomas died in 1431, leaving two sons, the oldest of whom was Thomas (II) Stonor (1424-1474), and five daughters, and yet another period of minority ensued. Thomas (I)'s widow married Richard Drayton of Oxfordshire and the couple lived at Stonor and then on Alice's dower lands in Kent. Although Alice had a sizeable jointure, there is no sign of tension between Thomas (II) and his mother and stepfather. Thomas wrote movingly of their deaths in 1468 and employed as an intimate man of business Thomas Mull, apparently husband of a daughter of Alice and Drayton. Thomas (II), like his father, was a ward of Chaucer, until the latter's death in 1434. He may then have been in the tutelage of William de la Pole, earl, later duke, of Suffolk, who had married Chaucer's heiress, since Thomas's wife, Joan, is said, quite possibly correctly, to have been an illegitimate daughter of Suffolk and Jacqueline of Hainault. Suffolk became the political heir to Chaucer and Beaufort in the region, and the Stonors and other local gentry were drawn into his circle. Thomas (II) Stonor served as local officer in Oxfordshire and Berkshire, although not with any regularity until the 1460s. During the Wars of the Roses, he managed to keep in with both sides, despite serving on Lancastrian commissions of array in 1459 and 1460 and -- doubtless encouraged by his tie of service with Warwick's brother, George Neville, archbishop of York -- co-operating with the readeption government in 1470-71. The family tie with the house of Suffolk remained under both Thomas and his successor, even though Duke William's son, John, had nothing like his father's influence in the region. Under Thomas (II) the Ermington affair resurfaced in the early 1460s, but in 1468 he was able to record a triumphant victory. He seems to have been a fairly formidable man, perhaps over-formidable with his son and heir, but showed himself to be not just an affectionate son but a loving husband. He had three sons and three daughters and he was able to establish both his younger sons, Edmund and Thomas, independently. 
Thomas (II) died in 1474, to be succeeded by his eldest son, Sir William Stonor (c.1449-1494), and was buried lavishly at Pyrton, the parish church for Stonor. His widow survived, probably until 1494. An argument with her son, recorded in 1482, had presumably been resolved by 1493, when she named William executor. William is the Stonor about whom most is known. Although some comments from relatives -- that, as a boy he was 'a musyr and a studyer' (Carpenter, 1.128), and that, as an adult, he was too lavish in his expenditure -- suggest a wastrel, he was in fact the most notable head of the family since Justice Stonor. This may have had a lot to do with the fact that he was the first since Justice Stonor's son Sir John to inherit as an adult. From 1478 he was part of Edward IV's rapidly expanding affinity, which seems to have been developing into the dominant political connection in the Thames valley in this period. He was made KB at the marriage of the young duke of York in early 1478 and became a knight of the body in 1478 or 1479. Although he himself did not go on the king's French campaign in 1475, his brothers did. That he held important local office in Oxfordshire from 1478 was almost certainly due to the household connection. The rising social level of his three wives reflects his personal rise. Despite the occasional foray into the marriage market, he was unmarried in 1474 but by 1475 had chosen for his wife Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Rich, the son of a wealthy London mercer, and daughter of John Croke, a London alderman. Her chief attraction was almost certainly her money, for William seems to have been rather short of ready cash at this time, but letters from Elizabeth to William from London, where she resided much of the time, show genuine affection. It was through this alliance that William met Thomas Betson, the Calais wool merchant, with whom he went into partnership in the wool trade from 1475 to 1479. Betson became betrothed to Katherine Rich, Elizabeth's young daughter from her first marriage, and his letters to Katherine and her family reveal a man of great charm. Elizabeth died in 1479, leaving no children from the marriage, and in 1480 Stonor married Agnes, widow of John Wydeslade, a gentleman of Devon, and granddaughter and heir of William Wynard, an Exeter merchant with substantial estates in Devon and Cornwall. Although Agnes died soon after, in 1481, it was probably this marriage that brought Stonor a tie with Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, and his wife, the Bonville heiress, that remained important in the safeguarding of his south-western estates. William was still childless and by late 1481 had married again, this time to Anne, daughter and, from 1483, heir of John Neville, Marquess Montagu. It was, however, Stonor's move into the highest political circles that was to prove his and his family's temporary undoing. In October 1483, he was one of the many household men, several from the Thames valley, in Buckingham's rebellion against Richard III. He was attainted and his lands confiscated and granted away, some of them to Lord Lovell, Richard's chief representative in the region. Stonor may have gone into exile in Brittany with Dorset. He was in any case restored to his estates, to his household position, and to local office on Henry VII's accession in 1485. In 1487 he fought for Henry at Stoke, where he was made a banneret, and his appointment as steward to Oxford University in 1492 indicates how close he was thought to be to the king. His third wife died in 1486 and he died in 1494, leaving a twelve-year-old son, John, and a daughter, Anne. Both were betrothed to members of the Fortescue family, perhaps in an attempt to end the Ermington affair for good. The question of the wardship of John -- 'Stonor's case' -- became a leading precedent in the crown's efforts to extend its prerogative wardship, but the really intensive litigation in the family followed on John's death in 1499, when Thomas (III), William's younger brother, claimed as the heir male against the heir general, William's daughter, and her husband. 'Stonor v. Fortescue' continued until the male line's victory in 1537. Their descendants still reside at Stonor Park. The Stonor family arms were azure, two bars dancettee or, a chief argent. 
The Stonors would be a typical, if unremarkable, prominent fifteenth-century gentry family, typical as much in their rise as in their subsequent history, were it not for the survival of a large number of papers and, above all, letters from this period. These came into crown hands, either in 1483 or with the 'Stonor v. Fortescue' suit in chancery, and remained there, and are the largest collection of gentry letters from the period after the Pastons'. Although less renowned than the latter, they are much more representative of the gentry world: unlike the Pastons, the Stonors were no longer social climbers and the Thames valley in the fifteenth century was a more stable region than East Anglia. If the letters contain fewer telling personal details than the Paston letters, they nevertheless offer an unrivalled insight into the routine life of a gentry family: estate management, consumption, debt and credit, marriage negotiations, dealing with churchmen, from bishops, archbishops, and abbots to parish priests, performing the king's business, and much else besides. They demonstrate how the family used for its affairs a network of kinsmen, personal agents, neighbours, and friends centred on the Thames valley, and how marriage and kinship with families from the region, such as Cotesmore, Barantyn, Brecknock, Hampden, Harecourt, Ramsey, and Rokes, helped both create and strengthen this network. It was a world where negotiation was the normal response to conflict and, while relations with the nobility may have been important, the nobles did not dominate gentry affairs in the Thames valley as they did in some other parts of England. The letters afford a privileged insight into the mundane but important affairs that must have been the stuff of daily life to almost all gentry families in this period, however enmeshed in local and national politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 63923


Stonor family (per. c.1315-c.1500), gentry, was founded by Sir John Stonor (c.1281-1354), chief justice of the common pleas, who raised the Stonors from their status of very minor Oxfordshire landowners. As a result of his successful career, which began about 1315, he was able to buy estates in several counties, notably Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, and Devon, and to begin rebuilding the family residence at Stonor, near Henley, Oxfordshire. Although a few additions to the estate were made later by marriage and purchase, the family property remained essentially as he left it. It was worth nearly $250 under Thomas (I). John had five or six sons, of whom one, Robert, was a canon of Wells, and the eldest was another John, Sir John Stonor (c.1310-1361), who succeeded him in 1354. Although knighted by 1351, John the younger had a curiously anonymous career; the lack of activity at home may have been due to prolonged service abroad, but there is no record of this. His wife is said to have been a daughter of John Wenard of Oxfordshire and he died in 1361. He was succeeded by his son Edmund Stonor (c.1347-1382), who became ward of the countess of Bedford, Edward III's daughter, and received livery in 1365. He was the first of the family to take his full place as a 'country gentleman'; he took part in local transactions and served as sheriff, MP, and JP in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. He was a commissioner for the poll taxes of 1379 and 1380 in Oxfordshire, which may explain the burning of his muniments and the murder of his servant in Hertfordshire during the peasants' revolt of 1381. He seems to have married a sister of Warin de Lisle of Berkshire, and they had three sons, of whom one predeceased his father, and one daughter. 
Edmund's death in 1382 began a lengthy period of almost continuous minorities in the Stonor family. John, the heir, was then about thirteen and died in 1383. His brother and heir Sir Ralph Stonor (c.1368-1394) was also a minor and both in turn were wards of Sir Robert Bealknap, chief justice of the common pleas, and Ralph was given in marriage to Bealknap's daughter Joan. He came of age in 1390, being fortunately too young to share in Bealknap's disgrace at the hands of the appellants in 1388. His only notable action as an adult was to serve on Richard II's Irish expedition of 1394, by which time he was knighted, and he died, probably in Ireland, in that year. Ralph left an infant heir, Gilbert, born in 1393, who died in 1396. By late 1395 Ralph's widow had married Edmund Hampden of Hampden, Buckinghamshire, creating a lasting tie between the two families. 
Ralph's second son, who succeeded his brother, was Thomas (I) Stonor (c.1394-1431). He is the first of the family whose activities are revealed through their letters and papers. From 1403 he was in the custody of Thomas Chaucer of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, son of the poet and a leading Thames valley landowner. Thus began a lengthy family association with the holders of the Chaucer lands and through Chaucer came a connection with Cardinal Beaufort, another power in the region. By 1416 Thomas Stonor was married to Alice, daughter and heir of Thomas Kirby of Horton, Kent, a match that considerably increased the Stonors' rather small estate in that county. Thomas came of age 'c'.1415; he may well have served with Henry V in France in 1419 and 1420, and he played a substantial part in local government, notably as MP and sheriff. He made further improvements to the family home; by the later fifteenth century it was clearly a commodious residence, whose parlours and chambers reflected the new fashion for privacy. It was under Thomas, in the early 1420s, that the protracted dispute with the Fortescues began over the Stonor property of Ermington, Devon, one of those purchased by Justice Stonor. 
Thomas died in 1431, leaving two sons, the oldest of whom was Thomas (II) Stonor (1424-1474), and five daughters, and yet another period of minority ensued. Thomas (I)'s widow married Richard Drayton of Oxfordshire and the couple lived at Stonor and then on Alice's dower lands in Kent. Although Alice had a sizeable jointure, there is no sign of tension between Thomas (II) and his mother and stepfather. Thomas wrote movingly of their deaths in 1468 and employed as an intimate man of business Thomas Mull, apparently husband of a daughter of Alice and Drayton. Thomas (II), like his father, was a ward of Chaucer, until the latter's death in 1434. He may then have been in the tutelage of William de la Pole, earl, later duke, of Suffolk, who had married Chaucer's heiress, since Thomas's wife, Joan, is said, quite possibly correctly, to have been an illegitimate daughter of Suffolk and Jacqueline of Hainault. Suffolk became the political heir to Chaucer and Beaufort in the region, and the Stonors and other local gentry were drawn into his circle. Thomas (II) Stonor served as local officer in Oxfordshire and Berkshire, although not with any regularity until the 1460s. During the Wars of the Roses, he managed to keep in with both sides, despite serving on Lancastrian commissions of array in 1459 and 1460 and -- doubtless encouraged by his tie of service with Warwick's brother, George Neville, archbishop of York -- co-operating with the readeption government in 1470-71. The family tie with the house of Suffolk remained under both Thomas and his successor, even though Duke William's son, John, had nothing like his father's influence in the region. Under Thomas (II) the Ermington affair resurfaced in the early 1460s, but in 1468 he was able to record a triumphant victory. He seems to have been a fairly formidable man, perhaps over-formidable with his son and heir, but showed himself to be not just an affectionate son but a loving husband. He had three sons and three daughters and he was able to establish both his younger sons, Edmund and Thomas, independently. 
Thomas (II) died in 1474, to be succeeded by his eldest son, Sir William Stonor (c.1449-1494), and was buried lavishly at Pyrton, the parish church for Stonor. His widow survived, probably until 1494. An argument with her son, recorded in 1482, had presumably been resolved by 1493, when she named William executor. William is the Stonor about whom most is known. Although some comments from relatives -- that, as a boy he was 'a musyr and a studyer' (Carpenter, 1.128), and that, as an adult, he was too lavish in his expenditure -- suggest a wastrel, he was in fact the most notable head of the family since Justice Stonor. This may have had a lot to do with the fact that he was the first since Justice Stonor's son Sir John to inherit as an adult. From 1478 he was part of Edward IV's rapidly expanding affinity, which seems to have been developing into the dominant political connection in the Thames valley in this period. He was made KB at the marriage of the young duke of York in early 1478 and became a knight of the body in 1478 or 1479. Although he himself did not go on the king's French campaign in 1475, his brothers did. That he held important local office in Oxfordshire from 1478 was almost certainly due to the household connection. The rising social level of his three wives reflects his personal rise. Despite the occasional foray into the marriage market, he was unmarried in 1474 but by 1475 had chosen for his wife Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Rich, the son of a wealthy London mercer, and daughter of John Croke, a London alderman. Her chief attraction was almost certainly her money, for William seems to have been rather short of ready cash at this time, but letters from Elizabeth to William from London, where she resided much of the time, show genuine affection. It was through this alliance that William met Thomas Betson, the Calais wool merchant, with whom he went into partnership in the wool trade from 1475 to 1479. Betson became betrothed to Katherine Rich, Elizabeth's young daughter from her first marriage, and his letters to Katherine and her family reveal a man of great charm. Elizabeth died in 1479, leaving no children from the marriage, and in 1480 Stonor married Agnes, widow of John Wydeslade, a gentleman of Devon, and granddaughter and heir of William Wynard, an Exeter merchant with substantial estates in Devon and Cornwall. Although Agnes died soon after, in 1481, it was probably this marriage that brought Stonor a tie with Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, and his wife, the Bonville heiress, that remained important in the safeguarding of his south-western estates. William was still childless and by late 1481 had married again, this time to Anne, daughter and, from 1483, heir of John Neville, Marquess Montagu. It was, however, Stonor's move into the highest political circles that was to prove his and his family's temporary undoing. In October 1483, he was one of the many household men, several from the Thames valley, in Buckingham's rebellion against Richard III. He was attainted and his lands confiscated and granted away, some of them to Lord Lovell, Richard's chief representative in the region. Stonor may have gone into exile in Brittany with Dorset. He was in any case restored to his estates, to his household position, and to local office on Henry VII's accession in 1485. In 1487 he fought for Henry at Stoke, where he was made a banneret, and his appointment as steward to Oxford University in 1492 indicates how close he was thought to be to the king. His third wife died in 1486 and he died in 1494, leaving a twelve-year-old son, John, and a daughter, Anne. Both were betrothed to members of the Fortescue family, perhaps in an attempt to end the Ermington affair for good. The question of the wardship of John -- 'Stonor's case' -- became a leading precedent in the crown's efforts to extend its prerogative wardship, but the really intensive litigation in the family followed on John's death in 1499, when Thomas (III), William's younger brother, claimed as the heir male against the heir general, William's daughter, and her husband. 'Stonor v. Fortescue' continued until the male line's victory in 1537. Their descendants still reside at Stonor Park. The Stonor family arms were azure, two bars dancettee or, a chief argent. 
The Stonors would be a typical, if unremarkable, prominent fifteenth-century gentry family, typical as much in their rise as in their subsequent history, were it not for the survival of a large number of papers and, above all, letters from this period. These came into crown hands, either in 1483 or with the 'Stonor v. Fortescue' suit in chancery, and remained there, and are the largest collection of gentry letters from the period after the Pastons'. Although less renowned than the latter, they are much more representative of the gentry world: unlike the Pastons, the Stonors were no longer social climbers and the Thames valley in the fifteenth century was a more stable region than East Anglia. If the letters contain fewer telling personal details than the Paston letters, they nevertheless offer an unrivalled insight into the routine life of a gentry family: estate management, consumption, debt and credit, marriage negotiations, dealing with churchmen, from bishops, archbishops, and abbots to parish priests, performing the king's business, and much else besides. They demonstrate how the family used for its affairs a network of kinsmen, personal agents, neighbours, and friends centred on the Thames valley, and how marriage and kinship with families from the region, such as Cotesmore, Barantyn, Brecknock, Hampden, Harecourt, Ramsey, and Rokes, helped both create and strengthen this network. It was a world where negotiation was the normal response to conflict and, while relations with the nobility may have been important, the nobles did not dominate gentry affairs in the Thames valley as they did in some other parts of England. The letters afford a privileged insight into the mundane but important affairs that must have been the stuff of daily life to almost all gentry families in this period, however enmeshed in local and national politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 63924


Stonor family (per. c.1315-c.1500), gentry, was founded by Sir John Stonor (c.1281-1354), chief justice of the common pleas, who raised the Stonors from their status of very minor Oxfordshire landowners. As a result of his successful career, which began about 1315, he was able to buy estates in several counties, notably Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, and Devon, and to begin rebuilding the family residence at Stonor, near Henley, Oxfordshire. Although a few additions to the estate were made later by marriage and purchase, the family property remained essentially as he left it. It was worth nearly $250 under Thomas (I). John had five or six sons, of whom one, Robert, was a canon of Wells, and the eldest was another John, Sir John Stonor (c.1310-1361), who succeeded him in 1354. Although knighted by 1351, John the younger had a curiously anonymous career; the lack of activity at home may have been due to prolonged service abroad, but there is no record of this. His wife is said to have been a daughter of John Wenard of Oxfordshire and he died in 1361. He was succeeded by his son Edmund Stonor (c.1347-1382), who became ward of the countess of Bedford, Edward III's daughter, and received livery in 1365. He was the first of the family to take his full place as a 'country gentleman'; he took part in local transactions and served as sheriff, MP, and JP in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. He was a commissioner for the poll taxes of 1379 and 1380 in Oxfordshire, which may explain the burning of his muniments and the murder of his servant in Hertfordshire during the peasants' revolt of 1381. He seems to have married a sister of Warin de Lisle of Berkshire, and they had three sons, of whom one predeceased his father, and one daughter. 
Edmund's death in 1382 began a lengthy period of almost continuous minorities in the Stonor family. John, the heir, was then about thirteen and died in 1383. His brother and heir Sir Ralph Stonor (c.1368-1394) was also a minor and both in turn were wards of Sir Robert Bealknap, chief justice of the common pleas, and Ralph was given in marriage to Bealknap's daughter Joan. He came of age in 1390, being fortunately too young to share in Bealknap's disgrace at the hands of the appellants in 1388. His only notable action as an adult was to serve on Richard II's Irish expedition of 1394, by which time he was knighted, and he died, probably in Ireland, in that year. Ralph left an infant heir, Gilbert, born in 1393, who died in 1396. By late 1395 Ralph's widow had married Edmund Hampden of Hampden, Buckinghamshire, creating a lasting tie between the two families. 
Ralph's second son, who succeeded his brother, was Thomas (I) Stonor (c.1394-1431). He is the first of the family whose activities are revealed through their letters and papers. From 1403 he was in the custody of Thomas Chaucer of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, son of the poet and a leading Thames valley landowner. Thus began a lengthy family association with the holders of the Chaucer lands and through Chaucer came a connection with Cardinal Beaufort, another power in the region. By 1416 Thomas Stonor was married to Alice, daughter and heir of Thomas Kirby of Horton, Kent, a match that considerably increased the Stonors' rather small estate in that county. Thomas came of age 'c'.1415; he may well have served with Henry V in France in 1419 and 1420, and he played a substantial part in local government, notably as MP and sheriff. He made further improvements to the family home; by the later fifteenth century it was clearly a commodious residence, whose parlours and chambers reflected the new fashion for privacy. It was under Thomas, in the early 1420s, that the protracted dispute with the Fortescues began over the Stonor property of Ermington, Devon, one of those purchased by Justice Stonor. 
Thomas died in 1431, leaving two sons, the oldest of whom was Thomas (II) Stonor (1424-1474), and five daughters, and yet another period of minority ensued. Thomas (I)'s widow married Richard Drayton of Oxfordshire and the couple lived at Stonor and then on Alice's dower lands in Kent. Although Alice had a sizeable jointure, there is no sign of tension between Thomas (II) and his mother and stepfather. Thomas wrote movingly of their deaths in 1468 and employed as an intimate man of business Thomas Mull, apparently husband of a daughter of Alice and Drayton. Thomas (II), like his father, was a ward of Chaucer, until the latter's death in 1434. He may then have been in the tutelage of William de la Pole, earl, later duke, of Suffolk, who had married Chaucer's heiress, since Thomas's wife, Joan, is said, quite possibly correctly, to have been an illegitimate daughter of Suffolk and Jacqueline of Hainault. Suffolk became the political heir to Chaucer and Beaufort in the region, and the Stonors and other local gentry were drawn into his circle. Thomas (II) Stonor served as local officer in Oxfordshire and Berkshire, although not with any regularity until the 1460s. During the Wars of the Roses, he managed to keep in with both sides, despite serving on Lancastrian commissions of array in 1459 and 1460 and -- doubtless encouraged by his tie of service with Warwick's brother, George Neville, archbishop of York -- co-operating with the readeption government in 1470-71. The family tie with the house of Suffolk remained under both Thomas and his successor, even though Duke William's son, John, had nothing like his father's influence in the region. Under Thomas (II) the Ermington affair resurfaced in the early 1460s, but in 1468 he was able to record a triumphant victory. He seems to have been a fairly formidable man, perhaps over-formidable with his son and heir, but showed himself to be not just an affectionate son but a loving husband. He had three sons and three daughters and he was able to establish both his younger sons, Edmund and Thomas, independently. 
Thomas (II) died in 1474, to be succeeded by his eldest son, Sir William Stonor (c.1449-1494), and was buried lavishly at Pyrton, the parish church for Stonor. His widow survived, probably until 1494. An argument with her son, recorded in 1482, had presumably been resolved by 1493, when she named William executor. William is the Stonor about whom most is known. Although some comments from relatives -- that, as a boy he was 'a musyr and a studyer' (Carpenter, 1.128), and that, as an adult, he was too lavish in his expenditure -- suggest a wastrel, he was in fact the most notable head of the family since Justice Stonor. This may have had a lot to do with the fact that he was the first since Justice Stonor's son Sir John to inherit as an adult. From 1478 he was part of Edward IV's rapidly expanding affinity, which seems to have been developing into the dominant political connection in the Thames valley in this period. He was made KB at the marriage of the young duke of York in early 1478 and became a knight of the body in 1478 or 1479. Although he himself did not go on the king's French campaign in 1475, his brothers did. That he held important local office in Oxfordshire from 1478 was almost certainly due to the household connection. The rising social level of his three wives reflects his personal rise. Despite the occasional foray into the marriage market, he was unmarried in 1474 but by 1475 had chosen for his wife Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Rich, the son of a wealthy London mercer, and daughter of John Croke, a London alderman. Her chief attraction was almost certainly her money, for William seems to have been rather short of ready cash at this time, but letters from Elizabeth to William from London, where she resided much of the time, show genuine affection. It was through this alliance that William met Thomas Betson, the Calais wool merchant, with whom he went into partnership in the wool trade from 1475 to 1479. Betson became betrothed to Katherine Rich, Elizabeth's young daughter from her first marriage, and his letters to Katherine and her family reveal a man of great charm. Elizabeth died in 1479, leaving no children from the marriage, and in 1480 Stonor married Agnes, widow of John Wydeslade, a gentleman of Devon, and granddaughter and heir of William Wynard, an Exeter merchant with substantial estates in Devon and Cornwall. Although Agnes died soon after, in 1481, it was probably this marriage that brought Stonor a tie with Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, and his wife, the Bonville heiress, that remained important in the safeguarding of his south-western estates. William was still childless and by late 1481 had married again, this time to Anne, daughter and, from 1483, heir of John Neville, Marquess Montagu. It was, however, Stonor's move into the highest political circles that was to prove his and his family's temporary undoing. In October 1483, he was one of the many household men, several from the Thames valley, in Buckingham's rebellion against Richard III. He was attainted and his lands confiscated and granted away, some of them to Lord Lovell, Richard's chief representative in the region. Stonor may have gone into exile in Brittany with Dorset. He was in any case restored to his estates, to his household position, and to local office on Henry VII's accession in 1485. In 1487 he fought for Henry at Stoke, where he was made a banneret, and his appointment as steward to Oxford University in 1492 indicates how close he was thought to be to the king. His third wife died in 1486 and he died in 1494, leaving a twelve-year-old son, John, and a daughter, Anne. Both were betrothed to members of the Fortescue family, perhaps in an attempt to end the Ermington affair for good. The question of the wardship of John -- 'Stonor's case' -- became a leading precedent in the crown's efforts to extend its prerogative wardship, but the really intensive litigation in the family followed on John's death in 1499, when Thomas (III), William's younger brother, claimed as the heir male against the heir general, William's daughter, and her husband. 'Stonor v. Fortescue' continued until the male line's victory in 1537. Their descendants still reside at Stonor Park. The Stonor family arms were azure, two bars dancettee or, a chief argent. 
The Stonors would be a typical, if unremarkable, prominent fifteenth-century gentry family, typical as much in their rise as in their subsequent history, were it not for the survival of a large number of papers and, above all, letters from this period. These came into crown hands, either in 1483 or with the 'Stonor v. Fortescue' suit in chancery, and remained there, and are the largest collection of gentry letters from the period after the Pastons'. Although less renowned than the latter, they are much more representative of the gentry world: unlike the Pastons, the Stonors were no longer social climbers and the Thames valley in the fifteenth century was a more stable region than East Anglia. If the letters contain fewer telling personal details than the Paston letters, they nevertheless offer an unrivalled insight into the routine life of a gentry family: estate management, consumption, debt and credit, marriage negotiations, dealing with churchmen, from bishops, archbishops, and abbots to parish priests, performing the king's business, and much else besides. They demonstrate how the family used for its affairs a network of kinsmen, personal agents, neighbours, and friends centred on the Thames valley, and how marriage and kinship with families from the region, such as Cotesmore, Barantyn, Brecknock, Hampden, Harecourt, Ramsey, and Rokes, helped both create and strengthen this network. It was a world where negotiation was the normal response to conflict and, while relations with the nobility may have been important, the nobles did not dominate gentry affairs in the Thames valley as they did in some other parts of England. The letters afford a privileged insight into the mundane but important affairs that must have been the stuff of daily life to almost all gentry families in this period, however enmeshed in local and national politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 63925


Stonor family (per. c.1315-c.1500), gentry, was founded by Sir John Stonor (c.1281-1354), chief justice of the common pleas, who raised the Stonors from their status of very minor Oxfordshire landowners. As a result of his successful career, which began about 1315, he was able to buy estates in several counties, notably Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, and Devon, and to begin rebuilding the family residence at Stonor, near Henley, Oxfordshire. Although a few additions to the estate were made later by marriage and purchase, the family property remained essentially as he left it. It was worth nearly $250 under Thomas (I). John had five or six sons, of whom one, Robert, was a canon of Wells, and the eldest was another John, Sir John Stonor (c.1310-1361), who succeeded him in 1354. Although knighted by 1351, John the younger had a curiously anonymous career; the lack of activity at home may have been due to prolonged service abroad, but there is no record of this. His wife is said to have been a daughter of John Wenard of Oxfordshire and he died in 1361. He was succeeded by his son Edmund Stonor (c.1347-1382), who became ward of the countess of Bedford, Edward III's daughter, and received livery in 1365. He was the first of the family to take his full place as a 'country gentleman'; he took part in local transactions and served as sheriff, MP, and JP in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. He was a commissioner for the poll taxes of 1379 and 1380 in Oxfordshire, which may explain the burning of his muniments and the murder of his servant in Hertfordshire during the peasants' revolt of 1381. He seems to have married a sister of Warin de Lisle of Berkshire, and they had three sons, of whom one predeceased his father, and one daughter. 
Edmund's death in 1382 began a lengthy period of almost continuous minorities in the Stonor family. John, the heir, was then about thirteen and died in 1383. His brother and heir Sir Ralph Stonor (c.1368-1394) was also a minor and both in turn were wards of Sir Robert Bealknap, chief justice of the common pleas, and Ralph was given in marriage to Bealknap's daughter Joan. He came of age in 1390, being fortunately too young to share in Bealknap's disgrace at the hands of the appellants in 1388. His only notable action as an adult was to serve on Richard II's Irish expedition of 1394, by which time he was knighted, and he died, probably in Ireland, in that year. Ralph left an infant heir, Gilbert, born in 1393, who died in 1396. By late 1395 Ralph's widow had married Edmund Hampden of Hampden, Buckinghamshire, creating a lasting tie between the two families. 
Ralph's second son, who succeeded his brother, was Thomas (I) Stonor (c.1394-1431). He is the first of the family whose activities are revealed through their letters and papers. From 1403 he was in the custody of Thomas Chaucer of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, son of the poet and a leading Thames valley landowner. Thus began a lengthy family association with the holders of the Chaucer lands and through Chaucer came a connection with Cardinal Beaufort, another power in the region. By 1416 Thomas Stonor was married to Alice, daughter and heir of Thomas Kirby of Horton, Kent, a match that considerably increased the Stonors' rather small estate in that county. Thomas came of age 'c'.1415; he may well have served with Henry V in France in 1419 and 1420, and he played a substantial part in local government, notably as MP and sheriff. He made further improvements to the family home; by the later fifteenth century it was clearly a commodious residence, whose parlours and chambers reflected the new fashion for privacy. It was under Thomas, in the early 1420s, that the protracted dispute with the Fortescues began over the Stonor property of Ermington, Devon, one of those purchased by Justice Stonor. 
Thomas died in 1431, leaving two sons, the oldest of whom was Thomas (II) Stonor (1424-1474), and five daughters, and yet another period of minority ensued. Thomas (I)'s widow married Richard Drayton of Oxfordshire and the couple lived at Stonor and then on Alice's dower lands in Kent. Although Alice had a sizeable jointure, there is no sign of tension between Thomas (II) and his mother and stepfather. Thomas wrote movingly of their deaths in 1468 and employed as an intimate man of business Thomas Mull, apparently husband of a daughter of Alice and Drayton. Thomas (II), like his father, was a ward of Chaucer, until the latter's death in 1434. He may then have been in the tutelage of William de la Pole, earl, later duke, of Suffolk, who had married Chaucer's heiress, since Thomas's wife, Joan, is said, quite possibly correctly, to have been an illegitimate daughter of Suffolk and Jacqueline of Hainault. Suffolk became the political heir to Chaucer and Beaufort in the region, and the Stonors and other local gentry were drawn into his circle. Thomas (II) Stonor served as local officer in Oxfordshire and Berkshire, although not with any regularity until the 1460s. During the Wars of the Roses, he managed to keep in with both sides, despite serving on Lancastrian commissions of array in 1459 and 1460 and -- doubtless encouraged by his tie of service with Warwick's brother, George Neville, archbishop of York -- co-operating with the readeption government in 1470-71. The family tie with the house of Suffolk remained under both Thomas and his successor, even though Duke William's son, John, had nothing like his father's influence in the region. Under Thomas (II) the Ermington affair resurfaced in the early 1460s, but in 1468 he was able to record a triumphant victory. He seems to have been a fairly formidable man, perhaps over-formidable with his son and heir, but showed himself to be not just an affectionate son but a loving husband. He had three sons and three daughters and he was able to establish both his younger sons, Edmund and Thomas, independently. 
Thomas (II) died in 1474, to be succeeded by his eldest son, Sir William Stonor (c.1449-1494), and was buried lavishly at Pyrton, the parish church for Stonor. His widow survived, probably until 1494. An argument with her son, recorded in 1482, had presumably been resolved by 1493, when she named William executor. William is the Stonor about whom most is known. Although some comments from relatives -- that, as a boy he was 'a musyr and a studyer' (Carpenter, 1.128), and that, as an adult, he was too lavish in his expenditure -- suggest a wastrel, he was in fact the most notable head of the family since Justice Stonor. This may have had a lot to do with the fact that he was the first since Justice Stonor's son Sir John to inherit as an adult. From 1478 he was part of Edward IV's rapidly expanding affinity, which seems to have been developing into the dominant political connection in the Thames valley in this period. He was made KB at the marriage of the young duke of York in early 1478 and became a knight of the body in 1478 or 1479. Although he himself did not go on the king's French campaign in 1475, his brothers did. That he held important local office in Oxfordshire from 1478 was almost certainly due to the household connection. The rising social level of his three wives reflects his personal rise. Despite the occasional foray into the marriage market, he was unmarried in 1474 but by 1475 had chosen for his wife Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Rich, the son of a wealthy London mercer, and daughter of John Croke, a London alderman. Her chief attraction was almost certainly her money, for William seems to have been rather short of ready cash at this time, but letters from Elizabeth to William from London, where she resided much of the time, show genuine affection. It was through this alliance that William met Thomas Betson, the Calais wool merchant, with whom he went into partnership in the wool trade from 1475 to 1479. Betson became betrothed to Katherine Rich, Elizabeth's young daughter from her first marriage, and his letters to Katherine and her family reveal a man of great charm. Elizabeth died in 1479, leaving no children from the marriage, and in 1480 Stonor married Agnes, widow of John Wydeslade, a gentleman of Devon, and granddaughter and heir of William Wynard, an Exeter merchant with substantial estates in Devon and Cornwall. Although Agnes died soon after, in 1481, it was probably this marriage that brought Stonor a tie with Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, and his wife, the Bonville heiress, that remained important in the safeguarding of his south-western estates. William was still childless and by late 1481 had married again, this time to Anne, daughter and, from 1483, heir of John Neville, Marquess Montagu. It was, however, Stonor's move into the highest political circles that was to prove his and his family's temporary undoing. In October 1483, he was one of the many household men, several from the Thames valley, in Buckingham's rebellion against Richard III. He was attainted and his lands confiscated and granted away, some of them to Lord Lovell, Richard's chief representative in the region. Stonor may have gone into exile in Brittany with Dorset. He was in any case restored to his estates, to his household position, and to local office on Henry VII's accession in 1485. In 1487 he fought for Henry at Stoke, where he was made a banneret, and his appointment as steward to Oxford University in 1492 indicates how close he was thought to be to the king. His third wife died in 1486 and he died in 1494, leaving a twelve-year-old son, John, and a daughter, Anne. Both were betrothed to members of the Fortescue family, perhaps in an attempt to end the Ermington affair for good. The question of the wardship of John -- 'Stonor's case' -- became a leading precedent in the crown's efforts to extend its prerogative wardship, but the really intensive litigation in the family followed on John's death in 1499, when Thomas (III), William's younger brother, claimed as the heir male against the heir general, William's daughter, and her husband. 'Stonor v. Fortescue' continued until the male line's victory in 1537. Their descendants still reside at Stonor Park. The Stonor family arms were azure, two bars dancettee or, a chief argent. 
The Stonors would be a typical, if unremarkable, prominent fifteenth-century gentry family, typical as much in their rise as in their subsequent history, were it not for the survival of a large number of papers and, above all, letters from this period. These came into crown hands, either in 1483 or with the 'Stonor v. Fortescue' suit in chancery, and remained there, and are the largest collection of gentry letters from the period after the Pastons'. Although less renowned than the latter, they are much more representative of the gentry world: unlike the Pastons, the Stonors were no longer social climbers and the Thames valley in the fifteenth century was a more stable region than East Anglia. If the letters contain fewer telling personal details than the Paston letters, they nevertheless offer an unrivalled insight into the routine life of a gentry family: estate management, consumption, debt and credit, marriage negotiations, dealing with churchmen, from bishops, archbishops, and abbots to parish priests, performing the king's business, and much else besides. They demonstrate how the family used for its affairs a network of kinsmen, personal agents, neighbours, and friends centred on the Thames valley, and how marriage and kinship with families from the region, such as Cotesmore, Barantyn, Brecknock, Hampden, Harecourt, Ramsey, and Rokes, helped both create and strengthen this network. It was a world where negotiation was the normal response to conflict and, while relations with the nobility may have been important, the nobles did not dominate gentry affairs in the Thames valley as they did in some other parts of England. The letters afford a privileged insight into the mundane but important affairs that must have been the stuff of daily life to almost all gentry families in this period, however enmeshed in local and national politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 63926


Stonor family (per. c.1315-c.1500), gentry, was founded by Sir John Stonor (c.1281-1354), chief justice of the common pleas, who raised the Stonors from their status of very minor Oxfordshire landowners. As a result of his successful career, which began about 1315, he was able to buy estates in several counties, notably Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, and Devon, and to begin rebuilding the family residence at Stonor, near Henley, Oxfordshire. Although a few additions to the estate were made later by marriage and purchase, the family property remained essentially as he left it. It was worth nearly $250 under Thomas (I). John had five or six sons, of whom one, Robert, was a canon of Wells, and the eldest was another John, Sir John Stonor (c.1310-1361), who succeeded him in 1354. Although knighted by 1351, John the younger had a curiously anonymous career; the lack of activity at home may have been due to prolonged service abroad, but there is no record of this. His wife is said to have been a daughter of John Wenard of Oxfordshire and he died in 1361. He was succeeded by his son Edmund Stonor (c.1347-1382), who became ward of the countess of Bedford, Edward III's daughter, and received livery in 1365. He was the first of the family to take his full place as a 'country gentleman'; he took part in local transactions and served as sheriff, MP, and JP in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. He was a commissioner for the poll taxes of 1379 and 1380 in Oxfordshire, which may explain the burning of his muniments and the murder of his servant in Hertfordshire during the peasants' revolt of 1381. He seems to have married a sister of Warin de Lisle of Berkshire, and they had three sons, of whom one predeceased his father, and one daughter. 
Edmund's death in 1382 began a lengthy period of almost continuous minorities in the Stonor family. John, the heir, was then about thirteen and died in 1383. His brother and heir Sir Ralph Stonor (c.1368-1394) was also a minor and both in turn were wards of Sir Robert Bealknap, chief justice of the common pleas, and Ralph was given in marriage to Bealknap's daughter Joan. He came of age in 1390, being fortunately too young to share in Bealknap's disgrace at the hands of the appellants in 1388. His only notable action as an adult was to serve on Richard II's Irish expedition of 1394, by which time he was knighted, and he died, probably in Ireland, in that year. Ralph left an infant heir, Gilbert, born in 1393, who died in 1396. By late 1395 Ralph's widow had married Edmund Hampden of Hampden, Buckinghamshire, creating a lasting tie between the two families. 
Ralph's second son, who succeeded his brother, was Thomas (I) Stonor (c.1394-1431). He is the first of the family whose activities are revealed through their letters and papers. From 1403 he was in the custody of Thomas Chaucer of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, son of the poet and a leading Thames valley landowner. Thus began a lengthy family association with the holders of the Chaucer lands and through Chaucer came a connection with Cardinal Beaufort, another power in the region. By 1416 Thomas Stonor was married to Alice, daughter and heir of Thomas Kirby of Horton, Kent, a match that considerably increased the Stonors' rather small estate in that county. Thomas came of age 'c'.1415; he may well have served with Henry V in France in 1419 and 1420, and he played a substantial part in local government, notably as MP and sheriff. He made further improvements to the family home; by the later fifteenth century it was clearly a commodious residence, whose parlours and chambers reflected the new fashion for privacy. It was under Thomas, in the early 1420s, that the protracted dispute with the Fortescues began over the Stonor property of Ermington, Devon, one of those purchased by Justice Stonor. 
Thomas died in 1431, leaving two sons, the oldest of whom was Thomas (II) Stonor (1424-1474), and five daughters, and yet another period of minority ensued. Thomas (I)'s widow married Richard Drayton of Oxfordshire and the couple lived at Stonor and then on Alice's dower lands in Kent. Although Alice had a sizeable jointure, there is no sign of tension between Thomas (II) and his mother and stepfather. Thomas wrote movingly of their deaths in 1468 and employed as an intimate man of business Thomas Mull, apparently husband of a daughter of Alice and Drayton. Thomas (II), like his father, was a ward of Chaucer, until the latter's death in 1434. He may then have been in the tutelage of William de la Pole, earl, later duke, of Suffolk, who had married Chaucer's heiress, since Thomas's wife, Joan, is said, quite possibly correctly, to have been an illegitimate daughter of Suffolk and Jacqueline of Hainault. Suffolk became the political heir to Chaucer and Beaufort in the region, and the Stonors and other local gentry were drawn into his circle. Thomas (II) Stonor served as local officer in Oxfordshire and Berkshire, although not with any regularity until the 1460s. During the Wars of the Roses, he managed to keep in with both sides, despite serving on Lancastrian commissions of array in 1459 and 1460 and -- doubtless encouraged by his tie of service with Warwick's brother, George Neville, archbishop of York -- co-operating with the readeption government in 1470-71. The family tie with the house of Suffolk remained under both Thomas and his successor, even though Duke William's son, John, had nothing like his father's influence in the region. Under Thomas (II) the Ermington affair resurfaced in the early 1460s, but in 1468 he was able to record a triumphant victory. He seems to have been a fairly formidable man, perhaps over-formidable with his son and heir, but showed himself to be not just an affectionate son but a loving husband. He had three sons and three daughters and he was able to establish both his younger sons, Edmund and Thomas, independently. 
Thomas (II) died in 1474, to be succeeded by his eldest son, Sir William Stonor (c.1449-1494), and was buried lavishly at Pyrton, the parish church for Stonor. His widow survived, probably until 1494. An argument with her son, recorded in 1482, had presumably been resolved by 1493, when she named William executor. William is the Stonor about whom most is known. Although some comments from relatives -- that, as a boy he was 'a musyr and a studyer' (Carpenter, 1.128), and that, as an adult, he was too lavish in his expenditure -- suggest a wastrel, he was in fact the most notable head of the family since Justice Stonor. This may have had a lot to do with the fact that he was the first since Justice Stonor's son Sir John to inherit as an adult. From 1478 he was part of Edward IV's rapidly expanding affinity, which seems to have been developing into the dominant political connection in the Thames valley in this period. He was made KB at the marriage of the young duke of York in early 1478 and became a knight of the body in 1478 or 1479. Although he himself did not go on the king's French campaign in 1475, his brothers did. That he held important local office in Oxfordshire from 1478 was almost certainly due to the household connection. The rising social level of his three wives reflects his personal rise. Despite the occasional foray into the marriage market, he was unmarried in 1474 but by 1475 had chosen for his wife Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Rich, the son of a wealthy London mercer, and daughter of John Croke, a London alderman. Her chief attraction was almost certainly her money, for William seems to have been rather short of ready cash at this time, but letters from Elizabeth to William from London, where she resided much of the time, show genuine affection. It was through this alliance that William met Thomas Betson, the Calais wool merchant, with whom he went into partnership in the wool trade from 1475 to 1479. Betson became betrothed to Katherine Rich, Elizabeth's young daughter from her first marriage, and his letters to Katherine and her family reveal a man of great charm. Elizabeth died in 1479, leaving no children from the marriage, and in 1480 Stonor married Agnes, widow of John Wydeslade, a gentleman of Devon, and granddaughter and heir of William Wynard, an Exeter merchant with substantial estates in Devon and Cornwall. Although Agnes died soon after, in 1481, it was probably this marriage that brought Stonor a tie with Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, and his wife, the Bonville heiress, that remained important in the safeguarding of his south-western estates. William was still childless and by late 1481 had married again, this time to Anne, daughter and, from 1483, heir of John Neville, Marquess Montagu. It was, however, Stonor's move into the highest political circles that was to prove his and his family's temporary undoing. In October 1483, he was one of the many household men, several from the Thames valley, in Buckingham's rebellion against Richard III. He was attainted and his lands confiscated and granted away, some of them to Lord Lovell, Richard's chief representative in the region. Stonor may have gone into exile in Brittany with Dorset. He was in any case restored to his estates, to his household position, and to local office on Henry VII's accession in 1485. In 1487 he fought for Henry at Stoke, where he was made a banneret, and his appointment as steward to Oxford University in 1492 indicates how close he was thought to be to the king. His third wife died in 1486 and he died in 1494, leaving a twelve-year-old son, John, and a daughter, Anne. Both were betrothed to members of the Fortescue family, perhaps in an attempt to end the Ermington affair for good. The question of the wardship of John -- 'Stonor's case' -- became a leading precedent in the crown's efforts to extend its prerogative wardship, but the really intensive litigation in the family followed on John's death in 1499, when Thomas (III), William's younger brother, claimed as the heir male against the heir general, William's daughter, and her husband. 'Stonor v. Fortescue' continued until the male line's victory in 1537. Their descendants still reside at Stonor Park. The Stonor family arms were azure, two bars dancettee or, a chief argent. 
The Stonors would be a typical, if unremarkable, prominent fifteenth-century gentry family, typical as much in their rise as in their subsequent history, were it not for the survival of a large number of papers and, above all, letters from this period. These came into crown hands, either in 1483 or with the 'Stonor v. Fortescue' suit in chancery, and remained there, and are the largest collection of gentry letters from the period after the Pastons'. Although less renowned than the latter, they are much more representative of the gentry world: unlike the Pastons, the Stonors were no longer social climbers and the Thames valley in the fifteenth century was a more stable region than East Anglia. If the letters contain fewer telling personal details than the Paston letters, they nevertheless offer an unrivalled insight into the routine life of a gentry family: estate management, consumption, debt and credit, marriage negotiations, dealing with churchmen, from bishops, archbishops, and abbots to parish priests, performing the king's business, and much else besides. They demonstrate how the family used for its affairs a network of kinsmen, personal agents, neighbours, and friends centred on the Thames valley, and how marriage and kinship with families from the region, such as Cotesmore, Barantyn, Brecknock, Hampden, Harecourt, Ramsey, and Rokes, helped both create and strengthen this network. It was a world where negotiation was the normal response to conflict and, while relations with the nobility may have been important, the nobles did not dominate gentry affairs in the Thames valley as they did in some other parts of England. The letters afford a privileged insight into the mundane but important affairs that must have been the stuff of daily life to almost all gentry families in this period, however enmeshed in local and national politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 63927


Stonor family (per. c.1315-c.1500), gentry, was founded by Sir John Stonor (c.1281-1354), chief justice of the common pleas, who raised the Stonors from their status of very minor Oxfordshire landowners. As a result of his successful career, which began about 1315, he was able to buy estates in several counties, notably Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, and Devon, and to begin rebuilding the family residence at Stonor, near Henley, Oxfordshire. Although a few additions to the estate were made later by marriage and purchase, the family property remained essentially as he left it. It was worth nearly $250 under Thomas (I). John had five or six sons, of whom one, Robert, was a canon of Wells, and the eldest was another John, Sir John Stonor (c.1310-1361), who succeeded him in 1354. Although knighted by 1351, John the younger had a curiously anonymous career; the lack of activity at home may have been due to prolonged service abroad, but there is no record of this. His wife is said to have been a daughter of John Wenard of Oxfordshire and he died in 1361. He was succeeded by his son Edmund Stonor (c.1347-1382), who became ward of the countess of Bedford, Edward III's daughter, and received livery in 1365. He was the first of the family to take his full place as a 'country gentleman'; he took part in local transactions and served as sheriff, MP, and JP in Oxfordshire and Berkshire. He was a commissioner for the poll taxes of 1379 and 1380 in Oxfordshire, which may explain the burning of his muniments and the murder of his servant in Hertfordshire during the peasants' revolt of 1381. He seems to have married a sister of Warin de Lisle of Berkshire, and they had three sons, of whom one predeceased his father, and one daughter. 
Edmund's death in 1382 began a lengthy period of almost continuous minorities in the Stonor family. John, the heir, was then about thirteen and died in 1383. His brother and heir Sir Ralph Stonor (c.1368-1394) was also a minor and both in turn were wards of Sir Robert Bealknap, chief justice of the common pleas, and Ralph was given in marriage to Bealknap's daughter Joan. He came of age in 1390, being fortunately too young to share in Bealknap's disgrace at the hands of the appellants in 1388. His only notable action as an adult was to serve on Richard II's Irish expedition of 1394, by which time he was knighted, and he died, probably in Ireland, in that year. Ralph left an infant heir, Gilbert, born in 1393, who died in 1396. By late 1395 Ralph's widow had married Edmund Hampden of Hampden, Buckinghamshire, creating a lasting tie between the two families. 
Ralph's second son, who succeeded his brother, was Thomas (I) Stonor (c.1394-1431). He is the first of the family whose activities are revealed through their letters and papers. From 1403 he was in the custody of Thomas Chaucer of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, son of the poet and a leading Thames valley landowner. Thus began a lengthy family association with the holders of the Chaucer lands and through Chaucer came a connection with Cardinal Beaufort, another power in the region. By 1416 Thomas Stonor was married to Alice, daughter and heir of Thomas Kirby of Horton, Kent, a match that considerably increased the Stonors' rather small estate in that county. Thomas came of age 'c'.1415; he may well have served with Henry V in France in 1419 and 1420, and he played a substantial part in local government, notably as MP and sheriff. He made further improvements to the family home; by the later fifteenth century it was clearly a commodious residence, whose parlours and chambers reflected the new fashion for privacy. It was under Thomas, in the early 1420s, that the protracted dispute with the Fortescues began over the Stonor property of Ermington, Devon, one of those purchased by Justice Stonor. 
Thomas died in 1431, leaving two sons, the oldest of whom was Thomas (II) Stonor (1424-1474), and five daughters, and yet another period of minority ensued. Thomas (I)'s widow married Richard Drayton of Oxfordshire and the couple lived at Stonor and then on Alice's dower lands in Kent. Although Alice had a sizeable jointure, there is no sign of tension between Thomas (II) and his mother and stepfather. Thomas wrote movingly of their deaths in 1468 and employed as an intimate man of business Thomas Mull, apparently husband of a daughter of Alice and Drayton. Thomas (II), like his father, was a ward of Chaucer, until the latter's death in 1434. He may then have been in the tutelage of William de la Pole, earl, later duke, of Suffolk, who had married Chaucer's heiress, since Thomas's wife, Joan, is said, quite possibly correctly, to have been an illegitimate daughter of Suffolk and Jacqueline of Hainault. Suffolk became the political heir to Chaucer and Beaufort in the region, and the Stonors and other local gentry were drawn into his circle. Thomas (II) Stonor served as local officer in Oxfordshire and Berkshire, although not with any regularity until the 1460s. During the Wars of the Roses, he managed to keep in with both sides, despite serving on Lancastrian commissions of array in 1459 and 1460 and -- doubtless encouraged by his tie of service with Warwick's brother, George Neville, archbishop of York -- co-operating with the readeption government in 1470-71. The family tie with the house of Suffolk remained under both Thomas and his successor, even though Duke William's son, John, had nothing like his father's influence in the region. Under Thomas (II) the Ermington affair resurfaced in the early 1460s, but in 1468 he was able to record a triumphant victory. He seems to have been a fairly formidable man, perhaps over-formidable with his son and heir, but showed himself to be not just an affectionate son but a loving husband. He had three sons and three daughters and he was able to establish both his younger sons, Edmund and Thomas, independently. 
Thomas (II) died in 1474, to be succeeded by his eldest son, Sir William Stonor (c.1449-1494), and was buried lavishly at Pyrton, the parish church for Stonor. His widow survived, probably until 1494. An argument with her son, recorded in 1482, had presumably been resolved by 1493, when she named William executor. William is the Stonor about whom most is known. Although some comments from relatives -- that, as a boy he was 'a musyr and a studyer' (Carpenter, 1.128), and that, as an adult, he was too lavish in his expenditure -- suggest a wastrel, he was in fact the most notable head of the family since Justice Stonor. This may have had a lot to do with the fact that he was the first since Justice Stonor's son Sir John to inherit as an adult. From 1478 he was part of Edward IV's rapidly expanding affinity, which seems to have been developing into the dominant political connection in the Thames valley in this period. He was made KB at the marriage of the young duke of York in early 1478 and became a knight of the body in 1478 or 1479. Although he himself did not go on the king's French campaign in 1475, his brothers did. That he held important local office in Oxfordshire from 1478 was almost certainly due to the household connection. The rising social level of his three wives reflects his personal rise. Despite the occasional foray into the marriage market, he was unmarried in 1474 but by 1475 had chosen for his wife Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Rich, the son of a wealthy London mercer, and daughter of John Croke, a London alderman. Her chief attraction was almost certainly her money, for William seems to have been rather short of ready cash at this time, but letters from Elizabeth to William from London, where she resided much of the time, show genuine affection. It was through this alliance that William met Thomas Betson, the Calais wool merchant, with whom he went into partnership in the wool trade from 1475 to 1479. Betson became betrothed to Katherine Rich, Elizabeth's young daughter from her first marriage, and his letters to Katherine and her family reveal a man of great charm. Elizabeth died in 1479, leaving no children from the marriage, and in 1480 Stonor married Agnes, widow of John Wydeslade, a gentleman of Devon, and granddaughter and heir of William Wynard, an Exeter merchant with substantial estates in Devon and Cornwall. Although Agnes died soon after, in 1481, it was probably this marriage that brought Stonor a tie with Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, and his wife, the Bonville heiress, that remained important in the safeguarding of his south-western estates. William was still childless and by late 1481 had married again, this time to Anne, daughter and, from 1483, heir of John Neville, Marquess Montagu. It was, however, Stonor's move into the highest political circles that was to prove his and his family's temporary undoing. In October 1483, he was one of the many household men, several from the Thames valley, in Buckingham's rebellion against Richard III. He was attainted and his lands confiscated and granted away, some of them to Lord Lovell, Richard's chief representative in the region. Stonor may have gone into exile in Brittany with Dorset. He was in any case restored to his estates, to his household position, and to local office on Henry VII's accession in 1485. In 1487 he fought for Henry at Stoke, where he was made a banneret, and his appointment as steward to Oxford University in 1492 indicates how close he was thought to be to the king. His third wife died in 1486 and he died in 1494, leaving a twelve-year-old son, John, and a daughter, Anne. Both were betrothed to members of the Fortescue family, perhaps in an attempt to end the Ermington affair for good. The question of the wardship of John -- 'Stonor's case' -- became a leading precedent in the crown's efforts to extend its prerogative wardship, but the really intensive litigation in the family followed on John's death in 1499, when Thomas (III), William's younger brother, claimed as the heir male against the heir general, William's daughter, and her husband. 'Stonor v. Fortescue' continued until the male line's victory in 1537. Their descendants still reside at Stonor Park. The Stonor family arms were azure, two bars dancettee or, a chief argent. 
The Stonors would be a typical, if unremarkable, prominent fifteenth-century gentry family, typical as much in their rise as in their subsequent history, were it not for the survival of a large number of papers and, above all, letters from this period. These came into crown hands, either in 1483 or with the 'Stonor v. Fortescue' suit in chancery, and remained there, and are the largest collection of gentry letters from the period after the Pastons'. Although less renowned than the latter, they are much more representative of the gentry world: unlike the Pastons, the Stonors were no longer social climbers and the Thames valley in the fifteenth century was a more stable region than East Anglia. If the letters contain fewer telling personal details than the Paston letters, they nevertheless offer an unrivalled insight into the routine life of a gentry family: estate management, consumption, debt and credit, marriage negotiations, dealing with churchmen, from bishops, archbishops, and abbots to parish priests, performing the king's business, and much else besides. They demonstrate how the family used for its affairs a network of kinsmen, personal agents, neighbours, and friends centred on the Thames valley, and how marriage and kinship with families from the region, such as Cotesmore, Barantyn, Brecknock, Hampden, Harecourt, Ramsey, and Rokes, helped both create and strengthen this network. It was a world where negotiation was the normal response to conflict and, while relations with the nobility may have been important, the nobles did not dominate gentry affairs in the Thames valley as they did in some other parts of England. The letters afford a privileged insight into the mundane but important affairs that must have been the stuff of daily life to almost all gentry families in this period, however enmeshed in local and national politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 63928


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63929


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63930


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63931


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63932


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63933


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63934


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63935


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63936


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63937


Mulso family (per. c.1350-1460), gentry, of Northamptonshire, must have originated in Mulsoe, Buckinghamshire, but a branch was already established at Newton by Geddington, Northamptonshire, in 1346. Henry [i] Mulso (fl. 1359-1380) 'of Geddington' appears in records over a period of about twenty years as a merchant and shopowner in Thames Street, London, and as a middle-ranking member of the Northamptonshire gentry. His relationship to the next owner of Newton, John [i] Mulso (d. in or before 1410) is uncertain, and likewise to his more prominent contemporary William [i] Mulso (d. 1376) king's clerk and successor to William Wykeham as surveyor of the works at Windsor in 1361. A canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and (again in succession to Wykeham) dean of St Martin's-le-Grand from 1364, William became a chamberlain of the exchequer of receipt in 1365 and ten years later keeper of the king's wardrobe. His close association with the court enabled him to build up a moderately sized estate in Buckinghamshire, adding Chesham and Stoke Poges to his lordship of Mulsoe, which he finally alienated in mortmain before his death in 1376. 
The last quarter of the fourteenth century saw the Newton branch of the family achieve some prominence in the person of John [i] Mulso, who was a lawyer with a clientele among the nobility and courtiers of Richard II. As a committed supporter of the king he was entrusted with local offices: JP in 1384, escheator in 1385 and 1391-2, MP in the parliaments of September 1388 and 1397-8, and sheriff in 1393-4, 1395-6, and 1397-9. In August 1397 he -- or possibly his namesake (and perhaps his brother), John [ii] Mulso (fl. 1367-1422), who was a burgess of Calais and household retainer of Thomas (I) Mowbray, earl of Nottingham -- was ordered to bring the chief justice, William Rickhill, secretly to Calais to record a forced confession of treason by the duke of Gloucester, held there in Nottingham's custody. In July 1399 he raised men in Northamptonshire to resist the invasion of Henry Bolingbroke, but by 1410 he was dead. After the death of his first wife, Margaret, he married Joan, with whom he is commemorated in a small but beautiful brass in Newton church. He had acquired the manor of Pilton from the executors of his friend Sir William Thorpe in 1391 and had raised the family into the office-holding elite of the shire. 
John [i] Mulso had three sons: Thomas [i] Mulso (d. 1446) with his first wife, Henry [ii] Mulso (d. 1425) and John [iii] Mulso (d. in or before 1416) with his second. John [iii] made the least mark. In 1401 he married Alice, widow of William Spernore, and two years later they acquired the important manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire, which was devised to their two sons, John [iv] and Thomas [ii], both of whom served in France between 1417 and 1431. John [iii] held no shire office and had died by 1416. By contrast his brother Henry [ii] served as escheator (1395-7) and aulnager (1398-9) in Northamptonshire and used the family's connection with the house of York to become the duke's lieutenant in Jersey and constable of the Tower of London. He served on the duke of Clarence's expedition to Aquitaine in 1412 and at Harfleur in 1415 where, by 1421, he had become lieutenant to Lord Cromwell. He subsequently returned to England to be elected to parliament for Northamptonshire in 1422. By then he was already in the service of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was treasurer of his household by 1423. In November 1424 he was preparing to accompany the duke to Hainault, but by April 1425 he had returned. He made his will on 1 June and died shortly afterward. His marriage to Joan had produced two sons to whom he left his armour, and two unmarried daughters; he asked to be buried in the north aisle of Geddington church, but no monument remains. 
It was Thomas [i] Mulso, the eldest and longest-surviving son of John [i], who was to sustain the family's role in the shire in the first quarter of the fifteenth century, serving as sheriff (1409-10) and escheator (1419-20) and being elected to parliament in 1417. He held the Mulso inheritance in Newton, Pilton, and Finedon, and acquired further lands at Little Ocle and at Kettleborough in Suffolk. In 1412 his landed income was assessed at not less than $54 p.a. placing him among the middling gentry. He too probably had some legal competence and was a frequent feoffee and witness for the local gentry and nobility. But after 1422 he held no further offices, occupying himself with his estates, though he did not die until 1446. His will, made in 1439, provided lands for his two younger sons, William [ii] Mulso (d. after 1461) and Sir Edmund Mulso (d. 1458), and money for the marriage of their sister Margaret, thereby reducing the full inheritance of Thomas [ii] Mulso (d. 1460), the eldest. 
By 1445 this next generation had already undertaken service in France -- Thomas [ii] from 1436, under a sequence of professional captains, and Edmund accompanying Richard, duke of York, to Normandy in 1441. There he held captaincies at Lisieux, Neuburg, Pont-Audemer, and Pont-de-l'Arche, received knighthood, and won a place among the select band of ducal counsellors, alongside Sir William Oldhall and Sir Andrew Ogard. After York's return in 1446 Sir Edmund became constable of Fotheringhay Castle and joint steward of Rayleigh, while Thomas [ii], temporarily relinquishing his English lands, became his brother's lieutenant at Pont-de-l'Arche and Elbeuf and York's captain in Bernay. In June 1449 Edmund accompanied the duke to Ireland where he was made seneschal of Meath; when the political crisis of 1450 brought York back from Ireland, all three brothers gave him open support. Edmund and others of the duke's bodyguard were targeted by the court; William [ii] became the duke's retainer with a large fee; and Thomas [ii] returned from France to sit in the parliament of November 1450 alongside Edmund as York's nominees. When in 1451-2 York found himself excluded from the court and forced into armed confrontation, Edmund and Thomas [ii] raised men in Northamptonshire for his march to Dartford where they were probably present. 
Although the brothers avoided reprisals like those taken against Oldhall, they remained under a cloud until York's fortunes improved with his first protectorate in 1454. Then, and again in November 1455, Edmund was engaged on diplomatic missions and Thomas [ii] was rewarded with an advantageous lease of the royal manor of Geddington in November 1454. Edmund joined Warwick's garrison at Calais in March 1456 but did not live to face the ultimate test of civil war. He made his will on 1 May 1458, asking to be buried in St Michael Paternoster Royal where he endowed prayers for Richard of York. As his executors he named his brother William [ii] and William Oldhall, who two years later was buried nearby. Though well rewarded for his loyalty to Richard of York, Edmund remained a professional soldier-counsellor and never established himself as a significant landowner. 
Thomas's later years were spent managing the Mulso lands in Northamptonshire and Suffolk, cultivating an obscurity which was suddenly terminated by his death on 25 July 1460, two weeks after the battle of Northampton and perhaps as a consequence of it. He left three daughters, one by his first wife, Anne, two by his second, Katherine. His heir, Alice, was already married to Henry Tresham (younger brother of the ardent Lancastrian Sir Thomas Tresham) to whom all the Mulso estates now passed. When Tresham was killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 the Mulso lands, by a kind of political justice, escheated to York's son, Edward IV. 
In their brief span the Mulsos were never among the leading gentry of Northamptonshire; their modest estates, acquired through local legal practice, were not significantly augmented either by a fortunate marriage of the heir or by service in war which the younger sons had to undertake. 


@@@@@


doc= 63939


Pingo family (per. c.1690-1815), clockmakers, engravers, and medallists, was established in London in the 1670s. It is believed that the name Pingo or Pingoe -- as it was formerly, and occasionally, styled -- comes from Devon, where members of the Pyncowe, Pinchoe, and Pinkoe families were living between the 1480s and 1640s. 
The first prominent member of the family was 


@@@@@


doc= 63940


Copeman, Sydney Arthur Monckton (1862-1947), medical scientist, was born at home on 21 February 1862 in the cathedral close at Norwich, the son of Arthur Charles Copeman (1824-1896), canon and rural dean of Norwich, and his wife, Mary Metcalfe (1834-1927), daughter of deputy lieutenant Charles Metcalfe JP, of Inglethorpe Hall, Emneth, Norfolk. He was the eldest of seven sons and five daughters, in that birth order, who all achieved a prominence in their chosen careers as physicians, priests, colonial governors, matrons of hospitals, and headmistresses. His father had qualified in medicine (MB, London) in 1848, having in 1844 been gold medallist of his year in anatomy and physiology; he practised only briefly before taking holy orders, and in addition to his ecclesiastical duties took on being chairman of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital and chairman of the building committee of the new hospital; he was active in the foundation and management of very many clerical, educational, and humane works centred in Norfolk. Copeman's maternal grandfather held lordships of five manors, and was also from a clerical and landowning family. 
Copeman was educated at King Edward VI School, Norwich, and at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he obtained a second class in the natural sciences tripos in 1882. He then went to St Thomas's Hospital, London. He graduated MB (1886) and MD (1890) at Cambridge, and was elected FRCP in 1899, proud of having become MRCP by examination though not primarily a clinician. On 12 July 1899 he married Ethel Margaret (1869-1944), youngest daughter of Sir Thomas William Boord, bt, of Wakehurst Place, Sussex (later managed by the National Trust and Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew). Their first house was 57 Redcliffe Gardens, London, where two of their three children were born. Their eldest child was William Sydney Charles Copeman (1900-1970). 
Copeman was initially encouraged to pursue medical research while an undergraduate by Sir Michael Foster, the first professor of physiology at Cambridge. He took the post of demonstrator in physiology and morbid anatomy at St Thomas's Hospital, and later became assistant lecturer in physiology and research scholar of the British Medical Association, with clinical access to patients and laboratory space. He published, within four years of qualification, seventeen papers on haematological subjects, including one in collaboration with Sir Charles Sherrington and two with W. S. Bristowe. 
These lines of research, Sherrington reported, were 'cut short... to my loss' (MacNalty and Craigie, 38), after Copeman was recruited by Dr Richard Thorne Thorne, principal medical officer of the Local Government Board. From 1891 Copeman's career was in public health, with the medical department of the Local Government Board. With no Medical Research Council or other scientific grants, he welcomed a paid post to allow him further opportunities to pursue his researches, which by now were embracing work on the relationship of variola to vaccinia (cowpox). These researches were aided in the early stages by a gift of $400 from Sir Joseph Lister, which Copeman later repaid. The rosebowl that Lister gave Copeman as a wedding present was donated to the Royal College of Physicians by his son, W. S. C. Copeman, in gratitude for Lister's friendship; Lister was his 'unofficial' godfather. 
Copeman's experimental work and publications for the next eight years were concentrated chiefly on vaccinia and smallpox viruses; he enquired into their nosological importance in man and in animals. Was vaccinia or cowpox in nature a variety of attenuated smallpox, i.e. variola minor or alastrim? How was this relevant to the development of an efficient vaccine against smallpox? Copeman was also pursuing, concurrently, another aspect that was of supreme importance to world health -- a method for rendering bacteriologically pure the virus vaccine raised in the calf. In 1889 the royal commission on vaccination had broadly recommended single-dose vials of vaccine rendered bacteriologically pure, provided the process of creating it free of contamination allowed no loss of efficiency of the active agent. For four decades scientists in many countries had been experimenting with heat treatments and with the addition of chemicals. Copeman suggested the use of glycerine before the royal commission on vaccination in 1893. He freely acknowledged that during the previous forty years variations along these lines had been advocated and tried and that a great variety of methods had been employed but without satisfaction. The worry about the vaccine transmitting erysipelas (caused by common staphylococci and streptococci), and the remoter syphilis and leprosy, was specifically questioned in the report by the royal commission on vaccination in 1896. The methods of vaccination then in use -- by transmitting material from arm to arm, or, since the days of Edward Jenner, from the calf's belly to the patient (as was still practised on the continent), or as lymph and exudate dried onto ivory points creating a scab crammed with unwanted micro-organisms -- were methods to be deplored on the obvious grounds of microbiological hygiene. 
However, in the Milroy lectures at the Royal College of Physicians in 1898, Copeman could now detail the methods he had devised to raise the pure vaccine: 'I at length found [success] in the addition to the lymph, or rather the vesicular pulp, obtained from a vaccinated calf, of a sterilized 50 per cent solution of glycerine in distilled water' (S. M. Copeman, 155). The long-term effectiveness and reliability of the virus in the vaccine was preserved, and the dangers of passing on bacterial infection were abolished. Copeman's improved methods allowed the vaccine to be stored for a long period in glass vials and transported round the world. The manufacture of the vaccine, the glycerinated lymph, was now simple and cheap. The 'Vaccination Act' of 1898 gave statutory authority, and the vaccination order (1898) of the Local Government Board effected Copeman's methods for the raising, production, and purification of glycerinated calf lymph. A new laboratory was provided in Chelsea, London, for its production, but to accommodate the vastly increased work the government lymph establishment was founded at Hendon in 1907. Copeman thus transformed vaccination against smallpox into a sure and safe operation. His methods of vaccine production continued to be employed until smallpox was eliminated from the globe in 1977. 
The important point about Copeman's career was that he was employed to do contract research -- taking on public health problems given to him by his employers. In many ways he carried on the tradition of investigative work established for the medical department by John Simon in the 1860s and 1870s. According to his obituarists he was also a pioneer in immunization against diphtheria, and his presidential address for the epidemiological section of the Royal Society of Medicine in 1926 concerned serum prophylaxis of measles. 'The remarkable thing about Copeman was that he made time to do so much in so many varied fields of activity and did it with little effort or appearance of haste. This characteristic was apparent in his literary work. He wrote easily and his writing displayed clarity of thought and diction. His scientific work was pursued under many difficulties for as a medical officer he was always liable to interruption in the middle of important experiments, in order to conduct some medical inspection, to hold a public enquiry or to go abroad at a moment's notice on the Crown's Service. Yet he always returned to research work with unabated energy. (MacNalty and Craigie, 45)' Copeman wrote nearly a hundred meticulous scientific papers and official reports concerning public health, infant and child mortality, household sanitation, food storage, waste disposal, and pollution by sewage and chemical effluents. He investigated outbreaks of scarlatina, typhus, and enteric fevers, incriminating milk, water, and ice-cream sources, particularly with regard to pollution of underground water supplies by contamination from soil and subsoil. Many of his reports resulted in drastic reforms. He investigated an outbreak of a mysterious, lethal, epidemic skin disease, the nature of which is still unknown; encephalitis lethargica; the epidemiology and natural history of ascaris gut infestations; and the cause of lead poisoning from drinking-water supplies. He travelled extensively in England and on the continent investigating and advising on the safety of manufacturing processes, explosive and poisonous gases from ferro-silicone manufacture, and 'offensive nuisances' from India-rubber and linoleum manufacturers. 
Copeman conducted ingenious experiments on bluebottles and houseflies, their breeding in horse manure and how to control this, and the range of their transmission of infection, tracking individual flies over large distances 1000 yards or more to rubbish tips. Cancer was a later interest. As a member of the council of the Zoological Society of London he developed its work on scientific lines and promptly dealt with an outbreak of anthrax, and he discovered a colony on London's Primrose Hill of a rare, burrowing parasitic fly. He was a founder of the Medical Research Club (Council), a councillor of the Royal College of Physicians, a knight of grace of the order of St John and a member of the chapter-general of the order, a liveryman of the Society of Apothecaries, and, after retirement, a member of the London county council. Other honours and distinctions were the fellowship of the Royal Society (1903), the Cameron prize of the University of Edinburgh (1899), the Fothergillian gold medal of the Medical Society of London (1899), the Buchanan gold medal of the Royal Society (1902), the Jenner medal of the Royal Society of Medicine (1925), and the gold medal of the International Faculty of Sciences (1938). 
'Copeman was tall and of distinguished appearance', and apparently elegant and so notably well-dressed (wearing a black, tall silk hat even on field work) as to attract special mention in the Westminster medical school student magazine. 'He was of generous and kindly disposition, ever ready to help his younger colleagues... well read, a man of wide culture and a delightful companion' (MacNalty and Craigie, 45). A high Anglican, he was a regular communicant. His wife, Ethel, helped him to prepare his work for publication, and assisted with his foreign correspondence in French, German, and Italian. She died on 24 April 1944. Copeman died at his home in King's Gardens, Hove, Sussex, on 11 April 1947, and was buried at Brighton parish church. A memorial service was held on 7 May 1947 at the church of the order of St John of Jerusalem. In 1996 an English Heritage blue plaque was erected outside Copeman's house in Redcliffe Gardens, on the 200th anniversary of Edward Jenner's discovery of vaccination against smallpox. 


@@@@@


doc= 63941


Paul, Sir James Balfour (1846-1931), herald and genealogist, was born in Edinburgh on 16 November 1846, the younger of two sons of the Revd John Paul (1796-1873), minister of St Cuthbert's, Edinburgh, and moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1847-8, and Margaret (died 1860), daughter of James Balfour of Pilrig, writer to the signet. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and at the University of Edinburgh, and was called to the Scottish bar in 1870. He was editor of the 'Journal of Jurisprudence' and later served as treasurer of the Faculty of Advocates (1883-1902). Married on 18 June 1872, he and his wife, Helen Margaret (died 20 Dec 1929), daughter of John Wairne Forman of Staffa, had three sons and a daughter. 
Paul was appointed lord Lyon king of arms in March 1890 and held that office until 1926; he was also secretary of the Order of the Thistle in a period which saw the erection of the order's chapel at St Giles, Edinburgh. He was knighted in 1900 and appointed KCVO in the year of his retirement. He had the advantage of serving as Lyon at a time of renewed and well-informed enthusiasm for heraldry in Scotland. For many years the Lyon office had slumbered, and the court of the lord Lyon had exercised little more than a nominal jurisdiction. The little work that was expected of Lyon was performed, with greater or lesser skill, by an official called the Lyon-depute, who received a fraction of Lyon's sinecure. Reforms came, and Paul's immediate predecessor was George Burnett, a scholar and a gentleman, who had compiled the first good book on Scottish heraldry to be written for many years. Paul was determined to follow in this tradition. 
Paul's chief and most lasting contribution to Scottish heraldry is his masterly edition of 'The Scots Peerage' (1909-14) in nine finely printed and beautifully illustrated volumes. It was fortunate that a work of this magnitude was completed on the eve of the First World War. It effectively replaced all former Scottish peerage reference works and, on the whole, was comprehensive and accurate in the information it contained. Unlike 'The Complete Peerage' it was not limited to successors to titles of honour and their immediate heirs. Amateurs of quaint and curious footnotes are likely to be disappointed. 'The Scots Peerage', as Paul acknowledged, was not his work alone -- he received much assistance from a well-chosen body of able and learned persons -- but there can be no doubt that he inspired the work and deserves most of the credit for it. 
In the Lyon office Paul was best-remembered for his first two editions of a useful and almost essential guide to the contents of the Lyon register, valuable at a time when the number of grants and matriculations was rapidly increasing. His other important contribution to Scottish heraldic literature was his 'Heraldry in Relation to Scottish History and Art' (1900), the publication of his Rhind lectures on archaeology delivered to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. To some extent this work represented a new and possibly enlightened view of heraldry. It was certainly a departure from the days of crudely painted armorials and dubious family histories, and it helped to introduce heraldry to the reader as an art form in itself. Additionally, Paul often contributed to journals on history and antiquities, and he was responsible for much of the work involved in preparing the 'Record' series volumes of 'Registrum magni sigilli' and 'Accounts of the Lord Treasurer of Scotland'. 
Paul was an enthusiastic and greatly appreciated member of the Royal Company of Archers (HM bodyguard for Scotland), which he joined in 1871; he published the history of the company in 1875. He took an active interest in the work of the Scottish History Society, the Scottish Record Society, and the Scottish Ecclesiological Society. In 1908 he was awarded an honorary LLD degree by his old university, in view of his public and scholarly achievements. He died on 15 September 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 63945


Elizabeth Mary Aslin (1923-1989), art historian and administrator, was born on 23 March 1923 at 33 Collegiate Crescent, Broomhall, Sheffield. She attended the Slade School of Art, then the University of London, and became an authority on the Victorian decorative arts and furniture. A gregarious and forceful personality, she made her reputation in the circulation department of the Victoria and Albert Museum, which she joined in 1947. As assistant keeper at the Bethnal Green Museum (1964-8), she transformed the display of dolls and toys and added a strong section on the Victorian decorative arts. She was assistant director at the Victoria and Albert from 1968 to 1974, and then again keeper at Bethnal Green between 1974 and 1981. Her books include 'Nineteenth Century English Furniture' (1962) and 'The Aesthetic Movement' (1969). She died, unmarried, on 14 April 1989 at 52 Dyke Road Avenue, Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 63949


Barnett, Dame (Mary) Henrietta (1905-1985), air force officer, was born at Glasnevin, Barnes Close, in Winchester on 16 February 1905, the youngest child and second daughter of Colonel George Henry Barnett CMG DSO, and gentleman-at-arms, of the 60th rifles, and his wife, Mary Dorothea, 'nee' Baker. She was educated at Heathfield School, Ascot, Berkshire (where she was known as Molly) from September 1918 to July 1922. Perhaps inspired by her father, she started what was to become her military career in 1938 as a volunteer in the no. 45 county of Oxford company of the Auxiliary Territorial Service, before transferring to the Women's Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF) after its establishment on 28 June 1939. She quickly rose through the ranks, serving during the early part of the war at RAF Upper Heyford in Oxfordshire and at RAF Feltwell in Norfolk, and then, in the testing conditions of the London blitz, as officer-in-charge of WAAF at the Air Ministry. Having served on home bases throughout the war, a posting in the summer of 1945 took her to the different, but in many ways equally challenging, environment of the headquarters of the Mediterranean allied air forces. Here she was staff officer responsible for all WAAF personnel working in the RAF Mediterranean and Middle East command, which included bases in Algiers and Cyprus. Although based in the grounds of Caserta Palace in Italy, in a converted Nissen hut that she nicknamed the Mushroom, Barnett travelled widely throughout the command, resolving welfare and other problems with tact and diplomacy, inspecting existing WAAF quarters, and assessing the feasibility of posting WAAF still further afield. 
On her return to Britain in October 1947 she served first as WAAF staff officer at headquarters Flying Training Command, and then from October 1948 as WAAF inspector, a job that again involved considerable travelling, although this time confined to bases within home commands. The immediate post-war years were a time of transition for the WAAF, from a wartime to a peacetime force, and also from an auxiliary and temporary adjunct to the RAF to a permanent, enlisted service. This latter change was a complex one involving considerable and lengthy negotiations and, although the requisite legislation was enacted in March 1948, it was to be almost another year before the permanent service was properly established. When the Women's Royal Air Force finally came into being on 1 February 1949 it was with Barnett as one of its two deputy directors, with responsibility for the selection, promotion, and career and personal problems of WRAF officers. 
From June 1950 she served for two and a half years as WRAF staff officer for home command until, on 1 November 1952, she became the only female station commander in the RAF on her appointment as commanding officer of Hawkinge in Kent. Hawkinge was primarily the WRAF officer-training centre -- the female equivalent of RAF Cranwell -- but it was home not only to up to 200 WRAF, but also to 70 members of an RAF glider unit. This was suitable preparation for command on a rather larger scale, and on 1 August 1956 she was appointed director of the WRAF with the acting rank of air commandant. 
During her time as director of the WRAF she sought particularly to promote the expansion of the service, and as part of her recruitment campaign she oversaw the introduction of a scheme of local service enlistment to the force, and the increase of WRAF rates of pay from 75 per cent to 85 per cent of the corresponding rates for the RAF. Her wartime experience of overseas service stood her in good stead in her role as ambassador for the service abroad, and she visited units in the Middle East, the Far East, Singapore, Malaya, Malta, Denmark, Gibraltar, and the NATO base at Fontainebleau, Paris. At home she enthusiastically led the WRAF in raising funds for the restoration of St Clement Danes Church on the Strand, London, which was reconsecrated as the official RAF church by the bishop of London on 19 October 1958, and in 1959 she oversaw the celebrations to mark the tenth anniversary of the integration of both the WRAF and the Princess Mary's Royal Air Force Nursing Service into the RAF. Tall and slim, she combined the requisite immaculateness in uniform with a homely and approachable appearance. She was appointed OBE in 1950, CBE in 1956, and DBE in 1958, and as director of the WRAF she was aide-de-camp to the queen. 
In March 1960 Dame Henrietta Barnett retired to a cottage in Woodstock, Oxfordshire, where, as well as maintaining her links with the WRAF as a member and sometime chairman of the executive committee of the WRAF Officers' Association, she involved herself in local affairs, serving as mayor of Woodstock from 1968 to 1969, and she continued to enjoy the country pursuits of fishing and hunting; as commanding officer of Hawkinge she had entertained the local hunt. She died of a heart attack at her home, Hoggrove House, 24 Park Street, Woodstock, on 11 September 1985. 


@@@@@


doc= 63950


Bather, Elizabeth Constance (1904-1988), police officer, was born on 11 October 1904 in Winchester, Hampshire, the daughter of the Revd Arthur George Bather, a housemaster at Winchester College, Hampshire, and his wife, Lilian Dundas Firth. She was educated at St Swithun's School, Winchester. From 1937 to 1946 she was a JP in Winchester, where she gained experience of young offenders, and she was also a member of Hampshire county council. She joined the Women's Auxiliary Air Force at the beginning of the Second World War, and became a senior officer at Bomber Command before being posted to Canada to help set up the Canadian Women's Auxiliary Air Force. She reached the rank of group officer in 1944, and was appointed OBE in 1946 for her services to the force. 
Despite her lack of police experience and her height (she was only 5 feet 4 inches tall), Elizabeth Bather was appointed in 1945 the first woman chief inspector in the Metropolitan Police Force of London, and after a year she succeeded Dorothy Peto as chief superintendent of the Metropolitan women police. She was promoted chief superintendent in 1949. The women police had grown out of the women patrols during the First World War, and had been started as an experimental force of 100 in 1919 with Sophia Stanley as the first superintendent, but in 1922 the government had decided to disband the whole force, and it was only as a result of Mrs Stanley's efforts, backed by the MPs Lady Astor and Margaret Wintringham, that a nucleus of twenty-five was retained, from which a new force could be built, and Dorothy Peto, appointed in 1930, could broaden the work of the force. Elizabeth Bather stressed the need for policewomen to be feminine, and was determined to recruit 'women of charm; women who can bring the gentle touch to a rough world'. She had the uniform redesigned, and allowed policewomen to wear make-up on duty and in summer to go on duty without their tunics. She also encouraged women police to concentrate on juvenile crime and welfare matters, which continued to be the main focus of policewomen until the early 1970s. She gave evidence to the Wolfenden committee on homosexual offences and prostitution, which reported in 1957. 
After her retirement in 1960 Elizabeth Bather served on the Hartley Wintney and Hart district councils in Hampshire from 1967 to 1976. A keen sportswoman, she rode, hunted, fished, and shot. Bather died on 8 January 1988 at Heathersides, Nately Scures, Hook, Hampshire. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 63956


White, Amber Blanco (1887-1981), writer and civil servant, was born in Christchurch, New Zealand, on 1 July 1887, the eldest of three children of Maud Pember Reeves 
('nee' Robison; 1865-1953)
['see 'Reeves, Magdalen Stuart], suffragist Fabian, and William Pember Reeves (1857-1932), politician. The family travelled to England in 1897, where her father became New Zealand's agent-general. Her widowed aunt, cousins, 'and attendants' joined the household in Cornwall Gardens, Kensington. 'London was hateful after New Zealand', she said. 'No freedom. No seashore. Streets, streets, streets. Houses, houses' (Harrison and White, 10267). Educated at Kensington high school and Newnham College, Cambridge (1905-8), Amber achieved a first in both parts of the moral science tripos. Her childhood was overcrowded with cousins, squabbling nursemaids, and parents too much preoccupied with work to pay the children much attention. Her mother, whom she admired, thought her 'impertinent' and her father's generosity with books an 'extravagance'. 'When I complained once that I hardly ever saw her, that I didn't love her at all, she boxed my ears. She was doing more important things, she was too busy to look after a child who ought to be doing her lessons'. Left alone 'with a room of her own and piles of books', she would retreat to her father's study, where she crept under the sofa to read. 'I cared more for books than for clothes'. One day, walking down the Charing Cross Road, she opened a book by Kant, 'and read the destruction of Roman Catholicism by reason' (personal knowledge). From then on she determined to go to Cambridge to study philosophy. Her encounter with Freud was similarly random, the result of a mistaken identity in Harley Street in the twenties. From then on she read Freud, Freud, Freud. 
When Amber left Cambridge (which she 'adored') in 1908 her tutors -- who included 'old Dr Keynes', father of Maynard, who had taught her logic and for whom she never made a single mistake -- provided references which described her as a 'clear and vigorous thinker [who] can express herself with admirable force and directness' (J. N. Keynes, Blanco White MSS). However, her intellectual career was interrupted by a passionate love affair with H. G. Wells ['see 'Wells, Herbert George]. Wells's advocacy of free love, or communal marriages, enjoyed a notoriety among the intellectual young, and Amber became his Newnham propagandist. Wells described Amber as 'a girl of brilliant and precocious promise... [with] a sharp, bright, Levantine face under a shock of very fine abundant black hair, a slender nimble body very much alive, and a quick greedy mind' (G. P. Wells, 73). Country walks and austere conversations about social philosophy soon gave way to lovemaking in Soho and Pimlico while she began her research into 'Why and how Men are Citizens' at the London School of Economics. Soon a 'trickle of whispered talk' (ibid., 72) began to undermine their unstable union. (George) Rivers Blanco White (1883-1966), a young lawyer and fellow Fabian, resolved to marry her. 
Amber meanwhile became pregnant (seized, to Wells's consternation, with 'philo-progenitiveness'), and left with Wells for Le Touquet (and more talk and lovemaking). She returned to London and marriage, at Kensington register office on 7 May 1909, to Blanco White. Wells's novels 'Ann Veronica' (1909) and 'The Research Magnificent' (1915) tell parts of this story. Their daughter, Anna-Jane, was born in December 1909. Amber collaborated with Wells in writing 'The Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind' (1932). In August 1939 she wrote to Wells that their love and their daughter 'have never for a moment felt that they were not worth the price' (G. P. Wells, 81). 
Their love affair figured vividly in the contemporary imagination and helped to pioneer changed attitudes towards sexual relations. Beatrice Webb, who judged Amber brilliant, vain, heathen, and selfish, as well as shy and sweet, wrote in melodramatic language of the havoc and distress their affair provoked, yet it prompted her -- a puritan -- to reconsider sexual ethics. Bernard Shaw's heroine in 'Misalliance' (1909) was Amber, according to Webb, who disliked Shaw's return to the 'rabbit-warren part of human life' ('Diary', 133). Reeves wrote three novels between 1910 and 1914 which examined love, marriage, work, and 'progressive' women. Two more children, Justin and Thomas, were born in 1912 and 1914. The Blanco Whites lived in London at Downshire Hill, Hampstead, and in Sussex for most of their married lives. 
During the First World War, with Rivers away and short of money, Amber worked first for the Admiralty, when she earned $2 a week, and later -- at Winston Churchill's request -- in the Ministry of Munitions on women's wages for $2 10's'. 'The average woman takes to welding as readily as knitting', she wrote. In 1919 she was appointed to the National Whitley Council for the civil service, but was pushed out, like many other women, in 1921. The children, whom she 'never saw', were looked after by a 'faithful old nurse' who refused to take a salary; she walked to work and breakfasted with cabbies for 3died Amber claimed credit for raising munitions workers' wages from 12's'. to 28's'. She did not like Mary Macarthur who, she acknowledged, had an 'impossible job -- women don't organize very well by themselves -- they'll join the men's trade unions... they grudge the subscription and don't see what they get out of it' (Walker and White, 10297). Her fourth novel, 'Give and Take' (1924), was about life in a government department. Sir Matthew Nathan (1862-1939), imperial administrator and close -- sometimes intimate -- friend through the twenties, admired the depiction of the strike committee. 
Rivers Blanco White stood unsuccessfully as a Labour candidate for Lincolnshire (Holland with Boston) in the general election of 1924; together they edited the 'Woman's Leader'. Amber edited 'The Townswoman' for the Townswomen's Guild, leaving it when the local people were able to take over. She stood twice as the Labour candidate for Hendon (1931, 1935) because it was a 'hopeless' seat and she wanted to signal her opposition to Ramsay MacDonald, leader of the National Government. As a Fabian she had believed that 'if you gave people better housing and better food and higher wages and better schools they would work harder and more ardently than they would for private employers'. Describing her pre-war suffragism she said that 'living in those days, life was so hopeful -- you felt that if you would only work hard enough things would get better and better' (Walker and White, 10293, 10294). Later, 'when I got into the Labour meetings in the slums, among the costers and the railwaymen and the women in tenth-hand velvet hats, when I saw their poor pinched grey and yellow faces in those steamy halls', she wrote to a friend in 1924, 'I knew all of a sudden that they were my people' (Fry, 87). The snobbery and condescension evident in her observations was about education and intelligence as much as birth. Disillusion with the progress of human nature, and disagreement with the Labour Party's colonial policy after 1945, led to the Blanco Whites' resignation. 
From 1928 Amber Blanco White lectured for Morley College, in philosophy and psychology. Eva Hubback, the principal, was a friend from Newnham; Amber replaced her as acting head for nearly two years after Eva's unexpected death in 1949. Lecturing was supplemented by research on banking and money for the 'New Statesman' which culminated in a book, 'The Nationalisation of Banking' (1934). 'The New Propaganda' followed in 1939, and 'Worry in Women' in 1941. But the book which summed up her thought, she said, was 'Ethics for Unbelievers' (1949). In 'Ethics' she argues that the origins of moral sense come from the child's conscience. Terrified by fierce passions within and violence without, the child internalizes his severe and powerful parents. Efficient, sensible, encouraging, 'above all reasonable' parents will breed happiness and good citizens. Hers is a reasoning Freud. Psychology blends with economics and evolution. Savages and primitives give way to enlightened reason: 'until order was imposed and education provided by the English, [the Maoris of New Zealand] were cannibals and among the most war-like, formidable and blood-thirsty of the savage races' (Blanco White, 77). Civilization was measured in part by the emancipation of women -- 'every woman must always desire children, a home and a father for them and the love which seems to make these things secure' (ibid., 210) -- and the rights of children; states of mind were less important than actions and behaviour, and moral good must be judged by the kinds of people it produced. Good men and women -- the aim of a scientific humanitarianism -- were the outcome of good homes; education should include the encouragement of marriage between equals, the wiser handling of children. 
Amber nursed her husband after his stroke in the 1960s, and was looked after herself by her cook-housekeeper, a maid, and her daughter-in-law Anne until her own death at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, St John's Wood, London, on 26 December 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 63957


Bloom, Ursula Harvey (1892-1984), writer, was born on 11 December 1892 in Springfield, Chelmsford, Essex, the only daughter of James Harvey Bloom, a Church of England clergyman, and Mary Gardner (died 'c'.1915), both from Norfolk families. Her mother, whom Ursula called Polly, left her philandering husband just before the First World War, moving Ursula and her younger brother, Joscelyn, from the rectory at Whitchurch near Stratford upon Avon, Warwickshire, to less comfortable circumstances at St Albans, Hertfordshire. Ursula was self-educated and at seven privately published her first book, 'Tiger'. She was taught the piano and violin, and first worked as a cinema pianist to help support her family. 
On 14 November 1916 Bloom married Captain Arthur Brownlow Denham-Cookes ('b'. 1890/91) of the 24th London regiment, who died in 1918 of influenza; they had one son, Philip. Her first novel was 'The Great Beginning' (1924), and in the following year she began her normal output of two books annually. On 28 November 1925 she married Commander Charles Gower Robinson RN. In the 1930s she became a crime reporter for the 'Empire News' and 'Sunday Dispatch', then a feature writer for the 'Sunday Pictorial' and beauty editor of 'Woman's Own'. She also wrote 'agony aunt' columns. 
Bloom was disciplined in her writing, striving for 10,000 words a day, and in her life, neither smoking nor drinking, and in 1937 joining George Bernard Shaw to support Gymnosophist societies that promoted nudity. Bloom began to have migraines in the 1940s when living in Malta, where her husband was stationed, and spent considerable time in hospitals seeking a cure. This experience was recounted in 'No Lady in Bed' (1944) and led to several hospital novels under the pseudonyms Sheila Burns and Rachel Harvey. She wrote four stage plays in the 1940s and several radio plays in the 1960s. 
In all, Bloom published some 560 books (she was once in the 'Guinness Book of Records' as the world's most prolific female writer). These were mostly atmospheric romances that were insignificant but inventive and well constructed with a fluent, readable style. She admitted to being not romantically inclined, and thought her romantic novels were silly and light. She wrote them variously under her real name and as Sheila Burns. Most novels had emotive titles, such as 'Love is Everything' (1933), 'The Tides of Spring Flow Fast' (1955), and 'Perchance to Dream' (1971). As Mary Essex, Bloom wrote modern romances, and as Lozania Prole she produced historical novels beginning with 'Our Dearest Emma' (1949), based on the life of Emma Hamilton. She also wrote two slightly inaccurate biographies of her parents, recounting her father's life in 'Parson Extraordinary' (1963) and her mother's in 'Price above Rubies' (1965). Her seven autobiographies and memoirs included 'Mistress of None' (1933), 'Rosemary for Stratford-on-Avon' (1966), 'A Roof and Four Walls' (1967), and 'Life is No Fairy Tale' (1976). Her non-fiction included biographies such as 'Hitler's Eva' (1954) and 'The Duke of Windsor' (1972), and books on various subjects like religion, careers, needlework (for which she was noted), cookery, and beauty. 
Bloom's second husband died in 1979, the year in which she wrote her last novel: the optimistic 'Sweet Spring of April'. She died on 29 October 1984 at the Winton Nursing Home, Nether Wallop, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 63961


Braddell, Dorothy Adelaide (1889-1981), designer and decorative artist, was born at 129 Inverness Terrace, Paddington, London, on 30 June 1889, the daughter of Jacob Levine Busse, stockbroker, and his wife, Annie Leonie Stiebel. After attending Miss Manville's school and King's College, London, she studied art at Regent School Polytechnic and at the Byam Shaw School of Art, and won a national gold medal for decorative design. On 12 September 1914, in Paddington, she married the architect Darcy Braddell (1884-1970), with whom she had a son and a daughter. For much of her early career she worked in advertising and display with a client list that included leading national companies such as Shell-Mex Ltd, Viyella, and Allied Ironfounders. However, her lasting reputation lay in her work in domestic interior and kitchen design, much of which was seen in prestigious exhibitions ranging from 'British Art in Industry', at the Royal Academy (1935), to 'Britain Can Make It', at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London (1946). Her work also featured frequently at the 'Daily Mail' Ideal Home exhibitions, for which she often contributed articles on domestic planning to the accompanying publications. 
An important client for many years after the end of the First World War was Shell-Mex Ltd, for whom Braddell produced advertisements as well as many vivid watercolours of English towns and villages that were used for a variety of publicity materials. In line with the newly founded Campaign for the Preservation of Rural England, Shell-Mex Ltd had become increasingly committed to promoting environmentally sensitive advertising and signage. These included what Braddell described as 'inn signboard' advertising -- painted pictorial boards hanging from posts. Although often connected to individual petrol stations they also featured the roads on which they were positioned through the use of illustrative vignettes. For example the Pioneer filling station at Kingston Hill, on the London to Portsmouth road, featured St Paul's Cathedral, the Hog's Back, and a sailing galleon. Braddell also produced an innovative set of large-scale pictorial designs to detract from the ugliness of many railway bridges spanning roads. Although advertising Shell they also featured distances from towns co-ordinated with colourful images of sightseeing attractions in the region. Her work for Shell also encompassed a variety of exhibition stands, including that at the 1932 Motor Show, where she adopted a markedly art deco style with recessed lighting, modernist chromium-plated steel furniture, and zebra-skin-like furnishing fabrics. Many art deco features were also incorporated into her Viyella stand for William Hollins & Co. at the Ideal Home Exhibition of the same year, especially in the decorative metal-and-glass lighting strip at cornice level. Her dexterity enabled her to move through a variety of styles, depending on the context and the aspirations of her clients. For example when designing the Crosse and Blackwell stand at the Nation's Food Exhibition at Olympia in 1925 she looked back to the period when the company was founded by drawing on the architecture of London baroque churches for the pavilion, with attendants dressed in period costume. 
Between the 1930s and 1950s Braddell devoted a considerable amount of energy to rational interior design and domestic planning, very much in tune with the aims of the campaigning Electrical Association for Women and contemporary thinking on scientific management in the home. Alongside other socially committed British women pioneers of domestic design and planning in the 1930s -- such as Caroline Haslett, Anne Shaw, Edna Moseley, and Elizabeth Denby -- Braddell has been undervalued in accounts of British inter-war design. Though socially and professionally well connected the fact that their work was largely centred on the home, itself seen as an essentially feminine domain, has resulted in a comparative lack of recognition. Their contemporary male counterparts, whose masculine values dominated significant committees such as that of the Council for Art and Industry, established by the Board of Trade late in 1933, suffered no such adverse compartmentalization. 
While undertaking many commissions for private clients Braddell also worked for a number of commercial companies, often acting -- unusually for a woman at that time -- in a consultancy capacity. Much of her domestic planning design was seen in exhibitions at home and abroad, and mainly featured domestic room settings, especially kitchens. These included the 'British Art in Industry' exhibition (1935), the Empire Exhibition (Glasgow, 1938), the 'Britain Can Make It' exhibition (1946), and the annual Ideal Home exhibitions, which were always held in central London. She was also involved in design for a much younger audience -- for instance in that for the self-contained and innovatory Children's Exhibition at the 1937 Ideal Home Exhibition, which occupied a prominent area and was geared to attracting the interest of children. Clothes, furniture, games and toys, books, and food were 'presented in such a way as to delight children... yet with a view of guiding their tastes in the right direction' (publicity pamphlet 1937, V&A, archive of art and design cuttings files). The brightly coloured display featured Alice in Wonderland, Peter Pan, and other children's favourites radiating around the central feature of 'Piccaninny Circus', topped by the 'Daily Mail' cupid. 
For many years Braddell showed many kitchens in a variety of styles at the ever popular Ideal Home exhibitions. For example at the 1933 exhibition she showed a 'commonsense kitchen', a 'gas kitchen', a 'basement kitchen' (which also served as a sitting room for two maids), a 'kitchen-living-room' for a small country house, and a 'luxury kitchen' (with a central chromium steel and armour-plated glass working table and modern tubular-steel furniture). Highlighting her approach she wrote: 'I think it can be truly said that good planning is the first essential of labour-saving' (Braddell, typescript, V&A, AAD/1980/2). Much of her work featured Aga cookers (manufactured in England by Allied Ironfounders) incorporated into modern, labour-saving settings with integrated work surfaces and built-in cupboards. She also worked closely with manufacturers on appliance design itself, most notably with the Parkinson Stove Company. Her room settings also featured in a number of significant international exhibitions, most importantly in the British pavilion at the Paris Exhibition of 1937, where all the designs shown were selected by the Council for Art and Industry. Her combined kitchen, scullery, pantry, and maid's sitting room for a small country house was designed to be run either by the owner or the maid. Built-in units and integrated worktops, together with Bakelite telephone and radio, conveyed a modern vision of the kitchen where functional, social, and leisure spaces were seen as one. After the Second World War she continued to look forward to better standards of design and planning in the domestic environment, as displayed at the 'Britain Can Make It' exhibition of 1946, mounted by the recently formed Council of Industrial Design. 
Dorothy Braddell continued to be busy into the 1960s, as her daybooks testify. She died at Quinton House, Lower Quinton, Warwickshire, on 27 April 1981. Examples of her drawings and prints are held in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 63962


Bruce, Mildred Mary (1895-1990), motorist and aviator, was born on 10 November 1895 at Margaretting, Ingatestone, Essex, the daughter of Lawrence Joseph Petre (1864-1944), landowner, of Coptfold Hall, Essex, and his wife, Jennie Maginness, 'nee' Williams (died 1943), an actress. She was educated at the convent of Sion. 
Growing up among five brothers, Mildred Bruce learned early in life how to sail, ride, motorcycle, and drive a car. Her love of motoring was encouraged by her marriage, on 16 February 1926, to the Hon. Victor Austin Bruce (1897-1978), youngest son of Hugh Campbell Bruce, second Baron Aberdare. Victor Bruce, winner of the Monte Carlo rally in 1926, introduced her to long-distance motor touring and to racetracks, and in 1927 Mildred won the 'coupe des dames' at the Monte Carlo rally, covering 1700 miles in seventy-two hours. In December 1927 husband and wife shared the driving at Montlhery to set an endurance record of 15,000 miles in nine days, averaging around 68 m.p.h. They also undertook a mammoth car journey, beginning at John o' Groats and ending in London, during which they circled the western Mediterranean through France, Italy, Sicily, north Africa, and Spain. The Hon. Mrs Victor Bruce, as she was now known, speedily wrote a book on the tour entitled 'Nine Thousand Miles in Eight Weeks' (1927); the lively narrative, noted 'The Times', travelled 'as competently as the motor-car which endured the long test' ('The Times', 8 July 1927). In the following year she produced 'The Woman Owner-Driver' (1928), a response to 'the growing tendency for women to drive and look after their own cars' (Bruce, 'The Woman Owner-Driver', inside cover). 
Bruce returned to Montlhery in June 1929 to claim a speed record for a single-handed twenty-four-hour drive, travelling 2164 miles at an average of 89.57 m.p.h. In between her record-breaking motor drives she established, in September 1928, the fastest time for a Dover-Calais channel crossing by motor boat. Her feats mirrored those of her own fictional creation Penelope, the heroine of a series of humorous short stories that appeared in 'Sketch'. They were later collected in a book, 'The Peregrinations of Penelope' (1930), accurately described as 'Wodehouse 'manque'' (Cadogan, 77). As well as conquering land and water, Penelope took to the air, and in the summer of 1930 Mildred Bruce, passing a car showroom off Bond Street, saw a Blackburn Bluebird light aircraft for sale at $550. It bore the sign 'Ready To Go Anywhere': on enquiring if the plane would travel round the world she was assured by the salesman, 'Of course... easily!' (Bruce, 'The Bluebird's Flight', 2). Before long she had decided to buy it and was planning to visit her mother's birthplace in New Albany, Indiana, via Japan. She learned to fly in a matter of weeks at Brooklands School of Flying and in the early hours of 25 September 1930 set off from Heston aerodrome, armed with route maps provided by the Automobile Association and forty hours of flying in her logbook. 'Bluebird' bore the identifier G-ABDS and when one of its engineers was asked by an onlooker what this stood for he replied 'A B -- y Daft Stunt' (ibid., 9). Such scepticism was general and few expected her even to manage to leave England. 
The following day Bruce surprised her husband by telephoning him not from Kent but from Munich, and in the next five months she proved herself a serious aviator, covering 20,000 miles by air and averaging over 400 miles a day in forty-seven days of flying. She arrived in Rangoon on 30 October 1930, Shanghai on 15 November, and Tokyo on 24 November. From Japan she took 'Bluebird' across the Pacific by ship and resumed flying at Vancouver, then travelled across the United States from Seattle and reached New York on 5 February. Pilot and plane then sailed the Atlantic on the 'Ile de France' and Bruce was honoured with a dinner in Paris by the Aero Club de France. On the final leg of her journey, from Lympne to Croydon on 20 February 1931, she was joined by five Bluebirds, one piloted by Winifred Spooner, and a lone Puss Moth belonging to Amy Johnson, whose flight to Australia in May of the previous year had inspired Mildred Bruce's own adventure. A sizeable crowd gathered to greet her and the under-secretary of state for air welcomed her home on behalf of the Air Council. Her flight, he said, 'testified to the nation's technical development', while her 'unpretentious efficiency' would do much to convince the public of the progress being made in air travel ('The Times', 21 Feb 1931). 
A series of celebratory dinners followed, including one given by the Women's Automobile and Sports Association. 'Flight' judged Bruce's venture 'one of the most meritorious that has been made by a woman' ('Flight', 182), and 'Aeroplane' particularly praised her passage over the Annam Mountains, and the 600 mile stage along the Yellow Sea to Osaka, 'severe enough tests of navigation and nerve' ('Aeroplane', 40/8, 25 Feb 1931, 337). In her own account of the voyage, 'The Bluebird's Flight' (1931), she made light of the difficulties she had faced, prompting one reviewer to observe that readers might well underrate the courage she had shown: 'Her journey was a series of narrowest escapes' ('The Times', 13 Nov 1931). 
Bruce's attempt on the world endurance record in August 1932 met with less acclaim. Piloting a Saro Windhover flying boat, with an accompanying aircrew, she remained airborne for 55 hours. It was well short of the world record, but was nevertheless hailed as a British record, a point vigorously disputed in an editorial in 'Aeroplane'. The journal considered the exercise to be of dubious technical value, and not comparable to the non-stop flight of two RAF pilots from Cranwell to Karachi in April 1929, a journey of almost 51 hours. Its tone betrayed a clear reaction against the sensational way that aviation was presented to the public: 'It all comes under the generic heading of humbugging the press and the people, like putting on bogus Heroes of the Air at movie palaces, and knocking down pylons which were not hit, and claiming records for women when male pilots did the flying, and so on. ('Aeroplane', 43/7, 17 Aug 1932, 332)' It was a process in which Bruce had become unwittingly caught up. In November 1934 she embarked upon an ambitious flight to the Cape in an autogiro, intending to be 'home by Christmas'. She planned to cross the Sahara, and to fly by night as well as by day. These were hazardous courses even with a back-up plane and the venture was abandoned when the autogiro was damaged in strong winds approaching Nimes. 
Three years later, in 1937, Bruce founded Air Dispatch Ltd, a small Croydon-based company carrying freight and passengers. It claimed the quickest air service to France and regularly delivered London newspapers to Paris breakfast tables. During the war the company moved to Cardiff and concentrated on aircraft repair. In 1941 Bruce divorced her husband of fifteen years; they had one son. She announced her intention to stand for parliament at Stroud as an independent in 1945, but withdrew before the election. She died at her home, Croftway House, 298 Finchley Road, Hampstead, London, on 21 May 1990. 
Mildred Bruce was one of the few women of her day to pursue a successful career in aviation. Her epic journey around the world confirmed to the public the stamina of women pilots, while the very casualness of her approach made travel by light aircraft seem less exceptional. It helped in the portrayal of the light plane as the 'aerial motor car'. Both as a motorist and as an aviator she won the respect of the male establishment and after her failed endurance record bid in 1932 'Aeroplane' saluted her: 'she has always proved herself to be full of real courage and energy... and whenever she has been beaten she has proved herself to be a thorough sportsman' ('Aeroplane', 43/7, 17 Aug 1932, 332). 


@@@@@


doc= 63967


Ponsonby, Frederick, third earl of Bessborough (1758-1844), politician and landowner, was born on 24 January 1758, most probably at 1 Cavendish Square, London, the fifth (but only surviving) son of William Ponsonby, second earl of Bessborough (1704-1793), and his wife, Lady Caroline Cavendish (1719-1760), daughter of the third duke of Devonshire; he was baptized at St Marylebone on 21 February 1758. Viscount Duncannon -- as he was to be known until his father's death on 11 March 1793 -- was connected from birth to the leading whig families. Though two of his sons did notable public service, he got through a long life with scant notice, and is known almost wholly as the husband of one of the finest letter-writers in English. 
After a private schooling, a spell at Christ Church, Oxford (1774-77), and the grand tour, Duncannon married on 27 November 1780 Lady Henrietta Spencer (1761-1821) ['see 'Ponsonby, Henrietta Frances], daughter of John Spencer, first Earl Spencer, and sister of Georgiana, duchess of Devonshire. In the same year he was elected, in the Devonshire interest, MP for Knaresborough, a seat he kept until his removal to the Lords in 1793. His political career was undistinguished. He supported Charles James Fox on the American War of Independence, blaming it on the king's 'evil' advisers, and he was briefly a lord of the Admiralty (1782, 1783) in the Rockingham and Fox-North administrations. In 1794 he followed the duke of Portland and seconded the address in support of the war with France, but a few months later the recall from Ireland of his brother-in-law William, second Earl Fitzwilliam, drove him back into opposition; he was the only other peer to sign Fitzwilliam's protest ('JHL', 8 May 1795). He remained in moderate opposition; at the forming in 1806 of the Fox-Grenville ministry he declined the postmastership and then the lord stewardship to accommodate others. On Irish matters he opposed the Union and Arthur Wellesley's 1807 'Insurrection Bill'. 
At Cavendish Square, where Duncannon and his bride at once took part in high whig social life, three sons and a daughter were born between 1781 and 1787. Both he and, to begin with, his wife gambled. Her debts, though smaller than her sister's, led him in 1793 to plead with her to tell him everything; he trusted 'that for the future you will see the necessity of our not going on as we have done' (Bessborough and Aspinall, 92). In the same year he succeeded his father as third earl of Bessborough in the Irish peerage. At the same time he took over the Bessborough estates in co. Kilkenny but he found the income disappointing because, in an inflationary period, the 27,000 acres were mostly let on long leases; though he took his seat in the Irish parliament he was an absentee, living in London and at Roehampton in Surrey. 'It is a sad piece of business', he wrote to his wife from Bessborough in 1793, 'to settle so many things, especially for me who has never been used to manage any thing' (Bessborough and Aspinall, 88). In 1801 he sold the family picture collection, and only a $100,000 legacy from his kinsman Henry Cavendish relieved him in 1810 from financial embarrassment. 
Bessborough's relationship with his wife still baffles: published documentation is partial in all senses, and some remains inaccessible. Contemporary comment, by Horace Walpole and others, generally stressed the 'kind' and 'amiable' temperament he shared with the whole Ponsonby family. Yet in the early years of the marriage his Cavendish aunt the duchess of Portland reproved him for scolding his wife in public, and his Spencer in-laws bridled at his neglect of her and his staying out all night. These may have been minor incidents within the conventions of aristocratic married life. His wife was several times unfaithful, as Duncannon apparently was himself; her brief affair with Richard Brinsley Sheridan, which Bessborough discovered in 1789, so flagrantly breached the rule (for women) 'thou shalt not be found out' that he started divorce proceedings, but was persuaded by his brother-in-law the fifth duke of Devonshire to forgive his wife. Published extracts from his letters to her in 1793, when she was ill, are sensible and show solicitude, affection, and respect: 'no happiness can be complete without you' (Bessborough and Aspinall, 95-6). Lady Bessborough's long and wholehearted affair from 1794 with the younger Granville Leveson-Gower produced two children, brought up, as was the custom, in their natural father's family under assumed names. Throughout it her letters as published give the impression that Bessborough remained amiable but had to be handled gingerly: the rule against letting the affair show held, and the births were disguised as 'illness'. A limited man married to a clever, emotional, witty woman, he seems to have retreated into his hobbies -- cards, sketching, and print collecting; he interleaved Daniel Lysons's four-volume 'Environs of London' with some 2000 prints. During the scandal of their daughter Lady Caroline Lamb's affair with Byron he appears to have been sympathetic but to have left the burden of intervention to his wife. 
According to Sir Joshua Reynolds's portrait at Althorp Bessborough had the oval, slightly aquiline, 'gentlemanlike' Cavendish face. From 1798 he suffered bad fits of gout. He was fond of his children, especially his youngest child, William (from 1838 Lord de Mauley). After his wife's death he handed over his properties to his eldest son and lived with William at Canford House, Dorset, where he died on 3 February 1844. He was buried there but was later reburied alongside his son at Hatherop, Gloucestershire, where de Mauley had moved after selling Canford House. 


@@@@@


doc= 63969


Villiers, Frances, countess of Jersey (1753-1821), royal mistress and courtier, was born on 25 February 1753 at Raphoe, Donegal, the only daughter (posthumous) of Philip Twysden (1713-1752), bishop of Raphoe, and his second wife, Frances, daughter of Thomas Carter of Robertstown and Rathnally, co. Meath, and his wife, Mary. Her father was descended from the Twysdens of Roydon Hall, in East Peckham, a long-established Kentish family. At his death he was bankrupt. On 26 March 1770 Frances married George Bussy Villiers, fourth earl of Jersey (1735-1805), extra lord of the bedchamber, of Middleton Park, Middleton Stoney, Oxfordshire, at the house of her stepfather, Colonel James Johnstone, in St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. The couple had at least seven daughters and three sons, including the fox-hunter George Villiers (1773-1859) ['see under 'Villiers, Sarah Sophia Child-], who succeeded to the earldom. 
From the mid-1770s Lady Jersey was closely associated with the whig Georgiana, duchess of Devonshire, and the 'Devonshire House circle'. She was intelligent and witty, and in 1777 Richard Brinsley Sheridan satirized her (and Lady Melbourne) as the venomous Lady Sneerwell in 'The School for Scandal'. With Georgiana she campaigned for Charles James Fox at the famous 1784 Westminster election. In 1782 she had attracted the amorous attentions of George, prince of Wales (1762-1830): 'If he is in love with me I cannot help it', she remarked. 'It is impossible for anyone to give another less encouragement than I have' (BL, Hickleton MS A1.2.7). However, during the spring of 1793 she embarked on an affair with him. She was a noted coquette and her other lovers included Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle (1748-1825); Georgiana's husband, William Cavendish, fifth duke of Devonshire (1748-1811); and the diplomat and clerk to the privy council, William Augustus Fawkener (1747-1811), who was said to be the father of one of her daughters ('Diaries of Sylvester Douglas', 1.88-9). Yet she remained close to her husband, and genuinely grieved when he died. In spite of her affairs, he had been her 'constant companion'. She told Georgiana's sister, Lady Bessborough, 'when all the world deserted her', Villiers had continued to show her 'undiminish'd and unremitting kindness' ('Lord Granville Leveson Gower', 2.109). 
During 1794 Lady Jersey encouraged the prince of Wales to marry his German cousin Caroline of Brunswick, and in 1795 she was appointed as one of the future princess's ladies of the bedchamber. Her motives for encouraging the marriage puzzled contemporaries, but presumably she wanted to embarrass the prince's 'unofficial' wife, Mrs Fitzherbert. From the first she ridiculed the princess's rough naivety. Lady Jersey was late for her arrival at Greenwich on 4 April, and she censured her costume. When the prince was condemned for immuring the princess in Carlton House, Lady Jersey shared in his unpopularity. 'I thought Lady Jersey was as cunning as a serpent, though not quite as harmless as a dove', remarked Lady Palmerston, prophetically, during May. 'She must feel like her cousin Robespierre (for I am sure they are related) and that ere long she may not be murdered but she will be driven from society' (Connell, 319). 
During the spring of 1796 Caroline of Brunswick pressed the prince to have Lady Jersey removed from Carlton House, and she became the subject of an extraordinary private correspondence. Caroline's letters infuriated the prince, who denied that Lady Jersey was his mistress. At the same time she also became the target of a virulent newspaper campaign accusing her of stealing compromising letters from Caroline to her mother, which had been entrusted to her care by Caroline's English tutor, Francis Randolph, and of passing them to the queen, who appears to have favoured her. Day after day she became increasingly vulnerable: a mob forced her to abandon her house in Pall Mall for her daughter Anne's in Berkeley Square, and in the streets she was hissed and insulted. On 29 June she proffered her resignation. She would have resigned her place far earlier, she told the princess, had not the prince insisted that the step would be regarded as a 'confirmation of every absurd & abominable falsehood'. However, the time had now arrived when she could 'with propriety, withdraw from such persecution & injustice, with the conscious satisfaction of 'knowing'' that she had given the 'strongest proofs' of her duty to the royal family (Add. MS 27915, fol. 26). Lord Jersey attempted to defend his wife's reputation from the charge of stealing Caroline's letters, but the matter was never satisfactorily cleared up, and in some circles Lady Jersey remained 'persona non grata'. During July 1796 she was burnt in effigy at Brighton. Her life was 'intolerable to endure and more than insipid to describe', she told her friend Edward Jerningham, and her nights were 'sleepless and weary' (Bettany, 247-8). Afterwards she escaped London for Bognor Rocks. The prince arrived in September, and the couple made plans to spend Christmas at Critchell House, near Wimborne Minster. Meanwhile, the prince settled her and her husband in a house in Warwick Street, adjoining Carlton House, which provoked another furore. 
During the summer of 1798 the first observable cracks began to appear in Lady Jersey's relationship with the prince; he had an affair with Elizabeth Fox, a former mistress of Lord Egremont, and there was talk of a reconciliation with Mrs Fitzherbert. Determined to separate from her amicably, the prince sent Edward Jerningham, his private secretary Colonel John McMahon, and other friends to negotiate with her. However, Lady Jersey was reluctant to be cast off, and it was not until 1799 that the relationship was unambiguously ended. During the summer of 1799 she moved out of Warwick Street into Stratford Place, and in December there was mention of a settlement. Finally, in January 1800, her husband was dismissed from his position as the prince's master of the horse (a position which he had held since 1795), and she went abroad. On returning to London, she resolved to 'plague' the prince, and they never re-established their former intimacy. 
Subsequently Lady Jersey suffered financial problems, and in 1802 her husband was threatened with imprisonment. The earl's death on 22 August 1805 left her without a 'sufficient income to support [her] rank', and during 1811 McMahon encouraged her to apply for a pension. However, the request was ill-received, and she was distressed to appear 'in the disgraceful shape of a beggar!' ('Letters of George IV', 1.216-17). Her son the fifth earl of Jersey raised her jointure from $1100 to $3500 per annum and paid off her debts 'at different times' ('Creevey Papers', 368), but her attempts to economize appear to have been unavailing. She died at Cheltenham on 25 July 1821 and was buried in the family vault at Middleton Stoney. Shortly afterwards her papers, including 'great abundance' of letters from George IV, were burned by her executor, Lord Clarendon (ibid., 367). 
Lady Jersey was a scintillating society woman, a heady mix of charm, beauty, and sarcasm. Lady Bessborough once remarked that she could not be happy 'without a rival to trouble and torment' ('Lord Granville Leveson Gower', 1.359), and clearly she was a practised intrigante. Yet there was also a softer side to her character; she was much concerned with the welfare of her children, and she could be charitable. She relished sophistication and wit, and even her worst enemies acknowledged her intelligence. Her personal attractions were widely admired: Horace Walpole described them as superior to those of the duchess of Devonshire (Walpole, 'Corr.', 25.411); in her prime, she was thin, 'soignee', and elegant. Although the satirists made much of the fact that she was already a grandmother when she began her affair with the prince, even in old age she never straitened her urge to dazzle and sparkle. In 1816 she reportedly said, 'It were better to go to Hell at once than live to be old & ugly' (Farington, 'Diary', 14.4912). 


@@@@@


doc= 63970


Butler, Rohan D'Olier (1917-1996), historian and civil servant, was born on 21 January 1917 at 74 Boundary Road, Hampstead, London, the younger son of Sir Harold Beresford Butler (1883-1951), civil servant, and his wife, Olive Augusta Newenham, daughter of Samuel Abraham Walker Waters, assistant inspector-general of the Royal Irish Constabulary. He grew up largely in Geneva, acquiring fluent French and German. He was educated at Summer Fields preparatory school, Oxford, as an oppidan at Eton College under Robert Birley, and privately abroad. He then read modern history at Balliol College, Oxford, where his principal tutor was Benedict Humphrey Sumner. He graduated with first-class honours in 1938, and in the same year was elected a prize fellow of All Souls College, which thereafter remained one of the centres of his life; from 1961 to 1963 he was sub-warden, and from 1984 fellow emeritus. 
In 1941 Butler published 'The Roots of National Socialism, 1783-1933', arguing that Nazism derived largely from elements deeply embedded in German history and culture. It was influential during and immediately after the war and underpinned Butler's later arguments for the formal suppression of the state of Prussia, which helped to shape the decisions of the allied council of foreign ministers after the occupation of Germany in 1945. At the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 he volunteered for the navy but was rejected because of poor eyesight. He worked instead at the Ministry of Information, his time there interrupted by a brief spell in the Special Operations Executive in 1941 and nine months as a pay corps private in 1941-2. He also served in the Home Guard (1942-4). In 1944 he was transferred to the Foreign Office, where he had a major role planning the allied occupation of Germany and Austria. 'Inter alia', he suggested the posthorn design for Austrian stamps. 
Butler declined a post-war Foreign Office career and offers of tutorial fellowships at Balliol and Christ Church, Oxford. He was an editor (1945-54) under Sir Llewellyn Woodward, then senior editor (1955-65) of the official, multi-volume 'Documents on British Foreign Policy, 1919-1939'. The series showed his rigorous and exacting scholarship. He also planned the succeeding post-war series, 'Documents on British Policy Overseas', and edited the first volume, published in 1984. From 1963 to 1982 he was historical adviser to the secretary of state for foreign affairs, a post in abeyance since 1929. His enthusiasm for this resulted from his belief in the beneficial contribution which historians could make towards formulating foreign policy. As adviser he wrote extensively, especially on German and Russian themes; as Sir Julian Bullard wrote, 'there were few important British ministerial speeches in that period in which the argument was not strengthened and the text not embellished by a contribution from Rohan's distinctive pen' (Bullard and Rogister, 4). A scrupulous historian, he deplored the harm done by official 'weeders'. He was made CMG in 1966. 
On 6 August 1956 Butler married, in Copenhagen, Lucy Rosemary Butler (1912-2009), daughter of Eric Byron, civil engineer, sister of Robert Byron (1905-1941), traveller and writer on art, and former wife of Butler's elder brother, Ewan. Through his marriage he gained three stepdaughters, and his wife's family home, White Notley Hall, near Witham, Essex, became his home. Their marriage was happy: she helped sharpen his interest in cultural history, and shared many of his intellectual interests. 
Butler contributed to several Festschriften and to the 'New Cambridge Modern History'. His 'magnum opus' was 'Choiseul: Father and Son, 1719-1754' (1980). Massively researched, over 1000 pages long, it embodied his aim of 'history from the inside' and placed Choiseul in his French and international context. It covered only Choiseul's early life, and Butler died before he was able to complete the intended three or four subsequent volumes. In 1981 he graduated DLitt from Oxford and in 1982 he was awarded the prix Jean Debrousse of the Academie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, Paris: a unique distinction for a work written in English. Friends and admirers were surprised that he did not receive further British recognition, and it was suggested that he was 'perhaps the victim of some academic malice' (Bullard and Rogister, 14). He was large and physically impressive, with a memorable, loud laugh. Despite a stammer, he was a brilliant conversationalist and raconteur who enjoyed entertaining friends, and he was generous with his time. He died on 30 October 1996 at the Lawns Nursing Home, Lawn Lane, Springfield, Chelmsford, Essex, of stomach cancer, and was survived by his wife and stepdaughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 63973


Penrose, Edith Elura Tilton (1914-1996), economist, was born on 29 November 1914 at Sunset Boulevard, Los Angeles, California, the daughter of George Albert Tilton, a civil engineer involved in road construction, and his wife, Hazel Sparling, a descendant of a passenger on the 'Mayflower'. She had two brothers, Harvey and Jack, both of whom were killed during military service, in 1952 and 1945 respectively. For a time she was brought up in road camps along the highway which her father surveyed, but the family eventually settled in the tiny Californian town of St Luis Obispo, where she went to school. She then studied at the University of California at Berkeley, graduating AB in economics in 1936. Her first job after graduating was in social work with an agency for depression relief. In 1934 she had married a lawyer, David Burton Denhardt, and in 1938 she was expecting their first child (a son) when Denhardt was killed in a mysterious hunting accident. In 1939 she began to work with Ernest Francis (Pen) Penrose (1896-1984), a distinguished economist who had been her professor at Berkeley, at the International Labour Organization in Geneva. She worked there as a researcher in the economics section of the organization, and her work on the food problems in wartime Britain gave rise to her first book, 'Food Control in Great Britain' (1940). Fearing a German invasion, the organization moved to Montreal in mid-1940, but in March 1941 John Winant, the deputy director, who had initially brought Pen to Geneva, was appointed American ambassador to Britain. Pen joined him in London as economic adviser, and Edith joined his staff as a special assistant; they remained in London throughout the war, and married on 27 October 1944. They had three sons, one of whom died as a young child. 
The Penroses followed Winant back to the United States in 1946 to serve under him on the US delegation to the newly formed United Nations. After Winant's death in 1947 they moved first to Princeton, and then to Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, where Pen took a chair in human geography and Edith began her postgraduate studies in economics. Her doctoral thesis was supervised by the eminent neo-classical economist, Fritz Machlup, and was published as 'The Economics of the International Patent System' (1951). This was the turning point in Edith Penrose's career. Through her doctoral research work and a subsequent research project involving fieldwork at the Hercules Powder Company, she became an industrial economist. Her major work, 'The Theory of the Growth of the Firm' (1959), was the product of these endeavours. Her approach differed fundamentally from the prevailing micro-economic, neo-classical paradigm, in that it attached great importance to observing the world. Theory, she argued, was necessary to understand a complex reality, but should not be developed in isolation from that reality. For Penrose, the firm is a set of productive resources 'under administrative co-ordination for the production of goods and services for sale in the market for a profit' (Penrose and Pitelis, 9). The distinction between firm and market lies in the boundary: economic activity inside the firm is carried on within an administrative organization, while economic activity in the market is not. Growth is endogenous to the firm. The firm is defined in terms of resources (including managerial) which are not inputs but provide services which are themselves inputs, while neo-classical theory defines the firm in terms of outputs produced at the minimum point of the average cost curve. According to Penrose, the incentive to grow is attributed to the inevitable emergence of unused managerial resources after an expansion plan has been completed. 'Unused productive services are, for the enterprising firm, at the same time a challenge to innovate, an incentive to expand, and a source of competitive advantage' (ibid., 11). The book had a tremendous impact both on the theory of the firm, and, by extension, on issues of strategic management. 
Throughout the 1950s Penrose was a lecturer and research associate at Johns Hopkins, but when she and Pen defended their colleague Owen Lattimore against Senator McCarthy's committee on unAmerican activities, they found it more congenial to leave the United States. Penrose then spent 1955-6 in Canberra as a visiting professor at the Australian National University, and 1957-9 as an associate professor at Baghdad University. At the latter she acquired the strong interest in the Middle East which bore fruit in her work on international oil companies. However, she never learned Arabic, and despite her affection for the region she had no deep understanding of its peoples and their culture. In 1960 Pen had reached retirement age, and they both returned to England, where, on the strength of her recently published 'Theory of the Growth of the Firm', Edith Penrose was appointed to a readership in economics at the London School of Economics and the School of Oriental and African Studies. In 1964 the latter established a chair of economics with special reference to Asia, which she held until 1978, and she also chaired the newly established economics department for some years. Her major empirical work at this time was on oil companies, 'The Large International Firm in Developing Countries: the International Petroleum Industry' (1968). In her work in this area she was among the first to discover the phenomenon of transfer pricing and its implications for tax optimization. To make the most of opportunities that reduce fiscal liabilities is a central feature of the multinational corporation's behaviour. The economic implications of this behaviour for oil markets and prices are wide-ranging; Penrose opened a field in which much research remained to be done. 
On retiring from London University, Penrose moved to a different type of institution, INSEAD, the management school at Fontainebleau, France, where she was professor of political economy and associate dean for research and development. In a sense this took her back to the field where she had made her most significant and original intellectual contribution: the management of firms. At INSEAD she received belated and well-deserved recognition, whereas the time spent at the School of Oriental and African Studies and her work on economic development were perhaps a digression. Pen's death in 1984 had a profound impact on her, and she decided to retire to Waterbeach, Cambridge, to be near her son. She continued to lead an active professional life, sitting on boards and committees, acting as a consultant and expert witness, and contributing important articles to the economic literature. She died at her home, 30A Station Road, Waterbeach, from heart failure, on 11 October 1996. 
Edith Penrose was petite, good-looking, extremely kind to those who needed her support, and very sharp with those she thought were able to take it. Not all were. She nevertheless won the affection and admiration of many who valued the independence of her mind and her indifference to social status and pretensions. She was a liberal in the substantive, not the romantic, meaning of the term. She was suspicious of any concentration of power, political or economic, and stood firm in defence of cherished values. She and Pen helped Jewish refugees in Switzerland in 1940, and their defence of Lattimore against McCarthy obliged them to leave the United States. She used to say, quoting John Winant, 'the important thing is to lose your illusions and not become disillusioned'. This was the motto of her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 63976


Marsh, Alec (1908-1996), jockey and horse-racing official, was born on 12 August 1908 at Staunton in the Vale, Nottinghamshire, the son of George Ernest Marsh, farmer, and his wife, Lily Gertrude, 'nee' Bramley. He hunted from an early age, graduated to point-to-point racing, and won his first race under National Hunt rules on Common Ground over hurdles at Warwick in February 1929. He was leading amateur rider for three consecutive seasons from 1934-5 but gave up riding in 1940 after a fall too many. He had ridden in over 1000 races, and had won 163 of them, including 21 on the flat. He won the Cheltenham foxhunters twice, in 1935 on Empire Night and in 1936 on Herod Bridge; the Liverpool foxhunters in 1936, on Don Bradman; and dead-heated for the Grand Sefton that year on the same horse. At one stage the National Hunt committee, anxious to protect the livelihood of paid riders, counselled him to turn professional himself, but he ignored their advice. Under the existing Jockey Club regulations this would have prevented him pursuing a career as a racing official. On 31 March 1937 he married Elizabeth Mary Jessop ('b'. 1910/11), daughter of Major Thomas Jessop of the Lincolnshire yeomanry. There was one son of the marriage. 
During the Second World War Marsh served with the RAF in Europe, Singapore, Burma, China, and India. On demobilization he acted as a starter for the Royal Calcutta turf club before returning to Britain to be appointed an official starter by the Jockey Club in 1947. He officiated at his first classic in 1952 and in that year also became the senior starter for the club. A further 100 classic starts were to come before his retirement in 1972, after a career in which he began over 25,000 races. As starter his job was to assist in keeping a race fair to all participants, including the punters, by ensuring that all horses were at the start in the correct draw and ready to go when he gave the signal. In the days before starting stalls this also required keeping the horses in line to prevent one being left or allowing a jockey to steal a flying start. Marsh compared starting to driving a car: 'Just as, with the right timing it is possible to overtake six cars at once, so with keen anticipation, one should eventually catch all the horses facing the right way simultaneously. No use panicking or losing one's temper. It all hinges on timing. (Sharpe, 119)' Initially he did not like the mechanical aspects of starting stalls, first used at Newmarket in 1965, which, of course, much changed his job. However, he later admitted that they benefited the sport. 
Marsh always arrived at courses wearing his tweeds and bowler hat and carrying a red flag for use by the recall man stationed down the course in case of a false start. In wet weather he would wear galoshes; in dry, shiny brown brogues. As an ex-rider himself, his authority was generally respected by the jockeys. He made it a point seldom to speak to jockeys 'because it is irrational to speak to them in one breath, and shout at them in the next' (Sharpe, 119). His authority could be mistaken for arrogance: one jockey described him as 'a cold fish with no favourites', but added that he was 'damned good at his job' ('Daily Telegraph', 22 Nov 1997). On retirement Marsh reflected that 'they have been good years, neither free from criticism nor from strain -- but they fulfilled my ambition' (ibid.). 
His first marriage having ended in divorce in 1959, Marsh married second, on 22 June 1972, Marjorie Minnie Cole ('b'. 1910/11), widow, of Easthorpe, Bottesford, Nottinghamshire, and daughter of Henry Norris, farmer. He died on 17 November 1996 at Grantham and District Hospital, Grantham, Lincolnshire, of ischaemic heart disease; he was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 63979


Bryan Keith-Lucas (1912-1996), political scientist, was born on 1 August 1912 at Fen Ditton, Cambridgeshire, and was educated at Gresham's School from 1924 to 1930. He read history and economics at Pembroke College, Cambridge, then joined the town clerk's department at Kensington, west London, qualifying as a solicitor in 1937. During the Second World War he served in north Africa, Italy, and Cyprus with the Buffs and Sherwood Foresters, ending the war as a major. He then returned to local government in Nottingham. His marriage in 1946 to Mary Hardwicke brought a son and two daughters. In 1948 he moved into academic life, being appointed senior lecturer in local government at Oxford University. He was elected a fellow of Nuffield College in 1950 and domestic bursar in 1957. He served as an Oxford city councillor for the Liberal Party, sat on several governmental committees, and advised on aspects of local government for Britain's former colonies, including Sierra Leone (1954), Mauritius (1955-6), Nigeria (1963), and Fiji (1975). In 1965 he was appointed professor of government in the new University of Kent, and from 1970 to 1974 he was master of Darwin College, where he and his wife played host to numerous undergraduates and visiting academics. After retirement in 1977 he taught politics part-time at King's School, Canterbury. In 1983 he was appointed CBE. Among his publications were 'The English local government franchise' (1952), 'The mayor, aldermen and councillors' (1961), which anticipated the much later introduction of democratically elected mayors, and (with P. G. Richards) 'A history of local government in the 20th century' (1978). In 1970 he produced a second edition of Josef Redlich's and Francis Wrigley Hirst's 'History of local government in England'. His wife was also a Liberal Party supporter; she served as a Canterbury councillor and as sheriff. He died at Canterbury on 7 November 1996, survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 63981


Hinton, Paula Doris (1924-1996), ballet dancer, was born at 132 Cranbrook Road, Ilford, Essex, on 1 June 1924, the elder child of (Alfred) Ernest Hinton (1895-1962) and his wife, Doris Clara Miriam, 'nee' Hurley (died 1972). They were travelling players, appearing in operas and other entertainments, so their daughters' early lives were peripatetic. The family settled in Liverpool; Paula Hinton was already in her mid-teens when, acting in a pantomime and liking the ballets in it, she decided she wanted to become a dancer. After studying locally, she made her ballet debut in 1943 as Helen of Troy in an Old Vic 'Dr Faustus' at the Playhouse, Liverpool. Her late start did not prevent her from being accepted into Ballet Rambert the next year. Small roles came quickly, some in the classics calling for a neat technique, others for a sense of humour in ballets by Frederick Ashton, Frank Staff, and Antony Tudor. There was no one Hinton 'look' on stage; she soon learned to transform herself with each role. Her lively qualities were noted by the resident choreographer, Walter Gore ['see below'], and one of her first leading parts was in his ballet 'Plaisance'. 


Gore's 'Antonia' in 1949, showing an irresistibly fascinating slut murdered by her lover, was an emphatic manifesto of Hinton's and his dramatic force. Then in 1950 Gore and Hinton left Rambert, and Hinton made guest appearances with the Original Ballet Russe, giving a glittering account of the title role in 'Le coq d'or', with Festival Ballet (she was outstanding as Giselle among other roles), and with Les Ballets des Champs-Elysees in Paris, where Gore created 'La damnee' showing her burnt as a witch. Thereafter the couple spent much time abroad, he becoming director and she leading dancer with companies in Germany, Norway, and Portugal. They formed companies of their own, too, in Australia and twice in Britain: the Walter Gore Ballet (1953-5) and the London Ballet (1961-3). A stubborn refusal to compromise on artistic standards and perhaps a certain impracticality in business matters precluded more permanent operations. But they also worked with many small companies in Britain and Europe, where Gore created ballets, most of them starring Hinton. Through all these peregrinations Hinton, believing that communication with the audience was more important than the occasion, never gave less than her absolute best, whether in heavy drama or light comedy. Even when in 1965, to help Western Theatre Ballet out of an emergency caused by injuries, she learned one of its major roles in Peter Darrell's 'The Prisoners' at only a few days' notice, she danced it as convincingly as it had ever been done. 
The couple's range was demonstrated in 1958 when within twelve months Gore made three contrasting dramas for Hinton: in 'Eaters of Darkness' as a woman wrongly confined to an asylum who goes mad in consequence; in 'The Magical Being', where she played a creature like the fierce firebirds of Russian tradition; and in a powerful though reticent duet about jealousy, 'Night and Silence'. But they enjoyed equal success in ballets with a comic touch, such as 'Peepshow' or 'Light Fantastic', with no story but a lively and individual animation. Unfortunately, their constant travels prevented their great talents from being as fully recognized as they deserved. 
Gore died on 15 April 1979 in Pamplona, Spain, where he and Hinton were working for a time. Hinton subsequently attempted to arrange revivals of his ballets, but with limited success because continuing links with established companies were lacking. She retired to Birkenhead, where she died in Arrowe Park Hospital on 5 November 1996 and was cremated. Hinton and Gore had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 63984


McGillveray, Angus (1930-1996), politician, was born at Dunmaglas, 46 Main Street, East Whitburn, West Lothian, on 13 October 1930, the elder of two sons of Joseph Charles McGillveray (1900-1971), fruiterer, and his wife, Marion Prentice, 'nee' Docherty (1902-1981). Educated at Whitburn primary school (1935-41) and Lindsay High School, Bathgate (1941-5), he was apprenticed to John Laughridge, a local company of painters and decorators. After his apprenticeship he worked with them for two years before establishing his own firm of painters and decorators in 1955. On 29 March 1952 he married Jean Blair Brown ('b'. 1930), florist, at the Church of Scotland, Stoneyburn, West Lothian. They had a daughter, Janice, and two sons, Charles and Colin. 
McGillveray was from his early years a great exponent of the culture of Scotland. A gifted artist, he also had special interests in piping and highland dancing. He arranged many fund-raising ceilidhs for cultural societies. He was responsible for holding in Bathgate one of the biggest highland dancing competitions in Scotland. It was to raise still more funds that he created a weekly sweep, called Saltire Pools, which benefited a wide range of cultural organizations. 
McGillveray joined the Scottish National Party (SNP) in 1952 when it was still a small organization with some 20 branches and a small membership. In the early 1960s the SNP began to grow. In 1962 it contested the West Lothian by-election and won over 23 per cent of the vote. The impetus given by this election boosted the SNP's national membership and prestige. It also created a power centre in West Lothian where McGillveray worked alongside the future party chairman, William Wolfe, to modernize the party. On his own initiative, McGillveray established a publications department in West Calder, which supplied leaflets, badges, and policy booklets to the party. By 1964 the SNP had 35 branches, and by 1970 the total had mushroomed to over 400. Membership had also gone through exponential growth. The whole organization was hungry for promotional material. During that period, McGillveray, by then head of the SNP's publications department, assisted by his wife, Jean, established a Scotland-wide network and sales reached into six figures. The famous 'It's Scotland's Oil' leaflet (1973) sold over 1 million copies -- a stupendous figure for a country with 3 million households. In 1962, again on his own initiative and at his own cost, he adapted the formula of Saltire Pools to found the SNP's own version, Alba Pools. This was a runaway success. In its first five years, it raked in $200,000. This money financed the explosive growth of the SNP and permitted the SNP at national level to set a high standard in research and publications new to Scottish politics. 
McGillveray's organizational genius and marketing flair contributed critically to the emergence of the SNP as a major player in Scottish and United Kingdom politics. He was widely recognized as a mainspring of the leap forward. Additionally, he fought many local elections and served on the West Lothian district council. Although his family had lived in the lowlands for two centuries, he was proud of his highland origins and was open and welcoming by nature. He died in the house of his birth on 4 November 1996, after a courageous struggle over years against cancer, and was survived by his wife and their three children. There was a huge turn-out at his funeral, at Falkirk crematorium four days later, testifying to the affection and respect in which he was held. 


@@@@@


doc= 63986


Lawton, Thomas (1919-1996), footballer, was born at 43 Macdonald Street, Farnworth, near Bolton, on 6 October 1919, the son of Thomas Lawton, a signalman on the Lancashire and Yorkshire railway, and his wife, Elizabeth Riley, a weaver at the Harrowby mill. His parents separated when Thomas was eighteen months old and he went with his mother to live with his grandfather James Hugh Riley, in a two-up and two-down terrace house off the Folds Road, near the centre of Bolton. Lawton's uncles were all keen recreational footballers and introduced their nephew to the pleasures of both street football and, later, Sunday games for side stakes. Lawton's mother and grandfather were probably most influential in shaping his early career. 
Tommy Lawton was an outstanding schoolboy footballer at Tonge Moor council school and Castle Hill and Folds Road central school (he scored an astonishing 570 goals in three seasons for the latter) and for Hayes Athletic, a Bolton league side for whom he played on Saturday afternoons. He played for Lancashire schools in 1933 and 1934 but strangely never for England at schoolboy level. As a fifteen-year-old Lawton played for Rossendale United in the semi-professional Lancashire combination, by which time he was working in a Bolton tannery, although Football League clubs queued up to take him out of it. Sheffield Wednesday almost signed him but his mother thought Sheffield was too far away from their Bolton home. Instead Lawton signed amateur forms for Burnley, who gave him a job in their office at $2 10's'. a week -- good money for a sixteen-year-old in 1935. The club also had to find a place for Granddad Riley, who became an assistant groundsman at $3 10's'. a week. Soon the Riley family were given a rent-free house in Brunshaw Road, Burnley. Lawton made his debut in the first team, at sixteen and a half, and signed as a professional in October 1936 on wages of $7 a week, with bonuses of $2 for a win and $1 for a draw. Granddad Riley had tried, but failed, to secure a signing-on fee of $500. Four days later Lawton scored three goals in a second-division match against Tottenham Hotspur. If this was a nice return on a modest investment, an even more satisfying one quickly followed when in January 1937 Everton paid Burnley $5400 for his transfer. 
Everton clearly saw Lawton as a replacement for Dixie Dean, and he did not disappoint. In 1937-8 he was the leading goal-scorer in the first division with twenty-eight goals and the following season, 1938-9, his thirty-five goals were crucial in the winning of the league championship. A well-built 5 feet 11 inches, Lawton was muscular and sharp. He shot well with both feet, but it was his heading ability which was really exceptional. The timing and height of his leaps were unsurpassed. From his boots to the heavily slicked centre-parted hair he was a menacing handful for any defence. Lawton's presence on away grounds would put thousands on the 'gate'. He was as much of a star as either Stanley Matthews or later, Tom Finney, but his twenty-year career in professional football was not the complete triumph it ought to have been. Like many other players of his generation, he had six years wrenched out of his prime by the Second World War. He also had a knack of falling out with his employers, and his half a dozen transfers, particularly in an era of the maximum wage, look eccentric and suggest a restless streak which he was unable to control. On the field Lawton was never booked or sent off, but off the field his character was an odd mixture of shyness and assertiveness. Only at Everton was he at the right club at the right time, and the disruption of war meant that he had little time to fulfil his potential. 
In 1938 Lawton was selected for England while still in his teens, and in 1939 he headed the winning goal in a famous victory over Scotland. When, in 1940, the army asked the Football Association to provide a list of players to be trained as physical training instructors, Lawton was one of those selected. Based in Aldershot, he played a lot of wartime football, including twenty-three games for England. On 15 January 1941 he married Rosaleen May Kavanagh ('b'. 1920/21), daughter of Thomas Kavanagh. The marriage ended in divorce in 1951. After being demobilized in 1945 Lawton moved again, after arranging his own transfer from Everton to Chelsea for $11,500. The main purpose of the change appears to have been to improve the state of his marriage. Looking back thirty years later, Lawton thought that he should have stayed with Everton and transferred his wife. He arrived at Chelsea just in time to play in their spectacular match against Moscow Dynamo. He liked London but stayed for only one full season with a team who were notorious under-achievers, even though his twenty-six goals that season were a club record. Instead Lawton surprised the football world by joining Notts County in 1947 for a fee of $20,000, a new British record. They were an unexceptional team which for several years before the war had been embedded in the middle of the southern section of the third division of the league. However, the club had potential, and Lawton began to realize some of it. Crowds rose from an average of 9,000 to 35,000, and in 1949-50 the championship was won and with it promotion to the second division. The success did not last. 
In the meantime Lawton had become the first post-war player from the third division to be selected for England, for whom he appeared three times in 1948. But he was never picked again, even though he was only twenty-nine and remained a regular goal scorer with Notts County with ninety goals in 151 matches. The rest of his career was sombrely anti-climactic. In 1952 he moved to second-division Brentford, where he became player-manager in the new year. Results were poor, the crowd critical, and he soon resigned as manager while continuing as a player. He had also been cited as co-respondent in a divorce case. On 23 September 1952 he married the woman, Gladys May Rose ('b'. 1919/20), daughter of Wilfred Ruebin Seabrooke, master decorator, whom he later called the love of his life. There was an even more surprising twist to his football career. In September 1953, at thirty-four, he was bought by Arsenal, whose young side had made a disappointing start to the season. Although he failed to score until March and was not a regular member of the first team, he did act as a catalyst in the improvement of the team. In 1956 he left Highbury to become player-manager of Kettering Town. He led them to the southern league championship in 1956-7, a success which led back to Notts County and the manager's office. The club suffered relegation from the second division at the end of the season and Lawton left, to spend the next four years as landlord of the Magna Carta pub in Lowdham, a village near Nottingham. 
It has often been said that great players do not necessarily make good managers. Most players made little preparation for the end of their careers and there were certainly no training courses for management. Lawton later said that his mistake had been to leave the first division for Notts County and in self-critical mood reflected that perhaps great playing success had made him over-confident. It may not have helped that he was opposed to modern coaching. Lawton had another managerial stint at Kettering in 1963-4 and was coach and chief scout at Notts County between 1968 and 1970. His 231 goals in 390 league games and his 22 in 23 matches for England did not insure him against a difficult middle age. Lawton found it hard to keep jobs for long and was involved in several failed business enterprises. He worked as a salesman for a firm making grandstand seats but he suffered a heart attack in 1970 and by 1972 was unemployed and in debt. It was a sad decline from his three seasons as a star player at Notts County, when he may have earned as much as $3000 a year, drove a grey Sunbeam Talbot sports car, and was probably the first surtax-paying footballer. Old footballing friends Andy Beattie, Matt Busby, and Joe Mercer persuaded Everton to arrange a testimonial match in 1972 which raised $6300, but Lawton continued to find it difficult to make ends meet. Two court appearances for minor fraud led to three years' probation in 1972 and 200 hours of community service in 1974. In 1984, at sixty-five, he was 'rediscovered' by the 'Nottingham Evening Post' and his conversations with journalists were turned into a weekly football column. His wife died in 1988, after which declining health forced Lawton into sheltered accommodation. He died on 6 November 1996 at his home, Abbeyfield, 49 Rosedale Road, Bakersfield, Nottingham, leaving a daughter, Amanda, by his first wife and a stepdaughter, Carol, and a son, Tommy, by his second. 


@@@@@


doc= 63988


Fowler, Peter Howard (1923-1996), physicist, was born on 27 February 1923 in Cambridge, the elder son and eldest of four children of Sir Ralph Howard Fowler (1889-1944), mathematical physicist, and his wife, Eileen Mary (died 1930), only daughter of Ernest Rutherford, Baron Rutherford of Nelson. He had reached the age of only seven when his mother died after his young sister was born. By great good fortune Phyllida and Derek Cook, friends of his parents, moved into the Fowler home, Cromwell House in Trumpington. The four Fowler children (Peter, Elizabeth, Patrick, and Ruth) and the three Cook children (Lesley, Joanna, and Allison) grew up as one large, and by all accounts, happy family, with only eight years between the eldest and youngest child. Fowler's first exposure to formal education was at his nursery school, the Malting House, Cambridge. In his report for the winter term of 1927, Mr Slavson wrote: 'Peter's interest in fires still persists but we have succeeded both in extending that interest into other channels than merely bonfire and to divert it... Peter is outstandingly of an experimental and investigatory nature, but, at the present time, these tendencies are focused around fire. (Wolfendale, 178)' All this was at the age of four! His traits of experimental skill which were to blossom in later life were already apparent.From an early age Fowler was fascinated by the weather, and especially clouds. This interest in meteorology could well have stemmed from his ancestor Luke Howard (1772-1864), Quaker, meteorologist, and business man. Howard was credited with classifying cloud types -- cirrus, nimbus, cumulus, and stratus -- and inspiring Constable and indeed Goethe. At seven Fowler left the Malting House to board at his preparatory school, Summer Fields at Oxford. This was a deeply unhappy experience and in later life he vowed never to send his own children away at such a tender age. The choice of Winchester College as his public school was probably strongly influenced by his father, who had been a scholar there. He was a popular pupil, keenly interested in experimental science, an unusual attribute for Wykehamists at that time. His choice of Bristol University came about primarily because his father had a high regard for Professor Arthur Tyndall and the Bristol physics department. After two years of wartime Bristol he joined the Royal Air Force, became a radar officer, and, as he wrote, 'benefited from a course on radio physics from Professor Nevill Mott and others' (Wolfendale, 178). His time in the RAF was eventful. His notable success related to the 'Gee' navigational aid. By 1944 the allies had developed this aid to guide bombers in the raids on the continent. The Germans, in their turn, constructed a powerful radio jammer to disable it. In a very short time Fowler, as a signals officer at Dover, devised a method of locating the jamming station in a manner not foreseen by the Germans. The station, which was located on a mountain at the Feldberg, near Frankfurt, was quickly destroyed. 
In 1946 Fowler was released from the RAF and returned to Bristol to resume his undergraduate studies. By this time he had already shown an interest in cosmic rays. In a letter to his grandmother, Lady Rutherford, Tyndall wrote, in February 1947: 'shortly before he left, earlier in the war, my colleague Dr [Cecil] Powell had developed a new technique for studying particles from atomic nuclei by firing them into a photographic plate and measuring the minute tracks which showed up when the plate was developed. We had already given Peter, as an inquisitive student, an opportunity at that stage of measuring a few of these before he joined the RAF. His experience with photographic plates allowed him to participate in a series of experiments which led to three research papers. (Wolfendale, 179)' All three papers were published in 1947 with Fowler as an author. This was after only one year of degree-level physics. After graduating in 1948, he was immediately appointed an assistant lecturer, and in 1951 he was appointed lecturer. He was extremely fortunate in falling for Rosemary Hempson Brown ('b'. 1925/6), whom he married on 23 July 1949. She was the daughter of Rear-Admiral George Herbert Hempson Brown and was herself a physicist, having obtained a first in physics in 1947. She became a research student in Cecil Powell's group and after Fowler graduated in 1948 the two worked together. She was happy to give up her research to provide him with the family life which he longed for after his years of boarding-school and the RAF. Their long and happy marriage was blessed with three daughters, who all read science at university. 
Although he was very active in the Bristol work, Fowler arrived just too late to share in the glory of the discovery of the pion (by C. M. G. Lattes and others in 1947), the discovery that was to earn Powell the Nobel prize. Nevertheless, Fowler's activities were acknowledged by Powell in his Nobel address, and after her husband's death Mrs Powell gave the Fowlers his presentation copy of 'The Prix Nobel' (1950). Fowler's forte was the detailed, and at times inspired, understanding of the emulsion technique. A significant discovery was that of the heavy tau meson, later termed the kaon (work carried out with his wife-to-be and others). This atomic particle decays into three pions and is now known to be one of the 'strange particles', the first of which were discovered in the elegant cloud-chamber experiments of G. D. Rochester and C. C. Butler in 1947. An early colleague of that period was D. H. Perkins, himself a distinguished nuclear emulsion physicist, and in 1959 they, with Powell, produced a major work: 'The Study of Elementary Particles by the Photographic Method'. This book of over 600 pages became a bible for all those working in the field of cosmic rays -- and not just those using the emulsion technique. Fowler also worked with Perkins on studies of the possible use of negative pion beams for cancer therapy, a technique that was, then, ahead of its time. 
The 1950s saw Fowler produce a steady stream of papers devoted to elementary particle physics using the emulsion technique. Balloon launches with increasingly massive payloads became commonplace. However, an interest in astrophysics was developing and this led to a number of discoveries, including the demonstration that very light atomic nuclei in the cosmic radiation come from the fragmentation of heavier nuclei on collision with the nuclei of gas in the gas between the stars. From September 1956 to June 1957 Fowler was visiting professor in the University of Minnesota, where heavy nuclei in the cosmic radiation had been originally discovered. In 1958 he was offered a permanent appointment by the University of Minnesota -- as a full professor -- but what turned out to be a minor health problem prevented him from taking up the post. Fowler's research work was recognized by the University of Bristol in 1958 by the award of a DSc and in 1961 by his promotion to reader. Election to the Royal Society followed in 1964. An honour which gave him, and many others, particular pleasure, was his appointment as Royal Society research professor in the same year. 
In the late 1960s Fowler had become interested in the gas-scintillation process as yet another technique to use in his pursuit of the heavy primary cosmic rays. After development work, and a balloon-borne instrument, a detector was made for the last all-British satellite, Ariel VI. Ariel VI was launched on 24 May 1979 and the Bristol detector accumulated very significant data on the abundance of the heavy primary cosmic rays. The analysis of the data took many years, but the results turned out to be both exciting and unexpected, not least the presence of very heavy nuclei. It was with these nuclei (having charge Z ] 70) that Fowler's name came to be identified; here, an exotic mechanism transcending the standard model had to be postulated. Mention should also be made of his work following the Chernobyl disaster on 26 April 1986. There were many British students reading Russian and studying in Russia at the time, mostly in the vicinity of Kiev, and thus potentially at risk. Bristol was much involved and Fowler's knowledge of radiation and meteorology was of considerable value. Discussions between the University of Bristol, Fowler, and the Nuclear Radiological Protection Board resulted in the students' being brought home about three days after the disaster. 
After retiring from the university in 1988, Fowler developed an association with Rolls-Royce, where he studied the temperature of turbine blades, work which was carried out with Peter Stewart, a Rolls-Royce engineer. The principle of the method was to determine the thermal broadening of the narrow resonance lines generated when epithermal neutrons are absorbed by specific metals. Alas, for financial reasons Rolls-Royce did not proceed with the necessary funding, but the technique was of great interest. Fowler was also chairman of the Herschel House Trust in Bath for many years, on behalf of the Royal Society. The house was where William Herschel made his celebrated discovery of the planet Uranus in 1781. In many ways Fowler and Herschel were alike -- both had great technical skill and both were fascinated by the cosmos. 
Fowler was a great family man, devoted husband of Rosemary, and a proud father. As a younger man he had enjoyed cricket and squash, and in later life his principal relaxation, aided and abetted by Rosemary, was his garden, and their efforts were often rewarded by prizes at local flower shows. He died of heart failure at his home, 320 Canford Lane, Westbury-on-Trym, Bristol, on 8 November 1996, and was buried in Bristol. He was survived by his wife and three daughters. A memorial service was held at Bristol Cathedral on 18 April 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 63990


Frankel, (Sally) Herbert (1903-1996), economist, was born on 22 November 1903 at Carlton Terrace, Johannesburg, Transvaal Colony, the first of three children of Jacob Frankel (1866-1930) and his wife, Mathilde, 'nee' Buxbaum (1876-1960). His parents, both Orthodox Jews, were born in Germany; his father emigrated to South Africa in 1896 and worked in the grain trade. Frankel went first to the Deutsche Schule and then to St John's College, Johannesburg. Despite achieving only a third class in his school-leaving exam he was able to enter the University of the Witwatersrand, and there flourished, moving with distinction from a BA honours in economics to an MA. His MA dissertation was published in London as 'Cooperation and Competition in the Marketing of Maize in South Africa' (1926). 
In 1923 Frankel began attending lectures at the London School of Economics, and later enrolled there for a PhD on railway freight rates, a topic he had started to investigate at the request of the Transvaal chamber of mines. The dissertation was successfully submitted in 1927 and published as 'The Railway Policy of South Africa' (1928). This study, like the one on maize, was notable for its painstaking attention to detail, and the strength, directness, and clarity of its criticisms of government policies exercised through monopolistic agencies without regard to the true economic costs. The hostility to government intervention in economic matters expressed in these early studies was to remain a distinctive feature of Frankel's thinking throughout his life. While in London, Frankel visited his relatives in Frankfurt and met his cousin, Ilse Jeanette Frankel. They were married in Wiesbaden, Germany, on 19 June 1928. They had one son and one daughter. 
In 1930 Frankel was appointed to the chair of economics and economic history at the University of the Witwatersrand. His publications during his remaining years in South Africa included a major investigation of the role of capital in the economic development of Africa, 'Capital Investment in Africa: its Course and Effects' (1938), and a pioneering study of the national income of South Africa since 1918. He served on many official inquiries, and was very active as a personal economic adviser to Sir Ernest Oppenheimer. He also had a close and long-standing relationship with Jan Hofmeyer, and advised him when he was minister of finance during the Second World War. Frankel's deep commitment to free market economics and his lifelong opposition to racial discrimination were expressed in his contribution to a liberal manifesto, 'Coming of Age' (1930), with contributions also by Hofmeyr, Edgar H. Brookes, and others. Although too radical to be acceptable to the vast majority of white South Africans, the policies advocated were seen by many Africans as offering only a token advance, especially on the crucial issue of the franchise. 
In 1945 Frankel was invited to take up a new chair of colonial economic affairs, established at Oxford to further the training of colonial service officers. He immediately informed Hofmeyr, hoping with all his heart that he would be told, 'Don't go, there's a job for you here, I've work for you here.' But Hofmeyr made no such response and Frankel accepted the Oxford offer (Frankel, 185; endorsing the account by Alan Paton, 'Hofmeyr', 1964, 256). He took up the chair and an associated fellowship at Nuffield College in 1946, and held this until retirement in 1971, though the title was twice changed, finally becoming the chair of the economics of underdeveloped countries. Frankel's strongly expressed free market convictions were no more popular in his new community than they had been in South Africa, and this, together with his strong distaste for abstraction and theory, left him somewhat isolated from the mainstream of British economics. He preferred more practical work leading to advice for governments, even when he knew that it was unlikely to be accepted. He served on numerous committees and commissions, including a working party on the east African groundnut scheme (what better example could there be of the folly of government intervention?), and the royal commission on east Africa (1953-5). His inaugural lecture, and some of his main essays and articles from his early period in Oxford -- all more general and reflective than his pre-war studies -- were published in 1953 as 'The Economic Impact on Under-Developed Societies'. 
Frankel was a man of great charm and many friendships. He found congenial company among fellow liberals in the Mont Pelerin Society formed under the leadership of F. A. Hayek, and was twice elected a vice-president. He served as president of the Oxford Jewish congregation, and from 1971 to 1989 was first chairman of governors of the Oxford Centre for Postgraduate Hebrew Studies. He travelled widely in Africa, the United States, and Israel, and from 1967 to 1974 was regularly a visiting professor at the University of Virginia. 
Frankel died at his home, 62 Cutteslowe House, Park Close, Oxford, on 11 December 1996. He was survived by his son and daughter, his wife, Ilse, having predeceased him in 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 63995


Scott, Ronald (1927-1996), jazz saxophonist and nightclub owner, was born at the Mothers' Home, 396 Commercial Road, Stepney, London, on 28 January 1927, the son of Joseph Schatt (also known as Jock Scott), a saxophonist and orchestra leader, and his wife, Sylvia (Cissie) Rosenbloom (died 1962), a saleswoman who lived at 33 South Tenter Street, Aldgate. His father, 'an urbane, humorous, charismatic and hard-gambling man', abandoned the family when Scott was four years of age, leaving Ronnie to be brought up by his mother and grandmother ('The Guardian'). In 1935 his mother married Solomon (Sol) Berger, a tailor, and a year later Scott acquired a half-sister Marlene. After unsuccessful attempts to play both the cornet and the soprano saxophone, Scott was given a tenor saxophone by Solomon Berger, his stepfather, and almost immediately showed an affinity for the instrument. He took lessons from the musician Jack Lewis, father-in-law of the singer Vera Lynn, and later from the bandleader Harry Gold. 
At the age of sixteen Scott was sufficiently competent to play with ephemeral bands appearing at clubs in the Soho area of London, then in 1944 he joined the band of the Belgian trumpeter Johnnie Claes, with which he remained for a year. During this time the band appeared in the George Formby film 'George in Civvy Street', with Scott clearly visible on screen. At the end of 1945 he worked briefly in a band led by Dennis Rose, a musician whose fresh ideas were to have a great influence on Scott and a rising generation of young British jazz players. In February 1946 Scott joined the new and prestigious Ted Heath orchestra; he remained for a year, appearing on a number of Heath's recordings made for the Decca label. 
After being dismissed by Heath, Scott and the drummer Tony Crombie made their first trip to the United States in order to hear the new jazz form, called bebop, played by its creators in New York clubs. A few months later Scott was back in the USA, this time as a member of the drummer Bobby Kevin's band aboard the newly refurbished liner 'Queen Mary'. By now he had become a member of a group of like-minded British jazz musicians, including John Dankworth, Dennis Rose, and Tony Crombie, and after a short stay with the sextet of the piano-accordionist Tito Burns, Scott became a founder member of the Club Eleven, a co-operative jazz group which opened its own club in a rehearsal room on Great Windmill Street, London. 
Club Eleven lasted from January 1949 until April 1950 and gave Scott his first experience of running a jazz club. He worked in the bands of Jack Nathan and Vic Lewis until the spring of 1951, when the drummer Jack Parnell formed his first orchestra and asked Scott and other leading jazz musicians to join. In January 1953 Scott and a number of others left Parnell and formed a successful nine-piece band under Scott's leadership. This band brought together some of the finest jazz players in Britain, made several recordings for the Esquire record label, and firmly established Scott as perhaps the most important figure in his field. But Scott's decision to enlarge the band led eventually to its breakup through lack of bookings. He then co-led another band with Tony Crombie before taking his own sextet on a tour of the USA. 
On his return to Britain at the beginning of 1957 Scott formed a quintet with the young tenor saxophonist Tubby Hayes and named it the Jazz Couriers. This was arguably one of the most important of all British jazz units, and the public responded by giving it considerable support. When it disbanded in August 1959 it was not for lack of musical success or popularity: Scott had decided to give up touring and open his own jazz club. 'Ronnie Scott's' opened its doors at 39 Gerrard Street, London, on 30 October 1959 and almost immediately became the focal point for jazz in the capital. The management of the club was handled by Scott's partner Pete King, a musician who had worked with him on many occasions, while Scott himself was responsible for its public image as well as frequently playing there with his own small group. 
The club gave Scott the opportunity to display his natural talents as wit and raconteur as well as his unrivalled abilities as a first-class jazz improviser. For the first two years of the club's life the long-standing disagreement between the British and US musicians' unions was still in force, making it impossible for American musicians to work in Britain. Thanks to considerable negotiations by the manager Pete King, the American tenor saxophonist Zoot Sims was allowed to play at the club for four weeks in November 1961. Basing subsequent bookings on reciprocal exchange, the club played host to many famous soloists and bands over the succeeding years and, thanks in large part to Scott's and King's work, the union ban was eventually resolved. Among those who played at the club were Dizzy Gillespie, Dexter Gordon, Coleman Hawkins, and Stan Getz. 
In December 1965 Ronnie Scott's moved to larger premises in Frith Street, London, and in October 1991 another branch was opened in Birmingham, but Scott, an inveterate Londoner, spent most of his time at Frith Street, where he had established a jazz club with an international reputation. Its clientele often included politicians, royalty, and prominent show-business personalities, all of whom found the relaxed atmosphere, plus Scott's policy of never capitalizing on their presence, to their liking. Scott was appointed OBE for his services to music in 1981. According to John Fordham, Scott could be 'dismissive, intimidating and self-preoccupied', and he could be generous, playful, and disarmingly modest. Indeed he 'had to be reminded of the remarkable role the [club] had played in the development of British jazz' ('The Guardian'). In 1979 he published 'Some of my Best Friends are Blues', written with Mike Hennessey. 
In the final year of his life Scott suffered health problems including recurring dental difficulties, the bane of many musicians, saxophonists in particular. This resulted in his failing to appear at his club as a playing musician for most of 1995. A gum operation had resulted in the removal of all his teeth and in the fitting of a plate, which he hoped would enable him to perform again in public. He had planned to announce his return to work by playing at the club on Christmas eve 1996, but was found dead from barbiturate poisoning at his home, 21 Elm Park Mansions, Park Walk, London, on 23 December. An interdenominational service of remembrance for Scott was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 7 April 1997 and attended by hundreds of friends and musicians. Scott never married but had a number of lengthy relationships. He had a son, Nicholas ('b'. 1964), with Ilsa Fox, and a daughter, Rebecca ('b'. 1972), with Mary Hulin. Both Ilsa and Mary changed their surnames to Scott. 


@@@@@


doc= 63998


Rushton, William George (1937-1996), cartoonist, comedian, and author, was born on 18 August 1937 at 3 Wilbraham Place, Chelsea, the only child of John Atherton Rushton (died 1958), a publisher, and his Welsh wife, Veronica Hannah Gilbert James. Willie Rushton was educated at Shrewsbury School, where his contemporaries included Richard Ingrams, Christopher Booker, and Paul Foot. With Ingrams and Booker he produced 'The Wallopian', a satirical version of the school magazine, to which he contributed cartoons. Along with commentary on schoolmasters that was more barbed than the authorities found acceptable, their chief targets were pseudo-intellectuals, for whom they coined the term 'pseuds', which later gained common currency in 'Private Eye'. Academically undistinguished, Rushton claimed to have failed O-level maths seven times; confronted with a specimen in a bottle during a biology exam and asked 'What's this?', he answered, 'Disgusting'. His theatrical talent found an outlet at Shrewsbury: he recalled that when he played Lord Loam in 'The Admirable Crichton', 'the audience wondered which elderly member of staff had been dragooned into playing Loam' ('The Independent', 13 Dec 1996). 
Rushton did his national service in the army, among the last generation to do so. He failed the officer selection board, and served in the ranks. An anti-authoritarian, he found the army absurd, but welcomed the egalitarian ideas he developed as a trooper in Bad Oeynhausen. After leaving the army Rushton worked for a short time in a solicitor's office. The occasional cartoons he sent to 'Punch' were rejected. He left the law firm after narrowly missing being knocked down by a bus, vowing that he would not waste another day of his life doing something he did not enjoy. His contemporaries from Shrewsbury had gone on to university: at Oxford, Ingrams was editing two magazines, 'Mesopotamia' and 'Parson's Pleasure', to which Rushton contributed cartoons. The idea for a London-based satirical magazine was developed in a Chelsea pub, and the first issue of 'Private Eye' appeared on 25 October 1961. Early issues of the paper were put together in Rushton's bedroom in his mother's house at 28 Scarsdale Villas, Kensington: he alone mastered the art of laying out Christopher Booker's copy and his own cartoons, which were then taken to Neasden to be printed by the then revolutionary photolitho process. 'Private Eye' was well received, and favourably reviewed in 'The Observer', and its success was assured. Rushton was more than a cartoonist for the magazine. He supplied jokes, puns, and 'doubles entendres', and had a genius for inventing names for 'Eye' characters, such as Lunchtime O'Booze, the archetypal hard-drinking journalist. 
Also in 1961 Rushton made his professional acting debut, in Spike Milligan's 'The Bed-Sitting Room', at the Marlowe Theatre, Canterbury; the critic Kenneth Tynan deemed his performance brilliant. Shortly afterwards, he joined Ingrams, John Wells, and Barbara Windsor in a bizarre cabaret at the Room at the Top (of a department store) in Ilford, where he was recruited by Ned Sherrin, the producer of the satirical BBC television show 'That Was The Week That Was' (or 'TW3' as it was familiarly known). Rushton had already started writing whimsical songs, like 'Neasden', 'The Bum Song', and 'Fornicazione... is Italian for Love'. On 'TW3' (1962-3) he was an immediate success. His weekly impressions of tory politicians have been called 'masterpieces of refined cruelty' ('The Times', 12 Dec 1996), although he did not really do impressions of individuals so much as impersonations of types: he excelled as the embodiment of pompous, overbearing establishment figures, ripe for knocking down. In 1963 he was persuaded to run against Alec Douglas-Home in the Kinross by-election, a decision he regretted. He won forty-five votes. He was unhappy with the sequel to 'TW3', and left after a few shows. He was put to better use in 'Not Only... But Also' (1965-6), which starred Peter Cook and Dudley Moore. In 1968 he married the actress Arlene Dorgan, with whom he had a son; there were two stepsons from her previous marriage. 
Rushton's theatrical career continued fitfully (he appeared in 'Gulliver's Travels' at the Mermaid in 1971 and again in 1979, and in Eric Idle's 'Pass the Butler' at the Globe in 1982), and in 1996 he toured with 'Two Old Farts in the Night', an anarchic run of one-night stands with his fellow radio panellist Barry Cryer. He had a series of cameo roles in films, including 'Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines' (1965) and 'Monte Carlo or Bust' (1969). On television he took the parts of Plautus in Frankie Howerd's comic foray into ancient Rome, 'Up Pompeii' (1970), and Major Trumpington in the drama 'Colditz' (1974). He never had a satisfactory vehicle to showcase his own talents: 'Rushton's Illustrated' (1980) had only one season. He was a regular panellist on the television quiz show 'Celebrity Squares' (1985-9) and a popular reader on the children's story programme 'Jackanory'. Perhaps his widest following was gained through the cult BBC Radio 4 'antidote to panel games', 'I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue'; he joined it in 1974 and appeared in each yearly series until his death. The show's formula, in which the teams of (usually) Tim Brooke Taylor, Barry Cryer, Graeme Garden, and Willie Rushton were given 'silly things' to do by the chairman, Humphrey Lyttelton, admirably suited Rushton's humour; even his silences could leave the audience rocking with laughter. 
Rushton remained prolific as writer, cartoonist, and illustrator. His commitment to 'Private Eye' diminished, but he continued to supply it with cartoons, especially to illustrate the regular 'Mrs Wilson's Diary' item, and Auberon Waugh's 'Diary'. He also illustrated Waugh's 'The Way of the World' column in the 'Daily Telegraph', and contributed to his 'Literary Review'. As well as illustrating the work of others, he published a number of humorous books, including 'Pigsticking, a Joy for Life: a Gentleman's Guide to Sporting Pastimes' (1977), 'Bureaucrats: how to Annoy Them' (under the pseudonym R. T. Fishall) (1981), and 'Willie Rushton's Great Moments in History' (1984). The original drawings from the latter work found a permanent home in the Victoria and Albert Museum. His cartoons were distinctive, 'distinguished by their clean line and bold use of black and white' ('Daily Telegraph', 12 Dec 1996), and his caricatures are readily identifiable with their subjects. In his later years he began to work brilliantly in colour. Cricket was a personal passion. His father had sent him for coaching at Lord's before he went to Shrewsbury, and in later life he played for the Lord's Taverners. He wrote a novel, 'W. G. Grace's Last Case' (1984), based on a fictional episode in the life of the great cricketer. 
Rushton was diagnosed with diabetes in the early 1980s, and gave up beer; he became, according to Richard Ingrams, 'quite grumpy as a result, but his grumpiness had an admirable and jaunty quality to it' ('Daily Telegraph', 13 Dec 1996). His sudden death profoundly shocked his friends and contemporaries. He went into hospital for heart surgery, and died from complications on 11 December 1996, in the Cromwell Hospital, Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 64000


Hill, Dame Elizabeth Mary (1900-1996), Russian and Slavonic scholar, was born on 24 October 1900 in St Petersburg, Russia, the fifth of the six children (and second of the three daughters) of Frederick William Hill (1860-1924), merchant, and his wife, Louisa Maria Wilhelmina Sophia, 'nee' Miller (1862-1929). She was baptized Bessie May and, many years later, changed her name by deed poll to Elizabeth Mary. Her father was British and her mother Russian (although of Austro-Prussian descent), and Elizabeth grew up fluent in four languages (English, French, German, and Russian). In 1917 the family left Russia and their privileged place in the British community, settled in London, and faced a life of increasing penury. 
Three and a half happy years as the 'French mamzelle' at Penrhos College, north Wales, preceded Hill's studies in Russian from 1921 at University and King's colleges, London, which resulted in a first-class degree in 1924. In 1931 she completed her PhD on the early nineteenth-century Russian psychological novel, under the supervision of Prince D. S. Mirsky. During these years and subsequently, she supported herself by constant lecturing, coaching, and above all translating. With her great friend Doris Mudie (of the Mudie's Library family) she translated from French and particularly from Russian, including letters written by Dostoyevsky to his wife (1930) and by Lenin (1937), and, under the pseudonym J. Penn, produced 'For Readers Only' (1936), a lively book of anecdotes (including one about an attack on Mirsky by an unsought admirer of Hill) and reminiscences of countless hours spent happily in the British Museum reading room. 
It was 1936 that brought Hill's appointment at the University of Cambridge as lecturer in Slavonic, which in those years had its refuge in the department of other languages. Only in 1948, when women were awarded degrees at Cambridge for the first time, was the department of Slavonic studies established and Elizabeth Hill elected to the professorship. On her fiftieth birthday (24 October 1950) she delivered her inaugural lecture, published as 'Why Need we Study the Slavs?' (1951), by which time she headed a department of ten lecturers, teaching Czech, Polish, Serbo-Croat, and Russian to growing numbers of undergraduates. Her competence in several of these languages -- notably Serbo-Croat -- notwithstanding, it was with the teaching of, and propaganda for, the Russian language that she was inevitably and justly linked. During the Second World War she was attached to the Ministry of Information as a Slavonic specialist, and it was largely as a result of her persuasion that the War Office agreed to set up intensive Russian-language courses at Cambridge. These were to continue during the period of national service and, in parallel with similar courses at the University of London, provided Britain with well-trained Russian linguists, many of whom pursued their studies at universities and achieved prominent positions in academe, the diplomatic service, and business. 
Lisa, which is how generations of 'kursanty' (participants in the services' courses) and undergraduates remembered her, was a legendary figure, black-suited, piercingly blue-eyed, and with hair swept back; and, as many Cambridge gateposts and policemen would have testified, an idiosyncratic interpreter in her black Fiat, nicknamed the Flea, of the highway code. She inspired people with a love of Russian and things Slavonic, encouraged and cajoled them, but she herself was not a publishing scholar. As one of her obituarists noted: 'she wrote almost nothing original, yet she was the direct inspirational force behind dozens of serious articles and books by other people' ('The Independent', 6 Jan 1997). In her posthumously published memoirs, 'In the Mind's Eye' (1999), she wrote of her 'creative dreams', of her work on Slavonic curses and spells in the 1920s, and of the devoted search for the 'truth' about the death of Tsar Alexander I that dominated her last years, 'but life forced me into other activities and another mould... in Cambridge it was my mission and my way to develop Slavonic Studies that obsessed me' ('In the Mind's Eye', 218-19). Her memoirs, written with great humour, 'elan', and prejudice, but sadly unfinished, are her literary legacy, with their parade of wonderful characters, British and Slav, and endless tales, honed over the years by an accomplished raconteur. Her 'mission' she nevertheless fulfilled, with enormous dedication and energy, and not the least of her great contributions was the building up of the substantial Slavonic holdings in the Cambridge university and departmental libraries. 
On her retirement from Cambridge, Hill became Andrew Mellon professor of Slavic languages and literatures at the University of Pittsburgh (1968-70). In 1976 she was made a DBE and in 1978 she received an honorary doctorate from the University of East Anglia. She was a professorial fellow of Girton College, Cambridge, a fellow of University College, London, from 1946, and on the occasion of her ninetieth birthday she was made an honorary fellow of the School of Slavonic and East European Studies, University of London. 
In 1984, at the age of eighty-four, Hill married the Serbian aristocrat Stojan Veljkovic (1906-1998), whom she divorced three months before her death. Her account of that marriage and its end forms a sad and bitter coda to her memoirs. She had hoped to return to her home at 10 Croft Gardens, Cambridge, where she had lived since 1936, but she died of a heart attack at 77 Park Road, Chiswick, London, on 17 December 1996. After a funeral service in the Russian Orthodox cathedral in Ennismore Gardens, London, on 31 December, she was buried in Grantchester churchyard, reunited with her companion Doris Mudie (died 1970). 


@@@@@


doc= 64002


Samuel, Raphael Elkan (1934-1996), historian, was born on 26 December 1934 in the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital, London, the son of Barnett Samuel (1906-1971), a solicitor, and Minna Nerenstein, later Keal (1909-1999) ['see 'Keal, Minna], a composer. Raphael was the only child of Jewish parents who separated when he was six and later divorced. He was brought up in Hampstead Garden Suburb and subsequently around Parliament Hill by his mother; she taught the piano and was also a partner in the family business Shapiro Valentine, a bookshop specializing in Hebraica. She became a communist activist and much of Samuel's childhood was spent with his aunt and uncle Miriam and Chimen Abramsky, who provided a second home. 
Samuel's particular combination of political activism and passionate interest in history was first nurtured by his uncle Chimen Abramsky, a renowned Judaic scholar, book collector, and historian of socialism. In 1939 Raphael and his school were evacuated to Aspley Guise in Bedfordshire, while his mother became an aircraft factory worker in Slough, where she met her second husband, Bill Keal. Between 1945 and 1952 Samuel attended the progressive King Alfred's School in Hampstead and from there, inspired by his history teacher John Handford, he won a scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford. Between 1952 and 1956 (with a year off for medical reasons) he read history under another political mentor and lifelong friend, the seventeenth-century historian Christopher Hill. 
Even as a dedicated communist at the height of the cold war, Samuel (then known as Ralph) made a considerable impact on a broad range of his Oxford contemporaries, both intellectually and practically. Practically, he revived the moribund socialist society as a novel forum for discussion between socialists and communists, and a seedbed of the future new left. Intellectually, he arrived in Oxford already well versed in Marxist historical debate through his schoolboy membership of the Communist Party historians' group (which included Hobsbawm, Thompson, Hill, Hilton, and others). He himself drew no distinction between his political and historical work. It was allegedly on party orders that he devoted his final year exclusively to academic work and gained a first-class degree. This total dedication to communism was shattered in 1956 by Khrushchov's revelations about Stalin and the Soviet invasion of Hungary. Samuel left the Communist Party, and -- together with his Oxford contemporaries Stuart Hall, Charles Taylor, and Gabriel Pearson -- founded the 'Universities and Left Review', one of the starting points of the new left movement in Britain and a forerunner, together with Edward Thompson's 'New Reasoner', of the 'New Left Review', founded in 1960. 
Although briefly an editor of 'New Left Review', Samuel's dissociation from communism provoked in him a crisis of confidence, which lasted well into the 1960s. After Oxford he joined Michael Young's Institute of Community Studies to study youth and housing in Bethnal Green. Attachment to the institute also led him to share a house at 19 Elder Street, Spitalfields -- once a Huguenot and weaving quarter in the oldest part of the East End on the edge of the City -- which he later bought and made his permanent home. In the early 1960s, however, a near breakdown led him to seek refuge and even consider settling in Ireland. A gradual re-engagement with Britain was prompted by Christopher Hill, who in 1962 secured for him a part-time tutorship in sociology at Ruskin College, a trade-union-supported Oxford college which prepared working people who had left school without qualifications for university. He continued to work at Ruskin until the last year of his life, when he became professor at the University of East London and the director of a centre for London history. 
In 1966 Samuel put on the first of the annual 'history workshops' at Ruskin. Not content with the existing diploma course, he encouraged students to pursue historical research projects which built on their own experiences, and to present their findings alongside established academics at the yearly workshops. These workshops also signalled a renewal of political engagement sparked, in particular, by his alarm about the condition of Britain around the time of Enoch Powell's 'rivers of blood' speech. The workshops lasted until the 1980s and regularly attracted over 1000 participants, mainly students and teachers from Britain and abroad and a wide spectrum of unaffiliated 1960s-style radicals. It was at the workshop of 1969 that the National Women's Liberation Conference was first proposed. Samuel published the best of these Ruskin research essays in a series of history workshop booklets. 
In 1976, together with a number of new left, Oxford, and Ruskin friends, Samuel founded the 'History Workshop Journal', and he remained one of its most active editors until his death. His impact was clearly to be detected in the journal's initial sources of inspiration: the experimentalism of Joan Littlewood's Theatre Workshop, the commitment to accessibility pioneered in adult education, echoes of a popular front politics uneasily combined with more anarchist notions of history from below. 
From this time Samuel also began to publish more of his own work. After his early sociological work in Bethnal Green, Samuel's interests switched to Ireland. It was archival work on the famine and the nineteenth-century Irish poor which rekindled his passion for history. But he published nothing until the early 1970s, when collaborative work with his students and a growing interest in oral history resulted in a study of quarry labourers in Headington, 'Village Life and Labour' (1975), and a pioneering investigation of manual work in Victorian England, 'The workshop of the world' ('History Workshop Journal', 3, 1977). Six years of interviews also resulted in an extraordinary autobiographical account by Arthur Harding of the East London Edwardian and inter-war criminal underworld, starting out from childhood in Arthur Morrison's notorious 'Jago' in Shoreditch, published as 'East End Underworld' (1981). 
In the 1980s political change produced a substantial shift in the direction of Samuel's writing. Mrs Thatcher's defeat of organized labour and her mobilization of patriotic support for the Falklands War, the demise of Marxism, the growth of feminist and post-colonial criticism, and the linguistic turn strongly affected both Samuel and the 'History Workshop Journal'. Most important for him was the fading of a politics of class. In a book-length essay for the 'New Left Review' he put his own communist childhood and beliefs into a historical perspective, in 'The lost worlds of British communism' (1985-7). He also attempted to set the split between Labour and the SDP in a longer-term social-historical context, initially ascribing the disintegration of pre-1950 class identities to the emergence of a new consumerist middle class. By the end of the 1980s, however, he had become convinced that this political shift was only one component of a larger set of social and cultural changes involving all groups in the population. 
Samuel tried to grasp this process through an examination of changing attitudes towards the past. He actively participated in the political debate about the place of history in the national curriculum, but always stressed that historical awareness was as much a product of 'unofficial' knowledge (myth, ritual, childood memory, fiction, fantasy) as of formal schooling. In his contributions to the three volumes he edited on 'Patriotism' in 1989 he noted that in the preceding thirty years there had grown up an 'extraordinary and ever-growing popular enthusiasm for the recovery of the national past'. He defended this development as a phenomenon which drew as much on radical as on conservative or nationalist roots. By 1994, in his last book, 'Theatres of Memory', intended as the first volume of a trilogy, this interest had been elaborated into a major research study of 'memory work' and the changing role of history in late twentieth-century Britain. He argued against detractors, especially on the left, that the expanding historical culture from 'theme parks' and 'living museums' to 'heritage' and 'retro-chic' was not only more democratic but also more inclusive of minorities of all kinds. Shortly after the publication of 'Theatres of Memory' Samuel developed cancer of the lung, from which he died at his home at 19 Elder Street, Spitalfields, on 9 December 1996. He was buried in Highgate cemetery on 18 December. A second volume of the trilogy, 'Island Stories', was published posthumously in 1998. 
In his personal life, Raphael Samuel actively sustained a wide range of friendships dating from different periods in his life: from his early Oxford days, Stuart Hall, Dennis Butt, and Peter Sedgwick; from his Ruskin years, Tim Mason, Gareth Stedman Jones, Alun Howkins, Sally Alexander, Sheila Rowbotham, Jerry White, Barbara Taylor. His adult life was also punctuated by a series of important and intellectually creative relationships with women, including Jean McCrindle, Lydia Howard, Hannah Mitchell, and Miranda Chaytor. Particularly important were the years 1970-76, during which he lived in Elder Street with Anna Davin and her children. On 3 July 1987 he married university lecturer Alison Elizabeth Light ('b'. 1955). It was a close and happy relationship, reinforced by shared passions and commitments, and it was an enormous source of strength throughout his last illness. 
No account of Samuel's writings or of his publishing and political activity could convey the extraordinary impact he made on all who met him or saw him speak. His physical appearance was in itself arresting. It conveyed intensity, energy, singularity of purpose, and drivenness, but lightened by considerable charm, an infectious sense of humour, and a never diminished boyish enthusiasm. He was slightly built, with a thin angular face, a sallow complexion, burning black eyes, and a mop of black hair which in middle age was sustained by the substitution of a long side-lock swept precariously across the crown of his head to conceal a bald pate. His dress, like his appearance, was singular, indefinably French, bohemian -- even slightly dandyish -- but harking back several decades, like a denizen of a left-bank cafe in a film from the 1940s or 1950s. 
In his youth a memorable political orator (who reputedly even addressed workers in languages other than his own), Samuel brought an equally theatrical talent to the delivery of academic papers. He never wrote out lectures, but instead brought thick files bulging with clippings, dog-eared photocopies, and pasted pieces of paper, each containing a few lines of typescript. Characteristically in his talks a few propositions were thickly elaborated with a mosaic of connected quotations, retrieved with a touch of suspenseful uncertainty from the bulging files and accompanied by a frequent sweeping back of the thinning mop of hair. The effect at its best was electrifying. Few who attended ever forgot the 'paper' he delivered to the Oxford Stubbs Society on the Irish famine: an eloquent, fiercely indignant, and witheringly contemptuous yet scholarly denunciation of whig attitudes. At their most powerful, these rhetorical powers introduced a passion into historical debate matched only by Edward Thompson. 
As in all memorable theatrical performance, power of delivery was inseparable from risk. A precise sense of time and timing was essential, if audience and speaker were to share the suspense of locating the right quotation from the jumble of manuscripts -- a suspense which could easily turn into impatience or exasperation if the hunt went on too long. This happened spectacularly in Oxford on the occasion of a special Ford lecture which Samuel delivered on 'The conservative view of history' in 1994. There, nervous and perhaps exhilarated by being honoured by Oxford, for which he felt long-standing affection, he spent so much time on preliminaries and paper-sorting, that he barely reached the substance of the lecture at all. 
Samuel's importance, therefore, cannot be measured solely by his writing or even by his organizational achievements. From his time in the Communist Party, through the foundation of the new left, to the establishment of annual history workshops and the development of the 'History Workshop Journal', Samuel was a brilliant and tireless, if eccentric, inspirer of events and creator of institutions which would not have come into existence without his energy and his ability to inspire others. 


@@@@@


doc= 64004


Kosterlitz, Hans Walter (1903-1996), pharmacologist, was born on 27 April 1903 in Berlin, the son of Bernhard Kosterlitz, medical practitioner, and his wife, Selma, 'nee' Lepman. Both Kosterlitz and his brother followed their father into medicine. Kosterlitz was educated at the universities of Heidelberg, Freiburg, and Berlin. His leanings were towards laboratory-based research, and he wrote his first scientific papers while still a medical student in Berlin. He gained his MD in 1928, and remained in Berlin for five years as an assistant in the first medical department, following his early interest in biochemistry, and studying the altered sugar metabolism in diabetic patients. 
Though not Jewish, Kosterlitz was evidently dismayed by developments in Germany, and in 1934 he decided to join the laboratory of John James Rickard Macleod, the regius professor of physiology in Aberdeen. Macleod had recently returned from Toronto, and was famous as one of the co-discoverers, with Frederick Grant Banting and Charles Herbert Best, of insulin. Though Aberdeen may have seemed a somewhat remote scientific outpost, Macleod's laboratory had great appeal for researchers in the field of diabetes. Macleod died only a year after Kosterlitz joined his laboratory, but the latter carried on his research into carbohydrate metabolism for another fifteen years. He was appointed a Carnegie teaching fellow in 1936 (the year in which he received his Aberdeen PhD), and lecturer in physiology in 1939. On 9 March 1937 he married Johanna Maria Katharina 
(Hanna; 'b'. 1905/6)
, daughter of Heinrich Gresshoner, farmer. They had one son, Michael. 
Early in the Second World War Kosterlitz was briefly interned, but he soon returned to Aberdeen to contribute to the training of medical students, and to work on what he saw as a more urgent topic than diabetes, namely the effects of nutrition on liver function. He was appointed senior lecturer in 1945, and reader in physiology in 1955. In the early 1950s he decided to change direction scientifically, and he turned his attention to the autonomic nervous system, particularly the control of peristalsis, the rhythmical propulsive action of the gastrointestinal tract. A brief period at Harvard in 1953-4, working with Otto Krayer (a distinguished expatriate German pharmacologist whom Kosterlitz had known in Berlin), kindled his interest in pharmacology, and he learned of a paper published by Paul Trendelenburg in 1917 showing that the plant alkaloid morphine powerfully inhibited peristalsis. In Aberdeen he devoted himself to studying the peristaltic reflex in isolated segments of intestine suspended in organ baths, and using this preparation to analyse the actions of morphine on the nerves involved in peristalsis. At that time several other laboratories were studying morphine's effects on the brain, and there was scepticism about the relevance of Kosterlitz's painstaking pharmacological work on the intestine. He revealed much later that he had harboured from the beginning the idea that morphine, a plant-derived substance, might be acting as a surrogate for an endogenous chemical mediator, and that his undisclosed ambition had been to discover its nature. 
Kosterlitz remained a reader in physiology at Aberdeen for thirteen years until 1968 when, at the age of sixty-five, he became professor and head of the newly created department of pharmacology at Aberdeen. This finally gave him the opportunity, denied for many years, to build up and lead his own department, and he made the most of it. His group turned its attention to carrying out careful quantitative pharmacological studies of the effects of morphine-like drugs on different animal tissues. Through these studies, they showed unequivocally the existence of three types of opiate 'receptor' (specialized binding molecules through which drugs exert their specific physiological effects). Simultaneously, other groups in Sweden and the United States came to similar conclusions by studying the binding of opiate drugs to different tissues. The discovery of specific receptors suggested the existence of an endogenous chemical mediator which, like morphine, produces physiological effects when it becomes attached to the receptor; Kosterlitz's long cherished belief in the existence of endogenous 'opioids' thus gained considerable credibility. 
At this critical point Kosterlitz, then seventy, had to retire from his university post, but he stayed on as director of a new, independently funded unit for research on addictive drugs, which he led for another twenty-two years. John Hughes, deputy director, played a major part in the unit's very successful research. They immediately set about identifying the mysterious endogenous substance, starting from copious extracts of pig brain, and using the pharmacological assays for morphine-like substances that they had perfected. After many set-backs, they succeeded in 1975 in isolating two novel peptides (leu- and met-enkephalin), which were the elusive endogenous opioid peptides. These short peptides, containing only five amino acids, were soon found within the sequence of much longer peptides (endorphins) produced by the pituitary gland, which also belong to the endogenous opioid family. This family of mediators, and the associated receptors, quickly became the focus of intense worldwide research activity, and proved to be involved in many brain functions, including pain perception, drug dependence, learning and memory, endocrine secretions, and much else. Kosterlitz's discovery thus represented an important scientific breakthrough, which was the basis for many subsequent advances in the pharmacology of the nervous system. 
Kosterlitz had an infectious enthusiasm for his work, and reciprocated the affection and respect of numerous younger colleagues. His many distinctions included fellowship of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1951), the Schmiedeberg Plakette of the German Pharmacological Society (1976), fellowship of the Royal Society (1978), the Albert Lasker award (1978), the royal medal of the Royal Society (1979), and honorary degrees from the universities of Liege, Aberdeen, St Andrews, and Dundee. Despite two serious strokes, and other illnesses in later life, he remained active as a scientist in Aberdeen (publishing his last paper in 1991) until shortly before his death, of bronchopneumonia and cerebrovascular disease, at Rowan Court, Cults, Aberdeen, on 26 October 1996; he was buried at Newhills cemetery, Aberdeen. He was survived by his wife, Hanna, and son, Michael, professor of theoretical physics at Brown University. 


@@@@@


doc= 64005


Proops, (Rebecca) Marjorie (1911-1996), advice columnist, was born at 55 Eastbourne Road, Tottenham, Middlesex, on 10 August 1911, elder daughter of Abraham Israel, who later changed his name to Alfred Rayle, and his wife, Martha Flatau. At that time her father was a van traveller in mineral water, but he soon gave that up and bought a series of pubs, moving restlessly from one district to another. Marje, as she was always known (having been mocked as 'Bekky the Jew girl' as a child), went to a series of London schools; she left her last, Dalston secondary school, just before she was sixteen and had three terms at Hackney Technical School. Considered 'the brainy one' beside her pretty sister Josephine, she also had a powerful contralto voice which won her talent competitions and an offer to join the D'Oyly Carte opera company, which her mother made her turn down. And she could draw: when she left art school her father paid a premium (unknown to her) to get her taken on by a commercial art studio in London's Smithfield meat market, where she was given mainly dogsbody tasks but was taught by her friendly seniors to dress more smartly, thin her eyebrows, and paint red with nail varnish the heavy glasses she always wore. 
At seventeen Marje set up as a freelance fashion artist, managing to sell drawings to several papers and magazines. On 21 November 1935 she married Sidney Joseph Proops (1908-1988), a builder, and had a son, Robert, nine months later; but, unusually for those days, she went on working. In 1939 she was appointed resident fashion artist at the 'Daily Mirror', but when the war came, Sidney (Proopsie) joined the Royal Engineers and was posted to the midlands and then abroad; Marje and her son moved to Stoke Poges in Buckinghamshire to be near her parents in Windsor. She was able to go on selling fashion sketches, particularly of knitwear, as a freelance; and on the strength of her captions to these, the editor of 'Good Taste' magazine asked her to write an article on the problems of mothers coping on their own in wartime. A pamphlet on venereal disease for female servicewomen and other commissions followed, and at the end of the war she joined the 'Daily Herald' as fashion editor, later graduating to woman's editor. And when the existing advice columnist, writing as May Marshall, left, Proops, unable to find a replacement, started answering the letters herself. 
So began her career as an 'agony aunt', which gave her 'Dear Marje' column iconic status in journalism and the country, a role she continued when she moved back to the 'Woman's Mirror' under Hugh Cudlipp in 1954. He had been impressed by the witty, forthright replies of American columnists Abigail van Buren and Ann Landers, and reckoned Marje could emulate them, and more. At first she was alarmed by how little she knew, but her friend the psychiatrist Dr Eustace Chesser let her bring round the letters in his lunch hour and gradually schooled her in their interpretation. She built up over the years not only increasing experience but a vast knowledge of the organizations and agencies where her troubled readers could go for help. She answered, or caused to be answered by her team of trained helpers, every one of the 50,000 letters she received each year; other readers telephoned her, and occasionally she was compelled to take practical action, for example when one girl rang from a call box to say she had taken suicide pills; Marje kept her in conversation for long enough for her staff and the police to locate and rescue her. 
Her columns were distinguished from the more conventional and moralistic work of previous advice columnists by their frankness about forbidden areas such as homosexuality, impotence, divorce, and incest; she claimed to be the first person to mention masturbation in a family newspaper. She was compassionate but could be tough with her correspondents: her journalist colleague Felicity Green described her answers as being 'brutally frank, sexually aware, liberal to the point of illegality' (private information). Her writing bridged in its fifty years a change in public attitudes from that in which wives wrote about 'submitting' to their husbands to one in which, in her own words, 'questions about orgasms are as common as questions about mothers-in-law'. She and those who followed her were even reproached for having accelerated the process, though she saw herself as struggling against hypocrisy and repression and cruelty. 
In her own life Marje appeared to be happily married to Sidney Proops, living in London first in Golders Green, then St John's Wood, and finally Barnes, and becoming a model grandmother to her son's two children. Not until 1992 did her authorized biography, 'Marje: the Guilt and the Gingerbread' by Angela Patmore, reveal that her marriage to Proopsie had been a disaster from the start, her wedded bliss a sham. Her appreciation of sex, however, was not; for many years (from about 1967) her real love was Philip Levy, the 'Mirror''s company lawyer, though there were other lovers as well. Though 'jolie laide' rather than pretty, she had an excellent figure, dressed with flair and suitability, and was popular -- with women as well as with men. She was not a good judge of people, being inclined to like anyone who liked her (even Robert Maxwell, the 'Mirror''s maverick proprietor, who put her briefly on the Mirror board). She enjoyed the grand style, and the procession of editors for whom she worked made a point of courting her and ensuring her the chauffeur-driven luxury she expected and -- in terms of her value to the 'Mirror' -- deserved. 
She wrote features and interviews as well as 'Dear Marje', and her talents were widely recognized. She was woman journalist of the year 1969, and was appointed OBE in the same year. She served on Sir Morris Finer's committee on one-parent families from 1976 to 1978, and on Lord Rothschild's royal commission on betting, lotteries and gaming 1976-8. She wrote two books, 'Pride, Prejudice and Proops' (1975) and 'Dear Marje' (1976). A rose was named after her, and in 1977 she went on display at Madame Tussaud's waxworks. 
Both Philip and Sidney died before her in the 1980s and Marje missed them both. In her last years she was increasingly frail, having survived an early hysterectomy and breast cancer, and moving with two false hips; she died of pneumonia at Cromwell Hospital, Kensington, on 10 November 1996, having concealed her age to the last. She was following Hugh Cudlipp's advice given long before: 'One day', he said, 'your name will be in the record books and you'll want to go on working. If you let them know your age, you won't be able to.' Marje reckoned that during her working life she had corresponded with 3 per cent of the British population, and had influenced countless more; in a friend's words 'she saved more souls than the Salvation Army'. And she embodied the best of the liberal spirit of the second half of her century. 


@@@@@


doc= 64006


Makins, Roger Mellor, first Baron Sherfield (1904-1996), diplomatist and public servant, was born on 3 February 1904 at 15 Orsett Terrace, London, the oldest of three sons of Brigadier-General Sir Ernest Makins (1869-1959), army officer and Conservative MP for Knutsford from 1922 to 1945, and his wife, Maria Florence (died 1972), third of four daughters of Sir James Robert Mellor (1839-1926) of Eastgate, Tenterden, Kent, master of the crown office and registrar of the court of criminal appeal. His mother was an accomplished violinist from a dynasty of Liverpudlian lawyers. The elder of his two brothers, Guy Henry ('b'. 1906), died following an accident in 1923; the younger, Geoffrey Ernest ('b'. 1915), was killed in action in Normandy in 1944. 
After being farmed out to a series of governesses and sergeant-majors by his itinerant parents -- his father was at this time a regular officer in the Royal Dragoons -- Makins enjoyed a short reign at West Downs, Winchester (1914-17), and then a slightly less glorious one at Winchester College itself (1917-22). From there, as expected, he went up to Oxford -- not the way of the true Wykehamist, to New College, but to clubbable Christ Church, to read modern history, which he did, fiercely, during the vacations, there being too many distractions of the hunting, shooting, and socializing variety during the terms. The system worked: he was awarded a congratulatory first (1925). His entire career, one might say, was a congratulatory first. That same year he was elected a prize fellow of All Souls, together with his tutorial partner, A. L. Rowse, historian and amateur of cats and cattiness. At twenty-one, Makins said that he had never known such perfect satisfaction. A lifetime later it was reprised. At eighty-two, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society (1986), a signal honour for a non-scientist. 
Between elections Makins had a reputation to make. His fellowship prescribed two years in college. He devoted the time to reading for the bar. No sooner was he called than he decided it was not the career for him, and reverted to his original idea of trying for the Foreign Office, his contact with the law and the legal profession 'as brief as it was briefless' (unpublished memoirs). He sat the examinations in 1928. Inevitably, perhaps, he passed first, notwithstanding a certain lack of fluency in French. (Behind him was John Cairncross, later 'the fifth man' among the Cambridge spies.) As top of the list, he had the choice of joining the office without further language study, or taking up a really difficult one like Russian or Chinese. Without hesitation he chose the first option. He was assigned to the American department as a probationary third secretary, in October 1928, and in time-honoured fashion was told to look after Latin America. 
So began a career of leaps and bounds in the service of his country. Soon Makins was posted across the Atlantic. There he found his second home. He served in Washington as third secretary from April 1931 to May 1934 (being promoted second secretary in October 1933), as minister from January 1945 to February 1947, and finally as ambassador from December 1952 to October 1956. He was also in Oslo, from May to September 1934; at the Foreign Office, being promoted first secretary in September 1939 and counsellor in August 1940; on the staff of the minister resident in west Africa, from July to December 1942; as assistant to the minister resident at allied forces headquarters, Mediterranean command, from January 1943 to September 1944; and again at the Foreign Office, as assistant and then from April 1948 deputy under-secretary of state. His recurrence in Washington sealed his influence and oriented his ambition; for it was there that he met and, on 30 April 1934, married his partner in life, Alice Brooks Davis (1908-1985), eldest of the three daughters of the Hon. Dwight Filey Davis, governor-general of the Federal Reserve Bank and of the Philippines, secretary for war in President Coolidge's administration, and donor of the Davis cup. It was a fortunate partnership. They were well matched, in temperament as in tennis (in golf she had the better of him). Thirty years later, in 1964, Makins (having been made CMG in 1944, KCMG in 1949, KCB in 1953, GCMG in 1955, and GCB in 1960) was made a hereditary peer. The question of a title arose. His account is characteristic, and quietly eloquent of this particular special relationship: 'For some reason which I could not well explain -- perhaps euphony -- I did not like the sound of Lord Makins, and rationalized it by pointing out that there were too many Lady Makins... It would avoid confusion if I were to take a territorial title. Sherfield was a good old English place name to which I had a better claim than anyone else. For some reason equally difficult to explain, Alice was against a change of name. She said she had changed her name twice and did not want to do it again. But I think it was an expression of her American origins and she had an unconscious prejudice against titles and indeed the idea of an hereditary aristocracy. She was always critical of pretensions of any kind, and one of the things I am most grateful for is that as I climbed the ladder she never let me get above myself. Anyway, we had quite a sharp argument about it... Alice often returned to this grievance. She claimed that I would be confused with Lord Sheffield, which was true up to a point... She also claimed that nobody would know who Lord Sherfield was -- I replied that all the people who mattered to us would know, and that I intended to establish the identity of Lord Sherfield as clearly as that of Sir Roger Makins. (We both had a point there.) (unpublished note)' They made up by choosing the supporters for his coat of arms: a British lion differenced with an atomic symbol on one side, and -- to Alice's delight -- an American bald eagle differenced with a tennis racket on the other. 
There was a history to the atomic symbol, and a sobriquet Makins did not care for: Mr Atom. As minister in the Washington embassy, given free rein by the enervative Ambassador Inverchapel, it fell to Makins to represent British interests in the precarious Anglo-American atomic diplomacy of the post-Hiroshima period. His task was to secure Britain's position, if not by fully-fledged collaboration on the wartime model, then by mutual consultation and appropriate allocation of the vital ingredient, uranium: a tall order. By 1947 the situation was difficult verging on desperate. In 1943 Churchill and Roosevelt had signed an agreement not to use the bomb against third parties without each other's consent (ostensibly an absolute veto), and in 1944 an 'aide-memoire' on full collaboration for both military and commercial purposes after the war. But the fairytale promise of these arrangements never materialized. The perfunctory way in which British consent was requested for the dropping of the bomb in 1945 spoke of the letter rather than the spirit of the original agreement. The passage through the US congress of the notorious 'McMahon Act' in 1946 formally severed the main arteries of atomic information exchange, the vital source of any genuine consultation. After Hiroshima, the constitutional authority of the president and commander-in-chief would not be compromised by written commitments to allies, however special the relationship. Furthermore, the British were clearly (and rightly) worried about the 'coupling' of this issue to the delicate matter of economic assistance from the Americans, and indeed to Anglo-American relations as a whole. 
On the other hand Britain was not entirely without cards to play. Apart from her own geostrategic position -- Orwell's Airstrip One -- there was the submerged issue of access to resources of various kinds, animal and mineral. A much-increased supply of uranium was indispensable to the expansionary US atomic weapons project. Both London and Washington fancied that the key to this supply was held by the British. Certain British scientists were held to be almost irreplaceable in the United States. At the first US post-war bomb test at Bikini in the Pacific, Ernest Titterton, instrumentation group leader at Los Alamos as late as 1947, gave the countdown and detonation order; and William Penney, whose presence had been specially requested for the purpose, played a leading part in the blast measurement and subsequent analysis. Penney remained 'persona gratissima' in Washington throughout the period, as did the unassuming Nobel laureate James Chadwick. It was not all jam and kippers, as Chadwick once remarked, but it was not negligible. 
None the less, in 1948, after much transatlantic tergiversation, the so-called 'modus vivendi' summarily removed the requirement for consent, made no offer to consult, and restored only limited technical atomic information exchange in return. These were the American terms. The free flow of information would take another ten years: a long sentence, and long-deferred gratification for Mr Atom. The 'modus vivendi', however, was a difficult child. Makins's handling of the negotiations has been variously assessed. No one doubts their exacting nature; but a number of authorities, including the magisterial Margaret Gowing, have suggested that Britain could have done better. Makins himself thought otherwise, resolutely maintaining to his dying day that it was 'the best agreement that could have been secured at the time' (unpublished memoirs) -- a defensive construction, and in the final analysis perhaps an insufficiently searching one. 
At the time, there was no thought of reproof or reproach. Makins had returned to London in an almost impregnable position at the heart of the machine, as assistant and soon deputy under-secretary at the Foreign Office, roaming freely through the jungle of economic and atomic policy making -- the critical and the sub-critical, as one might say. This was a daunting brief. It did not daunt Makins. 'He radiated humour, energy and good sense. Bounding from one meeting to the other, he seemed to us in the Office to be plural rather than singular' (A. M. Browne, quoted in Carrington, memorial service address). Cast as the poor relation with ideas above her station -- 'chief mendicant', in R. W. B. Clarke's biting phrase (Kelly, 114) -- Britain had frustratingly little room for manoeuvre. Steering the policy of the poor relation was the redoubtable Ernest Bevin. Whispering loudly in his ear was Roger Makins. In every sense, the whisper carried. Makins was one of the select few: a well-honed and for the most part well-heeled band of brothers who caballed behind the throne in the national interest. Another was the Treasury official Robert Hall. An extract from his diary of 1949 reveals, as Makins himself justly noted, 'the extent and confidence with which we officials were able in this period to influence and indeed manage appointments and policy': 'OSF [Franks], RM [Makins], EP [Edwin Plowden] and I had some chat about bodies and whether to move Hall-Patch from Paris. I should be sorry if this had to be done, but it is very bad that he does not get on with Harriman. We have decided that the next steps at home are to cut expenditure and wake up people on the Board of Trade doing the dollar export work. Everyone on the UK talks in Washington agreed that Holmes was a disaster and ought to be shifted, and also everyone except the Ministers that Harold Wilson is no good, ought if possible to be shifted from the Board of Trade, and certainly ought not to succeed Stafford Cripps [as chancellor of the exchequer]. If any young one is to do it it should be Gaitskell!! (unpublished memoirs)' Roger Makins was at the centre of that web of influence. There can be little doubt that he did much to keep the ship of state afloat during those years of economic reconstruction and diplomatic prestidigitation. Bevin was a heroic figure -- not least to his own officials -- but as illness and exhaustion took hold he, like Macmillan, became increasingly reliant on the rigorous Roger Makins, whose prudent counsel seemed so difficult to ignore. 'Dominant, but not domineering', in Jeremy Morse's felicitous apposition (memorial service address), Makins was a hard man to gainsay. 
This prudence manifested itself in Makins's assessment of personalities and eventualities alike. On the making of Macmillan during the war: 'On his record to date, nobody suspected that [he] had the remarkable diplomatic talents, the political vision and judgement, the powers of persuasion, and the courage to disregard instructions, which he displayed in north Africa, in Italy and in Greece' (unpublished memoirs). On John Foster Dulles as secretary of state: 'My main problem was that he travelled a great deal and I never quite knew what had passed in his dealings with Anthony Eden, Selwyn Lloyd and others... Reports were sent, of course, but it is only if one is actually on the spot that it is possible to know what nods or winks have been exchanged. (ibid.)' Less happily, on diplomatic golf: 'I played from time to time with the Vice-President, Richard Nixon... I had always been a very bad golfer (indeed, I had given up the game, as I thought, for good). Dick Nixon was equally bad. We formed a bond of misery, and a friendship developed which endured until he was driven from the White House. (ibid.)' 'Driven' may give pause to those brought up on dirty tricks and deleted expletives. Makins lived very much in the here and now, but he was in certain respects an official of the old school. Good order matched good work. Security outbid futurity. The purposive crowded the imaginative. 'He was above all a solver of problems' (Carrington, memorial service address). Expatiating on the difference between a 'realistic' and a 'romantic' view of the world -- the prospects for a European Community, for example -- there was no mistaking his own affiliation. The realism of the realists was another matter. In 1950 Makins adamantly opposed British participation in the Schuman plan for the first European Community, a coal and steel pool, arguing that 'it let the Americans off the hook' -- the hook of continuing engagement in Europe. 'We are not ready', he informed Etienne Hirsch, 'and you will not succeed' (Charlton, 93, 122, 151): the historic misjudgement of a generation of British policy makers. 
Deceived by his own masters over Suez in 1956 -- ambassadors were neither consulted nor informed -- on his return to London Makins was astonished to learn at the eleventh hour of the Anglo-French collusion. 'It had never occurred to me the British government would consider taking such action without full American support. I realised immediately that there would be a disaster and I began mentally to prepare myself for it' (unpublished memoirs). It was a characteristic response. The operation was impracticable. The collusion was deplorable, no doubt, but that was a secondary issue. What mattered was to anticipate the consequences. Remediation, not resignation, was uppermost in his mind. When Anthony Nutting and Edward Boyle resigned, at a moment of high anxiety for the government, Makins said to Boyle, 'privately, I do not blame you; you realise what has happened', and returned to the planning of emergency measures by the Treasury. Privately, also, he gave himself partial credit for the belated 'unblinkering' of the hawkish Harold Macmillan (unpublished memoirs). As Jeremy Morse acutely observed, 'his mind and style were marked by consistency and immediacy' (memorial address). And potency. 
After a rather frustrating interlude as joint permanent secretary of the Treasury from 1956 to 1959, alongside Sir Norman Brook -- appointed by Macmillan but abandoned to the vagaries of Selwyn Lloyd and the hostilities of the mandarinate -- Makins concluded his official service as chairman of the UK Atomic Energy Authority (1960-64), in which post his diplomatic skills were frequently (and successfully) called upon to resolve clashes of personality and of interest within the nuclear industry. He was unready for retirement. In afterlife, as he said, he revelled in a variety of activities in the City, chairing everything from Hill, Samuel (1966-70) to Wells Fargo (1972-84), and in the service of what might be called the public awareness of science and technology, culminating in a notable stint as chairman of the House of Lords select committee on science and technology (1984-7) -- a body, and an idea, whose very existence owed much to his inspiration. Makins was the very model of the inquisitive octogenarian. 
Like his contemporary Oliver Franks, with whom he was, as he remarked, 'very much on the same wavelength' (unpublished memoirs), Makins cast a long and impressive shadow in the committees of influence off the corridors of power. If the public pinnacle of his career was as ambassador in Washington, in truth he was a prime mover in the inner circles of the Anglo-Saxons throughout the momentous middle decades of the twentieth century. But it was not only the length and breadth of his career: the pace of his life was breathtaking. Makins was congenitally formidable. The 'New York Times' described him as looking like an affable hawk. Colleagues in the Foreign Office plumped for an amiable vulture. More prejudicial accounts move from the avian to the simian. Six feet four inches tall, with a frame and a voice and a zest to match, Makins was an imposing presence. His attack left the lesser primates awestruck and overwhelmed. In wartime Algiers, Harold Macmillan wondered whether he could live up to the standards set by his architectonic assistant: 'It is naturally a great loss -- even a great grief -- to lose Roger. He has been a most loyal supporter in all my difficulties and a most agreeable companion and friend. I think it is tribute to both of us that we have lived together for nearly two years like subalterns in a company mess without quarelling (and Roger's temperament is more highly strung than mine). The inspiring thing about him is his standard of work. He is 'never' satisfied with the second best. And this goes through the office and inspires the others. 
[His successor] will, I think, be agreeable and efficient. But he has not that rapier-like brain combined with that almost monastic devotion to duty which makes Roger such a unique figure in the public service. (diary, 29 Sept 1944, in H. Macmillan, 'The Blast of War', 1967, 552-3)' Devotion to duty did not preclude a voracious sociability. ('The Makins of a good party' was an old joke on the diplomatic cocktail circuit. And, in a crowded room, 'Meet you at the British Ambassador.') Makins relished the pleasure of encounter. His charm too was formidable. Unlike Franks, he enjoyed talking, but above all he enjoyed dancing. As a ballroom dancer he was a sensation. In the 1950s he waltzed staid Washington off its feet. Forty years later he was still at it, foxtrotting and quickstepping with the best of them, into the early hours, delighted, at his ninetieth birthday ball. The secret of successful diplomacy, he maintained, was stamina. Stamina was Makins's middle name. Sir Edward Bridges, a paragon public servant, once headed both the Treasury and the civil service. He was asked how he managed it. 'I don't,' Bridges replied. 'I just catch one ball in four' (Hennessy, 144). Makins did better than that. In the arena he was a prodigious all-rounder. In reflection, he might have conceded something to a Monnet or a Spaak or even a Franks. In action, turbocharged action, he had the measure of them all. 
Makins died at the age of ninety-two, at the Hampshire Clinic, Basing Road, Basingstoke, Hampshire, on 9 November 1996, of cancer and heart failure. His wife having predeceased him in 1985, he was survived by the six children of their marriage: twins Mary (Mollie) and Cynthia ('b'. 1935), Virginia ('b'. 1939), Christopher ('b'. 1942), Patricia ('b'. 1946), and Dwight ('b'. 1951). Christopher -- like his father a prize fellow of All Souls college -- succeeded him as second Baron Sherfield. A memorial service was held at All Souls on 1 March 1997, and another at St Margaret by Westminster Abbey, on 6 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 64007


Gittins, John Stanley (1910-1996), educationist, was born on 1 March 1910 in Hinckley, Leicestershire, the son of Albert Harold Gittins (1886-1943), a manager of the Co-operative Society, and his wife, Lily, 'nee' King (1883-1917). He was educated at Hinckley grammar school (1920-27); University College, Leicester (1927-31), where he graduated BSc in chemistry; Cambridge University (1931-2), where he was awarded a diploma in education; and the University of London Institute of Education (1932-3), where he graduated MA. He married Elizabeth Lewis ('b'. 1909), schoolteacher and approved school matron, on 2 August 1934. They had two children, Ann ('b'. 1939) and Christopher ('b'. 1946). 
Gittins served as a science master at Whitgift Middle School, Croydon, between 1932 and 1936, and was then appointed lecturer in education and psychology at the University College of the South West, Exeter, between 1937 and 1938. From 1938 to 1942 he worked as an inspector in the children's department of the Home Office. His duties during the Second World War entailed the inspection of possible sites for new approved schools in rural areas away from cities under threat of bombing and intended for the increasing number of young people identified as delinquent or at risk because of the social and geographical dislocations wrought by the war. One such site, formerly a hostel owned by the Ministry of Works, was at Aycliffe, near Darlington. When Gittins declared it suitable in 1942, he was invited by the Home Office to establish and administer the new school, and he remained its principal until his retirement. 
Gittins brought an evolving amalgam of themes to his new post: a natural scientific bent acquired as an undergraduate chemist; an admiration for psychology acquired as a graduate student in education; a stress on the superiority of experience and 'common sense' over academic theory; and a personal commitment to teaching. Professing -- as in the 'Northern Echo' of 1 June 1954 -- that very little was known about the causes or cures of delinquency, he nevertheless maintained a cautious optimism about the possibility of changing the young by exposing them to improving influences, including community service, hiking, art, drama, 'good films', and classical music. He once told Ron Clarke, sometime head of the Home Office research unit, that he was wasting his time on 'all that 'kiddlepumph'' about absconding from approved schools, the subject of Clarke's PhD dissertation, and that he would do better to examine the successful methods employed at Aycliffe (private information). Delinquency, Gittins said, is 'a malaise of society', a form of social incompetence compounded by unsatisfactory, unstimulating, and unstable homes ('Evening Dispatch', 31 Jan 1947). Aycliffe itself combined practical activity with therapy and education broadly conceived in 'a kind of crucible in which one is carrying out an experiment using ingredients in a concentrated form'. 
In common with many other post-war penologists, Gittins became persuaded that successful rehabilitation rested on early intervention and a proper classification of the young into categories for allocation to different regimes. Aycliffe was the first classifying school approved by the Home Office, the biggest and the best in the country according to the 'Evening Standard', designed to observe, assess, and place children in local training schools in the north-east. Gittins was perhaps most celebrated for the classifying methods he devised at Aycliffe and subsequently publicized in a Home Office report of 1952. Those methods were represented as pragmatic and simple, intended for purposes of action, and based on the limited knowledge of the time, rather than as scientific or precise measures of complex phenomena. Boys were transferred to a training school after a comprehensive report had been compiled on tests for educational attainment and intelligence, observations of health, and descriptions of family background and present conduct. 
As Aycliffe's founder, long-standing principal, and trainer of new staff, Gittins, who was described by Professor Roger Hood as a 'tall and imposing man' and by others as 'charismatic' (private information), came to exert a considerable authority over thinking about penal policy. He was appointed OBE in 1962 and retired from Aycliffe in 1970. He died of heart failure at the Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 27 October 1996, and was cremated in Newcastle the following month. He was survived by his wife, daughter, and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 64013


Frideswide Frances Emma Knight (1910-1996), communist activist, was born on 11 November 1910, one of four daughters (there was one son) of the Revd Dr Hugh Fraser Stewart (1863-1948), theologian and scholar of French literature and fellow and dean of St John's College, Cambridge, and his wife, Jessie Graham, 'nee' Crum (died 1966), an early Newnham student and the first to gain a first-class degree there. Frida enjoyed a liberal Cambridge childhood, but her schooling was curtailed at the age of fourteen by a rare heart condition. Sent to Italy to recuperate, she became an active anti-fascist, and soon joined the Communist Party. In 1937 she went to Spain under the auspices of the national joint committe for Spanish relief, helping to establish a children's hospital at Malaga, then working in Madrid as a typist and translator for the republican press agency. After the Francoist victory she assisted republicans held in camps in France; in 1940 she was interned by the Germans but escaped, taking to England to de Gaulle a message hidden in a cigarette. For the next two years she worked in London for the Free French. She remained a member of the Communist Party until it formally ended in 1991. At her home in Reading she was also active in the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, and when back in Cambridge she founded Cambridge Against the Missile Bases, arranged concerts by Soviet performers, and chaired the Cambridge-Cuba solidarity campaign. Her several publications included books on her escape from France, the French resistance, William Frend (1757-1841), reformer and scientific writer, and Cambridge music from the middle ages onwards. She also contributed articles to the communist 'Daily Worker', later the 'Morning Star'. She died on 2 October 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 64015


Birk, Alma Lillian, Baroness Birk (1917-1996), politician and journalist, was born on 22 September 1917 at 10 Belgrave Place, Brighton, the daughter of Barnett Wilson (formerly Woolfson) of Stamford Hill, London, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Tosh. Her father ran a successful greeting-card company, and she enjoyed a comfortable upbringing. She was educated at South Hampstead high school and the London School of Economics (LSE). Her youthful socialism became more deeply rooted at the LSE, and after graduating she was involved in Labour politics in Finchley. She married, on 24 December 1939, at Hampstead Garden Suburb synagogue, Ellis Samuel Birk ['see below'], then a solicitor's clerk, of East Finchley. They had one son and one daughter. Alma and Ellis Birk shared a commitment to socialism and both supported the Fabian Society. While he was stationed in Wiltshire with the army during the war she unsuccessfully contested a seat on Salisbury city council. She later won a seat on Finchley borough council and served as leader of the small Labour group from 1950 to 1953. A woman of great energy, and matching ambition, she was involved with the Howard League for penal reform, the Hendon hospital group, and numerous organizations concerned with child welfare and the Jewish community. At the general election of 1950 she contested Ruislip-Northwood, a Conservative stronghold, for the Labour Party: she was a distant second. Her chances were better at Portsmouth West in 1951, where she lost narrowly. She was encouraged to stand again, only to lose by a greater margin in 1955. It was her last parliamentary candidacy. 
Besides politics, Alma Birk's other great interest lay in journalism. She began with a column in 'Forward', a Labour weekly of Gaitskellite leanings, and from there she moved to the 'Daily Herald', which was acquired by the Mirror Group, to which her husband was legal adviser. Her journalistic career entered an exciting new phase when she became associate editor of 'Nova', a post she held from 1965 to 1969. 'Nova' proclaimed itself as: 'The new kind of magazine for the new kind of woman'. With Dennis Hackett, the editor, Birk assembled a team of writers who dealt frankly with social and sex problems. It was a radical departure from the 'standard diet of knitting patterns and home hints' ('Glasgow Herald', 2 Jan 1997). Birk contributed her own articles and made sure that 'Nova' stood out on the news-stands with arresting covers. The magazine had a lasting influence, although within a few years of the arrival of 'Cosmopolitan' it had folded, outpaced by a racier rival. By then Birk had moved on, her career firmly directed towards politics. 
In 1967 Harold Wilson recognized Birk's political and public activities with a life peerage. She was to be a working peer, intended to strengthen the Labour element in the upper chamber. To some observers, though, it was a blatantly political appointment, since Ellis Birk was by now powerful in the Mirror Group, upon which the prime minister relied for press support. Alma Birk nevertheless proved a highly conscientious and effective member of the upper house, where her elegant dress, slim figure, and gold-auburn hair attracted special attention. She would remark self-deprecatingly, 'they call me the poor man's Barbara Castle', but to the friends who knew the extent of her husband's directorships 'she was more the rich man's Barbara Castle' ('The Times', 31 Dec 1996). As chairman of the Health Education Council from 1969 to 1972 she impressed her chief, Richard Crossman, with her dynamism and executive ability, and she used to good effect the talents as a publicist that she had developed at 'Nova'. In March 1974 she was made a government whip, and in October she became parliamentary under-secretary of state at the Department of the Environment, with responsibility also for transport and Treasury affairs. Shortly before the general election of 1979 she became minister of state in the privy council office. 
Birk continued to give devoted service when Labour were in opposition. She was front-bench spokesman on the environment from 1979 to 1986 and on the arts, libraries, heritage, and broadcasting from 1986 to 1993, the role in which she was probably happiest. She and her husband were notable patrons of the performing arts and in particular of the open-air theatre at Regent's Park, from which she took her title. She was a member of the Theatres' Trust, a director of the British Film Institute, and president of the Association of Art Institutions (1984-96). Her long list of public commitments included being a prison visitor at Holloway from 1967 to 1971, vice-president of the Council of Children's Welfare from 1968 to 1975, vice-president of Redbridge Jewish Youth Centre from 1970, and a member of the Holocaust Memorial Committee. Although frail from illness in her last days, Alma Birk would still respond to a three-line whip in the House of Lords, where she could be found 'walking with a stick... chatting her lively way through the division lobby' ('The Independent', 3 Jan 1997). She died of breast cancer on 29 December 1996 at her home, Flat 1, 34 Bryanston Square, Westminster. 




@@@@@


doc= 64016


Herbison, Margaret McCrorie (1907-1996), politician, was born on 11 March 1907 at 46 Shotts Kirk Road, Shotts, Lanarkshire, the fourth of the six children of John Herbison, coalminer, and his wife, Maria Jane, 'nee' McCrorie. Her mother was 'from Northern Ireland -- in fact from [Ian] Paisley's Bannside. My father, a gentle and tolerant man, was shocked when after visiting cousins there I brought home some Orange songs. But I'd also learnt some Irish rebel songs' ('The Independent'). Thought by Harold Wilson to be indecisive, Herbison, in a creditably caring way, recognized that there were at least two sides to every question. 
Herbison enjoyed a happy childhood. After attending Dykehead public primary school the strict traditional dominies of her secondary school, Bellshill Academy, saw to it that this intelligent, assiduous miner's daughter entered Glasgow University. The university inculcated in her generation the expectation that they should repay the country for privileged education by service to society, and it was for service to society that in 1970 the university bestowed on her an honorary doctorate of laws. She gained her first degree in English, and in 1930 became a schoolteacher. From then until 1945 she taught English and history, first at Maryhill primary school in Glasgow and then at Allan Glen's secondary school. Her pupils recalled her with that mixture of affection and awe which is the mark of the really successful professional teacher. 'A right proper bantamweight' was the verdict of a pupil who himself later became an international boxer ('The Independent'). 
As an undergraduate at Glasgow, Herbison chaired the university's Labour branch, and she remained active in local Labour politics; she also lectured in economics for the National Council of Labour Colleges. After her father had been killed in the pit his miners' lodge, unprompted, nominated her as a candidate for the Labour selection conference in the North Lanarkshire constituency. She won the nomination, and in the general election of July 1945 took the seat from the incumbent Conservative, Sir William Anstruther Grey. She made her maiden speech on 17 October 1945, in which she said: 'In my constituency of North Lanark, where I am faced with a gigantic housing problem, we have suffered little or nothing from war damage... My people for a long time have been suffering deplorable conditions. That cannot be put on this Labour government; it is the result of governments not tackling this problem as it ought to have been tackled a long time ago... In many parts of my constituency there are people living in houses in which the Minister of Health or the Minister of Agriculture would not allow cattle to live. They would say, 'You must not house your cattle in them; if you do, we won't be willing to accept the milk for the children.' Yet, our children and their parents have to live in them. ('The Independent')' The fight for better conditions encapsulated the essence of Herbison's political career. 
Herbison soon caught the eye of the government whips. In 1947 she was chosen to second the Commons address in reply to the king's speech, an honour which had fallen to a woman only once before. Two years later she was chosen to be the only woman member of the first British delegation to the consultative assembly of the Council of Europe. When the Attlee government was returned again, with a small majority, in February 1950 she became joint parliamentary under-secretary of state for Scotland, under Hector McNeil. In eighteen months she made her mark -- espousing in particular the crusade to build new primary schools to replace many early Victorian ones. Following Labour's defeat in the October 1951 general election she flourished effectively on the opposition front bench, shadowing successively Scottish and pension affairs. Elected a member of the national executive committee of the Labour Party in 1948, she was a prominent Gaitskellite loyalist. She presided with skill over the 1957 Labour Party conference. 
In October 1964, when the Labour Party was returned to power, Harold Wilson appointed Herbison minister of pensions and national insurance (from August 1966 minister of social security). She wished to raise pensions at once, as the Labour Party in opposition had repeatedly and explicitly promised. She was furious when told by civil servants that for administrative reasons the increase could not be made payable in less than six months. However, she was able to abolish the national assistance scheme, so loathed by socialists, and replace it with the new device of supplementary benefits. In July 1967 she resigned office in protest at the government's refusal to increase children's allowances. Characteristically she refused to comment further, saying that she had no intention of 'giving the Tory press a story which would do harm to the Labour Party' ('The Scotsman'). Wilson, praising her warm humanity, expressed regret that she felt unable to accept decisions which commended themselves to her colleagues. She became chairman of the select committee on overseas aid in 1969 but retired from parliament at the general election of 1970. In the same year she was voted Scotswoman of the year. 
A devout member of the Church of Scotland throughout her life, Herbison was thrilled to serve as the queen's representative, the lord high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, in 1970-71, the first woman ever to be thus appointed. It was deemed highly appropriate when in 1974 she was appointed to the royal commission on standards of conduct in public life. She also served from 1976 as the first lay observer appointed to investigate allegations against the handling of complaints by the Law Society of Scotland. She died at St Mary's Hospital, Lanark, of cancer, on 29 December 1996. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 64018


Sparks, Hedley Frederick Davis (1908-1996), biblical scholar, was born on 14 November 1908 at 2 Sydner Road, South Newington, London, the only child of the Revd Frederick Sparks (1847-1908), curate of West Hackney, and his second wife, Blanche Barnes (1871-1951), daughter of William Jackson. His father died about six weeks before Sparks was born, and his mother was left in straitened circumstances. He was educated at St Edmund's School, Canterbury (where tuition, lodging, food, and clothing during term time was provided by the Clergy Orphan Corporation) and at Brasenose College, Oxford. He took a first in theology in 1930 and various university prizes, a BD in 1937, and a DD in 1949. Ordained deacon in 1933, he combined a curacy at the City Church with work on the 'Vulgate' and a (non-stipendiary) chaplaincy at Ripon Hall, where he had done his ordination training. The increasingly strident tone of the Modern Churchmen's Union and its links with Ripon Hall led to his resignation in 1936. He was, however, later chairman of the governors. From 1936 to 1946 he was lecturer in the theology department at Durham University; he took an active part in the maintenance of discipline in the absence of lay colleagues during the Second World War, and enjoyed doing so. He then went to Birmingham as the first Cadbury professor of theology (1946-52); there he developed the syllabus and gave the faculty an ecumenical basis, breaking new ground in the appointment of a Roman Catholic (H. Francis Davis) as lecturer. In 1952 he became Oriel professor of the interpretation of holy scripture in Oxford. Although he regretted the severance of the chair from a canonry at Rochester, the appointment fulfilled a long ambition. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1959. Until her death in 1951 he had provided a home for his mother. On 25 August 1953 he married Margaret Joan ('b'. 1930), daughter of C. H. Davy. They had two sons and a daughter. In 1976 he retired to Canterbury. 
In 1933 Sparks was recruited by H. J. White, dean of Christ Church, to assist him on the critical edition of the 'Vulgate' 'New Testament' begun by J. Wordsworth. The first fascicule of the work had been published in 1889; by 1926 it had reached '2 Corinthians'. Sparks helped White with the proofs of 'Ephesians' (published with 'Galatians' in 1934) and after White's death became editor, originally under the supervision first of F. C. Burkitt and then of B. H. Streeter, but from 1937 on his own. He completed volume 2 in 1941 and the final volume in 1954. Towards the end there was an increasing amount of work to be done, since some of the collations he inherited were incomplete and there were more patristic commentaries to be incorporated. Sparks in turn recruited the assistance of A. W. Adams, who helped with the proofs from '2 Timothy' onwards and to whom Sparks handed over the editorship of the Johannine epistles. In 1942 Sparks was asked to help with what became known as the 'Critical Greek Testament'. This project dated back to 1926 and the volumes on 'Matthew' and 'Mark' had already been published. 'Luke' was eventually to appear in two parts in 1984-7. Sparks was responsible for the citations of the 'Vulgate' and for part of the Old Latin material (in connection with which he went to Beuron in 1976 and 1977). From 1959 he was also involved with the preparation of the Stuttgart edition of the 'Vulgate' (published in 1969). 
Apart from his work on the Latin text of the 'Bible', Sparks was engaged on two other long-term projects. His 'Synopsis of the Gospels' (in English) showed not only the parallels between different sections in the synoptic gospels but also parallels between identical and alternative words or phrases within the sections, and included the Johannine parallels. Part 1 appeared in 1964, part 2 in 1974, with 'John' printed as the main text and the synoptic parallels noted on the right-hand side of the page. 'The Apocryphal Old Testament' (1984 [actually 1985]) was designed as a handy replacement for the work of R. H. Charles, published in 1913. Omitting the 'Apocrypha', it contained revisions of the translations by Charles or new translations, with some new items; while the translations were the work of different scholars, the introductions and bibliographies were all done by Sparks, providing the book with uniformity and a high standard of accuracy. He also wrote 'The Old Testament in the Christian Church' (1944), 'The Formation of the New Testament' (1952), and a number of learned articles in journals, contributed to various co-operative enterprises, including 'Chambers' Encyclopedia' and 'The Cambridge History of the Bible', and was responsible for the biblical material (in a wide sense) in the second edition of 'The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church'. 
Beyond the field of textual criticism, Sparks exercised wide influence through his teaching, his wise counsel in the bodies with which he was associated, and his editorship of the 'Journal of Theological Studies' from 1954 to 1977. He recruited Henry Chadwick, then young and little known, as co-editor, insisting that they should appear as equals. For twenty-four years he devoted infinite care to the journal, teaching generations of beginners how to handle and present scholarly material, and reading with a sharp and critical eye the whole of every issue. In Oxford he was but one of eight professors of theology, but his sane views carried weight in the affairs of both faculty and college. From 1961 to 1968 he was also rector of Wytham; until 1975 he usually took a locum during the long vacation and almost everywhere he lived he regularly helped with services in church. His strong sense of duty found expression in meticulous scholarship and an expectation of high standards in others (coupled with a certain intolerance when these were not met), and in a pastoral care even for the most unattractive. He was short in stature, but could dominate an audience. He was devoted to railways and music, and was a good practical gardener. He died on 22 November 1996 in the Nunnery Fields Hospital, Canterbury, and was buried on 28 November in New Romney churchyard, after a funeral service in Canterbury Cathedral. He was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 64021


Hardcastle, Frances (1866-1941), mathematician, was born at Writtle, Essex, on 13 August 1866, the eldest of eight children of Henry Hardcastle (1840-1922), graduate of Trinity College, Cambridge, a barrister, and director of a brewery. Her mother was Maria Sophia Herschel (1839-1929), seventh child (fourth daughter) of Sir John Frederick William Herschel, so Frances was a great-grandchild of Sir William Herschel, inheriting a notable astronomical tradition. Two of her brothers also graduated from Trinity College; the elder, Joseph Alfred (1868-1917), later became an astronomer. 
Frances Hardcastle was educated privately before entering Girton College, Cambridge, in 1888; her aunt Constance Anne Herschel (1855-1939) had previously been resident lecturer in natural sciences and mathematics there. In 1891 Frances Hardcastle passed second class in the mathematical tripos part one examinations, and went on in 1892, somewhat unusually, to sit the tripos part two, in which she gained class 2 (3). Cambridge did not then permit women to graduate but Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania, USA, accepted her as a graduate student, and she worked under Professor C. A. Scott, also a Girtonian. She was appointed an honorary fellow in mathematics at Chicago University for 1893/4 and held a fellowship in mathematics at Bryn Mawr during the academic year 1894/5. Her sole publication while in the United States was a translation from the German of Felix Klein's 1881 lectures on algebraic functions. However, it was probably during this time that she began her research into point groups -- nowadays called 'divisors' and much studied in algebraic geometry. 
Hardcastle returned to Britain in 1895 to become a graduate student at Girton. There her research matured and in papers in the 'Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society' (1897-8) and the 'Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society' (1898) she set out an extension of the theory of point groups which was said to display great insight. She further synthesized the topic by four articles on the theory of point groups in the 'Reports of the British Association' for the years 1900 and 1902-4, which included a historical survey. She deviated only once from single-minded pursuit of this subject -- appropriately, to assist Arthur Berry with the publication in 1898 of his 'Short History of Astronomy' by verifying the calculations, proof-reading, and drawing many diagrams. 
It seems that an accident, possibly in conjunction with ill health, caused Hardcastle to leave Cambridge in 1904 and abandon her mathematical research. She was able to live in adequate comfort on money settled on her by her father, increased later by inheritance. She and her sister Mira Francisca were named joint executors of her father's will, despite the availability of several brothers. She lived in London for a period, and worked for a year as a joint secretary, with Frances Sterling, for the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (the suffragist organization), before moving to Newcastle where she served as secretary of the North-Eastern Federation of Women's Suffrage Societies. She spent her eventual retirement beside the Northumberland moors at Stocksfield, in a house she had built with Dr Ethel Williams, a former Newcastle GP. She died on 26 December 1941 while visiting Cambridge, and was buried in Girton churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 64023


Simpson, Esther (1903-1996), worker for refugee scholars, was born Esther Sinovitch on 31 July 1903 at 33 Lower Brunswick Street, Leeds, the youngest child and only daughter of Ilya (later Ellis) Sinovitch (later Simpson), textile worker, and his wife, Sara Liba (later Sarah), 'nee' Peravosnick. Esther's parents were late nineteenth-century Jewish immigrants from Shtayochisik, in eastern Lithuania. After attending Leeds Girls' Modern School (1914-20), she won one of the twenty city scholarships to Leeds University in 1921, and graduated with a first-class degree in French and subsidiary German in 1924. She then taught herself the Gregg system of trilingual shorthand for English, French, and German, and became a sought-after secretary-cum-translator-cum-interpreter, working first in Germany and France and then for the International Fellowship of Reconciliation in Vienna and, briefly, for the World Alliance of the YMCA in Geneva. It was her brother, a conscientious objector during the First World War, who first introduced her to the Society of Friends, and she related to all she met, believing and responding in the Quakerly way to that which is of God in every one, ever after. 
Appalled by Hitler's wholesale dismissal of Jewish lecturers and professors from German universities Tess Simpson asked Leo Szilard if she could be of use to the Academic Assistance Council recently founded in London by William Beveridge, Maynard Keynes, Gilbert Murray, Ernest Rutherford, and others, to help these persecuted scholars. In July 1933 she was appointed assistant secretary -- on a third of her previous salary -- of the emergency funding centre and international academic labour exchange that the council set up in two small offices of the Royal Society's rooms in Burlington House. This Academic Assistance Council, renamed the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning in 1936, was an organization run by British scholars to rescue other scholars regardless of their race, nationality, political beliefs, or religion. Tess Simpson was to persevere in that endeavour for the next sixty years. When challenged, late in life, about the council's exclusive focus on intellectuals, she replied: 'What was happening [in Germany]... was anti-human and I wanted to do something to mitigate against that... Each [refugee organization] could only do so much but of course I felt terrible about the plight of others' ('The Times', 1 July 1992). 
At first almost all the refugees were Jews. But after the Nuremberg laws of 1935 German academics could be expelled if they had just one Jewish grandparent or a Jewish wife. Between 1933 and 1940 Tess Simpson became a one-woman reception centre for nearly 2600 refugee intellectuals. They arrived in Britain rejected, nearly destitute, and traumatized by the humiliation and hatred meted out to them by Nazis, and found themselves in a country still suffering massive unemployment, whose popular newspapers were as hostile to Britain's being 'flooded' by foreign asylum seekers as at any other time, before or since. Tess Simpson was almost always the first person to meet each new arrival and she greeted him or her with warm sympathy, high intelligence, and immense practicality, setting them 'on the stairway to survival and success' ('Hampstead and Highgate Express', November 1996). Many of these desperate people were eventually to become among the most eminent thinkers in their fields in the world, but they all started in Britain as Tess Simpson's 'children' for whom she found a new life, often locating work for them in small colleges in the United States or in university colleges in the British Commonwealth, if not at first in Britain. 
After the fall of Norway in 1940, the British government, headed by Churchill, panicked about these and other 'enemy aliens' in Britain and decided to intern them all. To her horror Tess Simpson learned that over 500 of 'her' refugee scholars, many of them now doing work of national importance and of course anti-Nazis to a man, were about to be arrested, sent to camps surrounded by barbed wire, and possibly even deported. She made vain protests to the Home Office and had to spend the next year accumulating the most meticulous documentation attesting to the integrity of every single individual case in order to give Professor Archibald Vivian Hill, MP for Cambridge University and vice-president of the executive committee of the society, and Eleanor Rathbone, MP for the Northern Universities, the evidence they required before they could succeed in their joint effort, helped by Bishop George Bell of Chichester, to have all these interned intellectuals released. 'Do you know the story of Bruce and the spider? I am that spider', she later remarked (Cooper, 'Refugee Scholars', 134). 
Tess Simpson continued to work for the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning, often in a voluntary capacity, from the end of the Second World War until her official -- but not actual -- retirement at the age of seventy-five. She gave help to refugee scholars fleeing Czechoslovakia in 1948, Hungary in 1956, apartheid South Africa after 1960, Czechoslovakia again in 1968, and Poland, Chile, Greece, Brazil, Argentina, Bangladesh, Zambia, Rhodesia, Iraq, Persia, and China -- in fact wherever and whenever a brutal regime targeted independent-minded, critical intellectuals. It was said of her phenomenal 'computer' brain that all her refugees and their families lived inside her head and that she was forever working out the right contacts -- and possible sources of funding -- for each of them that would enable them to survive and fulfil their potential. The list of her refugees from Nazism alone included at least sixteen future Nobel laureates and many other outstanding thinkers and artists (including Karl Popper, Hans Kornberg, Ernst Gombrich, Nikolaus Pevsner, Marie Jahoda, Geoffrey Elton, Ludwig Guttmann, Otto Deutsch, Max Rostal, Peter Schidlof, and Rudolf Peierls -- among many, many others). 'Yours was a truly personal success, the giving of yourself and your friendship unstintingly in a way that literally changed the cultural history of the world' was the tribute to her from Sir Walter Adams, former director of the London School of Economics and general secretary of the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning, in 1966 (Cooper, 'Refugee Scholars', 235). In addition, between 1944 and 1966, Tess Simpson worked as secretary of the Society for Visiting Scientists, which was in fact a one-woman band, sponsored by the British Council and supported by fellows of the Royal Society. 
Small, dynamic, austere in her personal spending, Tess Simpson lived mostly on bread and cheese, fruit, and vegetables; the luxuries she indulged in were good talk and the playing of music. She was a dedicated and immensely talented violinist and viola player until deafness struck her in her seventies. In 1949 she was given the ordre des Palmes Academiques of the French government; in 1956 she was made an OBE; she received honorary doctorates from the universities of London and Leeds, in 1984 and 1989 respectively; in 1991 she was elected an honorary member of the Royal College of Physicians; and in 1995 Austria gave her the Oesterreichische Ehrenkreuz fur Wissenschaft und Kunst. Four years before her death from a heart attack in Hampstead, London, on 19 November 1996 (she said she had too much work to do to go into hospital), the Nobel laureate Max Perutz said of her: 'I cannot think of anyone else with the same combination of warm affection for the individual scholars and iron toughness in the face of officialdom' (report of reception at the Ciba Foundation, 2 July 1992). At her request, her body was donated for medical science. 


@@@@@


doc= 64025


Wright, Sir Martin (1692/3-1767), judge, was the eldest son of William Wright, a barrister, and his second wife, Dorothy Finch. He was born into a legal family: his father was recorder of Oxford, a judge in Wales, and a bencher of the Inner Temple, serving as treasurer of the inn in 1719; his brother John also became a barrister of the Inner Temple. In 1709, at the age of sixteen, he matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, and in November of the same year was admitted to his father's inn, where he was called to the bar in 1718. Wright married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Hugh Willoughby MD, of Barton Stacy, Hampshire; and they had two sons and two daughters. Their marriage settlement was dated 2 December 1719. 
Wright achieved public notice in 1730 by the publication of his 'Introduction to the Law of Tenures', and three years later he was created serjeant-at-law. In 1738 he obtained an appointment as one of the king's serjeants, and the following year became a baron of the exchequer. Hardwicke had recommended Giles Eyre, a fellow king's serjeant, whom Walpole rejected as a tory, but had also suggested Wright as 'a very thorough Whig and a good lawyer' (Lemmings, 277). Mr Baron Abney wrote in his notebook that the appointment so disappointed Eyre that it hastened his death (Abney's reports, MS IHR 976). Wright remained in the court of exchequer for but one year, from November 1739 until November 1740, when he was translated to the king's bench. In company with other judges he was knighted in 1745, on the occasion of the loyal address after the Jacobite rising. He reported cases throughout his judgeship of the king's bench; the manuscript was bequeathed to the Inner Temple, where it remains, in fourteen volumes; there are also some of his exchequer reports in manuscript, preserved in a copy taken by Thomas Parker (and now in the Lilly Library, Bloomington, Indiana). On 6 February 1755 he surrendered his patent on grounds of ill health, and was granted a pension which was renewed by George III in 1761. He nevertheless lived another twelve years after retirement, dying at Fulham on 26 September 1767. 


@@@@@


doc= 64026


Umfreville, Edward (bap. 1702?, d. 1786), collector of legal manuscripts, was probably baptized on 24 November 1702 at the Temple Church, London, the eldest son of Edward Umfreville (died 1739), a minor exchequer official, and his wife, Mary. His family was supposedly descended from an ancient Northumbrian family which had fallen into obscurity. He may have been a grandson of Edward Umfreville (1638-1691), bencher of the Middle Temple and unsuccessful claimant to the barony of Umfreville. Upon his admission to the Inner Temple in January 1723 he was described as the son of Edward Umfreville of the Inner Temple, gentleman, as was his brother William in 1734, though no record can be found of their father's admission to the inn, and the reference may simply be to his occupation of a chamber in Inner Temple Lane. The son was called to the bar in 1727, but devoted himself to historical studies and is not known to have engaged in legal practice on his own behalf. In 1741 he was living in Johnson's Court, Fleet Street. 
It is not clear how Umfreville managed to acquire his enormous collection of legal manuscripts, though they seem mostly to have been bought at auction in his earlier days. His concentration was on paper manuscripts, which sold for a few pence or shillings a volume, and his was probably the largest collection of its kind ever made, including more than eighty volumes of unpublished law reports and readings. He was well known in antiquarian circles, and was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1745, but later resigned from the society 'in disgust' together with his friend Dr Richard Rawlinson. By 1748 he had fallen into such financial difficulties that his inn pardoned him all his 'amercements' since call, and in 1758 he was obliged to sell a considerable part of his library, including 257 manuscripts, for the benefit of his creditors. Many of these manuscripts came into the Lansdowne collection and are now in the British Library. In 1792, after his widow's death, another 1000 law manuscripts were sold at auction, and these formed the basis of the collection of Francis Hargrave, also in the British Library. A good many other manuscripts still exist, with his 'E. U.' ownership inscription and notes in his spidery hand, which cannot be located in the sale catalogues. Though his annotations show him to have been learned in legal history and deeply knowledgeable about legal manuscripts, Umfreville's only publication was 'Lex coronatoria' (1761). This treatise on the law relating to coroners was prompted by his appointment in 1754 as a coroner for Middlesex, an office which he held until his death at Islington on 17 June 1786. In 1760 he was invited to become a bencher of the Inner Temple, but declined. Nothing is known about Umfreville's wife except that she died at Lambeth on 22 March 1791. His son and heir, Neville, was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1748. 


@@@@@


doc= 64027


Robinson, Christopher (1712-1787), judge, was born in Dublin, the eldest of the three sons of Dr Bryan Robinson (1680-1754), physician and medical writer, who became regius professor of physic at Trinity College, Dublin. His mother, whose name is not known, died on 25 February 1744. Robinson received private tuition before entering Trinity College in 1729 at the age of sixteen. He was later admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn and in 1737 was called to the Irish bar. 
Robinson's competence, attention to detail, and familiarity with past precedents procured his rise within the ranks of the Irish legal profession. He never entered parliament but rendered government useful alternative service as a pamphleteer. As seneschal of the Dublin liberty of St Sepulchre's from 1742, Robinson was embroiled in quarrels over his court's powers, in the course of which, unusually for an Irish lawyer of the period, he acquired a taste for historical research. Made a king's counsel in 1744, Robinson regularly served as a judge of assize and on the Dublin city commission before his elevation, on the recommendation of Lord Chancellor Bowes, to a puisne judgeship in the court of king's bench in 1758. Later the same year at Cashel, in co. Tipperary, he married Elizabeth Martin (died 1793), only daughter of the Revd Hartstonge Martin of Kilkenny; they had three sons, only one of whom survived his father. 
Robinson's twenty-nine years on the bench constituted one of the longest eighteenth-century Irish judicial careers. He did not court popularity. A stout defender of the penal laws against Catholics, he was later to manifest hostility to proposals for Irish legislative independence. In 1763 he backed the preferment of charges of treason against the Oakboys of co. Armagh, insisting that the offence was broad enough to encompass the conduct of those who sought by armed force to demolish enclosures, raise wages, or break open prisons. Robinson at the same time extended no favours to those in high places. In 1769, during a sitting of the Irish parliament, he imposed fines on eight MPs who had failed to appear for jury service. The next year he placed a hefty mulct on the property owners of co. Armagh for failing to keep the circuit road from Armagh to Lisburn, co. Antrim, in a decent state of repair. Motions censuring Robinson for his actions on both occasions were adopted by the Irish House of Commons within days of each other in March 1772. Nor did Robinson endear himself to John Blaquiere, the Irish chief secretary, in the 1774 controversy over the latter's enclosure of land in the Phoenix Park to build himself an official residence: he dissented from his colleagues in king's bench who voted to quash the presentment charging public nuisance. Robinson's tenure of office preceded regular Irish law reports. Exceptionally, a printed judgment of his from 1784, that in 'R. v. Reily' ('Irish Term Reports', 204, at 227), survives. Agreeing with the rest of the court that a sheriff, in summoning a meeting to press for parliamentary reform, had violated his constitutional office, Robinson lamented that the people were so commonly led astray 'by the idle declamatory frothy compositions of half-educated young men' (ibid.). 
Robinson's opinions on a range of issues were frequently deferred to by his fellow judges. Some of the working papers from which these oracular pronouncements derive are extant, all unpublished (Pearse Street Public Library, Dublin). In these particular interest attaches to Robinson's coverage of contemporary case law, English and Irish. He left important notes, too, on such subjects as the doctrinal relationship of murder and manslaughter, the 'Irish Civil Bill', and the crown's Irish revenue. Robinson amassed a library of over 4000 books, one of the largest in private ownership in Ireland at the time. A substantial part of the collection was acquired after his death by the benchers of King's Inns in Dublin to form the nucleus of the library at the inns which was opened in the early nineteenth century. Robinson died at his home, 8 Dominick Street, in Dublin, on 16 January 1787. 


@@@@@


doc= 64028


Prime, Sir Samuel (1701-1777), serjeant-at-law, was born on 21 August 1701, the second son of Thomas Prime, a grocer at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and his wife, Elizabeth, and attended the grammar school there before going up to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1718. Two years later he was admitted to the Middle Temple, where he was called to the bar in 1724. Numerous surviving opinions under his name show that he had an extensive chambers practice, and he distinguished himself sufficiently at the bar to be given the coif at the last general call of serjeants, in 1736, and a patent as one of the king's serjeants in 1738. Together with Serjeant Birch he was knighted in 1745. On 23 August 1748 he married Hannah, daughter of E. Wilmot of Banstead, Surrey, and widow of John Sheppard of Campsey Ash. 
By dint of seniority as a king's serjeant Prime became in 1749 the king's prime serjeant-at-law, and as such leader of the bar of England until his retirement in Trinity term 1758. The reason for his retirement, according to Lord Thurlow, was a chance remark by the latter on the affront to his rank by the government in entrusting the prosecution of the French spy Florence Hensey, for high treason, to Sir Fletcher Norton. He was treasurer of Serjeants' Inn, Chancery Lane, from 1749 until the same year. His office of king's serjeant was not renewed after the demise of the crown in 1760. Professional anecdotes of him, handed down into the following century, suggested that he was a dry and long-winded advocate with little or no sense of humour. Nevertheless, the 'Gentleman's Magazine' perhaps intended a compliment when it said, after his death: 'He was the Sir Fletcher Norton of his time.' Serjeant Prime lived nearly twenty years in retirement. He died on 24 February 1777 and was buried in the Temple Church, where there is an inscription. His only son, Samuel Prime (died 1813), followed him to St John's College and the Middle Temple, where he was called in 1773. 


@@@@@


doc= 64029


Oughton, Thomas (b. 1660), ecclesiastical lawyer and legal writer, born on 13 September 1660 in the parish of Holy Trinity Church, Coventry, Warwickshire, was the son of Thomas Oughton (died 1695), registrar of the court of delegates, and his wife, Issable. The younger Oughton was a deputy registrar of the same court until about 1720, and remained on the list of proctors until about 1740. 
Oughton achieved a lasting reputation for his treatise on procedure in the ecclesiastical courts -- a work that had an unfortunate history. As early as 1713 Oughton completed a manuscript entitled 'Processus judiciarius', which he handed over to a printer; but the entire stock and also, it seems, the copy were destroyed by fire. Oughton then set about the painful task of rewriting the lost book, which occupied him for a further fifteen years. It finally appeared in 1728, in two volumes, under a new title, 'Ordo judiciorum', which the author borrowed from that of a book by the sixteenth-century Italian procedural writer Roberto Maranta. Dedicated to the judges and advocates of Doctors' Commons, the treatise began with a detailed account of the civilian profession and its customs. The author then described the procedure of the church courts, which still used Latin for both the written documents and the oral proceedings. 
Only a few years after the first edition, parliament abolished the use of Latin in all the courts, a change which was not reflected in the second edition (1738) but which nevertheless seems not to have diminished the status of Oughton as the principal guide to the ecclesiastical courts before the nineteenth-century reforms. Sir William Scott said in 1820 that Oughton and Godolphin were 'the oracles of our practice' ('Phillimore's Reports', 3.329). An attempt was made in 1831 to render Oughton's treatise more widely accessible by translating a considerable part of it into English. The new edition by James Thomas Law, chancellor of Lichfield and Coventry, was printed as 'Forms of Ecclesiastical Law, or, The Mode of Conducting Suits in the consistory Courts', and it enjoyed a second edition in 1844. It included material inserted at the appropriate points from other authors, rendering further recourse to the Latin proceduralists largely unnecessary for practical purposes. Nothing is known about Oughton's family life, or when and where he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 64030


Lloyd, Sir Richard (1696/7-1761), judge, was baptized on 31 May 1697 at St Mary's Church, Lichfield, the elder son of Talbot Lloyd of Lichfield, a professional soldier who died a prisoner of war in France, and his wife, Elizabeth Savage, natural daughter of his commanding officer, Lord Rivers. He attended Lichfield grammar school, where four contemporary judges, William Noel, Sir Thomas Parker, Sir John Eardley Wilmot, and Sir John Willes, were also educated. From Lichfield he went at the age of sixteen, in 1713, to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was elected a fellow in 1718. The fellowship lasted until 1723, the year of his call to the bar by the Middle Temple, after which he devoted his time to the law. 
During the 1720s Lloyd married Elizabeth (died 1788), daughter of William Field (or Feild) of St Osyth's Priory and of Crustwic Manor in Weeley, Essex, and Arabella Savage, another natural daughter of General Lord Rivers. The couple had two sons and two daughters, and they settled close to Elizabeth's home region, probably at Ipswich. Their eldest son was born there in 1730 and about this time Lloyd acted as deputy recorder of Harwich. He held in due course the recorderships of Harwich, Orford, and Ipswich, and in 1738 he was appointed king's counsel and elected a bencher of his inn. With others of his rank, he was knighted on the occasion of the loyal address after the Jacobite rising of 1745. The year 1745 also brought him great good fortune when the dowager countess of Winchilsea, aged ninety, inexplicably left him her entire estate. This legacy enabled him immediately to enter parliament, as member for St Michael; and he remained in parliament until he became a judge, representing Maldon from 1747 and Totnes from 1754. It also enabled him in 1747 to buy Hintlesham Hall, near Ipswich, which had recently been rebuilt by Richard Powys (died 1743), member of parliament for Orford, who had died heavily in debt, and in 1752 to acquire the Powys estates in Hadleigh. The total outlay for these properties was more than $35,000. Lloyd also maintained a London residence in Queen Square. 
In 1754 Lloyd succeeded William Murray as solicitor-general, an office he held for five years. Although he expected to follow him as attorney-general, when this was discussed in 1754 the duke of Newcastle wrote to Lord Hardwicke that his character would not support him and that he would be 'a very improper one' (Yorke, 2.315). The duke said he would not oppose Lloyd's appointment as chief justice of Chester, though he correctly predicted that he would not take it, 'as I doubt the circuits would be incompatible with his views of the chair' (ibid.). Two years later Lloyd expected promotion in the alterations after the death of Chief Justice Ryder, but was opposed by Newcastle, who appointed Sir Robert Henley as attorney-general. Newcastle reported a 'very unpleasant conversation' (ibid.) with Lloyd touching his expectations, and Hardwicke replied, 'my wish is the same as yours, that he may be let fall gently' (ibid., 317). Since Lloyd was unwilling to serve under Henley, he resigned and had to content himself for three years with the bare expectation of a judicial appointment, looking now even to Chester if it should become available. 
The first vacancy went to William Noel, much to Lloyd's disappointment, but Noel was plagued by illness and Lloyd had high hopes of succeeding him. In February 1759, when Noel's successor was under consideration, Hardwicke wrote to Newcastle: 'I really think Sir Richard Lloyd has the best pretension of any body; [he] has served the King a great many years, and once in an eminent Station, with great steadiness; and behaved extremely well the last Session of Parliament. The King promised to do something for him, and can do nothing so easily as this. If this should become vacant, and he should be disappointed of it, after all his other disappointments, especially a late one, He will despair, and I shall despair for Him. (BL, Add. MS 32888, fol. 260)' Newcastle submitted his name to the king, but Noel survived, and in November 1759 Lloyd was 'let fall' into the seat in the court of exchequer vacated by the death of Mr Baron Legge. On this occasion Lord Keeper Henley wrote to Hardwicke that there had been no other applications and that 'I think both of Sir R.'s abilities and behavior to the king's government are such as to render him as proper an object of his majesty's favor on this occasion as any I could name to him' (BL, Add. MS 35596, fol. 9). Lloyd's judicial career lasted less than two years, for on 6 September 1761 he died at Northallerton, Yorkshire, while returning from the northern circuit. He was buried at Hintlesham, where an inscribed stone was later removed from his monument and placed in the churchyard. His wife survived him, and his eldest son, Richard Savage Lloyd (1730-1810), succeeded to the estates at Crustwic and Hintlesham, and also followed his father as member of parliament for Totnes. 


@@@@@


doc= 64031


Denton, Alexander (bap. 1679, d. 1740), judge, was baptized at Hillesden, near Buckingham, on 25 August 1679, the second son of Alexander Denton and his wife, Hester, daughter and heir of Nicholas Herman of Middleton Stoney, Oxfordshire. His father was elected MP for Buckingham in 1689. His elder brother was Edmund Denton, first baronet, also member for Buckingham. Denton was admitted to St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in April 1697, and the following year to the Middle Temple, by which inn he was called to the bar in 1704 and to the bench in 1720. 
The year after his call Denton was the victim of a serious threat to the independence of the bar. As one of the counsel representing the prisoners in the Aylesbury election case, on their application for habeas corpus, he was himself committed to prison by the House of Commons for a supposed breach of privilege. The case resulted in a major conflict between the two houses of parliament. It may, however, have served Denton well by bringing him to the attention of Lord Wharton, who probably supported him when he was elected to succeed his brother as member of parliament for Buckingham in 1708; he served in parliament from 1708 to 1710, and in the Irish parliament from 1709 to 1710, and then again (as king's counsel) in the English parliament from 1715 until 1722. On 3 March 1716 Denton married Catherine, daughter and heir of John Bond of Sundridge, Kent, with a fortune of $20,000. 
Denton's local connections secured his election as recorder of Buckingham, and as early as 1710 the duke of Devonshire wrote to Chief Justice Parker asking for 'your favour at the bar for him' (BL, Stowe MS 750, fol. 13); but his eminence in the profession was firmly secured when he was appointed attorney-general to the duchy of Lancaster in 1714, and king's counsel in 1715. He was considered for the position of solicitor-general in 1720, but passed over in favour of Philip Yorke (subsequently Lord Hardwicke). In 1722 he was appointed to the bench as one of the justices of the common pleas, the patrons at his serjeant's call being Viscount Townshend and Robert Walpole. A puisne judgeship was not the summit of his ambition, and in 1729 he secured the courtly position of chancellor to Frederick, prince of Wales, but his further aspirations were thwarted. In 1735 he wrote to Hardwicke, seeking the chief justiceship of the common pleas, offering to resign as prince's chancellor, but Hardwicke tactfully questioned whether his health would withstand the strain. In the event Thomas Reeve was appointed. On Reeve's death in 1737 Denton applied again to Walpole, alleging some 'court promises' to support him; but Walpole thought him 'too old and infirm to discharge the duty' (HoP, 'Commons'). The following year he was offered the office of chief baron of the exchequer when James Reynolds indicated his wish to retire, turned it down in a letter to Hardwicke on 2 July, suggesting Edmund Probyn instead, and then changed his mind almost immediately but too late. Mr Justice Abney wrote privately that he was unfit for either office, 'for he wanted spirit and rediness to preside in any court, and was a total stranger to the practice of the Exchequer' (Abney's reports, MS IHR 976(2), University of London). 
Thomas Abney considered that these disappointments 'sat so heavy on his spirits that they contributed much to shorten his days' (Abney's reports), which ended at Bath on 22 March 1740. The final cause of death was 'a tedious complicated distemper of consumption and gout' (ibid.). A monument, with a bust in judicial robes, was erected at Hillesden, which suggests that he might have been buried there. A painting by Jonathan Richardson, in scarlet judicial robes, with the embroidered purse of Prince Frederick, was engraved in quarter length by George Vertue in 1731. 
It is known that Denton wrote law reports, which were cited by contemporaries but have not yet been discovered. The obituary by Abney epitomizes his character by saying that 'though his parts were low and his manner heavy, yet he had taken great pains in his profession and had really more knowledge in it than those who were not intimate with him conceiv'd'. As Denton and his wife had no children the estates devolved on the judge's nephew, George Chamberlayne, who also succeeded him as MP for Buckingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 64032


Denison, Sir Thomas (1699-1765), judge, was one of at least two sons of Joseph Denison, a merchant of Leeds. His elder brother William resided at Ossington Hall, Nottinghamshire, and was the grandfather of John Evelyn Denison (1800-1873), speaker of the House of Commons. However, the records of the Inner Temple state that Thomas was admitted in February 1719 as the son and heir apparent of Joseph Denison, gentleman. He had been educated at Leeds grammar school. From the Inner Temple, Denison migrated in 1721 to Gray's Inn, and thence in 1727 to Lincoln's Inn where he was called to the bar in 1733. These facts suggest a difficulty in gaining a foothold in the law, and it may be that he practised for some years below the bar. Nevertheless, by 1740 he was the leader of the king's bench bar, in terms of the number of causes which he handled there, and, in 1742, within ten years of call, he was appointed one of the justices of that court. According to his epitaph, allegedly written by Lord Mansfield, he had been 'pressed, and at last prevailed upon', to accept this office, and 'discharged the important trust of that high office with unsuspected integrity, and uncommon ability', steadily adhering to 'a religious application of the inflexible rule of law to all questions concerning the power of the crown, and privileges of the subject' (Foss, 'Judges'). He married Anne (died 1785), daughter of Robert Smithson. 
Denison was knighted in 1745, on the occasion of the presentation by the judges of their loyal address after the Jacobite rising, and remained in office until 14 February 1765, when he resigned on grounds of ill health. He died on 8 September 1765, and was buried in Harewood church, Yorkshire, near the tomb of Chief Justice Gascoigne. His monument is surmounted by a bust in judicial robes, and there is a painting in robes by Thomas Hudson which has been engraved in mezzotint. Denison left a useful series of judicial notebooks, which are now in the Harvard law school. Denison's wife, Anne, survived him by twenty years. As they had no children the estates passed to Anne's grandniece, who married Edmund, the fifth son of Sir John Beckett, baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 64033


Bacon, Mathew (b. c.1700, d. in or before 1757), legal writer, was the second son of Edward Bacon of Rathkeny, co. Tipperary, Ireland. He was admitted to the Inner Temple on 27 May 1726, and to the Middle Temple on 21 June 1731. He was called to the bar on 24 November 1732. In 1731 he published anonymously the 'Compleat Arbitrator, or, Law of Awards and Arbitraments', which provided a straightforward and up-to-date account of the law of arbitration, and reached a third edition in 1770. In 1736 there appeared, also anonymously, the first two volumes of 'A New Abridgment of the Law', the third volume following in 1740. Only the first two thirds of the fourth volume were completed by Bacon before his death. The remainder of that volume, which appeared in 1759, and just over half of the fifth and final volume, which appeared in 1766, were written by Joseph Sayer, serjeant-at-law. The remaining portion of the fifth volume was completed by Owen Ruffhead. The work reached a seventh English edition, in eight volumes, in 1832. It was extremely popular in the United States of America, and was several times edited there by Bird Wilson, and by John Bouvier. 
Unlike earlier abridgements, Bacon's work did not consist of notes of cases and statutes roughly put together under alphabetical heads, but rather foreshadowed modern legal encyclopaedias in containing a collection of scientific treatises on all branches of the law. Bacon's abridgement, which Charles Viner refused to regard as an abridgement at all, but just 'called so in order to make it more saleable', was in this way superior to Viner's, and attained a popularity which Viner's work was unable to match. Much, though not all, of Bacon's material was derived from the work of Jeffrey Gilbert, chief baron of the exchequer in Ireland from 1715 to 1722, and subsequently chief baron of the exchequer in England. There is a frequent resemblance between the text of Bacon's abridgement and Gilbert's published works 'Devises' (1730), 'Ejectments' (1734), and 'Rents' (1758), though there is no such resemblance with certain other published works by Gilbert, and it is possible that Bacon obtained Gilbert's material not from his treatises but from a manuscript abridgement compiled by Gilbert. Bacon may also have used the works of Matthew Hale, William Hawkins, and Knightley D'Anvers. A section of Bacon's abridgement was published separately in 1798 as 'Leases and Terms of Years', with notes by Henry Gwillim. Bacon was probably also the author of another anonymous work, 'A General Abridgment of Cases in Equity', known as 'Equity Cases Abridged', part 1, the first equity digest, which was published in 1732 and reached a fifth edition in 1793. Bacon's will, leaving all his property to his brother John, was proved in London on 11 March 1757. 


@@@@@


doc= 64034


Adams, Sir Richard (1709/10-1774), judge, was the son and heir of John Adams of the parish of St Olave, Southwark. He was admitted to the Inner Temple on 23 October 1727. Called to the bar in 1736, Adams practised as one of the common pleaders of London until 1748, when he was elected recorder of that city, after a close contest, by the casting vote of the lord mayor. The Inner Temple shortly afterwards elected him a bencher. He was knighted in 1752, while still recorder of London, and it is said that George II was so impressed by one of his speeches in that office that he personally selected him for the bench. The appointment came in 1753, when he was made one of the barons of the exchequer in succession to Edward Clive, and he sat in the court of exchequer for nearly twenty years, declining the opportunity to move to the common pleas in 1754. 
Adams married a daughter (died 1755) of James Molinier and they had at least two sons. He died on circuit at either Bedford or Huntingdon, from gaol fever believed to have been caught at the Old Bailey; the date is variously given as 14, 15, 16, or 18 March 1774. Sir John Wilmot, who knew him intimately for forty years, said: 'I never saw him out of temper in my life' (Wilmot, 199-200). 


@@@@@


doc= 64035


Harris, Edmund Robert (1803-1877), lawyer and benefactor, was born on 6 September 1803, probably at Preston, Lancashire, one of four children (three boys and a girl) of Robert Harris (1764-1862), a Cambridge graduate and vicar of St George's Church, Preston (1798 to death), and headmaster of Preston grammar school (1788-1835), and his wife, Nancy (1774-1837), daughter of Edmund Lodge and Elizabeth Eccleston. He was probably educated at his father's school before he and his younger brother, Thomas (the oldest brother, Robert, died in infancy), were articled to their uncles Edmund and Jonathan Lodge's firm of solicitors in Chapel Street, Preston; the practice eventually passed to the two brothers. A solicitor from 1827, in 1848 Edmund Robert was appointed deputy prothonotary to the court of common pleas for Lancashire, which gave him responsibility for the general official business of the court. One of the superior courts in the county and sitting at the Lancaster assizes, the court of common pleas dealt with actions concerning lands, personal actions of Lancashire residents, and actions against corporations in the county. In 1865 Harris became the court's acting prothonotary and associate, assuming full title four years later. However, his responsibilities were reduced as new offices for the court were opened in Liverpool and Manchester, presumably in response to an expansion in business at a time of marked population growth. He was left in charge of the court's Preston office, with jurisdiction for the county's northern division. 
On the death of their father in 1862 Edmund Robert Harris and his brother Thomas, neither of whom had married, moved from Ribblesdale Place in Preston to the town's newly emerging suburb of Ashton-on-Ribble. There they resided at Whinfield, an imposing, classical-style detached house in extensive grounds, with kitchen garden, orchard, fowl yard, and aviary. By the early 1870s, however, Robert Edmund's health was beginning to fail -- he suffered from bronchial and heart problems -- and before his retirement in 1874 he relinquished some of his more demanding duties. He died at his home on 27 May 1877 in his seventy-fourth year, and was buried on 1 June in St Andrew's churchyard, Ashton, Preston. 
According to Harris's close and long-standing friend the Revd C. H. Wood, Harris was a most punctilious man with regard to business matters, always paying very close attention to detail and following established procedures -- ideal qualities, Wood believed, for a lawyer. Harris was also a very private man, preferring to go about his work in a quiet, unostentatious manner and shunning public office, though, in 1854, he did become a member of the general committee for establishing a free library in Preston. Not least through his charitable bequests he was regarded as a benevolent person, as well as a kind and considerate employer. 
Harris's death caused considerable interest in Preston, not only because he was the last in his family line -- neither his brother nor sister had children -- but also because he was very wealthy. He had inherited money from his parents, uncles, and siblings, pursued a successful legal career, and acquired railway stock and real estate. Rumour abounded as to how the proceeds from realizing his estate, thought to be worth $250,000, would be spent. He had already made numerous charitable bequests, including $7000 to erect an infectious disease ward at Preston Infirmary, and though some people believed that the bulk of his fortune would be left to Queen Anne's Bounty for augmenting the livings of poor clergy, others anticipated that local charities and local people would be the main beneficiaries. The will stipulated that the Harris money was to be used to establish educational and/or charitable institutions in Preston, which would perpetuate the memory of the Harris family. During the 1880s and 1890s the Harris bequest financed three such institutions, namely the Harris Orphanage (1888), the Harris Free Library and Museum (1893), and the Harris Technical School (1897). The orphanage and technical school eventually became part of the University of Central Lancashire. In 1912 it was reported that the solicitors of the Harris trustees estimated that the value of the benefactions made to Preston under Harris's will amounted to no less than $311,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 64036


Keay, Sir Lancelot Herman (1883-1974), architect, was born on 3 August 1883 at 1 Clarence Villa, Enys Road, Eastbourne, the second son of Henry William Keay (1849-1938), bookseller and seven times mayor of Eastbourne, and his wife, Annie Maria Merrick, 'nee' Head (1848-1944). He was educated at Eastbourne College and Brighton College of Art and Technology. Between 1906 and 1915 he served as chief architectural assistant to the city of Norwich and was responsible for the restoration of the guildhall and of the Blackfriars and St Andrew's halls, as well as extensions to the city's asylum and isolation hospital. In addition he carried out small housing schemes. A keen theatregoer, he was also an early member of Nugent Monck's Guild of Norwich Players, formed in 1911. 
On the outbreak of the First World War Keay volunteered as a dispatch rider. Shortly afterwards he was commissioned as a lieutenant in the 209th field company, Royal Engineers, attached to the 34th division, and was seriously wounded during the battle of the Somme (1916). After leaving France he was posted to Egypt and appointed commanding royal engineer for the Suez town of Kantara. In addition to his routine Royal Engineer services he was responsible for the operation of road and rail bridges across the Suez Canal, and for the supply of drinking water to the occupied area of Palestine. After the amalgamation of the Royal Engineers commands of Kantara and Isma'illiyyah, he was lent for duty with the frontier district administration to prepare a report on transport routes for the western desert, and also visited Suva, Fiji. In 1920 he married Iris Stone (1896-1983), the elder daughter of E. G. Stone of Clifton, St Peter Port, Guernsey, with whom he had two daughters. 
After his return to England in 1921 Keay was appointed chief architectural assistant to Birmingham corporation, for which he developed more than 16,000 houses under the auspices of post-war housing legislation. In 1925 he was chosen as chief architectural assistant within the city engineer's department of Liverpool corporation on the recommendation of Sir Thomas White, then chairman of the housing committee. On the retirement of the city engineer, John Alexander Brodie, in 1926, Keay became acting director and then director of housing (1929) at the head of the corporation's separately constituted housing department. In the same year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects. 
Keay's time in Liverpool produced his most influential work, from which he gained a reputation for the breadth and quality of his municipal housing. His appointment reflected a corporation alert to the potential of multi-storey inner-city housing and Keay was regarded as the person to realize these aspirations. During the late 1920s and 1930s he participated in national and international debates on slum clearance and rehousing, and became a prominent critic of the legislative conditions that impeded comprehensive redevelopment of unfit housing. Keay's profile was far higher than his non-metropolitan position might suggest, a reflection of the scale of Liverpool's housing challenge and the efficacy of his response. In frequent public appearances at the RIBA and elsewhere, most notably in the film 'Homes for Workers' (1938, produced by the Liverpool Gas Company), Keay set out the necessity and multiple benefits of modern housing for ordinary Liverpudlians. In 1935 he became a member of the Ministry of Health's new housing advisory committee, on which he sat until 1957, and which contributed to the formulation of the 'Housing Act' of 1935, which sought to secure the powers of comprehensive redevelopment. Though subsequently limited in scope by war and by the difficulties of compulsory purchase, the act paved the way for more comprehensive planning legislation after the war. In addition he advised the Ministry of Works and was a member of the National Housing and Town Planning Council. 
Pragmatic and enthusiastic for the possibilities of new housing, Keay viewed multi-storey forms as an inevitable and welcome solution to the problem of Liverpool's central slums. He maintained that the large number of tenants displaced by clearances should be rehoused as near as possible to the docksides where the majority worked, and that this required the optimal reuse of expensive inner-city plots. In addition Keay argued for the preservation of the countryside from unnecessary sprawl and the creation of a fine civic landscape modelled on the modern expressionist designs then popular in continental Europe. The most characteristic of Keay's estates, the five-storey St Andrew's Gardens (1931-5), designed by his assistant John Hughes, was modelled on Bruno Taut's Hufeisensiedlung ('horseshoe') estate in Berlin. Keay had visited and admired the Berlin estate in July 1931, and St Andrew's Gardens, with its 316 flats marked out by their horizontal fenestration and 'sun balconies' (a first in British public housing), was promoted as a symbol of a new and sanitary form of city lifestyle. That such schemes were being planned before Arthur Greenwood's housing act of 1930 made slum clearance and new properties mandatory is evidence of the persuasive force of Keay's interest in multi-storey housing solutions. 
In contrast to the European modernism favoured for the inner city, Keay addressed the need for housing on Liverpool's fringes with the construction of large suburban estates. Here he applied 'beaux-arts' ideas of axial planning and widespread use of neo-Georgian styling akin to that he had initially favoured before his introduction to continental modernism. The focus for these suburban estates was Brodie's Queen's Drive (begun in 1904), a broad orbital road around the inner city. Formalistic planning devices, including open-sided garden squares, and such detailing as parapeted roofs, urns, and palace-fronted terraces gave developments like Norris Green an urbane yet domestic sensibility. 
These trends reached their height in Keay's plan for the Speke estate, which was developed from 1928 on an 1800 acre site acquired from Speke Hall, 8 miles south of the city centre. The plan was for a self-contained satellite township, rather than a traditional suburban extension, and in 1936 Keay designed a residential area that was intended to house 20,000 people. Early progress was slow and by 1938 just 500 houses had been built, with a further 900 in place by the end of the war. Building then accelerated and more than 4000 properties were added in the following decade. By now, however, it was clear that Keay's original vision for a 'self-contained community unit' (Pevsner, 254), characterized by mixed social tenure and a self-sufficient infrastructure of economic and community services, would not be realized. 
From 1938 Keay extended his remit from housing to that of Liverpool's city architect, a post he held until 1948. Notwithstanding the eventual failure of the Speke new town project, Keay oversaw the construction of more than 35,000 new flats and houses in the city's centre and suburbs. This impressive body of work was recognized throughout his career, culminating in the presidency of the RIBA (1946-8, the first incumbent from a public-sector background) and his appointment as KBE in 1947. Between 1947 and 1957 he was a member of the advisory council on building and civil engineering research and development, and was appointed chairman of both the Basildon and Bracknell new town development corporations in 1948. The final part of his career, during the 1950s and 1960s, saw work on municipal and social housing schemes across London under the auspices of his private practice, Sir Lancelot Keay, Basil Duckett and Partners. Keay died of a heart attack on 2 November 1974 at his home, 22 Hyde Park Gardens, Paddington, London. In the following decade redevelopment of Liverpool city centre saw the demolition of many of his multi-storey blocks, of which St Andrew's Gardens and Myrtle Gardens (now Minster Court) remain as two of the few extant examples. 


@@@@@


doc= 64037


Bentine, Michael (1922-1996), comedian, was born on 26 January 1922, in Watford, Hertfordshire, the second of two sons of Adan (later Adam) Bentin, aeronautical engineer, and his wife, Florence (died 1949), daughter of James Dawkins, a Southend Water Board official. His paternal grandfather was Don Antonio Bentin Palamerra, vice-president of Peru for eight years and president-elect on his death. He added the final 'e' to his name when he went into show business after the war. When he was a child a botched tonsillectomy left him with a profound stammer that was not cured until he was sixteen and a schoolboy at Eton College. In the Second World War he was at first turned down by the RAF, despite repeated applications, because of his father's Peruvian nationality. He was playing Lorenzo in 'The Merchant of Venice' at the Open Air Theatre, Regent's Park, when he was arrested as a deserter; the RAF had accepted him at last but had failed to inform him. He was, he said later, 'the first British serviceman to be arrested in doublet and hose for 400 years' ('The Independent', 28 Nov 1996). He wanted to fly, but inoculation with a faulty serum nearly cost him his life and left him with poor eyesight. He spent the war as an intelligence officer and was deeply distressed when, as he saw it, the psychic gifts he had inherited from his father gave him hideous foreknowledge of those who would be killed as he briefed air crew on their missions; he saw their heads as skulls. 
Part of Bentine's work as an intelligence officer with the RAF was to organize forward airfields as the allies advanced through France and into Germany. As such, he was one of the first British officers to enter Belsen. This affected him deeply. The Nazis, he concluded, were 'pure evil'. After the war he had a minor breakdown and was unable to stop weeping for a time. Bentine left the RAF a junior officer, but more than fifty years later his memorial service in the actors' church, St Paul's, Covent Garden, was attended by three air marshals, and he was roared to his rest by the RAF red arrows aerobatics team streaming coloured smoke as they flew in formation over central London. He had helped to raise millions of pounds for the RAF Benevolent Fund. 
After the war Bentine and his friend Tony Sherwood -- they called themselves Sherwood and Forrest -- played the Windmill Theatre, London, a temporary refuge for budding former service comedians. Sherwood left, and Bentine and his brother Philip were fooling around with a broken chair at home; Philip pretended it was a machine-gun and within minutes they had found a hundred uses for it. It became the basis of black-bearded Bentine's surreal solo act. Later, it gave him a star spot in the West End show, 'Starlight Roof'. A plunger on his wild black hair enabled him to impersonate a trolley-bus, among other things. This led to four years' work in the West End, with an appearance at a royal command performance, and seasons at the London Palladium and in the London production of the 'Folies Bergere'. 
Bentine was one of the founder members of 'Crazy People' (later to become 'The Goon Show') on radio in 1951 ['see also 'Goons]. It was a show peopled by surrealist characters, and it quickly acquired a massive cult following and exercised enormous influence on subsequent radio and television comedy. Bentine played Osric Pureheart, inventor of the permanently submergible submarine and other unique artefacts. He pulled out of 'The Goon Show' after two series (forty-three shows), because, he said, its original conception had changed. Bentine then made 'The Bumblies', a show that appealed both to children and to adults, for the BBC, and he later made other children's shows, including 'Potty Time' and 'Madabout', for BBC television. After working in America and Australia for two and a half years he returned to Britain to launch a series of brilliant comic fantasies on television with 'It's a Square World', which ran from 1960 to 1964, and won the grand prix de la presse at Montreux in 1963 (the first BBC show to win an award at the Swiss television festival). In one episode he hired a Chinese junk, dressed his actors as a Chinese crew, and bombarded the houses of parliament with plastic cannon balls until parliament appeared to sink. 'Do any of you gentlemen speak English?', enquired an officer from a river police launch. At other times he fired the BBC television centre into space, raided it with whooping 'Red Indians', and pretended to torpedo it. After scorching a brick he was sent a memorandum by a BBC executive that said: 'Under no circumstances is the BBC Television Centre to be used for the purposes of entertainment'. His effect on BBC staff can be measured by an incident about eighteen months after he had shot the last 'Square World' episode. A gang wielding baseball bats and wearing balaclavas raided the BBC's pay office. As they made their getaway, preparing to batter their way through the barrier, one of the BBC guards opened it, gave them a cheery wave and shouted, 'When will it be on, Mr Bentine?' 
Bentine was a gifted restorer of Victorian paintings, a collector of jade, an amateur astronomer, and an expert on -- and with -- all kinds of weaponry, from sabres to sub-machine guns, though after the war he determined he would never shoot another living creature. In 1998, 'Ghost Force', Ken Connor's 'secret history of the SAS', disclosed that in the mid-1960s, Bentine, by then a combat firearms instructor on special consultation to the armed forces and the police, was invited to a shooting demonstration at Paddington Green police station. Connor described how he drew a.44 Magnum with a 12-inch barrel and began rapid fire. 'When the smoke cleared', Connor wrote, 'every single target had been blasted apart'. The author went on to say that, 'As much as anyone, he deserves the credit for promoting the idea of a counter-terrorist force within the SAS' (Connor, 204-5). 
Bentine pioneered the use of hovercraft to open up areas of Peru that were unreachable even by waterways, and was made a comandador del merito for that and his work in organizing relief after Peru's devastating floods in 1970; he was appointed CBE by the queen in 1995. He represented Prince Charles at Peter Sellers's funeral. He wrote no fewer than three autobiographies: 'The Long Banana Skin' (1975), 'The Door Marked Summer' (1981), and 'The Reluctant Jester' (1992). He also wrote five novels, four books describing his psychic experiences, and five children's books. Bentine was a compendium of seemingly contradictory ideas and decidedly odd notions, of recondite knowledge and technical skills. He had the insatiable curiosity and meticulous grasp of detail of a good research scientist and engineer; he also possessed an awareness of human folly that made him burn with anger at its cruelties and shake with laughter at its absurdities. It was this that put him at the cutting edge of radio and television comedy for more than two generations. 
Bentine's first marriage, to Marie Barradell on 9 August 1941, ended in divorce on 20 January 1947. His second wife, Clementina Theresa Gadesden Stuart-McCall, was a ballet dancer. They married on 14 February 1948. Two daughters, Elaine, sole child of his first marriage, and Marylla, elder daughter of his second marriage, both died of cancer in the 1980s. His eldest son, Stuart, was killed in a light-aircraft crash in 1972. Bentine himself died from prostate cancer on 26 November 1996, in Walton on the Hill, Tadworth, Surrey. He was cremated at Leatherhead, Surrey. He was survived by his wife, Clementina, his son Richard, and his daughter Serena. 


@@@@@


doc= 64038


Hammond, Dame Joan Hood (1912-1996), singer, was born on 24 May 1912 in Christchurch, New Zealand, the daughter of Samuel Hood Hammond ('fl'. 'c'.1875-1950) and his wife, Hilda May, 'nee' Blandford ('fl'. 'c'.1885-1955). Her parents were British, and when she was a few months old the family moved to Sydney, Australia. She was educated at the Presbyterian Ladies' College, Pymble, New South Wales, where from an early age she showed a natural aptitude for music and for sport. In 1928 she entered the New South Wales Conservatorium of Music to study violin, piano, and singing. She originally intended to be a violinist, but a bicycle accident at the age of twelve had left one arm shorter than the other, so she concentrated on singing. At the same time she played a great deal of golf, and at the age of seventeen she won the junior state championship. 
In 1932 the Williamson Imperial Grand Opera Company gave a season in Australia, visiting Sydney, Melbourne, and other cities. The principal singers were Italian, but the chorus and minor roles were recruited locally. Hammond secured an engagement with the company as a mezzo-soprano, appearing in 'Aida', 'Pagliacci', and 'Madama Butterfly', as Giovanna in 'Rigoletto', and as Siebel in 'Faust'. She obtained leave of absence to play in the ladies' state golf championship, which she won. The following year she was runner-up in the Australian open championship. She became golf correspondent for the 'Sydney Telegraph', meanwhile singing whenever and wherever she could, for music clubs, in cinemas, and even in department stores. 
Another season of grand opera was presented in Sydney by Sir Benjamin Fuller in 1935. The singer taking the part of Venus in 'Tannhauser' dropped out, and Hammond sang the role at short notice. She also sang Helmwige in 'Die Walkure'. A fund of $2000 was raised so that she could travel to Europe to study further. After a final concert in Sydney she sailed on 6 April 1936 in the Norwegian freighter 'Dagfred', arriving in Genoa six weeks later. She went first to Vienna, where she remained a year, though she did not care for her teacher. Then she went to London, where she studied with the Italian tenor Dino Borgioli, an excellent teacher. Now a soprano, she returned to Vienna in 1938 to sing at the Volksoper, as Nedda in 'Pagliacci', in the title role of 'Martha', and as Konstanze in 'Die Entfuhrung aus dem Serail'. She made her London debut that autumn, giving a recital at the Aeolian Hall and singing in 'Messiah' under Sir Thomas Beecham at the Queen's Hall. Early in 1939 she returned to Vienna, to sing Mimi in 'La Boheme' and Violetta in 'La traviata', this time at the State Opera. She also prepared the roles of Elisabeth in 'Tannhauser' and Donna Elvira in 'Don Giovanni'. Meanwhile the political situation was growing worse by the day. Hammond went back to London in August to sing at a Henry Wood Promenade Concert and did not return to Austria. 
After war was declared Hammond volunteered as an ambulance driver, and sang for the BBC and with the Entertainments National Service Association to entertain the troops. In January 1940 she was asked to sing Mimi and Tosca at La Scala. With great difficulty she managed to get to Milan, and even started rehearsals, but Italy was about to enter the war on the side of the Germans, and she had to leave. For two years her operatic career, which had begun with such promise, was in abeyance. However, she was kept extremely busy in the concert hall and the recording studio. Her first recording paired the Bach-Gounod 'Ave Maria' and Mendelssohn's 'On wings of song'. This was followed by a number of operatic arias, including 'O my beloved father' from 'Gianni Schicchi'. In 1942 Hammond joined the Carl Rosa Opera Company, which had just began to operate again, making her British stage debut in Glasgow as Madam Butterfly and touring the country for three years, singing Violetta, Marguerite in 'Faust', Leonora in 'Il trovatore', Mimi, and Tosca, as well as the Marschallin in 'Der Rosenkavalier' in concert. 
After the war Hammond toured Germany with Sadler's Wells, singing Butterfly, and in 1946 returned to Australia for a four-month concert tour. In 1947 she went back to Vienna to sing Mimi, Tosca, Butterfly, and Violetta. The State Opera was in ruins, and performances were given at the old Theater an der Wien. After a tour of South Africa, in 1948 Hammond made her Covent Garden debut as Leonora in 'Il trovatore', and she returned there during the next three seasons as Leonore in 'Fidelio', as Aida, and as Butterfly. She toured the USA in 1949, and also appeared with the New York City Opera as Butterfly, Aida, and Tosca. During the Verdi celebrations in 1951, the fiftieth anniversary of his death, Hammond sang Elisabeth de Valois in 'Don Carlos' at Sadler's Wells. She also took part in several performances of the Verdi 'Requiem', music that she particularly liked. 
In the 1950s Hammond travelled widely, touring Scandinavia, east and central Africa, India, the Far East, Canada, the USA, Australia, and the Soviet Union, where she sang Aida and Tatyana in 'Eugene Onegin' (in Russian) at Leningrad and Moscow. She also sang Tatyana and Fevronia in Rimsky-Korsakov's 'The Invisible City of Kitesh' at Barcelona. One of her most popular recordings was 'O silver moon' from Dvorak's 'Rusalka'; perhaps mistakenly, she sang Rusalka in the British stage premiere of the opera at Sadler's Wells in 1959, which was not a great success. For the Elizabethan Opera Trust in Australia she performed Tosca and two new roles, Desdemona in 'Otello' and Strauss's Salome. She broadcast several operas for the BBC, including 'La forza del destino', 'Turandot', Massenet's 'Thais', 'Guillaume Tell', and Rimsky-Korsakov's 'Mlada', as well as two contemporary works, Alan Bush's 'Wat Tyler' and Dennis ApIvor's 'Yerma'. 
In November 1965 Hammond suffered a coronary attack and was forced to retire. Her many records continued to sell and in 1969 she was awarded a golden disc for 'O my beloved father', originally used to back Tosca's 'Vissi d'arte'. She published her autobiography, 'A Voice, a Life', in 1970. Having been appointed OBE in 1953, CBE in 1963, and CMG in 1972, she was appointed DBE in 1974. Her home in Australia, together with her golfing trophies and all the souvenirs of her singing career, was destroyed by a bush fire in 1983. Music lovers all over the world sent replacements for her lost treasures. She died at Bowral, New South Wales, on 26 November 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 64042


Donovan, Terence Daniel (1936-1996), photographer, was born at 24 Antill Road, Mile End, London, on 14 September 1936, the only child of Daniel Donovan, lorry driver, and his wife, (Lilian) Constance Violet, 'nee' Wright, cook. He had a fractured education -- 'I spent most of the war', he once said, 'in the cab of a large lorry travelling round England with my father' (Vines). Nevertheless he found time to learn the craft of photography (which throughout his life it remained, never an art). He enrolled to study lithography, as an eleven-year-old apprentice, at the London School of Photo-Engraving in Fleet Street (later relocated and renamed the London College of Printing), while also attending Fairfield Road secondary modern school. He left at fifteen to become a photographer's assistant at Gee and Watson, a blockmakers for the printing industry, and from there moved to work first with the photographer Hugh White and then with Michael Williams, a photographer for 'Fleet Illustrated'. His stay there -- of at least three to four years -- was broken by two years of national service in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps (1955-7), where he supplemented his pay by producing picture postcards. In 1957 he joined the studio of the leading fashion photographer John French, as assistant to the photographers Adrian Flowers and John Adrian (also known as Adriaan). After a year he left with Janet Campbell Cohen ('b'. 1933), a stylist for French, to open a studio in Yeoman's Row, Knightsbridge. It was a success from the start, his first commission pedestrian but well paid: a photograph of a Viota sponge cake, for 27 guineas (taken on 27 January 1959). He and Janet Cohen married on 2 June 1960, and had one son, Daniel. 
Unlike many young photographers Donovan was not forced to specialize in a particular discipline, thanks to a versatility that attracted a range of clients, including the leading advertising agencies and fashion and lifestyle magazines of the time. Prominent among the latter were 'Vogue', 'Harper's Bazaar', and 'Man About Town' (later renamed 'About Town' and then just 'Town'). Donovan's expertise was sought for fashion, still life, and portraiture, both in a studio setting and on location. Shooting mostly with black and white film in the early years, his singular, 'verite' style set him apart from his contemporaries and was best illustrated by a series of men's fashion pictures taken on the streets of London for 'Man About Town', published in 1961, and, for the same magazine a year later, a series of portraits of the young actress Julie Christie in her London flat. Both sets were taken with an informality untypical of the time. 
Donovan brought the life of his times into the studio, too, getting his models to walk and to pose like the girls he knew from the East End. In the process he helped to give magazines a new visual language of gesture and stance -- a 'working-class chic'. Again for 'Man About Town' he contributed two remarkable photo-essays, the first on an artists' collective in Holland Park and the second on one day in the life of a West End stripper. He chose not to pursue straight documentary work: 'I tend to reduce my reportage to graphics', he explained later; 'I don't really want to report on life... I'm quite happy to see a girl scratching her nose in a coffee bar and translate that via a model' (Vines). In 1963 he took his first photograph for 'Vogue' -- a portrait of the conductor Georg Solti in Covent Garden -- and began an association with the magazine that ended only with his death. His last published photograph was for 'Vogue' and appeared posthumously in February 1997, a grainy portrait of the London-based design team Clements Ribeiro, which in style and execution was similar to the up-to-the-minute portraits of the London fashion scene that he had created decades earlier. 
Donovan's first marriage came to an end in July 1967, and on 30 April 1970 he married Diana St Felix Dare ('b'. 1942), film publicist and, later, corporate affairs consultant; they had a son, Terence, and a daughter, Daisy. In the 1970s, while continuing to shoot fashion for 'Vogue', Donovan explored the more lucrative field of advertising photography, began a series of experimental 'impressionistic' fashion photographs for 'Nova' magazine, and also turned his hand to the moving image. He financed and directed a feature film, 'Yellow Dog' (1973), influenced by Japanese cinema and martial arts. The film was not a popular success but he was asked subsequently to direct commercials for television and, later still, to direct for the American CBS Network films of the National Theatre stage plays 'Early Days', 'On the Razzle', and 'The Importance of Being Earnest'. 
By the 1980s much of Donovan's time was spent on television commercials and advertising photography, although he frequently shot fashion for 'Vogue', 'Elle', and 'Marie Claire', and the fashion collections (often twice a year) for the Italian edition of 'Harper's Bazaar'. His voracious instinct for the highly colourful, for an exaggerated glamour, and for baroque fantasies in French chateaux made him a favourite with fashion editors of the 1980s and early 1990s. 'You see, fashion photography is an act of theatre', he maintained, 'and you really have to love it' ('Yellow dog'). He brought the sensibility of the glossy magazine to the fashion pages of British newspapers, much as his early employer John French had done years before at the 'Daily Express'. He was also a pioneer of the pop promotional video, most notably that for Robert Palmer's song 'Addicted to Love' (1986). For this he was nominated one of 'Vanity Fair' magazine's 'People of the decade' in 1989. 
Donovan's interests were wide-ranging, compensating perhaps for the years of disrupted schooling. He was a devotee of Zen Buddhism and a practitioner of judo. At one point he owned a chain of dress shops, a firm of building contractors, and an ironmonger's shop in Chelsea, and part-owned a restaurant with the actor Terence Stamp. He also held a successful show of his paintings at the Albemarle Gallery, London, in 1992. Like his great friend David Bailey he was a by-word for English commercial photography: 'The Falstaff of Fashion Photography', according to Francis Wyndham, 'without malice, trusted by his rivals' (Wyndham, notes). He was a photographer to the royal family, too, taking the official engagement photographs of the duke and duchess of York and photographing the princess of Wales on three occasions (8 October 1986, 24 June 1987, and 26 February 1990). Prints from these three sittings were deposited in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery, London. In 1996 he was appointed visiting professor of Central St Martin's College of Art and Design. 
Donovan hanged himself on 22 November 1996 at a studio he was building in Hanwell, London, following a severe reaction to medication; he was buried at Gunnersbury cemetery on 29 November. He was survived by his wife, Diana, and his three children. He had just completed a twenty-one page portfolio for 'GQ' magazine on rock'n'roll heroes in celebration of 'swinging' London's second incarnation -- the 'cool Britannia' of the mid- to late 1990s. This marked a return to editorial photography that was keenly anticipated and which, published in the month of his death, became his valediction. He published three books of his photographs, 'Women Through the Eyes of Smudger TD' ('c'.1964), 'Glances' (1983), and 'Fighting Judo' (with Katsuhiko Kashiwazaki, 1985). A retrospective exhibition of his London photographs was held at the Museum of London in 1999, and a large-format anthology of his photographs, 'Terence Donovan', was published in 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 64043


Pollard, Margaret Steuart (1904-1996), Cornish poet, was born at 2 Whitehall Court, London, on 1 March 1904, daughter of John Steuart Gladstone (1862-1920), an East India merchant, and his wife, Anne Fitzgibbon, and granddaughter of W. E. Gladstone's niece Mary Ellen (who married her second cousin Robert Gladstone). After a basic education at Eversley School, Folkestone, she entered Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1922. She became a college scholar, and obtained in 1924 and 1925 first-class honours in both parts of the oriental languages tripos, the first woman to do so. She was Caroline Turle scholar in 1925-6 and received the degree of PhD in 1952. Her initial interest was Hinduism, but she learned (and taught) Russian, and became interested in the Eastern Orthodox church, later translating Old Church Slavonic Marian hymns. 
Peggy Gladstone moved to Cornwall after her marriage on 30 June 1928 to George Francis Giffard Pollard (1905/6-1968) (RNVR, known as Frank or Cap'n), a journalist and the son of John Empson Toplis Pollard, a solicitor, whom she met at Cambridge. She became interested in preserving Cornwall and its landscape from what she (and others) saw as the encroaching vandalism of the modern world, and served as Cornish secretary for the Council for the Preservation of Rural England from 1935 to 1945. She was a practical champion of the countryside through membership between 1932 and 1937 of Ferguson's Gang, the unorthodox group of anonymous fund-raisers for the National Trust, mainly women (Ferguson may or may not have existed), and Pollard used the name Bill Stickers (as in 'bill stickers will be prosecuted'). Her donations to causes of this nature and to other charitable works cannot be calculated. 
In accordance with her attitude towards preservation, Peggy Pollard became interested in the movement to revive the Cornish language, which had based itself upon the language of the medieval Cornish plays. Peggy Pollard learned revival Cornish and was enthusiastically involved with the Cornish bardic gathering, the Gorseth. She became a bard in 1938 with the name Arlodhes Ywerdhon, Irish Lady, after a rock at the north end of Gamper Bay, near Land's End and part of the estate of Mayon Cliff, which the National Trust purchased in 1935. The rock's eponym, who perished there, was said to appear with a lantern on stormy nights: it was a good name to choose. 
Peggy Pollard wrote English songs and poems about the county, and in 1947 'Cornwall', a book giving a brief but pithy impression of Cornish life; but she contributed to the continued revival of the Cornish language principally with her 'mystery plays'. One gained the Gorseth prize in 1941, and another satirized members of the movement, but they are lost; Pollard also won the prize in 1940 with 'Bewnans Alysaryn' ('The life of Alysaryn') and this was published, in 1941. Now viewed as a forgotten milestone of modern Cornish, it is at once pastiche, parody, and serious play. Early Cornish drama includes a saint's life played over two days, which mixes comic and serious elements. Pollard's play is divided into eleven (pretty short) 'days', and parodies the medieval texts by having the stage directions in spoof early English; one character 'goeth completelie dottie', while some torturers (stock characters in Cornish mystery plays) are accompanied by 'the Press'. At the end of the second 'day' she suggests that 'if expense bee no object, let them set fire to the house for a spectacular curtaine'. Her Cornish imitates elements (and imprecations) from the older plays, with occasional English or Latin; yet the play is also serious, with Alysaryn a reluctant and (in spite of a close encounter with Beelzebub) theologically rather modern saint, miracle worker, and martyr, between God and the devil, wanting only to be his own honest self. For all that, the play ends with hymns. 
Pollard was much involved with Truro Cathedral and spent time as secretary to the evangelical bishop Joseph Hunkin, but converted to Catholicism in the 1950s and helped to revive in 1965 the fifteenth-century guild of Our Lady of the Portal, supporting the building of a Catholic church in Truro. Our Lady of the Portal and St Piran (the Cornish national saint) was opened in 1973 on the presumed site of a medieval chapel. In the guild she was simply Sister X, and members said their devotions on the telephone at specific times every evening. At eighty she led a group to the baroque pilgrimage church of Vierzehnheiligen in Bavaria. She exhibited watercolours and embroidered for the cathedral. Her embroidery of C. S. Lewis's 'Narnia' stories is almost as long as the Bayeux tapestry. She was (briefly) a teacher in Probus. 
Peggy Pollard is not easy to sum up: she was a linguist with strong mystical-theological interests which manifested themselves differently at different points in her life. She was literary, witty, and practical: besides painting and embroidery she was Gorseth harpist from 1948 to 1953, and she kept (and liked) goats. She was philanthropic in the best sense, donating anonymously to works in Britain and supporting a group of black nuns in South Africa. By common consent she was an eccentric, but an eccentric of a scholarly and very British kind. Concerned with preserving the national heritage, her role in the Cornish language movement typifies her, reflecting both scholarship and a pragmatic romanticism. Her husband died in 1968 -- they had no children -- and she herself died at the Kenwyn Nursing Home, New Mills Lane, Truro, Cornwall, on 13 November 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 64045


Post, Sir Laurens Jan van der (1906-1996), writer and conservationist, was born on 13 December 1906 at Philipolis in the Orange River Colony, the fifth son and thirteenth of fifteen children of Christiaan Willem Hendrik van der Post (1856-1914), lawyer and politician, known as CWH. His father, of Dutch stock, had arrived in South Africa at the age of three from Leiden in the Netherlands, and in 1885 married Johanna, the elder daughter of Andries Lubbe, of mainly German ancestry, and his wife Elizabeth Liebenberg, whose typical Afrikaner mixture of French, Dutch, and Scandinavian descent also included a seventeenth-century 'Hottentot princess', Eva, possibly of bushman (San) origin, who married an early Dutch settler, Pieter van Meerhoff. After Johanna's death in 1888, leaving one child, CWH in 1889 married her younger sister Maria-Magdalena (Lammie), with whom he had fourteen more. He fought against the British in the South African War, and was exiled to Stellenbosch in Cape Province, where Laurens was conceived in 1906. The family returned home to the small town of Philipolis in the Orange River Colony and there Laurens (originally Lourens in Afrikaans) was born. 
Van der Post's childhood was spent in Philipolis and on family farms at Wolwekop and Boesmansfontein. He became an avid reader of classic European literature, from Homer to Shakespeare, and in later life liked to recall how he had retreated with books from his father's extensive library to the branches of a huge mulberry tree. Among other vivid childhood memories was that of being shown the two famous comets of 1910 by his father, who died in August 1914. In 1918 van der Post was sent for a year to Grey College, Bloemfontein, to which he returned for the last two years of his education until he was eighteen. In March 1925 he took his first job as a trainee reporter on the 'Natal Advertiser' in the busy port of Durban. His duties included acting as the shipping and hockey correspondent, reporting on his own feats as a player for the Durban and Natal hockey teams. In 1926 he joined two already well-known writers, Roy Campbell and William Plomer, who had launched a short-lived satirical magazine, 'Voorslag', intended to promote a multiracial South African culture. In the same year he spent three months sailing to Tokyo and back on a Japanese freighter, the 'Canada Maru', with Plomer, and this introduction to a still largely traditional Japan later inspired books by both writers. 
In 1927 van der Post met Marjorie Edith Wendt (died 1995), daughter of Theo Frederick Charles Otto Wendt, the founder and conductor of the Cape Town Orchestra. Early in 1928 he joined her in England, and on 8 March they were married in Bridport, Dorset. Their son Jan Laurens, later known as John, was born on 26 December. In 1929 van der Post went back to Cape Town, to write for the 'Cape Times' under the editorship of Desmond Young. In 1931 he returned to England, where he spent some time in London, establishing friendships with members of the Bloomsbury group such as Arthur Waley, J. M. Keynes, E. M. Forster, Virginia Woolf, and her husband, Leonard, whose Hogarth Press in 1934 published van der Post's first novel, 'In a Province', an early attempt to portray the tragic contradictions of a racially divided South Africa. The same year he set up as a dairy farmer at Colley Farm, near Tetbury, Gloucestershire, where for five years he attempted to juggle the needs of his cows with visits to London to contribute as an occasional correspondent to various South African newspapers. It was a dark phase of his life, in which his sense of Europe's drift towards war echoed his own lack of personal focus. In 1936 he made five voyages to South Africa, on one trip meeting and falling in love with Ingaret Stella Giffard-Young, known as Ingaret Giffard (died 1997), an English would-be writer and actress five years his senior, who was already married to Gordon Arthur James Giffard-Young. Later that year Marjorie gave birth to a daughter, Lucia, and in 1938 van der Post sent his wife and two children back to South Africa. By the start of the war, torn between his family and his new love, with his career going nowhere, he was lost and dispirited. Only in the next few years was he to 'find himself'. 
In May 1940 van der Post volunteered to join the army. After officer training he was transferred in January 1941 to the intelligence corps as acting captain and posted to east Africa, to join General Wingate's 'Gideon force' in a bid to restore the emperor Haile Selassie to his throne in Abyssinia. His own unit's task involved leading 11,000 camels over hazardous terrain, and fellow officers recalled how expertly he cared for his animals. In March he was invalided out with malaria and, after time in Palestine, he was, as a Dutch speaker, posted in early 1942 to the Dutch East Indies. As acting lieutenant-colonel he was placed in command of special mission 43, to organize an allied retreat after the Japanese invasion of Java. On 20 April he was captured and taken first to Soekaboemi camp, where he met Wing Commander W. T. H. Nichols, then to Bandoeng where, with Nichols and an Australian surgeon, Edward 'Weary' Dunlop, he played a heroic role in sustaining the morale of hundreds of prisoners of war of several nationalities, by his courage and tireless care for the needs of others. They organized a 'camp university', providing courses in every subject from basic literacy to degree-standard ancient history. Van der Post ran a camp farm to supplement their pitiful rations. In 1945, as the war approached its end, there were warnings that all prisoners would be killed and, in an episode he was later to describe in 'The Night of the New Moon' (1970), they were saved only by the dropping of the atomic bombs and Japan's surrender. 
As his fellow prisoners left for home, van der Post remained on Java, which had been placed under British responsibility by Mountbatten's south-east Asia command, as GSO1 (political) to the British headquarters staff. On 15 September he joined Admiral William Patterson on the cruiser HMS 'Cumberland' to receive the Japanese surrender, and for two years he played an important role in attempting to mediate between Indonesian nationalists and representatives of the discredited Dutch colonial regime. Trusted by nationalist leaders, such as Mohammad Hatta and Ahmed Sukarno, he warned both Mountbatten and the prime minister, Clement Attlee, whom he met in London in October 1945, that the country was a powder keg. Attlee sent him to The Hague to repeat his warning directly to the Dutch cabinet. In November 1946, when British forces withdrew, he became military attache to the British consulate in Batavia, but after his return to England in 1947 his fears were borne out, as Indonesia collapsed into the civil war which led to independence. He retired from the army and was made a CBE the same year. 
In 1948 van der Post returned to South Africa, as assistant editor on the 'Natal Daily News', but when the election victory of Malan's National Party ushered in apartheid he came back to London. In May 1949 he was commissioned by the Colonial Development Corporation (CDC) to survey the Nyika and Mlanje areas of Nyasaland for their agricultural potential. On 13 October, having been divorced from Marjorie, he married Ingaret Giffard (the daughter of Hardinge Frank Giff, barrister) and, on honeymoon in Switzerland, where his new wife introduced him to the psychologist Carl Jung, he completed a book about his Nyasaland trip, 'Venture to the Interior'. In 1950 he was asked by Lord Reith, head of the CDC, to organize an expedition to Bechuanaland, led by Frank Debenham, to assess the potential of the remote Kalahari desert for cattle ranching. He then for the first time met hunter-gathering bushman (San) inhabitants of the central Kalahari, as he did again in 1952 during a second expedition to complete plans to set up a cattle industry. In the same year 'Venture to the Interior' was finally published, becoming an instant best-seller on both sides of the Atlantic. In 1954 his novel 'Flamingo Feather', a Buchanesque thriller about a Soviet plot to take over South Africa, also sold well. In 1955 the BBC commissioned him to return to the Kalahari in search of the bushmen, for what in 1956 became a hugely successful television series. This was followed in 1958 by the most famous of all his books, 'The Lost World of the Kalahari', and in 1961 by 'The Heart of the Hunter', drawing on a nineteenth-century collection of bushman stories by Wilhelm Bleek. Van der Post's evocation of the bushmen as the first human inhabitants of southern Africa, persecuted by all the races that had arrived subsequently, and now representing the 'lost soul' of civilized modern man, encouraged the colonial government to set up the Central Kalahari Game Reserve in 1961 to guarantee their survival. This was to be confirmed by the constitution when in 1966 Bechuanaland was given independence as Botswana. 
Van der Post's now secure fame as a writer resulted in a steady succession of books over the next decade, including two on his wartime prison-camp experiences, 'The Seed and the Sower' (1963) and 'The Night of the New Moon' (1970). He received lucrative commissions for more general travel writing, including 'A Journey into Russia' (1964), describing a lengthy trip through the Soviet Union. In 1972 another BBC television series based on his friendship with Jung, who had died in 1961, was followed by the book 'Jung and the Story of our Time' (1976). During this time of success he moved in 1969 into the penthouse flat at the top of Chelsea Towers, a 1960s block off the King's Road commanding a view over London, where he and Ingaret spent the rest of their lives. They also in 1970 moved into Turnstones, a modern house looking out on the North Sea at Aldeburgh, Suffolk, where Ingaret had long owned a cottage, and where he wrote in a wooden coastguard tower on the seafront and played tennis with a circle of friends centring upon Benjamin Britten. 
It was through Suffolk friends that van der Post was introduced to Prince Charles, whom he took on a safari to Kenya in 1977 and with whom he enjoyed a close and influential friendship for the rest of his life. In the same year -- with another close friend, Dr Ian Player, a prominent South African conservationist -- he set up the first World Wilderness Congress at Johannesburg, launching what became an international movement to promote the spiritual value to mankind of preserving the world's fast diminishing areas of wilderness. After 1979, when his friend and Chelsea neighbour Margaret Thatcher became prime minister, she valued his advice, notably on the politics of southern Africa, beginning with the Rhodesia settlement of 1979-80, and in 1981 he was given a knighthood. 
In 1982, when a bad fall injured his back, ending his tennis and skiing, van der Post published an autobiographical book 'Yet being someone other', centred on his long-standing love of the sea and his journey to Japan in 1926. But his accounts of having taken part in whaling expeditions were later questioned as fanciful, and from now on his writings, which because of failing health had to be dictated, became infrequent. Ingaret was now entering a twilight of dementia, and he valued the time he was able to spend with a long-standing friend, Frances Baruch. In 1984 his son John died, having made a successful life in England as an engineer, but van der Post continued to enjoy a close relationship with his daughter Lucia and her family. Despite scarcely knowing her father as a child, she had also come to settle in London, to become a respected journalist. 
Despite the tribulations of age, van der Post never ceased to throw himself into projects of all kinds, from promoting the worldwide wilderness movement and other conservationist causes to setting up a centre of Jungian studies in Cape Town. To the end of his life he was a spellbinding speaker and storyteller, whether to vast audiences in many countries or to a single friend. As South Africa moved towards black emancipation, his fears of a one-party, Xhosa-dominated state and his friendship with the Zulu leader Chief Buthelezi led him to campaign behind the scenes for a federal constitution which might give a voice to all the country's different racial and tribal groups. 
In 1996, in his ninetieth year, van der Post did what he could to avert a final tragedy threatening the Kalahari bushmen, when they were threatened by the Botswanan government with eviction from the reserve that had been set up to ensure their survival. Ironically part of their downfall lay in the consequences of the cattle ranching he had helped to promote nearly half a century before. In October he published his last book, 'The Admiral's Baby', describing his time in Java after the war. He was rapturously received by huge audiences at a five-day celebration of his work in Colorado, and returned for a ninetieth birthday party attended by friends from almost every period of his life. Next day he took to his bed and on 16 December 1996, after murmuring in Afrikaans of 'die sterre', the stars of the veld where he grew up, he died. His funeral at Christ Church, Chelsea, on 20 December was attended by Prince Charles. At his memorial service in 1997 Lady Thatcher and his daughter Lucia Crichton-Miller read lessons, and addresses were given by Ian Player and Chief Buthelezi, representing South Africa's first black president, Nelson Mandela. His ashes were buried in a special memorial garden at Philipolis on 4 April 1998. Ingaret died five months after him, on 5 May 1997. A bronze bust of van der Post by Frances Baruch was placed in Prince Charles's garden at Highgrove, only a mile or two from the Cotswold farm he had run in the 1930s. 
After van der Post's death various journalists rushed to discredit him, not least by revealing the story of how in 1952 he had fathered a child on a fourteen-year-old girl who had been entrusted to his care on a sea voyage to England by her South African family. He was ridiculed for his role as a 'modern sage' and 'guru to Prince Charles', and journalists delighted in tracking down examples of how, in writing about his life, he had sometimes blurred fact with fiction. This process culminated in 2001 in a biography, 'Storyteller', by J. D. F. Jones, which, highly unusually for an 'authorized' biography, presented its subject in an almost unrelievedly negative light. In so far as the book shed light on the darker side of van der Post's life and in particular on his tendency to mythologize, it served a useful purpose. But not even this bleakly critical and not always factually reliable account could conceal the heroic part van der Post had played in the Javanese prisoner-of-war camps, testified to by many survivors. Above all the book failed to understand why van der Post's writings on the bushmen, wildlife, Africa, and the human spirit had struck such a chord with millions of readers. He was indeed in the best sense a storyteller, opening the door to a spiritual dimension of which the modern world is starved. 


@@@@@


doc= 64046


Wilmot, Anthony Talbot de Burgh (1915-1996), colonial administrator, businessman, and evangelist, was born on 24 June 1915 at The Mount, Shoreham, Kent, the youngest of five children and third son of Albert de Burgh Wilmot, paper manufacturer, and his wife, (Mary) Dorothea Herbert, 'nee' Noyes. He was educated at Tonbridge School and St Edmund Hall, Oxford, where he read English and attended lectures by C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien. After graduating with a third-class degree in 1937, he was accepted for appointment to the colonial administrative service in Northern Rhodesia on 31 August that year. After returning to Oxford (where he completed the colonial service probationers' course, and won a hockey blue) he served as assistant district commissioner in Northern Rhodesia between 1938 and 1940, acquiring such fluency in Chibemba that he could be mistaken for a native speaker. As senior cypher officer to the 11th African division in the east Africa campaign during the Second World War he rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel and was mentioned in dispatches on 30 December 1941. In 1944 he became secretary to the government in British Somaliland. While on home leave, on 1 June 1946, he married Alice Eva (Eve) Stanley-Smith (1922-2006), daughter of Algernon Charles Stanley-Smith, missionary doctor, and granddaughter of Stanley Peregrine Smith, one of the renowned 'Cambridge Seven' missionaries to China. They had seven children, including two sets of twins: Jonathan and Miriam ('b'. 1948), Timothy ('b'. 1950), Geoffrey ('b'. 1953), Rachel ('b'. 1955), and David and Patrick ('b'. 1959). While the children were at boarding schools Wilmot would write to one of them each day of the week. 
In September 1946 Wilmot was transferred to the Gold Coast as an administrative officer. In 1954 he was appointed permanent secretary to the Ministry of Communication and Works, where he saw through such projects as the construction of the Volta Dam and Tema harbour. In 1956 he left the colonial service to join the Commonwealth Development Corporation, and after two years in Singapore, Borneo, and Malaya returned to Africa as west African regional controller, working to encourage business investment in west African countries prior to independence. He subsequently worked in the private sector, as a business consultant and 'company doctor'. 
From the early 1950s Tony and Eve Wilmot ran a weekly 'Bible' class in their home. Wilmot had a gift for choosing future influencers in whom to invest. Regular members of his 'Bible' classes included Yakubu Gowon, later military governor of Nigeria; Jeremiah Gana, later Nigeria's minister for information; Emeka Anyaoku, later secretary-general of the Commonwealth; and Philemon Quaye, later commodore of the Ghanaian navy, and then Ghana's ambassador to Liberia and Egypt. In 1955 Wilmot was commissioned by the British Inter-Varsity Fellowship, a founding member of the fledgeling International Fellowship of Evangelical Students (IFES), to gauge the possibility of pioneering a sister movement in Africa. From that point on Wilmot became the moving spirit behind the foundation of the Pan African Fellowship of Evangelical Students. 
Seeing the need for African pastors to be trained in their own context, Wilmot worked to found a theological college for postgraduate study in Africa. He and his wife travelled throughout Europe, America, and Australia to raise the required funding and in 1979 purchased 18 acres in Karen, outside Nairobi, Kenya, for $200,000. The site housed three chicken runs and a dog-food factory. That scene illustrated a profound characteristic of Wilmot: he looked at what was and saw what could be. In 1983 the Nairobi Evangelical Graduate School of Theology was opened with a Zimbabwean dean, four students, and Wilmot as principal. By the time of his death it had trained 200 pastors and theological teachers. 
When Wilmot retired to Kent another project loomed. Throughout all his years in Africa he had maintained a close link with the evangelical parish church of St Nicholas, Sevenoaks. The church had grown significantly and needed to find more space. There was no alternative but to dig underneath, a first for a medieval structure and not without risk. The cost was over $2 million, almost all of which had to be raised from within the congregation. Wilmot worked closely with the rector, Miles Thomson, bringing business acumen and wide experience in project management. Together they called the project 'building for the gospel' and drove it through to completion in June 1995. 
Wilmot died at Farnborough Hospital from heart failure on 14 December 1996 and was buried in Greatness Park cemetery, Sevenoaks. He was survived by his wife, Eve, and their seven children. While he had devoted most of his working life, both in the colonial service and in business, to the political and economic development of Africa, the founding of the evangelical student ministry and of the Nairobi Evangelical Graduate School of Theology formed a major part of his legacy to the church across that continent. 


@@@@@


doc= 64051


Coral, Joseph (1904-1996), bookmaker, was born on 11 December 1904 into a Jewish family in Warsaw, Poland. His father, Abraham Kagarlitsky, died when he was very young; his mother, Jessica, took Joe and his two brothers to London, before the First World War, and they settled in the East End. The family soon changed its name to Coral, a name drawn from R. M. Ballantyne's novel 'Coral Island'. During his school years Joe was afflicted by polio which badly affected both his arms, but his remarkable flair for mathematics had been strongly apparent. On leaving school at fourteen he took a job with a lamp-maker, just as the First World War came to an end. It was there that he made his first entry into the world of betting; he became a bookie's runner: that is, someone who runs bets for his colleagues and workmates on behalf of the local bookmaker. Off-course ready money (cash) betting on horse-racing had been illegal since 1853, and the bookie's runner was a pivotal figure in the culture of working-class betting and gambling. 
Coral soon understood that the bets were money in the bookmaker's pocket. The punters rarely made claims for winnings due. 'I would notice', he recalled, 'that it was only once in a blue moon that there would be a claim the next day. I thought 'you must be mad to give it to the bookmaker'' (McGrath). He began to stand bets himself, and to make his own profits. He was sacked from the lamp-maker's workshop for, in Coral's words, 'concentrating on the wrong ledger'. He went to work at a small London advertising agency. The Saturdays off enabled Coral to build up a local network of punters based at a billiard hall in Stoke Newington, and he was soon established as a local bookmaker. Billiards and snooker also remained his lifelong hobbies. In 1927 he left advertising to set up his own pitches at the Harringay and White City greyhound racing tracks. The introduction of the electric hare from the United States of America in 1926 thus assisted Coral's career: it created a legal context for trackside betting. 
In common with so many bookies Coral maintained both a legal and an illegal trade. The legitimate side of the business was greyhound racing and credit betting with cheques, where no ready money changed hands, but the most lucrative wing of his business was street betting. Coral stated that he would go out every morning with the aim of increasing his trade. He drank in local pubs, took shaves with the local barbers, and informally plied his trade with those publicans, barbers, shopkeepers, and others willing to take bets on his behalf. Other locals took bets for Coral from pitches in streets and in back alleys. By 1930 he was a cash-in-hand employer of between seventy and eighty agents who collected ready-money bets for him. By that year he had also taken over the pitches of Bill Chandler, a popular Hoxton bookie, who was unable to compete with Coral. 
The illegality of street betting bred criminal interference, and the dog tracks were unofficially controlled by gangs. Coral's success attracted the attention of the notorious London mafia, the Derby Sabini gang. During the late 1920s Coral was violently intimidated by Derby Sabini himself. According to Coral, 'I shoved an old rusty pistol that wasn't even loaded into his guts and told him 'F*** off or you'll get this through the belly'' ('The Times'). This gesture earned Coral both the freedom to conduct his business without overt menaces and the respect of the local punters. 
Coral was one of the largest regional bookmakers in England by 1939. War interrupted the betting business, owing to the huge reductions in the racing calendar, but Coral was still busy. He opened a credit betting office in Stoke Newington in 1941, and moved the office to London's West End four years later. After the war, moreover, Coral was one of a number of bookmakers who advertised betting by post in the major sporting newspapers such as the 'Sporting Life' and the 'Sporting Chronicle'. 'Sporting' newspapers were really betting newspapers. Betting by post was legal because no cash changed hands, only cheques or postal orders. The illegal business continued to thrive, however, but the 1950s witnessed a thawing of official attitudes to betting and gambling. During an era of full employment and affluence the paternalistic concern of church and government lest the working classes gamble themselves into poverty was misplaced. The police, moreover, took the opportunity to argue to the royal commission on betting, lotteries and gaming of 1949-51 that the law was unworkable, and that illegal betting was a thriving open secret which rendered futile any attempts to restrict it through intervention. This change of thinking led to the 'Betting and Gaming Act' of 1960, which finally legalized off-course cash betting, and introduced the licensed betting office to the high streets and back streets of England and Wales. 
Initially Coral, along with other large bookmakers such as William Hill, for example, had been unenthusiastic about legalization. A major requirement of the 1960 act was that any new betting office needed to show 'unstimulated demand' before being granted a licence. One way was to convert existing business premises to a licensed betting office. Coral paid to have the sweetshop of one of his agents turned into a betting shop. The most efficient way, however, to negotiate the new law was to buy up other offices, and by 1962 Coral had twenty-three shops. Subsequently during the 1960s the corporate structure of bookmaking became more fully fledged, and bookmaking firms became public companies, operating on a legal and commercial basis. Corals became a public limited company in 1963, and diversified into casinos, bingo halls, and hotels. The firm was bought, in 1970, by the brewing, hotels, and entertainments group Bass. The motives for the take-over were clear: Corals' annual profits were $1.5 million in that year. He remained president of the bookmaking firm and a major company director, and took some important subsequent initiatives. 
By the mid-1970s expansion had produced 650 Corals bookmakers' shops, and by the end of the decade Corals was one of the 'big four' bookmaking firms. It retained that status into the 1990s. In 1992 Corals entered into an arrangement with the tote, the pool betting system based at the racecourses, whereby pool bets could be placed at Corals outlets. The company had also been one of the British bookmaking operations that ventured into Europe at that time; the aim was to take advantage of the continental punter's dissatisfaction with the lack of choice engendered by the municipal and state monopoly over betting. There were thirty-six Corals shops in Belgium by the end of 1992, taking bets on British and other countries' horse- and dog-racing. 
Coral had married his wife, Dorothy Helen, in 1927. They brought up three sons, two of whom, Bernard and Nicholas, pursued careers in the family business from the early 1950s. Joe Coral died in University College Hospital, Camden, London, on 16 December 1996 from lung cancer, having suffered from dementia for some years. His address at death was a comfortable flat in Gloucester Place, Marylebone, London. A spokesman of the modern firm of Coral told the 'Sporting Life' that 'we shall not see his like again' -- a cliche appropriate for many earlier bookmakers and certainly for him: Coral's was a powerful rise from poverty to prosperity. In circumstances of considerable adversity, he had taken his chances and opportunities, and had reaped the results of wealth. 


@@@@@


doc= 64052


Bell, Quentin Claudian Stephen (1910-1996), art historian and potter, was born into the heart of the Bloomsbury group on 19 August 1910, the younger son of (Arthur) Clive Heward Bell (1881-1964), art critic, and his wife, Vanessa Bell (1879-1961), painter, and the daughter of Sir Leslie Stephen. Brought up at 46 Gordon Square (where he was born) and, during school holidays, at the house his parents leased at Charleston in Sussex, he was educated at Peterborough Lodge in Swiss Cottage, London, and at Leighton Park School, the Quaker boarding-school in Reading. In contrast to his brother Julian Heward Bell, he left school at the age of seventeen intending to become a painter. Following a tour of central European galleries with Roger Fry, he spent periods of time in both Paris and Rome. 
In 1933 Bell contracted chest infections which led to seven months in a sanatorium in Switzerland (leaving him with a lifelong aversion to the Alps) followed by convalescence near Monaco, where he began a history of the principality. In 1935 he was again painting in Rome, and his collages were exhibited at the Mayor Gallery. But later that year he decided to become a potter rather than a painter and enrolled himself at Burslem School of Art. While living in Stoke-on-Trent he was also active in the affairs of the local Labour Party. Two years later he returned to Charleston, installed a kiln, and continued his political activities both in Sussex and with the Artists' International Association. On the outbreak of the Second World War he would have joined up, but was prevented from doing so on account of his medical history. Instead he worked as a labourer on Maynard Keynes's farm at Tilton in Sussex and helped his mother and Duncan Grant with the mural decorations of Berwick church, before being given a job in the political warfare department of the Foreign Office by David Garnett. 
In 1947 Bell published his first major book, 'On Human Finery', a pioneering study of the history of fashion, much influenced by the writings of Thorstein Veblen. Following his marriage on 16 February 1952 to (Anne) Olivier Popham, art historian, and the daughter of Arthur Ewart Popham, keeper of prints and drawings at the British Museum, he needed an income and was appointed to a senior lectureship at King's College, Newcastle upon Tyne, by his friend Lawrence Gowing. In 1959 he and his family -- including three young children, Julian, Virginia, and Cressida -- moved to Leeds, where he was a lecturer in the department of fine art and, from 1962 to 1967, its inaugural professor. In 1963 he published a short study of Ruskin and 'The Schools of Design', a scholarly study of the origins of the national system of art education. In 1964 he was appointed Slade professor of fine art at Oxford University and, in 1965, Ferens professor of fine art at Hull. He was a racy lecturer with a particular interest in Victorian painting. 
In 1967 Bell returned south to Sussex to become professor of the history and theory of art at Sussex University and bought a large house under the downs, close to Charleston. The move coincided with an invitation to write the biography of his aunt Virginia Woolf. From this point onwards he was increasingly involved in the revival of public interest in Bloomsbury. He published a succinct analysis of the group in 1968, and his biography of Virginia Woolf was published in two volumes in 1972 to great acclaim. 
After retiring from his post at Sussex in 1975, Bell was able to spend more time and energy on his pottery. In 1985 he and his wife, Olivier, moved to a smaller house next door to the park in Firle and each morning he would wake up early and disappear to his kiln, only emerging for gin and ginger beer in the evening. He undertook a mixture of work, some rough, painted plates and mugs, which he saw as belonging to an artisan tradition, but also more ambitious ceramic sculpture. Neither style fitted comfortably within the work of contemporaries, as his pots were too utilitarian to be regarded as art and his ceramic sculpture too conventionally figurative. But this in no way deterred him from turning out a great amount of work which was both vigorous and affordable, a crossover between the Omega workshop and folk art. 
By the 1980s Bell had very much inherited the mantle of Bloomsbury and was a sage-like figure with a white beard and a humorous, slightly quizzical air, dispensing information and advice to the many visiting academics who came to research the lives of his family. He was particularly instrumental in establishing the Charleston Trust, which was responsible for saving his mother's house, but he also found time to write a pseudo-Victorian novella, 'The Brandon Papers' (1985), and to collect his essays and lectures in 'Bad Art' (1989). In the 1990s he embarked on his autobiography, but discovered that he was much better at writing about others than about himself. In the end it emerged as a series of character sketches, 'Elders and Betters' (1995), which revealed his own character only intermittently in a series of dry asides. Gradually weakened by ill health, he died at his home, 81 Heighton Street, Firle, Sussex, on 16 December 1996. He was survived by his wife, Olivier, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 64053


Murray, Ruby Florence Campbell (1935-1996), singer, was born on 29 March 1935 at 84 Moltke Street, Donegal Road, Belfast, the youngest of four children of Daniel Murray (died 1969?), a labourer, originally from Scotland, and Wilhelmina (Winifred) Murray, 'nee' Connolly (died 1989). She was named after a 20-stone local comedienne and chip shop assistant but in her pomp became as much part of the mythology of Belfast as George Best and Harland and Wolff. Furthermore she has achieved immortality in British folklore, as 'a Ruby Murray' has evolved as rhyming slang for 'a curry'. 
Murray left school in Fane Street aged fourteen and worked in several teenage deadbeat jobs. Her ambition to be a singer, however, was fired at the age of four when she was taken to see G. H. Elliott, the music-hall entertainer known as the 'chocolate coloured coon'. Against a background of strict laws regarding child performers, she began singing solo aged ten on various stages -- large, small, and makeshift -- throughout Ireland and Britain. Four years after her professional debut at the age of twelve, she joined the cast of a touring revue, 'Yankee Doodle Blarney'. Playing at the Metropolitan Theatre in London's Edgware Road she was spotted again by producer Richard Afton, who had been responsible for her pre-teen Irish television appearances. He signed her to succeed Joan Regan as resident singer in the television series 'Quite Contrary' and two days later she made a record -- 'Getwell Soon' -- for conductor Ray Martin's Columbia Records, but it made little impression. Her second release at the beginning of 1955 was 'Heartbeat', the success of which led her to take the pop world by storm, her massive popularity making her one of the most successful stars in the history of British popular music. In November of that year she was voted favourite female vocalist by readers of 'New Musical Express', receiving 1000 more votes than Alma Cogan and twelve times as many as Petula Clark. 
With an immediately recognizable voice, intimately husky, gentle, and soothing, Ruby Murray's simple style disguised skilful phrasing coupled with a freshness and an appearance of vulnerability and innocence. Once she had five records simultaneously in the top twenty, the accolade list of the 1950s, and her total of eighty weeks in the music charts was surpassed by no other female artist until Madonna in 1985. She earned the sobriquet 'Heartbeat Girl' after her first hit, but perhaps her indelible signature tune was 'Softly, Softly', a wistful love ballad sung with an Irish lilt and trademark involuntary catch in the throat. During a hectic period in the mid-1950s she starred with Norman Wisdom in 'Painting the Town' at the London Palladium, had her own television show and, proving she could dance as well as sing, topped the bill in variety and pantomime, performing also overseas wherever British troops were based. She had a mixed reception in the United States, sometimes mobbed by hysterical crowds and warmly commended by Frank Sinatra, but booed in a Chicago club for refusing to sing Irish rebel songs. She sang the theme song to a rather limp comic film 'It's Great to be Young' (1956) but in the same year gave a refreshing and totally natural performance as a singing chambermaid in the film 'A Touch of the Sun', starring Frankie Howerd. 
On 23 August 1957 Ruby Murray married Bernard Burgess ('b'. 1929?), a member of the Jones Boys harmony group. They had a son and a daughter. She enjoyed further modest hits in the UK in 1959 and 1970, and continued to tour at home and abroad -- notably in Africa -- but never recaptured the success that she had enjoyed in the mid-1950s. Her increasing dependence on alcohol and valium put both her career and her marriage under strain; the latter was further undermined by her infatuation with the comedian Frank Carson, which made her rendition of 'I'll Walk the Rest of the Way' -- a song about an extra-marital affair -- seem bleakly autobiographical. She and Burgess were eventually divorced in 1977; thereafter she lived with Ray Lamar, a theatrical impresario, and they married in 1993. 
Always fondly remembered by many, Ruby Murray was greeted with a standing ovation when she appeared with a host of other stars in the 'Forty Years of Peace' concert programme (1985). Yet four years earlier she had been fined for drunk and disorderly conduct in Torquay and her final London appearance in March 1993 revealed a frail and uncertain performer. She died of bronchial pneumonia and liver cancer in Torbay Hospital on 17 December 1996. Her obituary in the 'Irish News' (18 Dec 1996) stressed that 'her memory will remain a potent force in the lives of many, particularly in Northern Ireland' but her background had left her ill-equipped to cope with the pressures of stardom and with increasing adversity. A bittersweet tale of triumph and transformation is told in the play 'Ruby' by Marie Jones, performed in April 2000, recalling 1950s Belfast when, for a time, she had held the world in her hands. 


