@@@@@


doc= 64054


Cassels, Sir (Archibald) James Halkett (1907-1996), army officer, was born in Quetta, India, on 28 February 1907, the only son of General Sir Robert Archibald Cassels (1876-1959), army officer, and his wife, Florence Emily, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Halkett Jackson. Jim Cassels, as he was invariably known, was educated at Rugby School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he won the sword of honour. He was commissioned second lieutenant in the Seaforth Highlanders in 1926. In 1930 (having been promoted lieutenant the previous year) he served with the 2nd battalion at Jhansi and then took part in operations in the North-West Frontier Province on the Khajauri plain. He moved with the battalion to Haifa in 1931, was appointed adjutant, and was involved in the Arab disturbance of 1933. In 1934 he returned to England but soon went back to India to become aide-de-camp to his father, first when the latter was general officer commanding, northern command, and later when he was commander-in-chief of the army of India. On 29 October 1935 he married Joyce Emily (died 1978), daughter of the late Brigadier-General Henry Kirk, and his wife, Mrs G. A. McL. Sceales, of Clifts End Hall, Thanet, Kent; they had one son, Robert James ('b'. 1941). 
At the outbreak of war in 1939 Cassels (who had been promoted captain the previous year) was at the regimental depot on the Moray Firth; from here he was posted to the Staff College, Camberley, in 1940 for the wartime course. He then saw a short period of active service in France where he was appointed brigade major to Brigadier Sir John Laurie of 157th infantry brigade, in the 52nd Lowland division, which was sent to France after the Dunkirk evacuation. The aim of this operation was to assist the French to hold a line along the Somme and the Aisne against the advancing Panzers. However, the French regarded the position as hopeless and surrendered, leaving the 157th brigade to fight its way back to Cherbourg, from where it was lucky to be evacuated on 17 June 1940. 
Between 1940 and 1944 Cassels held a number of staff appointments but in June 1944 he took command of the 152nd infantry brigade, 51st Highland division, on the beachhead east of the River Orne. He led the brigade with distinction, liberating St Valery, capturing Le Havre, and taking it through the operations in the Netherlands, the Ardennes battle, the Rhine crossing, and the final advance into Germany. He was made DSO and was mentioned twice in dispatches. In 1945 he was promoted temporary major-general commanding the 51st Highland division, which was then occupying the Bremen district. In 1946 he took command of the 6th airborne division, which was sent to Palestine to engage in anti-terrorist duties, where he was again mentioned in dispatches. 
In 1947 Cassels attended the course at the Imperial Defence College (IDC) and in 1948 he became director of land/air warfare at the War Office, with the full rank of major-general. This was followed by a year as chief liaison officer, UK liaison staff, in Australia. His next assignment was to form and command the 1st British Commonwealth division in Korea in 1951. The division consisted of troops from Britain, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, but was quickly welded by him into an excellent fighting formation. Cassels's informal style, combined with his habit of visiting soldiers in forward, isolated positions, made him extremely popular and successful. He was awarded the American Legion of Merit. In 1953 he became commander of 1st (British) corps in Germany, and after returning to England in 1954 (when he was promoted lieutenant-general) he was director-general of military training (1954-7). He was then appointed director of emergency operations in the Federation of Malaya, a post he held for two years, and in which he was noted for his perception and drive in bringing the operations to a successful conclusion. 
Having been promoted general in 1958, Cassels was general officer commanding, eastern command (1959-60); commander-in-chief, British army of the Rhine and commander, NATO northern army group (1960-63); adjutant-general to the forces (1963-4); and chief of the general staff (1965-8). He was promoted field marshal on retirement in 1968. His period as chief of the general staff came at a particularly difficult time for, although the Soviet forces greatly outnumbered those of the West in men, guns, tanks, and aircraft, the British government was determined to cut down on defence expenditure. At the same time Cassels was convinced that some members of the House of Commons regarded the expansion of Soviet power as no threat to Britain and were even prepared to assist the Russians, openly or secretly, but as his information about Soviet intentions and domestic subversion was classified he was unable to reveal it. He was unable to prevent drastic reductions in the Territorial Army and the truncation or amalgamation of regiments of the regular army. He was also unable to prevent Britain's being weakened by the loss of aircraft-carriers, and by inadequate provision for the future of the RAF. Nevertheless his influence and prestige undoubtedly prevented much more damaging reductions. He also helped restrain the government from precipitate actions such as military intervention against the declaration of independence in Rhodesia. 
Tall and good-looking, Cassels was an inspiring commander, who could be stern when necessary, but was popular with troops owing to his cheerfulness and approachability. An enthusiast for what was then called 'dance music', he would often enliven the mess by singing the latest tune to the accompaniment of his own guitar. He also played the clarinet. An exceptional all-round sportsman in his youth, Cassels played cricket, fives, and rugby football for Rugby for several years and continued to show outstanding sporting prowess at Sandhurst. He was a good shot and a skilled fisherman, and a first-class polo player, cricketer, and golfer; he was a member of the MCC committee and president of the company of veteran motorists. 
Cassels was appointed CBE in 1944, CB in 1950, KBE in 1952, and GCB in 1961. His first wife, Joyce, died in 1978, and later that year he married Joy, widow of Kenneth Dickson. Cassels died in Newmarket on 13 December 1996, and was survived by his second wife and the son of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 64055


Hall, Peter Andrew (1936-1996), folklorist and musicologist, was born on 28 June 1936 at 285 Harrow Road, Paddington, London, the son of Thomas Temple Hall, corporal in the Coldstream Guards, and Marion Coghill Smith. His parents married shortly after his birth. After an upbringing in Aberdeen and Newcastle, Hall entered Aberdeen University in 1955 to read first medicine and then, after national service, science. He after entered the teaching profession, first as an uncertified teacher, though he graduated BEd from Aberdeen University in 1972. He spent a professional lifetime in the region as a dedicated, stimulating, and popular teacher of physics, standing down only weeks before his death. On 17 February 1959 he married a fellow student, Marion Harvey Maclennan ('b'. 1939); they had a daughter and a son. She was later to become an obstetrician and gynaecologist of international repute. 
Hall and his wife shared a love of music, and with the advent of the folk-song revival in the early 1960s his obsession with playing in jazz bands was transmuted into a consuming interest in folk-song and folklore. The north-east of Scotland had been known to scholars for hundreds of years as one of the richest areas in the world for its vibrant tradition of folk-song. Francis Child of Harvard searched there successfully for the great balladry of Britain in the nineteenth century; at the beginning of the twentieth the region produced the 3100 songs of the 'Greig-Duncan Folk Song Collection'. In the 1960s the area was still rich in song and performers, including the travellers, of whom Jeannie Robertson became a famous example. Hall rapidly became an expert on folk-song and traditional culture and an experienced collector. A founder member of the influential Aberdeen Folk Song Club in 1962, he established a group, the Gaugers, to perform the rich north-east material in 1967, bringing out 'Beware of the Aberdonian' in 1976; they were in the process of completing a series of commercial recordings for Aberdeen City Library at the time of his death. 
Hall tape-recorded more than 600 items of folk-song and folk-tale from tramps and travellers, farmworkers, and folk in general in Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire, Banffshire, and the west of Ireland. Many of these were later used in commercial recordings and in radio and television broadcasts. He was a spirited singer and able musician (having exchanged the jazz trumpet for the concertina and melodeon), and performed on radio and television and at concerts and festivals throughout Britain, France, Germany, and Belgium. He was as much in demand as a superb musicologist (who could also wear his scholarship lightly) to write record notes, produce broadcasts, and judge in competitions, especially of the Traditional Music and Song Association of Scotland. He wrote articles, both scholarly and popular, and was the first editor (later musical editor) of the folk revival magazine 'Chapbook', from 1964 to 1969. Supervised by the eminent sociologist Ian Carter, he gained an MLitt degree from Aberdeen University in 1985 for his thesis 'Folk songs of north east farm servants in the nineteenth century', the 'bothy ballads'. It remains the classic work on the subject, but he was too modest to publish, preferring to distil much of its content into an authoritative introduction to volume three of the 'Greig-Duncan Folk Song Collection', which he co-edited in 1987. He collaborated with Norman Buchan MP to produce the thoroughly researched and influential 'The Scottish Folksinger' in 1973 (reprinted in 1986). In 1995 he was invited to be consultant to the Edinburgh International Festival for a unique and highly acclaimed series of twenty-one concerts of songs from the north-east of Scotland, based on the 'Greig-Duncan' collection. 
Bearded and stockily built, this deeply modest man was a committed socialist and humanist. An 'uomo universale', Hall was a scientist who loved the arts, a scholar who loved hill walking, a devotee of both classical and folk music, and a talented photographer whose work was exhibited in Aberdeen Art Gallery. A sympathetic and loyal friend, he was kindly and generous (especially with his research findings), and a humorous and fascinating conversationalist who gave very careful thought to any question asked of him. He was as much in demand for talks to local associations and continuing education groups as for international conferences, where he was renowned for his clarity, humour, musical illustrations, and startling originality. Having committed all too little of his encyclopaedic knowledge and extensive findings to print in his lifetime, he worked on his researches until the very end, concerned that he was leaving so much unfinished by nature of the sudden onset and rapidity of his illness. He died of cancer of the stomach in Aberdeen Royal Infirmary on 5 December 1996 and was cremated following a humanist service at Aberdeen crematorium on 10 December. He was survived by his wife and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 64065


Roberts, Sir Bryan Clieve (1923-1996), lawyer and civil servant, was born on 22 March 1923 at Southsea, one of twin sons of Herbert Roberts, educationist, and his wife, Doris Evelyn, 'nee' Clieve. His father had taught at Radley College and London University before becoming director of education for Croydon. Roberts grew up mainly in Blackheath. He was educated at Whitgift School and in 1941 he joined the Royal Artillery in the ranks. Commissioned the following year into the 13th (Honourable Artillery Company) regiment, Royal Horse Artillery, he took part in the Normandy landings and served throughout the battle for north-west Europe as a liaison officer in 11th armoured division. His twin brother, Peter, a fellow gunner, was killed while crossing the Rhine, a loss which affected Roberts profoundly. After the war he went up in 1946 to Magdalen College, Oxford, graduating with a second-class degree in jurisprudence in 1948. He was called to the bar by Gray's Inn in 1950. He was in private practice for a short time before serving in the Treasury solicitor's department from 1951 to 1953. 
Post-war English life did not suit Roberts, and in 1953 he left for Northern Rhodesia where he served for eight years, first as crown counsel and latterly as director of public prosecutions. On 3 January 1958 he married Pamela Dorothy Campbell, 'nee' Knight ('b'. 1920). There were no children of the marriage. In 1961 Sir Glyn Jones, the new governor of what was then still the British colony of Nyasaland, offered Roberts the post of solicitor-general. In the same year he was appointed queen's counsel for the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Promotion came swiftly. Within twelve months he was made minister of justice and then, after Nyasaland became independent as Malawi, in 1964 he was appointed attorney-general. In the following year his role was expanded to include the posts of cabinet secretary, permanent secretary to the office of the president, Dr Hastings Banda, and head of the Malawi civil service. A year later he also became chairman of the Malawi army council, the national security and intelligence council, and the national development and planning council. From then until he retired, he was Banda's principal adjutant and close adviser. 
Malawi underwent considerable turmoil after independence, and it was much to Roberts's credit that he was able to cope with a number of difficult disturbances. These included a cabinet revolt shortly after independence, in which all of Banda's ministers either resigned or were dismissed, two armed uprisings, and changes to the criminal justice system which resulted in the resignation of the entire high court bench. At this time the president faced considerable hostility both within the country and abroad. Despite this he continued to be successful as head of the newly independent country, and was able to achieve considerable economic stability. It was perhaps significant that his most authoritarian decisions, which attracted considerable criticism, took place after Roberts had retired. Roberts worked for the president for nearly ten years, returning to England in part because his mother's health was deteriorating. His success with Banda was due to a number of factors, principally because from the start he identified very clearly with the president's objectives, so that when he disagreed with him, which when necessary he was prepared to do with courage, Banda trusted his judgement. In addition, he was swift and very decisive in what he thought and did, qualities which clearly appealed to the president. In 1973, the year after his retirement, he was made KCMG (having been appointed CMG in 1964). 
On his return to England, Roberts joined the Lord Chancellor's Department and worked for a time for his former pupil-master, Lord Hailsham. He was initially responsible for the training of lay magistrates, which at that time was a novelty and which he largely pioneered. His marriage to Pamela Campbell ended in divorce on 1 March 1976, and on 10 July 1976 he married Brigitte Monica Briony Reilly-Morrison, formerly Bridget Monica Patricia Morrison, lecturer, daughter of William Reilly, police inspector. Again there were no children of the marriage. In 1977 Roberts was promoted to under-secretary and was appointed secretary of commissions. In that capacity he was responsible for advising the lord chancellor on the appointment and work of the magistracy. He also energetically developed his predecessor's work with the Commonwealth Magistrates' Association, of which he served as chairman from 1979, before becoming life vice-president in 1994. In 1982 he was appointed a stipendiary magistrate for inner London, a role which he filled with vigour for the next eleven years. In the course of that time he sat in practically every court in inner London. He found the work congenial, and gained a reputation for tolerance combined with sharp insight. A characteristic enquiry to a defendant was 'If you were parking, how is it you were exceeding the speed limit?' ('The Independent'). 
In appearance, Roberts was tall, spare and elegantly dressed. He had a sardonic sense of humour and a passion for exact English. His second marriage having also ended in divorce, on 5 October 1985 he married Elizabeth Barbara Jane Forter, 'nee' Wood, with whom he knew much happiness until his death from cancer at the St Charles's Hospice, London, on 6 December 1996. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 64068


Vassall, (William) John Christopher (1924-1996), Admiralty official and spy, was born on 20 September 1924 at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, where his father, William Vassall, was a long-serving chaplain and his mother, Mabel Andrea Sellicks, was a nurse. Educated at a boarding-school at Seaford in Sussex, he went to Monmouth School at the age of thirteen. His obituary in 'The Times' noted that he was 'a mediocre scholar with no enthusiasm for games, [though] he had the reputation as the best-dressed boy in the school, but also acquired the nickname 'Serf', for his servility towards his elders and eagerness to please' ('The Times'). At the age of seventeen he volunteered for the Royal Air Force, but was rejected. He also failed to get into Keble College, Oxford. After jobs in a City branch of the Midland Bank and as a temporary clerk in the Admiralty he was conscripted into the Royal Air Force in 1943 and trained as an RAF photographer, serving with 137 wing in western Europe. After the war he joined the civil service and in 1948 gained a posting with the Admiralty. In 1952, at the height of the cold war, he was sent to Moscow on the staff of the naval attache: although a very lowly employee, he grandly described himself on his business cards as 'junior attache', and was rebuked for turning up at social occasions thought to be too elevated for his grade. 
Unsurprisingly Vassall was unhappy with the protocol and snobberies of embassy life and sought friends outside. A homosexual at a time when such practices were unlawful in Britain and the Soviet Union, he was vulnerable to entrapment by the KGB. He made the acquaintance of a Pole named Mikhailsky, who introduced him to the secret world of homosexual Moscow. It was at a party in 1954 that he was photographed in a variety of compromising positions. There followed a classic entrapment, with the KGB using threats of exposure, which quickly gave way to flattery and financial inducements. From 1954 until his arrest in 1962 Vassall supplied his Soviet controllers with an unceasing flow of documents, first from the Moscow embassy, then from the Admiralty in London. His treachery inflicted untold damage as, at various times in his career, he had access to critical information. At the time Vassall claimed that he did not regard his actions as espionage. He never, for example, thought of confiding in the British ambassador or the naval attache, whom he considered cold, aloof, and forbidding: curiously the ambassador later said he would have arranged for Vassall to be returned home, 'as had been done in one or two other cases' ('The Times'). 
Back at the Admiralty, Vassall's lifestyle began to outstrip his civil service income. He took a flat in Dolphin Square, Pimlico, and started to wear Savile Row suits and take foreign holidays. Eventually the lifestyle brought him to the attention of the authorities and a secret raid at his flat uncovered a range of incriminating evidence. That another spy had been uncovered at the heart of the British state led to a scandal that destabilized the Macmillan government a year before the Profumo affair led to the downfall of the prime minister. A range of security issues were raised, and after the trial of the hapless Vassall -- most of which was heard 'in camera', and which ended with an eighteen-year sentence -- the Radcliffe inquiry was established to investigate. The inquiry did not achieve any concrete results, except the gaoling of two journalists, for refusing to reveal their sources, and a former junior minister at the Admiralty. A former political correspondent of the 'Sunday Telegraph' called the tribunal 'a massive cover-up' ('Daily Telegraph', 6 Dec 1996). 
Vassall had converted to Roman Catholicism in 1953, and was regularly visited by Lord Longford. He was released ten years into his sentence, and spent some time in a monastery, writing a volume of self-serving memoirs ('Vassall', 1975) in which he described himself as a 'pygmy of a spy'. He changed his name to Phillips, found a job as a clerk with the British Records Association, and lived for the rest of his life in quiet obscurity in London's St John's Wood. He died of a heart attack on 18 November 1996 in St Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, Westminster, and was cremated; it was not until nearly three weeks later that his death came to the attention of the press. 


@@@@@


doc= 64071


Tubbs, Ralph Sydney (1912-1996), architect and exhibition designer, was born on 9 January 1912 at Banavie, The Crescent, Hadley Wood, Hertfordshire, the youngest of the four sons of Sydney Walter Tubbs (1876-1940), chartered accountant, and his wife, Mabel Louisa, 'nee' Frost (1877-1948). He was educated at Mill Hill School and trained at the Architectural Association, London (1930-35), before working unpaid for a year with Erno Goldfinger to learn about modern construction. Tubbs was briefly an assistant to Walter Gropius and Maxwell Fry, which he found less stimulating, before returning to work on Goldfinger's own house at 2 Willow Road, Hampstead. In the interim he joined the Modern Architecture Research (MARS) Group, then in the vanguard of thinking on modernism, and exhibited a model of a bandstand at its major exhibition in January 1938. At a time when there was little work for architects committed to the modern movement in architecture, Tubbs found a niche in exhibition design, producing an exhibit on town planning for the British pavilion of the New York World's Fair (1939-40). 
Following the outbreak of the Second World War, Tubbs was deemed unfit for military service on account of a permanent limp caused by a school sports injury. Instead he worked on the design of munitions factories, in collaboration with Ralph Freeman of the civil engineering firm Freeman, Fox & Partners, and also joined the night watch at St Paul's Cathedral. In 1939 he became secretary of the dispersed MARS group and in 1940 designed 'Living in Cities', an exhibition for the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts, in which he reviewed past instances of urban planning and stressed the need for sensitivity in post-war design. 'The city should be a place of happiness for everyone', somewhere 'to live in and not... merely worked in and escaped from at nights' ('Manchester Guardian', 28 Oct and 5 Nov 1941). In 1942 Tubbs produced a book of the same title which sold 134,000 copies, and in October of that year he staged another exhibition, 'The Englishman Builds' (National Gallery, London) -- a history of architecture, landscape, and culture -- which three years later was also published in book form. On 7 November 1946, at St Mary's Church, Friston, Sussex, he married (Edith) Mary Taberner ('b'. 1923), daughter of William Howard Taberner, civil servant; the couple had two sons and one daughter. Between 1944 and 1951 Tubbs sat on the RIBA council and executive committee, during which time he was also vice-president of the Architectural Association (1945-7), prior to his re-election to the RIBA council in 1951. 
Tubbs's most significant building was also for an exhibition, and it acquired a fame out of all proportion to its eleven-month life. This was the Dome of Discovery, built beside the River Thames for the Festival of Britain (1951), for which Tubbs was appointed one of the co-ordinating architects, alongside Hugh Casson and Misha Black, in April 1949. Tubbs's initial proposal, to make a pedestrian thoroughfare from Trafalgar Square to the South Bank site, was frustrated by limits on materials; thereafter he focused on the dome while Casson and Black organized the architects who worked on the smaller buildings around it. 
The first plan for the site appears to have been for a round, semi-subterranean structure to display developments in mining and tunnelling. However, the chance receipt of an advertisement for an aluminium dome inspired something more ambitious. With his wartime experience of factory construction, and the technical expertise this brought, Tubbs was the natural choice to design the dome, on which he again worked with Ralph Freeman as the project's consulting engineer. As befitted the festival, Tubbs's design was spectacular. At 365 feet in diameter (a figure deliberately chosen to be memorable), rising to 95 feet at its crest, it was both the world's biggest dome and the largest aluminium structure, and was more than twice the size of the Perisphere at the New York World's Fair. The dome's structure was based on a series of concentric circles, over which were laid ribbed arches in three directions to create a lattice of triangular sections, enclosed by a continuous aluminium wall. This made for an economical and light structure able to expand and contract, yet braced against wind from any direction. The dome was the festival's principal exhibition space with exhibits set on a series of balconies supported on massive concrete fins; these were linked by open staircases from a central platform, reached via what was then Britain's longest unsupported escalator. 
In contrast to the open-air setting of much of the festival site, the dome's interior was artificially lit; for many visitors the relative darkness and the numerous exhibits detracted from the beauty of Tubbs's design. Nevertheless, there was a prominent campaign to save the dome after the festival's closure in September 1951. Tubbs and Freeman estimated the cost of its removal to Crystal Palace, which was then being acquired as a park by the London county council. However, the Conservative minister of works, David Eccles, refused time for the matter to be properly debated in parliament and the dome was demolished, its aluminium sold back to its suppliers for a fraction of the original cost. For his contribution to the festival Tubbs was appointed OBE in 1952, in which year he also became a fellow of the RIBA. 
In the decade after the festival Tubbs became known for a small number of carefully thought-out institutional buildings, of which the first was the Indian YMCA student hostel on Fitzroy Square, London, opened in 1952. This was a light structure -- clad in brick and stone panels with long bands of windows -- which retained the proportions of Robert Adams's neighbouring terraces. Internally the hostel's tight plan was enlivened by festival-style setting staircases and walls at angles. Constructed when controls on materials and public building were at their height, the hostel (which Tubbs extended in 1962-4) proved a major addition to the canon of humane British modernism. 
Tubbs repeated this mix of spaces and non-orthogonal proportions at Baden Powell House, Queen's Gate, Kensington, commissioned in 1956 and opened in 1961. The finished building -- which comprised a hall, library, common room, and two floors of dormitories -- displayed Tubbs's characteristic attention to detail in all areas of a design; indeed for one reviewer it was 'the workaday parts of the building, the Scouts' bathrooms and kitchens' that were 'the aesthetic high points' ('The Guardian', 10 July 1961, 17). After the Indian YMCA and Baden Powell House, Tubbs was commissioned in 1961 to construct four halls of residence for University College, London. Though he did not court commercial commissions, Tubbs also worked closely in this period with the entrepreneur Sidney Bernstein on the building of new offices and studios for Granada Television on Quay Street, Manchester. Tubbs's curtain-walled office slab -- crowned with large, red signage -- became a powerful addition to the skyline in 1960 and remains one of the city's very few post-war office buildings of genuine quality. Other commissions outside the capital include the delicate brick Institute of Education for Cambridge University (1963-4), and housing schemes in Basildon and Harlow new towns. 
Tubbs's later career was dominated by another London commission, the rebuilding of Charing Cross and Fulham hospitals on the site of the latter, for which he was commissioned in 1959. Work began in 1963 with a two-storey building, enabling part of the Fulham Hospital to be demolished and replaced by a sixteen-storey ward block. Built to a cross plan between 1966 and 1972, the new Charing Cross Hospital opened in January of the following year, though some facilities were not operational until as late as 1984. Tubbs's design demonstrated his concern not only with the interrelationship of the hospital's departments, but also for good architectural and landscape design to render large-scale buildings on a human scale. 'Everywhere I have tried to make it as unfrightening as possible for patients' he commented in 1973, extolling the cruciform design as a means of making a large building seem more intimate ('The Times', 13 Jan 1973): 'Patients going to hospital are naturally anxious and need an architecture which is very sympathetic' ('Building', 26 Oct 1984). He was disappointed that discussions of his career invariably focused on the Dome of Discovery and overlooked later works, in particular Charing Cross Hospital, where his compact plan offered an alternative to the 'racetrack' corridor patterns then favoured by specialist hospital architects. 
Ralph Tubbs was a quiet, extremely charming man with a firm commitment to seeking 'humanity and joy' in architecture ('Building Design', 6 Dec 1996). In addition to architecture he was a dedicated and knowledgeable entomologist, and served as vice-president of the Royal Entomological Society of London (1982-4). He lived at 9 Lingfield Road, Wimbledon, south London, before his death, from septicaemia and subacute bacterial endocarditis, at St George's Hospital, Tooting, on 24 November 1996. He was survived by his wife and three children, and was buried on 2 December at Putney Vale cemetery following a funeral service at St John's Church, Wimbledon. 


@@@@@


doc= 64072


Salam, Muhammad Abdus (1926-1996), theoretical physicist, was born on 29 January 1926 in Santokdas in the district of Sahiwal in the western Punjab, India (later Pakistan), the eldest of nine children of Muhammad Hussain (1891-1969), an educational official in the small market town of Jhang, and his second wife, Hajira Nabi Baksh (1903-1977). Muhammad Hussain had high expectations of his eldest son. It is reported that he had a vision, when Hajira Begum was expecting her first child, that the child would be a son, who would bring glory to God by his intellectual prowess. He decided to name the child Abdus Salam ('servant of peace'). Salam added Muhammad in later life to make his name more distinctive and to emphasize his Muslim credentials. The young Salam certainly lived up to these high expectations. Growing up in Jhang, a hundred miles west of Lahore, he became a local celebrity when he was placed first in the whole Punjab in the matriculation examination. There is still extant a remarkable photograph of him in traditional Punjabi costume which appeared at this time in the local newspaper (reprinted in 'TWAS Newsletter', October-December 1996). 
Salam was interested in science and mathematics from an early age. He recalled that his teacher in Jhang, telling the class about the forces of nature, had said that gravity was everywhere, even in Jhang, but that electricity had only reached Lahore, while the nuclear force lived only in Europe, so they should not worry about it -- advice Salam certainly did not take! But he had much broader interests too. He was a fine literary scholar, and remained throughout his life a lover of poetry in several languages, including Persian, Punjabi, and English. 
In 1946 Salam won a special scholarship to Cambridge, in remarkably fortuitous circumstances. The head of the Punjab government had some funds remaining that had been collected to aid the war effort, and had determined to use them to provide scholarships for overseas study, aimed specifically at the sons of small farmers. As it happened, Salam's father had acquired a small piece of land, making him eligible for the scheme. Moreover, at the last minute, Salam heard from St John's College, Cambridge, that another student had withdrawn, making it possible for him to take up his place immediately. The scheme was later cancelled, but leaving Salam as the sole beneficiary, a piece of good fortune that he saw as a special gift of Allah. 
In Cambridge, Salam first took a first in the mathematical tripos in two years and added a first in natural sciences in his third year; he found this particularly demanding because of his lack of previous experience of experimental work. After graduating he returned to his home in Pakistan, where, on 4 August 1949, he married his cousin, Amtul Hafeez Hussain ('b'. 1927). There were three daughters and a son of the marriage. He obtained an extension of his scholarship to allow him to do some postgraduate work, but since it was insufficient to support a wife he had to return alone to Cambridge. Initially he joined the Cavendish Laboratory and worked under Samuel Devons, but he rapidly came to the conclusion that experimental work was not for him. He then turned to Nicholas Kemmer, who suggested that he work with another student, Paul Matthews, who was just then completing a PhD thesis on renormalization theory. Recently developed by Julian Schwinger, Sin-Itiro Tomonaga, and Richard Feynman, this was a way round the long-standing problem of infinities in quantum electrodynamics (QED): any attempt to go beyond the lowest order of approximation had previously yielded nonsensical infinite answers, and renormalization theory provided a way of eliminating these infinities and extracting finite and meaningful answers. Matthews had been trying to extend these ideas to meson theory, then thought to describe the strong nuclear forces. He suggested to Salam that he try to fill in a gap in the proof by Freeman Dyson that renormalization works, and was amazed at the speed with which Salam returned with a complete answer. This was the beginning of a long and fruitful collaboration and close friendship between Matthews and Salam. 
Following a very productive year with Matthews in Princeton, USA, Salam returned to Pakistan as professor of mathematics at both Government College and the University of Lahore. He wanted to continue his research while at the same contributing to the development of his country, but he found poor facilities and no encouragement to do research. Finally in 1954 he decided to return to Cambridge as a lecturer and fellow of St John's. Another reason for his departure was the growing and violent antagonism towards the Ahmadiyya sect of Islam, to which he belonged. This sect, founded in 1889 by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, who declared himself the Madhi, the rightful successor to Muhammad, was regarded by many orthodox Muslims as heretical. 
Two years later Salam was offered the chair of theoretical physics at Imperial College, London (in succession to Hyman Levy). He arranged that Matthews join him as a reader. Together they built at the college one of the best theoretical physics groups anywhere. Salam was already famous for his work on renormalization, and in 1959 he was elected as the youngest fellow of the Royal Society, at the age of thirty-two. Initially the group was part of the mathematics department, but in 1960 Patrick Blackett persuaded Salam to move into the rapidly expanding physics department which had the advantages of a fine new building and easy interaction with experimenters. 
Salam continued his close connections with Pakistan. In 1961 he was appointed scientific adviser by President Ayub Khan. He believed very strongly in the central importance of science and technology in development, and set about implementing these ideas, instituting laboratories for nuclear and space research, and research institutes for wheat and rice. He also tried to tackle the problem of waterlogging and salinity caused by irrigation, but the recommended solutions were never fully implemented. In 1974 Salam resigned in protest when, under Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the Ahmadiyya were officially declared non-Muslim and deprived of civil rights. Nevertheless, though living mainly in Britain and Italy, Salam retained his Pakistani nationality throughout his life. 
Salam deeply regretted having to leave his native country to pursue his chosen career, and determined to do what he could to help others faced with a similar dilemma. His opportunity came when he was appointed to represent Pakistan on the general council of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). He conceived the idea of an international centre with which scientists from developing countries could be associated, while retaining their links with their own countries. More or less single-handed, and against the opposition of most of the major powers, he persuaded the IAEA to back the idea, provided funds could be found from elsewhere. He found a suitable home for the centre in the city of Trieste, then seeking a new role after being separated from its natural hinterland by the post-war division of Europe. The International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) received generous backing from the Italian government and the city of Trieste, and was formally inaugurated in 1964; it moved to a new building on the outskirts of the city in 1968. Increasingly from then on, Salam came to spend more of his time in Trieste, though he retained his part-time professorship at Imperial College until his retirement in 1994. 
Despite considerable initial scepticism in the scientific community, the ICTP was a great success, providing a lifeline for many thousands of scientists from developing countries. It was soon recognized as a world-class institute. It gradually broadened its scope, from high-energy physics to mathematics, materials science, and much else, and it organized workshops on more environmental topics such as soil science and oceanography. Similar institutes were set up in other subjects in several different countries. In 1997 it was formally renamed the Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics. 
Salam married twice. His second wife, whom he married on 11 November 1967, was Louise Napier Johnson (1940-2012), then a demonstrator in the zoology department of Oxford University, and later the David Phillips professor of molecular biophysics and a professorial fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. There was one son and one daughter of the marriage. 
The basic aim of Salam's research was to find the theories describing the interactions of matter at the most fundamental level. By the early 1950s quantum electrodynamics had provided an excellent and increasingly well-verified theory of electromagnetic forces, and the search was on for similar theories of the strong nuclear forces that bind protons and neutrons in atomic nuclei, and of the weak forces responsible for the beta decay of radioactive nuclei. 
Two main themes of Salam's work were symmetries and unification. As more and more fundamental particles were discovered, physicists tried to bring some order into the subject by grouping them together into multiplets related by various symmetries. For example, so far as the strong interactions are concerned, protons and neutrons behave similarly, and it seems reasonable to regard them as two different states of a particle termed the nucleon. The symmetry between the two (isospin symmetry) is not exact, because protons and neutrons do behave differently in regard to electromagnetism, since the proton has an electric charge while the neutron does not. Gradually, other approximate symmetries were discovered, which laid the foundations for the later formulation of the theory of the strong forces, quantum chromodynamics (QCD). 
Salam played a significant role in this work, but his major contribution in the 1960s was in unification. He saw the newly discovered approximate symmetries not so much as important in themselves, but rather as clues to the structure of the underlying theory. From a very early stage he was convinced that the solution was to be found in a gauge theory. In gauge field theories, particle interactions are related in a special and intimate way to the basic symmetries. The best-known gauge example is quantum electrodynamics, but in a paper published in the 'Physical Review' in 1954, Yang and Mills proposed a similar theory, based on isospin symmetry, as a possible theory of strong forces. Essentially the same theory was proposed independently by a student of Salam's, Ronald Shaw, though his work was published only as a Cambridge University PhD thesis. 
The main focus of Salam's interest was on the weak forces. Over a decade, from the late 1950s, especially with his collaborator John Ward, Salam sought a theory that would describe them and, more ambitiously, a unified theory of weak and electromagnetic forces. There were serious obstacles to be overcome. Superficially, there are big differences between the two. In most field theories, forces between pairs of particles can be understood in terms of the exchange of other particles between them; in quantum electrodynamics these exchanged particles are photons, which have zero rest-mass. However, the weakness and very short range of the weak interactions show that in that case the exchanged particles (called W bosons) must be heavy, which is unnatural in a gauge theory. Another mysterious aspect of the weak interactions is parity non-conservation, or violation of mirror symmetry, first suggested by Lee and Yang in the 'Physical Review' in 1956 and discovered experimentally by Wu and others the following year. How, then, could the theory be unified with QED, in which parity is strictly conserved? 
It took more than ten years to solve these problems. To understand the large mass of the W particle, the key idea was 'spontaneous symmetry breaking', as first suggested in the context of the mass of the photon in a plasma by Philip Anderson, writing in the 'Physical Review' in 1963. The resolution of the parity problem came only with the realization that another type of exchanged particle, besides the W, was needed, the Z boson, a suggestion that came from Sheldon Glashow writing in 'Nuclear Physics' in 1961. But it still took several more years to put these two ideas together into a viable unified theory, which Salam called the 'electroweak' theory. It was first written down by Steven Weinberg (in 'Physical Review Letters', in 1967), and independently by Salam (in 'Elementary Particle Theory', edited by N. Svartholm, and published in Stockholm in 1968). The theory was triumphantly vindicated a few years later by the observation of Z-mediated interactions at the Conseil Europeen de Recherches Nucleaires laboratory in Geneva. For this work, Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg shared the 1979 Nobel prize for physics. 
The success of the electroweak unification encouraged many people to try to extend these ideas to incorporate other interactions. Writing in the 'Physical Review, D (Particles and Fields)' for 1973, Salam, with Jogesh Pati, proposed one of the first grand unified theories, unifying strong, electromagnetic, and weak interactions. This theory made the very remarkable prediction that the proton is unstable. Whether this is true or not was still, at the end of the twentieth century, not known. Salam was also, writing in 'Nuclear Physics, B (Particle Physics)' for 1974, with John Strathdee, one of early advocates of supersymmetry, which allows the unification of very different types of particles. 
Salam was a passionate advocate of the importance of science and technology in development. He argued that only by building up an indigenous science base could the balance between the rich North and the poor South start to be addressed. As scientific adviser in Pakistan he pressed for 1 per cent of the gross national product to be devoted to this aim. He hoped to achieve the same kind of advance that was seen in Japan at the time of the Meiji restoration. But he failed to persuade his government to devote to science and technology anything approaching this figure. When he won the Nobel prize, President Zia ul Haq invited him to visit Pakistan, and awarded him the country's highest honour, the order of Nishan-e-Imtiaz. Salam then offered to donate his Nobel prize money of $66,000 to a fund to provide scholarships for young Pakistanis to study abroad, provided that the government itself would allocate $1 million to the fund. He was again disappointed by the meagre response, and in the end set up a fund independent of the government. 
Salam was also very active on a wider international front. The award of the Nobel prize gave him enormous prestige throughout the developing world, particularly in Islamic countries -- he was the first Muslim to win one of the science prizes. He received many honours and took every opportunity to argue the case for science in the 'third world', in particular urging on his co-religionists a return to the spirit of free enquiry that marked the golden age of Islamic science, when for 500 years the Arabs had led the world. He was fond of telling the story of Michael the Scot, who travelled to Spain in 1217 to study at the great Arab universities of Toledo and Cordoba and who translated Aristotle's works into Latin from Arabic texts. Salam wanted to perform a similar task in reverse, trying to inspire the Islamic world with the value of new knowledge and new ways of thinking. 
One result of Salam's endeavours was the founding in 1981 of the Islamic Science Foundation, though with a much smaller budget than he would have liked. He was also the moving spirit behind the formation of the Third World Academy in 1983, with its base in Trieste and Salam as its first president. This was both active and influential, through its fellowship and associateship programmes, research grants, and prizes. 
In the mid-1980s Salam developed a degenerative neurological disorder, somewhat similar to Parkinson's disease, which made his life increasingly difficult. It was eventually diagnosed as progressive supranuclear palsy. Despite this affliction he remained cheerful and continued to travel and to work for as long as he could. Characteristically he branched out into new fields of research, writing papers on a new theory of high-temperature superconductivity with S. Randjbar-Daemi and J. Strathdee in 'Nuclear Physics, B (Particle Physics)' in 1990, and on the problem of the origin of chirality in biology in the 'Journal of Molecular Evolution' in 1991. 
Towards the end of his life Salam was confined to a wheelchair, and he found communication difficult. He gave up the post of director of the ICTP in 1994, becoming instead its first president. In the same year he retired from his chair at Imperial College. He died peacefully at his home in Oxford on 21 November 1996, at the age of seventy. He was buried on 25 November at Rabwah in Pakistan, the traditional centre of the Ahmadiyya community. The last prayers for him were attended by 35,000 people. Both his wives survived him, as did his six children. 
Salam was a recipient of many honours, including the Atoms for Peace award (1968), the Nishan-e-Imtiaz (1979), an honorary KBE award (1989), membership of twenty-four academies, forty-five honorary doctorates from twenty-eight countries, the first Edinburgh medal and prize (1989), the Cataluna international prize (1990), and the Royal Society's premier award, the Copley medal (1990). He was scientific secretary of the Geneva conferences on the peaceful uses of atomic energy in 1955 and 1958, chairman of the United Nations advisory committee on science and technology in 1971-2 and of the UNESCO advisory panel on science, technology, and society in 1981, and a member of the South Commission. He was a warm and generous man, and an inspiration to many aspiring scientists throughout the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 64075


Collins family (per. c.1820-c.1980), publishers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 64076


Sir William Collins (1817-1895) was born in Glasgow on 12 October 1817. In 1829 he left Glasgow grammar school and was apprenticed to the business; in 1843 he became a partner; and on 24 June 1845 he married Annabella Proudfoot Glen (died 1862). He inherited more than ambition and a prosperous business: like his father, he was a fervent supporter of many good causes, but in one respect he went even further by preaching total abstinence. 
By 1853 the Scottish literary renaissance led by Sir Walter Scott and J. G. Lockhart had wound its course, but the publishers of such English authors as Dickens, Tennyson, and Thackeray kept book printers busy throughout the land, not least in Edinburgh. Scotland was now on the threshold of rapid commercial advance, and with it came an ever-increasing appetite for education and, therefore, schoolbooks. The appointment of Collins as publisher to the Scottish School Book Association swelled the tide in the early 1860s. His list was widening in scope, although it was still overwhelmingly educational in tone, and the installation of ten new steam-driven presses made it economically attractive to print and publish dictionaries and other reference books and standard editions of household classics. 
The new presses also helped to establish Collins as one of the leading publishers of the 'Bible'. In 1860 he stated in evidence to the select committee on the 'Bible' printing patents that he had seventeen editions in print and was printing over 100,000 copies per year; the cheapest was priced at 1's'. In 1861 the house of Collins moved into the fine new premises at Herriot Hill, later known as Cathedral Street, that they continued to occupy for over a hundred years. In 1862 Collins was appointed queen's printer for Scotland. 
The Collins list continued to expand during the middle years of the century, the seminal period of modern science, and Collins recognized this with a 'Science Series' comprising seventy-two titles at various levels, of which more than 2.5 million copies were sold. Trotter's 'English Grammar' sold over half a million copies, and by 1868 the firm was selling more than a quarter of a million illustrated dictionaries per year. 
On 26 September 1865, his first wife having died on 12 September 1862, Collins married Helen Jamieson, with whom he had two children (he had eleven in all). Outside business he devoted himself earnestly to temperance reform (earning himself the nickname Water Willie) and, as a Glasgow city councillor for the Liberal persuasion from December 1868, to close scrutiny of the city's expenditure of public money. In 1877 he became lord provost of Glasgow, and a year later led the corporation and his affluent fellow citizens in the prompt establishment of a relief fund to help the thousands of genteel investors left penniless by the collapse of the City of Glasgow Bank. He was knighted in 1881. 
In 1871 Collins bought the copyright in the 'Popular Poets' series from the fading London publishing firm of Edward Moxon; under the new title 'Grosvenor Poets' they sold well for the next half-century. In the following year he published 'Domestic Cookery' and 'Domestic Medicine' to compete with Mrs Beeton's 'Book of Household Management'. In 1875 he bought out the Scottish School Book Association, and the schoolbook list rose to 920 titles. Like so many other Scots, Collins and his sons William Collins ['see below'] and Alexander, now both partners in the firm, were drawn to explore the expanding world markets of the Victorian empire. They had already achieved substantial exports, particularly of schoolbooks, to Australia and New Zealand, where the name of Collins was respected and reassuringly familiar to the many Free Church families who had emigrated there after the Disruption of the Church of Scotland. The mid-1870s saw Collins representatives travelling all over Canada, India, and the Antipodes; within ten years new offices in Sydney and Cape Town had been added to those in Glasgow, Edinburgh, and London (Auckland followed in 1888). Editorially, too, the firm was quick to realize that it was imperative to create new educational books for these new markets and to adapt many of the books already on the list, originally written with British schools and schoolchildren in mind, for use abroad. By the end of the decade the gospels had been translated into African languages, printed in Glasgow, and exported to missionaries on the west coast of Africa. 
In 1879 Collins bought a paper mill at Bowling, Dunbartonshire, for his third son, John. In the same year the publishing and printing business was converted to a limited company. It had grown very large, with nearly 2000 employees. Twenty-eight presses were producing about 2 million books per year, but still could not keep pace with the demands of the publishing departments. The stationery side was already flourishing (120 million envelopes were manufactured annually on machines invented by the third William Collins) when in 1881 the firm produced the first of the many millions of diaries that it was to print over the following 120 years. By the early 1890s the rate of progress had still not slackened: two more paper mills at Denny, Stirlingshire, had been acquired, more presses installed, and an innovatory process had been introduced to add colour by lithography to the monochrome letterpresses illustrations in school and children's books. 
Although it was still open to any Scottish printer to apply for a licence to print the whole 'Bible' or part of it, in practice Collins had by now secured a virtual monopoly through the economies of scale that could be achieved in their large, efficient plant -- and hence a virtual monopoly also in publishing the 'Bible' north of the border. A new enthusiasm had developed for the addition of maps, illustrations, and explanatory material ('helps') to the plain text of the Authorized Version, and Collins were quick to benefit while it lasted. In 1892 the firm opened the International Bible Agency in New York to act as its sole agents, and a new typeface (Clear-Type, from which the press took its name for the next eighty years) was introduced for use in dictionaries and bibles. 
William Collins died on 20 February 1895 at Edinburgh, aged seventy-seven. As a boy and young man he had watched his father expand the firm he had started so humbly into an important employer in Glasgow and a considerable force in the book trade. His life, like his father's, was distinguished by hard work, driving ambition, strict financial rectitude, generous philanthropy, and exemplary care and consideration for his staff (not least in repeatedly taking the lead among Scottish printers in reducing the working week). The city fathers recognized his contribution to Glasgow by burying him high up on the Necropolis, near his father's grave and the John Knox memorial statue. 



@@@@@


doc= 64077


William Collins (1846-1906) was born at Glasgow on 6 September 1846. He developed his natural bent for science and technology through attending Glasgow University. On 2 December 1875 he married Annie D. Leisk, but the couple remained childless. Although he inherited a relentless drive to expand the family business, his character differed markedly from that of his father and grandfather. Everything was done at top speed. A partner before the age of thirty he was censured more than once by his fellow directors for impetuously exceeding his responsibilities. 
William's brother Alexander Glen Collins, born on 25 June 1848, became a partner before the age of twenty-eight, and concentrated on increasing the sales of bibles and schoolbooks. He married Cornelia, the daughter of the late Godfrey Thomas Hope Pattison, an American merchant, on 18 June 1872; his first son, William, was born in 1873, and his second, Godfrey, in 1875. An art lover, he worked with his father on an exhibition designed to help the relief of hardship occasioned by the collapse of the City of Glasgow Bank. He is known to have shared his father's enthusiasm for yachting. A genial, well-liked figure -- who must nevertheless have his share in any celebration of the success of Collins bibles -- he lived for some years in semi-retirement before his death in 1911. 
The third William Collins, as has been noted, lived and worked in the fast lane. A fashionable though often absent-minded dresser, he kept two fine carriages, a yacht, a flat in London, and a hunting-box in Northamptonshire (a taste later shared by his great-nephew William Alexander Roy Collins), yet found time also for old-master paintings, music, literature, and gambling on the Riviera. Above all, he was a hard worker and a thinker, and he soon saw clearly that the firm had been too reliant for too long on its staple lines of bibles, school and reference books, classics, and stationery. In adding to these a new and more adventurous list of original fiction and non-fiction books for children, and thus reviving memories of his grandfather's early publishing initiatives, he shaped the firm as it was to develop and thrive over the next century. This new list became known in the trade as 'Reward Books', as it was composed of wholesome and godly titles, intended as Sunday-school prizes, or birthday and Christmas presents. It featured such popular authors as Katherine Tynan, Andrew Lang, and the future Mrs Thomas Hardy, Florence Dugdale. 
The turn of the century saw the inception within the space of seven years of five outstanding series of hardback pocket classics designed to sell at 1's'. per copy: 'Nelson's', the 'World's Classics', 'Collins's', 'Routledge's', and 'Everyman's'. These series inevitably shared a great many features, serving as they did the needs of the same classes and categories of reader as understood and anticipated by publishers and editors of similar commercial and scholarly standing. Collins, like Nelson, published mainly fiction; the other imprints cast their nets much wider, with a high-minded appeal, as J. M. Dent put it, 'to every kind of reader'. The new rotary presses brought over from Germany in 1900 proved well suited to the mass production of these little books, and 'Collins Handy Illustrated Pocket Classics' (unlike the other series, embellished with newly commissioned illustrations) were launched three years later. The series eventually numbered almost 400 volumes, including twenty-one by Sir Walter Scott. In the next fifty years Collins sold some 29 million 'Classics': their best-sellers included 'David Copperfield' and three other Dickens titles, 'Wuthering Heights', 'Vanity Fair', 'Treasure Island', 'Pride and Prejudice', and 'Jane Eyre'. The 'Gem' series, originating with an English dictionary in 1902, grew to over 100 titles and provided further business for the rotary presses for the whole twentieth century. 
William Collins continued to develop and consolidate his firm at a brisk pace. But his life was tragically cut short on 17 July 1906, in an accident stemming from the combination of his mechanical ingenuity and his literally breakneck pace of life. He had fashioned his own gate-key to the lift in the block of flats at Westminster where he stayed when in London. This saved him seconds when the hall-porter was busy, but on this occasion it cost him his life: the electricity supply had failed, the porter was elsewhere mending the fuse, the hall was dark, and the lift-shaft was empty. 
Again the family was lucky enough to have two brothers and their cousin ready to step up. 


@@@@@


doc= 64078


William Alexander Collins (1873-1945), the nephew of the third William Collins, was born in Glasgow on 26 March 1873, the son of Alexander Glen Collins (1848-1911) and Cornelia Pattison ('b'. 1854/5). He was educated at Harrow School. He married Grace Brander, and they had two sons: William Alexander Roy Collins ['see below'] and Ian Glen Collins (1903-1975). William Alexander Collins was elected to the board in 1897, and succeeded to the chairmanship in 1906 at thirty-three. He assumed particular responsibility for stationery and the overseas offices; his brother, Sir Godfrey Pattison Collins (1875-1936), who had trained for the Royal Navy, was appointed a director in 1899 and took charge of publications; and his cousin William Collins Dickson, born on 12 October 1876 and educated at Fettes College and Glasgow University, also appointed a director in 1899, took charge of engineering and costing. Retrenchment soon became the first priority, when it was discovered that before his death in 1906 the impetuous William Collins had invested too optimistically in new equipment and branch offices in the empire. 
May 1907 saw the simultaneous appearance of both the Collins and the Nelson 'Sevenpennies', cheap pocket hardback editions of copyright novels from their proprietors' and other publishers' lists. Many publishers declined to lease titles to them, but enough were available to feed the hungry rotary presses. Even these did not represent the cheapest line of fiction on the Collins list -- there was a 'Penny Library' for schools, and the 'Pocket Library' of eighty full-length novels priced at 31/2died, of which several million copies were sold before the First World War. Business was now booming in the empire, and the workforce in Britain was producing nearly 90,000 books per week. 
In 1910 Godfrey Collins embarked on his long second career of public service, winning Greenock for the Liberal Party at both general elections in that year. He quickly found political favour and was appointed parliamentary private secretary to the secretary of state for war, Jack Seely. He continued his editorial overview of the Collins lists, and in 1913 put his experience to the firm's service in launching a new series, the 'Nation's Library'. For a shilling one could read 'Socialism and Syndicalism' (by Philip Snowden), 'Aviation', 'The Case for Railway Nationalisation', 'The Land Problem', or 'The Relations of Capital and Labour'. 
Godfrey Collins, aged thirty-nine, and William Alexander Collins, aged forty-one, were not slow to join the Army Service Corps after the outbreak of the First World War. William won the DSO in France, and rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel; Godfrey served in France, Egypt, India, Gallipoli, and Mesopotamia, and was appointed CMG in 1917. Collins sent nearly 300 other members of staff to the war, and struggled like so many other firms with the consequent scarcity of craftsmen and skilled workmen. Costs tend to rise in wartime, and supplies of materials dry up. The scarcity of paper dictated some pruning of the list to ensure that books needed for the national emergency (not to mention books which could be relied on to be profitable) were accorded priority over more marginal items. Thus it was that the 'Nation's Library' and the 'Sevenpennies' fell under Godfrey's rationalizing axe on his return to business in 1917, while the 'Collins Children's Annual', launched in 1914, survived the war (and stiff competition from other publishers' similar products) and well beyond. As the war progressed it was joined in the children's list by 'Hunting the U-boats', 'With Beatty in the North Sea', and ''Midst Shot and Shell in Flanders'. 
Godfrey Collins seems to have inherited from his uncle William the ability to run headlong, without in his case falling down a lift-shaft. In that same year, 1917, realizing that there was simply not enough good fiction reliably available -- from the Collins list and other publishers -- to support the series of cheap reprints that had so flourished before the war, he decided to move general publishing to London and to broaden its base, found premises at 48 Pall Mall, recruited an editor, Gerald O'Donovan, and issued an autumn list of no fewer than fourteen titles. This would have been a considerable performance at the best of times. In 1917, with the Glasgow factory short of 132 craftsmen and already at full stretch producing bibles and school books, it was a miracle, which Godfrey achieved by employing outside printers and binders -- crumbs from the table for them, of course, but 80,000 crumbs, and a very promising table. 
That first list included works by Henry James (the firm bought four titles from his executors, including 'The Ivory Tower'), Mrs Humphry Ward ('Missing'), and Edward Garnett ('Turgenev'). The list over the next few years included works by Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, Victoria Sackville-West (her first three novels), J. Middleton Murry ('Aspects of Literature'), Rose Macaulay (Collins published all her novels from 1920 to 1956), Henry Williamson ('The Beautiful Years'), Walter de la Mare ('Memoirs of a Midget'), and Michael Arlen ('The Green Hat', of which 70,000 copies were pre-ordered by booksellers in 1923, and of which 200,000 were sold within three years). New poetry began to appear on the list, with volumes by the Georgian poets Edward Shanks, Francis Brett Young, and Gerald Gould. 
Godfrey Collins had been re-elected for Greenock in 1918 as a Coalition Liberal, and again in 1922, as a Liberal. Re-elected in the following year at Greenock, he became Liberal chief whip. He continued to represent Greenock throughout the 1920s. This increase in his workload, and the success of his new list, necessitated two new key appointments at Pall Mall: that of S. J. Goldsack, who became sales manager, and F. T. Smith, who transferred from Glasgow as chief editor. They held these positions, and much later directorships, until well after the Second World War. 
By the early 1920s detective stories were in vogue. Collins had already published their first, 'The Skeleton Key' by Bernard Capes: the floodgates opened, unsolicited manuscripts poured in, Freeman Wills Crofts, G. D. H. Cole and Margaret Cole, and Agatha Christie (with 'The Murder of Roger Ackroyd') joined the list, and in 1930 the 'Crime Club' was born. Its members -- 20,000 within the first twelve months -- received a monthly mailing giving details of the new books. Writers of the calibre of Rex Stout, Ngaio Marsh (creators respectively of Nero Wolfe and Roderick Alleyn), and Nicholas Blake (Cecil Day Lewis) joined what became a large stable of authors. Christie, promoted as the 'Queen of Crime', was always the most popular, particularly when she featured Miss Marple or Hercule Poirot. Alongside pure whodunits, adventure stories or thrillers gained in popularity on the coat-tails of John Buchan; all were to feature on the Collins list for the next half-century. 
Meanwhile the sale of bibles, testaments, and liturgical books continued to flourish: by 1931 sales exceeded 600,000 copies, helped no doubt by the sales jingle: '
Satan trembles when he sees 


'Bibles' sold as cheap as these. 

' Overseas markets, to which William Alexander Collins paid personal attention, were particularly successful, notably in the United States. The Collins brothers, sensing the post-war ferment of new ideas in education, realized that many of the schoolbooks which had remained in print since before the turn of the century were obsolescent if not obsolete. They set up four new series of reading and geography books, histories, and Shakespeares. A new educational manager was appointed at Cathedral Street, John Crossland, whose 'Laurel and Gold' series included his own verse anthology, of which over half a million copies were sold. Other notably successful anthologies followed. Children's home reading was supplied by books on the open air and transport subjects. 
Returned again for Greenock in 1931 as a National Liberal, Sir Godfrey Collins was appointed secretary of state for Scotland in 1932, and so could no longer be an active director of Collins. Re-elected in 1935, he was taken ill while on holiday in Switzerland, and died at Zurich on 13 October 1936. One of his authors, Rose Macaulay, said in tribute: 'Never did any publisher realize more fully than he the identity of interest of publisher and author'. By then William Alexander Collins's sons William Alexander Roy, always known as Billy, and Ian Glen ('b'. 23 April 1903) were hard at work in the firm -- unless they were playing tennis in the men's doubles at Wimbledon or, in Ian's case, cricket for Scotland. Ian had immersed himself in Glasgow business: manufacturing technologies, bibles, schoolbooks, diaries and stationery, and the intricacies of the export trade. Billy Collins, who had been working at Pall Mall with his uncle, took charge when he died, ambitious to enhance the house's standing in the modern world of London publishing. 
Winifred Holtby's 'South Riding', written in seven months in 1935 and completed just before she died, was published in early 1936 to critical applause, winning the James Tait Black memorial prize for the best novel of the year; it remained in print for many years. In 1936 also appeared 'The Weather in the Streets' by Rosamond Lehmann. The same outstanding year saw debuts by T. H. White, Peter Cheyney, and Nigel Balchin. Other well-known authors published by Collins before the Second World War included Howard Spring ('My Son, my Son'), Margery Sharp, Leo Walmsley, and the poet laureate John Masefield ('The Country Scene' and 'A Tribute to Ballet', both illustrated by Edward Seago). Trips by Collins to the United States also secured British rights in novels by Mary Ellen Chase, Kenneth Roberts, Agnes Sligh Turnbull, and James Ramsey Ullman, among others. 
To meet the manufacturing demands of this expansion in their publishing, Collins extended their Cathedral Street empire in 1936 by acquiring the adjoining printing works of the publishing house of Blackie (premises which had been bought by Blackie in 1829 from A. and J. M. Duncan, then printers to the University of Glasgow). The 1920s and 1930s witnessed the typographic revolution led by Stanley Morison, when the Monotype Corporation revived the great type designs of the previous centuries in a form suited to single-character machine typesetting. The directors of Collins sought the advice of the distinguished printer and typographer Giovanni Mardersteig: when he asked to see the vaunted Clear Type, he was told that no such type now existed. The outcome in 1936 was Collins's Monotype Fontana (the name refers to the firm's device), modelled by Mardersteig on the Scottish roman types made about 1760 at Alexander Wilson's Glasgow foundry. 
The Second World War brought back the problems of the First World War that were still familiar to many members of the staff, almost 500 of whom served in uniform, and the same number in munitions factories. Paper was soon in short supply and, before long, rationed. Bombed schools, bookshops, and wholesalers arose from the ashes and demanded replacement books. Imported materials and exported bibles, books, and stationery were lost in Atlantic raids on allied shipping. Collins was hardest hit in London: the warehouse at Bridewell Place and the office at Pall Mall were destroyed in air raids in, respectively, 1940 and 1944. The editorial offices under Billy Collins moved to 13-14 St James's Place, where they remained until 1983. 
As had happened in the First World War, wartime difficulties coincided with enormous demand for bibles, classic fiction, and patriotic and escapist literature of all kinds. The boredom of the long hours of inactivity between battles and in air-raid shelters and hospitals intensified the value of the book as a never-failing friend to millions of readers and introduced the habit of reading to millions of newcomers. Indeed, to quote Desmond Flower, 'Anything printed, even if upside down and/or in Sanskrit, was saleable' (D. Flower, 'The Paper-back', 1959, 17). 'Cometh the hour, cometh the man', and Arthur Bryant, already the author of a three-volume biography of Samuel Pepys, joined the Collins list in 1940 with 'English Saga, 1840-1940'. He published many more works of popular history with the firm until his death in 1985. 
In 1941 Collins published Peter Quennell's 'Byron in Italy' (sequel to 'The Years of Fame', 1935). In the same year appeared the first twenty of the 'Britain in Pictures' series. These elegantly produced essays on all aspects of British life, work, history, and arts, each plentifully illustrated in full colour, represented only the second large-scale appearance in Britain of that phenomenon of post-war publishing, the 'packaged' book. The series was the brainwave of Hilda Matheson, then engaged on propaganda work for the Ministry of Information, and seems to have been designed to quicken patriotic feelings. W. J. Turner was appointed general editor. Publication was entrusted to Collins and design and production to Adprint, whose directors Wolfgang Foges and Walter Neurath had previously sold the 'King Penguin' series to Allen Lane. By 1951 nearly 3 million copies of 133 titles had been sold: the best-sellers were 'The Birds of Britain' by James Fisher (84,218), 'Life among the English' by Rose Macaulay (61,636), 'Wild Flowers in Britain' by Geoffrey Grigson (60,574), and 'The English Poets' by Lord David Cecil (60,247). 
Succeeding years of the war brought work from Bernard Darwin, Noel Streatfeild, Thomas Armstrong, Hammond Innes, Norman Collins (no relation), Hesketh Pearson ('Bernard Shaw', 1942), and Edmund Blunden ('Cricket Country', 1943). Three months after the war ended came the first two volumes in the 'New Naturalist Library', which had been under discussion for three years between Billy Collins and a distinguished editorial board. Unlike 'Britain in Pictures', which saw a brief revival in 1951 to coincide with the Festival of Britain and was then remaindered, the 'New Naturalist Library', which grew to over eighty titles by 1976, remained in print. 
William Alexander Collins, who had been appointed CBE in recognition of his work for servicemen in 1943, died on 3 September 1945 at a nursing home in Prestwick, Ayrshire. A caring and generous employer, a friendly, modest, yet lively man, he had been content to see his brother Godfrey succeed as a West End publisher and his sons take responsibility for important departments of the firm, while remaining firmly in charge at board level. The final key member of this generation of the Collinses, his cousin William Collins Dickson, who had been living in retirement since 1929, died nine days later. So 


@@@@@


doc= 64079


Worth, Adam (c.1844-1902), criminal and art thief, was born in eastern Germany to Jewish parents, who emigrated to Cambridge, Massachusetts, when he was a young child. Worth, who had no formal education, enlisted in the Union army in 1861 at the outset of the American Civil War. His first recorded crime was that of 'bounty jumping', the practice of deserting from one regiment and then signing up with another to obtain whatever bounty was on offer, which he refined to new levels by faking his own death at the second battle of Bull Run before re-enlisting under an assumed name. 
At the end of the war Worth settled in New York and began his criminal apprenticeship as a pickpocket. With the patronage of the notorious fence Fredericka 'Marm' Mandelbaum, he soon rose to prominence in the New York underworld, achieving distinction as a bank robber, forger, and gambler, and earning the nickname Little Adam, a sobriquet reflecting his small stature and large criminal pretensions. In November 1869, in partnership with 'Piano' Charley Bullard, a talented pianist and safe-breaker, Worth tunnelled through the wall of the Boylston National Bank in Boston and extracted from the bank safe an estimated $200,000 in cash and securities. Pursued by the Pinkerton Detective Agency, the pair fled to England, where they met and formed an unlikely 'menage a trois' with Kitty Flynn ('c'.1850-1894), an attractive and ambitious Irish barmaid. Worth adopted the alias Henry J. Raymond, in ironic tribute to the highly respectable and recently deceased editor of the 'New York Times'. After some years running an illegal gambling parlour in Paris, the trio settled in London, where Worth gradually built up an international criminal industry, of which he was the controller, banker, and principal beneficiary. 
The detective William Pinkerton described Worth in a posthumous pamphlet ('Adam Worth, alias 'Little Adam'', 1904) as 'the most inventive and daring criminal of modern times', but he also noted that, in contrast to the vast majority of Victorian villains, Little Adam deplored violence, eschewed alcohol (at least initially), and displayed extraordinary loyalty to his associates and minions. Worth's earnings from forgery, robbery, and fraud enabled him to live the life (and adopt the views and even the accent) of a wealthy English Victorian gentleman, with an apartment in Piccadilly, a substantial mansion in Clapham, a string of racehorses, and a steam yacht. Kitty Flynn had two children attributed to Bullard (whom she had married) but who were widely believed to have been fathered by Worth between about 1869 and 1876. After Kitty Flynn left both men to marry a Cuban sugar millionaire, Worth married Louise Bohljahn about 1886, with whom he had two more children. 
Worth's most famous crime was carried out in 1876, when he broke into the Mayfair premises of Thomas Agnew & Sons, art dealers, and stole Thomas Gainsborough's portrait of Georgiana, duchess of Devonshire, which had been sold two weeks earlier for 10,100 guineas, then the highest price ever paid for a portrait at auction. He had initially intended to use the painting as ransom to extract an associate from Newgate prison. The plan came to nothing and instead, for romantic reasons that remain partly mysterious, he kept the portrait for the next twenty-four years, having designed a false-bottomed trunk in which to transport it. Worth himself described his relationship with the painting as an 'elopement'. 
The criminal network established by Worth, who would eventually become Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's model for the evil Professor Moriarty in the Sherlock Holmes stories, continued to expand profitably until 1892, when he was arrested in the course of a rash attempt to rob a mail carriage in the Belgian city of Liege. Worth was exposed, ruined, and sentenced to seven years' hard labour in the Prison de Louvain. His wife, hitherto ignorant of his real character, was placed in a lunatic asylum soon after hearing of his fate. Scotland Yard had learned, through informers, that Worth was the thief of the Gainsborough painting (which had been hidden in a warehouse before his disastrous attempted robbery in Liege), but all efforts to persuade him to surrender the painting, even when offered his liberty in exchange, were flatly rejected. 
Worth obtained early release for good behaviour, but emerged from prison in poor health and broken in spirit. He soon contacted Pinkerton, his erstwhile adversary, and declared that he intended to return 'the Lady', less out of contrition than through a desire to provide for his two children. Protracted negotiations followed, at the culmination of which art dealer Morland Agnew travelled to a Chicago hotel and was presented with the portrait by an elderly bellboy widely believed to have been Worth himself, in disguise. Within hours of the painting's return to Britain it was purchased by the American millionaire J. Pierpont Morgan. Worth, who was by then drinking heavily, followed the portrait back to Britain. On 8 January 1902, four days after Morgan took possession of the masterpiece, Worth died at his residence at 2 Park Village East, in Camden Town, London; he was buried two days later, under the alias Henry J. Raymond, in an unmarked grave in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 64080


Fletcher, Elizabeth (1731-1758), scholar, was born in December 1731, the youngest daughter and seventh of the eight children of Andrew Fletcher, Lord Milton (1691/2-1766), lord justice clerk of Scotland, and his wife, Elizabeth Kinloch ('bap'. 1710, died 1782), daughter of Sir Francis Kinloch of Gilmerton. Generally known as Betty, she was educated at Miss Aylesworth's school in Chelsea from February 1742 to April 1745, although there is little evidence for its curriculum beyond music and singing. She was later taught French and music with her sisters in Edinburgh by private tutors. Her life was brief; from the point of view of her only daughter, also Elizabeth, she married early and within a year she was dead in childbed (Wedderburn, 104-5). 
Starkly summarized, Betty Fletcher's short existence and untimely end might seem tragic but unremarkable in an age of high maternal mortality. However, there was more to Betty than these brief facts suggest. Her father, Lord Milton, known for his shrewdness, leniency, and discretion, exercised these qualities not only as a judge but as confidential agent to Sir Robert Walpole's leading Scottish adviser, Archibald Campbell, Lord Ilay, later third duke of Argyll. The two men were friends as well as business associates, and so Betty spent several weeks each summer with her parents and sisters at Inveraray Castle, the duke of Argyll's principal residence. There she mixed with a stimulating group of clever young men. One of them was Robert Adam the celebrated architect, then at the start of his career. Proud and ambitious, he felt that Lord Milton's family were patronizing him when he met them at Inveraray in 1754. When Betty said that she envied his forthcoming opportunity of going to Italy, for she loved paintings, he commented to his own sisters: 'This from the stinkingest of mortals I look'd on as no small compliment, till [the] next disdainful look from her nizzety gab wipt entirely away all impression of it'. He went on to characterize her sister Mally as proud and overbearing and their amiable mother as 'virulent' (Lindsay and Cosh, 70). 
Adam's reaction was not shared by others, for it seems that Betty was very popular with her contemporaries. More than that, she played an important role in the circle of young men who were to become the leading intellectuals of Scotland's Enlightenment. It was she who introduced William Robertson the historian, David Hume and Adam Ferguson the philosophers, Adam Smith the economist, and John Home the playwright to her father and so to the all-powerful Lord Ilay. 'They owe their rise to her -- genius, taste and refinement of sentiment in no degree inferior to their own', her daughter wrote proudly, many years later, commenting that not one of them would disclaim it (Wedderburn, 104-5). 
In the late 1750s Betty met Captain John Wedderburn of Gosford (1720-1793), who later changed his name to Halkett when he inherited the baronetcy of Pitfirrane. They fell in love, and married on 6 February 1758. A devoted couple, they hated being apart even for a few hours, but within months of the wedding Captain Wedderburn's regiment was posted to the West Indies. Betty was by now pregnant, and her friends urged her to use her influence to have her husband sent somewhere nearer home. She refused to interfere, and he set sail. She bore his absence with serenity, but she had always been delicate and 'Grief suppressed preys on the vitals' (Wedderburn, 104-5). She gave birth to a daughter, whom she named after herself, but died soon afterwards, on 18 December 1758, telling her friends, 'I have done my duty to my husband's honour, but my doing so has cost me my life' (ibid.). 
Captain Wedderburn returned to Scotland, eventually remarried, and had fourteen more children, but he never forgot his first wife and he brought up their daughter on tales of her mother's modesty, discernment, and thirst for knowledge. At a time when women were increasingly developing scholarly interests, her short life demonstrates how, even without a formal education, intelligent women could play a full and influential part in intellectual society. 


@@@@@


doc= 64081


Townshend, Caroline, 'suo jure' Baroness Greenwich (1717-1794), landowner, was born on 17 November 1717, the first of the five children of John Campbell, second duke of Argyll and first duke of Greenwich (1680-1743), and his second wife, Jane Warburton (died 1767), daughter of Thomas Warburton of Winnington, Cheshire. The duke, 'warm-hearted, frank, honourable, magnanimous but fiery-tempered, rash, ambitious, haughty and impatient of contradiction' ('Scots peerage', 1.376), was successively commander-in-chief of the government forces in Scotland and high steward of the household. His second wife, a plain, unsophisticated country woman of much lower rank than he, had been maid of honour to Queen Anne and subsequently served in the same capacity in the household of Caroline of Ansbach, princess of Wales, wife of the future George II. Their eldest daughter was born at 27 Bruton Street, their London house, and christened Caroline, for the princess, who acted as godmother. 
The family visited the duke's Scottish estates each summer, but Caroline and her four younger sisters were brought up at Sudbrook, an elegant mansion built by their father on the west side of Richmond Park. Accommodated in a special wing known as 'The Young Ladies' House', they were left to do much as they pleased. Having no son, their father treated Caroline as his heir and summoned her to dine with him on Sundays, but at other times the sisters had little discipline and ran wild. As a result, they were known to contemporaries as 'the bawling Campbells' and 'the screaming sisterhood' (Lindsay and Cosh, 5). Even so, Caroline was attractive and extremely eligible. Introduced into London society, she had a brief romance with the earl of Lichfield's son, Lord Quarendon, a personable young man not wealthy enough to be acceptable to her father. Meanwhile, Francis Scott, second duke of Buccleuch, had decided that she would make an appropriate wife for his elder son, Francis, earl of Dalkeith (1721-1750). The dukes met in May 1742 and the match was made. 'Lord Dalkeith likes the lady extreamly well, and I don't doubt they will be very happy together', the duke of Buccleuch commented with satisfaction (Fraser, 1.487). Caroline's tearful protests and Lord Quarendon's angry assertions that he had been jilted were ignored, and the wedding took place at Bruton Street on 2 October 1742. 
Just over a year later, on 4 October 1743, the duke of Argyll died. Because he had no son, his English honours became extinct and his dukedom, which was entailed on the male line, passed to his younger brother. Caroline, however, inherited various properties, including Adderbury, a large seventeenth-century mansion in Oxfordshire, and Caroline Park, Granton, now part of Edinburgh. Originally known as Royston House, the latter had been purchased in 1739 by the duke, who had changed its name in his daughter's honour. Caroline and her husband divided their time between London, Adderbury, and their Scottish properties. Lord Dalkeith was not as handsome as Lord Quarendon, but he was dignified and sincere, and he made an agreeable husband. He represented Boroughbridge in parliament from 1746 to 1747. Caroline gave birth first to a daughter, born in 1743 and named after herself, and then to four sons, including Henry Scott, third duke of Buccleuch (1746-1812). The family's happy life was shattered when, at the age of twenty-nine, Lord Dalkeith contracted smallpox and died at Adderbury on 1 April 1750, leaving his estate and the guardianship of the children to his wife. Caroline was five months pregnant, and gave birth to their second daughter, Frances, later Lady Frances Douglas, on 26 July. 
For the next five years Caroline remained a widow, and during that time her eldest son and daughter both died. In 1755, however, she remarried and began a second family. The wedding took place at Adderbury on 15 August. Her new husband, Charles Townshend (1725-1767), eight years her junior, was the brother of George, first Marquess Townshend. Variously described as a brilliant orator able to intoxicate the House of Commons with his witty irrelevancies, and as 'the consummate self-seeking political insider' (note, Charles Townshend MSS), Charles was already MP for Great Yarmouth. With the help of Caroline's connections, he became lord of the Admiralty, secretary at war during the Seven Years' War, and, finally, chancellor of the exchequer. Their first child, Anne, was born the year after their marriage, when Caroline was thirty-nine, and she went on to have three more sons. 
In recognition of the fact that Caroline had been unable to inherit her father's titles and principal estates, she was appointed ranger of Greenwich Park, and then, on 19 August 1767, she was created a peeress in her own right, with the title of Baroness Greenwich. Just over a fortnight later, on 4 September 1767, Townshend died suddenly at the age of forty-two. Caroline lived on for almost thirty years more, looking after her property, interesting herself in her family, and enjoying London society. She died at Sudbrook on 11 January 1794. Her title of Baroness Greenwich had been created with remainder to the male issue of her second marriage, but her sons by Townshend had predeceased her, leaving no male children themselves, and so her title became extinct. She was buried in Westminster Abbey, in the Argyll family vault in Henry VII's chapel, on 25 January 1794. 


@@@@@


doc= 64082


Douglas, Frances, Lady Douglas (1750-1817), friend of Sir Walter Scott and Lady Louisa Stuart, was born on 26 July 1750, the sixth and posthumous child of Francis Scott, earl of Dalkeith (1721-1750), eldest son of the duke of Buccleuch, and Lady Caroline Campbell (1717-1794) ['see 'Townshend, Caroline, suo jure Baroness Greenwich], eldest daughter of John Campbell, duke of Argyll. She was brought up in the family's residence at Grosvenor Square, London, where she experienced a difficult childhood: her mother showed her little affection and was, according to her aunt, the redoubtable Lady Mary Coke, 'insensible to her merits' ('Letters and Journals', vol. 1). The saving grace of her early years was her mother's second marriage in 1755 to the mercurial politician Charles Townshend (1725-1767). Recognizing her many qualities, he was the most important influence on her early education and development. Alexander Carlyle, minister at Inveresk, later a great friend and correspondent, met her at Dalkeith in 1767 and noted her good taste, knowledge of 'belles-lettres', and ready wit. He also saw how the stepfather, her 'enlightened instructor', protected her from the tyranny of her mother ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 515). The growing intimacy between Townshend and the highly strung adolescent could have developed into something more dangerous had not Lady Frances used the occasion of her brother's marriage in 1767 to escape to Scotland. Townshend's death some months later removed her protector, but Lady Frances blossomed in the literary society at Dalkeith Palace. In 1779 the death of her aunt Lady Jane Scott afforded her financial independence as well as a house at Petersham, Surrey. 
In 1782 Lady Frances visited Dublin with her brother as the guests of Lady Carlow, sister of Lady Louisa Stuart, but also to sort out the finances of her stepsister Anne Townshend, who had married disastrously. For someone who in her youth had claimed to prefer the armchair to society, her stay in Ireland was the making of her. In a series of lively letters to her sister-in-law, the duchess of Buccleuch, she describes herself as 'recherchee and fetee', a success Lady Carlow ascribed to her having been so much 'mortified and neglected at home' (Stuart, 'Gleanings', 1.185). She stayed on to introduce her friend Lady Portland, the wife of the new lord lieutenant, into society, returning to England via Wales, where she visited the ladies of Llangollen, later petitioning successfully for royal pensions for Sarah Ponsonby. Her Irish letters, subsequently annotated by Lady Louisa, her literary executor, were, following the conventions of her circle, never published. Like the verse journals of her tour in Scotland in 1780, and of another to the Lake District in 1781 (written at the request of Queen Charlotte), they were copied or circulated among friends and family, and greatly admired. 
On 13 May 1783 Lady Frances married Archibald James Edward Douglas, first Baron Douglas of Douglas (1748-1827), at her brother's London residence in Grosvenor Square. The marriage to a 'safe... and comfortable man' seems to have been, if not a love match, one of convenience and mutual affection. Douglas's first marriage to her friend Lady Lucy Graham, who died in 1780, had produced four children. Lady Lucy's attachment to her friend and Lady Frances's affection for her children played no small part in the union, which was itself to produce a further eight offspring. She parodied her role as 'wicked stepmother' in a prose and verse version of Cinderella written in 1801. At Bothwell Castle with its ruined medieval castle and 'romantick solitudes' she created an 'air of ease, comfort and gaiety' (Stuart, 'Memoire', 96), where the Douglases welcomed authors and poets, including Mary Berry and M. G. Lewis, and the French emigre aristocracy. It was there, in 1799, that she introduced Sir Walter Scott to her great friend and confidante Lady Louisa Stuart, who became one of his most valued critics and one of the few to share the secret of the authorship of his novels. Through their auspices Scott also met the classical scholar J. B. S. Morritt of Rokeby. She and Lady Louisa had formed a close bond through their family connections, and a shared passion for poetry and literature. Lady Douglas's early life is related in Lady Louisa's frank 'Memoire of Frances, Lady Douglas', written some years after her death for her daughter the novelist Lady Caroline Scott. There she encapsulated the character of this charming woman whom Jane, duchess of Gordon, described as 'a most uncommon sort of young lady' (NA Scot., GD1/479/15/2). Lady Louisa asked Sir Walter Scott to memorialize Frances Douglas in one of his novels, and believed he had done so in the character of Jeanie Deans in 'The Heart of Midlothian' (1818). 
Lady Douglas was small and undistinguished in appearance -- even the favourably inclined Carlyle described her as 'far from handsome' -- but surviving portraits of her scarcely seem to justify Sir Walter Scott's description of her as 'quite the ugly old woman of a fairy tale', though, he adds, 'still [with] the 'air d'une grande dame''. Although she characterized herself as a 'weak, unsteady creature', her strength and generosity of mind, modesty, loyalty, and wit nevertheless made her greatly admired; her only fault, mentioned by all, was her laziness. Lady Douglas was prone to nervous exhaustion; her many pregnancies took their toll on her health, and in middle age she lost the sight of one eye. But her sudden death in May 1817 at Bothwell Castle, Lanarkshire, came as a shock to her friends and family. She was buried in the Douglas aisle in Douglas parish church, Lanarkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 64083


Ker, James (d. 1768), jeweller and politician, was the son of Thomas Ker of Edinburgh, deacon of the corporation and a magistrate of the city, and his wife, Margaret, daughter and coheir of John Kerr of the Canongate. His grandfather was Sir Thomas Ker of Redden, Roxburghshire, the brother of Robert, first earl of Ancrum. Nothing is known of his early life, but on 8 July 1725 he married Jean (died 1746), daughter of Gavin Thompson, writer to the signet, of Lowget, Edinburgh; the couple had three sons and eleven daughters. In 1734 he was elected deacon of the Incorporation of Goldsmiths, and became engraver to the mint and assay master in 1745. 
Ker is reported as having commanded a company of gentleman volunteers, presumably during the Jacobite rising of 1745-6, and if so this probably helped his election on 2 December 1746 to the burgh council of the city of Edinburgh, as deacon of the Goldsmiths. He remained a member until 1754, and was elected convenor of the ordinary council deacons in 1747 and 1750. In 1747 Ker was returned as member of parliament for Edinburgh on the interest of the incorporated trades, of which he was in that year convenor. Although a government supporter himself, he had opposed George Drummond, lord provost of Edinburgh, the candidate supported by the prime minister, Henry Pelham. Ker accordingly called on the third duke of Argyll and wrote to Pelham the day after his election, to apologize for standing against their candidate and promising his support for the government. Argyll gave him qualified approval; earlier in the year, on 23 July, he had written to Pelham: 'Mr Ker, the Jeweller, is certainly a Whig, but he was too much a Patriot at a certain time to be a favourite of mine, & I am told that he is weak & whymsical, though his professions of zeal for the present Administration is strong enough. (U. Nott. L., MS Ne C 1946/2)' On receipt of a friendly reply from Pelham, Ker wrote fulsomely of his loyalty to the administration, and was rewarded with a secret-service pension of $300 per annum. No record remains of Ker's parliamentary activities and it seems likely that he was content to act as a loyal government supporter rather than attempting to make a mark. On the burgh council he appears to have been meddlesome and unco-operative, and to have made many enemies. He was said to have formed an overweening sense of his own status and to have become haughty and vain. By the time of the next election Argyll reported to Pelham that Ker's behaviour and attitude had earned him the hatred and contempt of his fellow citizens. He had apparently highly disobliged many members of the council by bringing in members of the opposite party (who then campaigned against Ker himself), and had made enemies of the merchants by opposing their scheme to improve the harbour of Leith. In addition, a number of traders complained of his high-handed and contemptuous treatment of them, the result being: 'the town will not bear Mr Ker' (Argyll to Pelham, 5 Nov 1753, U. Nott. L., MS Ne C 2215). In 1754 he lost his place on the council and in the same year was not put up for re-election to parliament, and consequently lost his secret-service pension. 
Ker's wife, Jean, died on 10 October 1746, and on 6 August 1750 he married for a second time, his bride on this occasion being Elizabeth (Betty) Ker (1713/14-1799), daughter of the late Lord Charles Ker, former director of the chancery and son of the first marquess of Lothian. This marriage resulted in five sons and two daughters. James Ker died on 24 January 1768 at Drumsheugh, near Edinburgh. For much of his life he had held property both in Edinburgh and at Bughtrig, Roxburghshire. His second wife outlived him, and died on 21 February 1799, at the age of eighty-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 64084


Maule, William, earl of Panmure of Forth (1699/1700-1782), politician and landowner, was the third but eldest surviving son of the five children of Harry Maule (1659-1734) and his first wife, Lady Mary Fleming (died 1702), daughter of William, fifth earl of Wigtown. William Maule was the last male of the house of Maule, a family that could trace an unbroken descent in the male line for 760 years. His father was the younger brother of James Maule, fourth earl of Panmure (1658/9-1723). Both his father and uncle were ardent Jacobites who fought at Sheriffmuir and, as a consequence, forfeited their estates in Forfarshire and spent many years abroad in exile. Maule was educated at Leiden (1718) and the Scots College in Paris (1719) and despite his unfortunate family affiliations was presented at court on the succession of George II in 1727. He appears to have been a committed Hanoverian and was able to obtain a commission at that time in the 25th infantry regiment, although his progress in the army was not as rapid as he might have wished. However, after service at Dettingen in the War of the Austrian Succession (1743) he was raised to an Irish peerage as Viscount Maule of Whitechurch and earl of Panmure of Forth. Two years later he served at the battle of Fontenoy; further commissions in the Royal Scots Fusiliers and the Scots Greys and a posting to Gibraltar in 1753 led to his eventual promotion to the rank of colonel in 1770. 
Under the patronage of the earl of Ilay, Panmure became MP for Forfarshire in 1735, an office he held until his death, despite a vigorous challenge by Thomas Lyon (son of the earl of Strathmore) in 1768. Lyon's bid led supporters of both candidates to create votes through artificial divisions of their estates. This resulted in a multitude of appeals and counter-appeals to the court of session and the House of Lords, and a temporary dislocation of the Forfarshire commission of supply as it split on the question of the division of the cess. The resulting conflict cost Panmure in the region of $20,000, and prompted him to strike a deal with Lyon to prevent future contests. In the whole of his forty-seven years as a member of parliament there are no recorded instances of his speaking in the House of Commons. 
As the eldest son at his father's death (23 June 1734), Panmure took on the responsibility of regaining the family's forfeited land. During the 1730s he negotiated with the York Buildings Company to buy back the estates, currently leased to Sir Archibald Grant and Garden of Troup on a 29-year tack. Panmure attempted to purchase the lease or to have a superior lease inserted between the York Buildings Company and the existing tenant to strengthen his position should the land come up for sale. The company's disorganized financial situation was such that lengthy and costly legal discussions yielded few tangible results, and it was not until 1763 that his friend Alexander Forrester finally piloted a bill through the House of Commons authorizing the auction of the Panmure estate. In Edinburgh on 20 February 1764 Panmure, the sole bidder, bought back his family estates for $49,157 18's'. 4died, somewhat less than the $72,000 that he had estimated. A popular, benevolent, and charitable man, as a landlord Panmure showed considerable interest in his tenants' well-being and in the improvement of his estates. His efforts provide a good example of the rehabilitation of former Jacobite families back into the Scottish landed establishment during the second half of the eighteenth century. Panmure died, unmarried, on 4 January 1782, at which point his estate was entailed to George, eighth earl of Dalhousie, the husband of his sister Jean. 


@@@@@


doc= 64085


Maule, John, of Inverkeilor (1706-1781), politician, was the second surviving son of Harry Maule, styled fifth earl of Panmure (1659-1734), and his second wife, Anne (died 1729), daughter of Patrick Lindsay, who from 1669 assumed the surname and arms of Crawford of Kilbirnie, Ayrshire. Whereas Maule's father was a Jacobite, active in the 1715 rising and afterwards in exile, Maule had a successful career because of his being a staunch whig. He was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in Scotland in 1725, though it was said of him in 1744 that, in the law, 'bussiness or practice' had he not (Shaw, 70). Instead he became, in the late 1730s, confidential political secretary to Archibald, earl of Ilay, and, in 1737, keeper of the register of sasines. He was 'an irrepressible, hard-drinking bachelor' whose correspondence with Ilay's political associates, notably Andrew Fletcher, Lord Milton of the court of session in Scotland, abounds with 'earthy asides' (Lindsay and Cosh, 65). Maule was a well-oiled cog in a well-oiled machine for the control of Scottish politics. 
Maule's elder half-brother William Maule, in 1743 created earl of Panmure of Forth in the Irish peerage, was another staunch whig, and it was he who engineered Maule's return as MP for the Aberdeen burghs at a by-election in 1739. The whig Maules, none the less, found it hard to escape suspicions of Jacobitism. During the 1745 rising the magistrates of Edinburgh searched John Maule's house. The maid refused them entrance to a locked room, which she said was full of arms. These proved to be coats of arms, collected by Maule's father, who had been an antiquary as well as Jacobite. Maule and his brother Lord Panmure sent a memorandum to Henry Pelham, denying the charges of Jacobitism against them made by the duke of Cumberland and others in 1746, and John Maule was unanimously re-elected MP in 1747. In August 1748 he stepped down, having been appointed -- through the influence of Ilay, from 1743 third duke of Argyll -- a baron of the court of exchequer in Edinburgh. A court of session judge wrote at the time that 'mr Maule is to be our Baron, of which I wish him joy. It is an honourable and genteel retreat from more publick business' (Shaw, 70). John Maule died, unmarried, on 2 July 1781. 


@@@@@


doc= 64086


MacLeod, Norman, of Dunvegan (1705-1772), politician and chief of clan MacLeod, was born on 29 July 1705 in Perth, the younger son of Norman MacLeod of Dunvegan ('c'.1685-1706) and Anne Fraser, daughter of Hugh, Lord Lovat, and his wife, Lady Amelia Murray. Though known in his own family as the Red Man, from the red tartan that he wears in his portrait by Allan Ramsay, at the family seat in Skye, he was better known to his tenants and indeed to posterity as An Droch Dhuine (the Bad Man). He succeeded his elder brother, John (1704-1706), when only a year old, following his father's untimely death. His mother subsequently married Peter Fothringham, of Powrie, Forfarshire, in 1708 and, in 1717, the somewhat feckless John Mackenzie, second earl of Cromarty. He therefore suffered a somewhat rootless childhood, with his education seemingly 'much neglected' under his governor, John Macrae. 
During MacLeod's minority some $90,000 Scots of longstanding debt on the vast MacLeod estate was apparently liquidated by the factor John MacLeod of Contullich and his brother Alexander, the clan lawyer. Nevertheless their traditionally-minded administration, as well as an ill-concealed Jacobitism, left them in a somewhat vulnerable position. When the chief came of age in 1724, at Cromarty's urging he initiated legal proceedings against the previous administration on grounds of dishonesty. His eventual success came at no small cost to his personal reputation. 
About 1726 MacLeod married Janet, daughter of Sir Donald MacDonald, fourth baronet, of Sleat (Domhnall a' Chogaidh). The match was far from happy and they separated in 1733. The young chief revealed a rather dangerous penchant for meddling, finding himself caught up in the Lady Grange affair when in 1732 he assisted in the kidnap of Rachel, wife of James Erskine, Lord Grange ['see 'Erskine, Rachel, Lady Grange]. Seven years later he was seriously implicated in the notorious 'Long nan Daoine' (Ship of the People) scheme when over a hundred of MacLeod's tenants and their children were forcibly abducted to be sold into slavery in American plantations. The ship being stormbound in Donaghadee, co. Down, some of the prisoners escaped to raise the alarm. The resulting scandal was hushed up with the help of Duncan Forbes, lord president of the court of session. 
Forbes became something of a father figure to MacLeod, reconciling him with his wife, and, together with Simon Fraser, Lord Lovat, engineering his election as MP for Inverness-shire in 1741 as a supporter of the Argyll interest. Though not above Jacobite intriguing in his early years, after the rising of 1745 MacLeod employed brazenly duplicitous delaying tactics against Lord Lovat to keep the latter's Frasers at home during the crucial first few months. The chief's loyalty won him commissions to raise four independent companies for Loudon's regiment, and he supposedly tricked his own clansmen into marching against the Jacobite army. On 23 December 1745 they saw action at Inverurie. Though MacLeod himself showed great personal bravery, his forces were required to retreat before a superior Jacobite contingent, eventually ending up back in Skye. MacLeod's loyalties caused widespread animus against him in the aftermath of Culloden, his situation exacerbated by the government's tardy repayment of the $2500 that he had spent on his companies and by the death of Forbes in December 1747. 
MacLeod's wife had died in April 1743. In October 1748 he married Anne, daughter of William Martin of Braes, Skye. Considerably younger than her husband, she is said to have encouraged him in his growing extravagance, a lifestyle that he was increasingly unable to afford following his retirement from parliament in 1754. Indebtedness and an increasing addiction to gambling and drink meant that he had to leave London; he subsequently settled in the Whitehouse estate, near Edinburgh, then in the modest house of Park, near St Andrews. Rents on the MacLeod estate had already been raised significantly, and for many tacksmen and tenants the widespread famine of the early 1770s proved the final straw. With mass emigration looming, rents were lowered and the estate placed in the hands of trustees. Racked by sores, gout, and stomach pains Norman MacLeod of Dunvegan died at Strathtyrum House, St Andrews, on 21 February 1772. He was buried in the churchyard of St Andrews Cathedral. 
From his first marriage to Janet MacDonald, MacLeod had three children: John, his heir, who predeceased him in 1767, Ann, and Emilia. From his second marriage to Anne Martin he had three daughters: Elizabeth, Anne, and Rich Mary. He also fathered two illegitimate sons: Alexander, 'whose mother is said to have been an Edinburgh lady', and Norman. He was succeeded as chief by his grandson Norman MacLeod (1754-1801). He well merits his somewhat evil reputation. Extravagant and boorish, with a taste for intrigue, his chief interest to historians is in his spanning of two eras in the history of the Gaidhealtachd, being the model of a new type of landlord whose future lay not so much with his clanspeople but rather in the wider British political and financial sphere. He appears to have been the first of the MacLeod chiefs not to have spoken Gaelic, and it is notable that, rather uniquely, no praise-poem for him has come down in the oral tradition of the Isle of Skye. 


@@@@@


doc= 64087


MacLeod, Norman, of MacLeod (1754-1801), army officer and politician, was born on 4 March 1754 at Brodie Castle, Forres, Moray, the only son of John MacLeod (died 1767) and Emilia Brodie ('b'. 1730), daughter of Alexander Brodie of Brodie, lord Lyon king of arms. He was educated privately, principally in Edinburgh under the care of Professor George Stuart, and then at the University of St Andrews (1769) and University College, Oxford (1770). In 1772 he succeeded his grandfather Norman MacLeod as chief of clan MacLeod. 
For the proud head of an ancient family that claimed descent from Danish royalty, MacLeod's inheritance was a singularly unhappy one. Ruin stared him in the face. The estates were buried under a mountain of debt, numerous relatives had to be provided for, creditors were pressing for payment, and the tenantry (who were struggling to pay their rents) were considering mass emigration to America. The young chief met the crisis head on. Meetings were arranged with the tenantry, and, by promising to live among them, temporarily reduce their rents, and attend to their interests, he dissuaded most from emigrating. The response of the clan's middle and lower ranks to MacLeod's appeals convinced him of their attachment, and may have prepared him psychologically for the subsequent adoption of quasi-democratic political opinions. MacLeod's determination to live among his clan, however, was short-lived. Strict economy and attention to estate management were uncongenial and offered little hope of significantly reducing his debts, while life in the remote fastness of Dunvegan Castle was unappealing to an ambitious young man impatient to prove himself on a bigger stage. 
The approach of war in America offered MacLeod a chance of escaping from the gloom that had enveloped him on Skye, and in 1775 he was commissioned with the rank of captain into the 71st regiment. While undertaking training at Inverness, he met and, on 25 March 1776, married Mary MacKenzie (died 1784), daughter of Kenneth MacKenzie of Suddie, Ross-shire. Taken prisoner 'en route' to the front, he never saw active service in America, but his early experience of military life did not sour him and, shortly after his return in 1779, he was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the 2nd battalion of the 42nd regiment. 
In March 1781 the battalion sailed for the Cape of Good Hope, but, to MacLeod's delight, it was diverted to India, where the prospects of fame and fortune were far brighter. In 1782, shortly after his arrival, he was placed in command of a small force which defeated the vastly more numerous army of Tipu Sahib at Panniani. Ever prickly about matters of honour, MacLeod reacted furiously when a lieutenant-colonel in the East India Company army was given command over him. Honour and prospects were restored when, in April 1783, he was awarded the brevet rank of brigadier-general and placed in command of his own army. The subsequent campaign on the Malabar coast enhanced his military reputation and added significantly to his wealth. 
Following the death of his first wife on 20 February 1784, MacLeod married in the same year Sarah Stackhouse ('b'. 'c'.1767), daughter of Nathaniel Stackhouse, second in the council at Bombay. In 1785 his spirits rose when he was transferred to Bengal and appointed second in command of the army there, a post worth $6000 a year. His hopes, however, were seemingly blasted in 1788, when a general order was issued depriving all British army officers of brevet rank in India. The mortified MacLeod lobbied hard to have the order rescinded, but to no avail. Determined to seek redress and to revive his stalled career, he returned home in 1789. 
Since boyhood MacLeod had entertained thoughts of a parliamentary career, and during his absence abroad his political ambitions had been ably nursed. Armed with a conditional endorsement from Henry Dundas, he worked hard to cultivate the Inverness-shire freeholders and successfully negotiated an agreement with the crucially important Fraser interest, in return for whose support in the 1790 election he would push a Fraser candidate in the one following. The duke of Gordon's hated army of 'parchment barons' (whose qualification to vote rested upon legal technicality rather than the law as traditionally understood) was thus outmanoeuvred, and Gordon was brought reluctantly to back MacLeod, who was then returned unopposed. 
MacLeod supported Pitt's administration to the best of his limited parliamentary abilities until 7 May 1791, when a meeting with Dundas went so disastrously wrong as to ignite MacLeod's explosive temper and cause him to cross the floor of the house. The breach, which was apparently occasioned by Dundas's refusal to accede to MacLeod's demand for a specific appointment before agreeing to return to India, was bitter and permanent. He attached himself firmly to the opposition and the cause of political reform. Long opposed to 'fictitious' votes, MacLeod now argued for extending the county franchise. He attended the county reformers' convention, held at Edinburgh in July 1792, and proposed that the franchise should be vested in those owning land worth an annual valued rent of $100. His ideas were not adopted, but his optimism was undimmed. 
A member of the London Society of the Friends of the People since May 1792, MacLeod had found on his return to Scotland that numbers of gentlemen were discussing the formation of a Scottish association based on the same principles. Although he attended the Scottish burgh reformers' convention, where he urged the burghs to co-operate with the London Friends by organizing petitions in favour of parliamentary reform, he was not actively involved in the establishment of the Scottish Association of the Friends of the People. He had no qualms, however, about supporting this plebeian organization. 
MacLeod addressed the delegate meetings of the local societies in both Glasgow and Edinburgh, advocating equal representation and short parliaments, and urging petitions as the proper constitutional means of obtaining reform. Having returned to London in December, he did not attend the first national convention of the Scottish Friends of the People, but the growing conservative alarm at the radical reform movement's progress only convinced him of the need to increase his support for the Scottish radicals. On his arrival in Edinburgh in January 1793 he again addressed the local societies, stressing his confidence in them and their cause, while his morale-raising pamphlet 'Letters to the People of North Britain' (1793) was serialized in the radically inclined 'Edinburgh Gazetteer'. He presented the Edinburgh petition in support of Grey's reform motion of May 1793 and voted with the minority, but by then he was losing interest in the reform movement. The formal breach did not come until November, but as early as February he had turned his attention to the opportunities offered by the outbreak of war with France. 
Numerous approaches for military employment over the next four years were rebuffed, but given that MacLeod continued vigorously to oppose the government's policies, arguing in his 'Considerations on False and Real Alarms' (1794) that the war was both misconceived and ruinously expensive, the wonder is that he persevered in his applications. With no prospect of retaining his Inverness-shire seat, he fired off a violent valedictory and sought refuge in the venal constituency of Milborne Port. The expenditure of $15,000 failed to convince the electors there of his merits, and MacLeod retreated north to spend his declining years in reduced circumstances, bad health, and low spirits. A jaunt to Ireland in 1800 provided only temporary relief from his depression. A cruise was arranged to restore his health, but he died at Guernsey on 16 August 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 64090


Brewer, Cecil Claude (1871-1918), architect, was born on 12 December 1871 at 9 Endsleigh Street, Bloomsbury, London, the youngest child of Alfred Brewer, an upholsterer, and his wife, Anne Heal. He was educated at a private school in Elstree, Hertfordshire, and at Clifton College. In 1890 he was articled for three years to the London architect F. T. Baggallay. He also studied at the Architectural Association, of which he remained an active member, and at the Royal Academy Schools. In 1894 he joined the office of Robert Weir Schultz in Gray's Inn; it was perhaps through Schultz that he was introduced to a circle of architects around W. R. Lethaby who talked of architecture, in the language of the arts and crafts movement, as reasonable building. Much of Brewer's career was spent among these colleagues, and he admired Lethaby all his life. But his sense of what constituted reasonable building changed with time. 
In the early 1890s Brewer was living at University Hall in Gordon Square, Bloomsbury, a settlement devoted to work among the poor. The architect Arnold Dunbar Smith (1866-1933), born in London on 2 December 1866, the son of Joseph Smith, a leather merchant, and Elizabeth Margaret Mason, was also a resident, and he too was studying at the Royal Academy. In 1895 he and Brewer won a limited competition for the design of a new building for the settlement in Tavistock Place, Bloomsbury. The Passmore Edwards Settlement (later Mary Ward House) was built in 1896-7 in the inventive yet reticent vernacular style which Lethaby and others used for middle-class houses in the country. Applied here for the first time to a public building in London, it had a striking and appropriate freshness, the influence of which can be felt in the work of other young progressive architects in Britain, including Charles Rennie Mackintosh. Following this success Smith and Brewer went into practice together. 
The two partners were very different. Brewer was electric, urbane, interested in ideas, a fragile figure with a permanently boyish face. He could work feverishly, but had a weak heart and was never far from physical collapse. Smith was shy, composed, and precise. Perhaps because of these differences, they could collaborate closely. Theirs was not a large practice, and for a dozen years or so their work consisted mainly of houses in the home counties and East Anglia. Thanks perhaps to their settlement connections, progressive intellectuals and social reformers figured rather largely among their clientele. In 1899, for instance, they built Heath Cottage, Oxshott, Surrey, for Bernard and Helen Bosanquet, and in 1907 a small house in Haslemere, Surrey, for Adelaide Anderson, the first head of the women's branch of the factory inspectorate. The houses themselves were designed after the model of English domestic architecture of the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, as was usual then, but treated with a mixture of freedom and severity typical of the Lethaby circle. In some of them, small complex spaces were cleverly articulated with English classical details, as if Wren had been asked to fit out a ship's cabin. 
On 25 May 1904 Brewer married Irene MacDonald (1857-1939), a daughter of George MacDonald, the novelist. They were introduced by her cousin the architect Frank Troup, who was one of Brewer's Gray's Inn circle. They lived at first in Gray's Inn; when Smith and Brewer moved their office to 6 Queen Square, Bloomsbury, in 1914, the Brewers moved there too. 
In 1910 Smith and Brewer won the competition for the design of the National Museum of Wales at Cathays Park in Cardiff. This complex, monumental classical building was a new departure for the practice. Reasonable building it might be, but not in the homely sense of the arts and crafts movement. A friend wrote of Brewer, 'in later years he inclined more and more to the larger view of architecture as a matter of fine planning, ordered massing and intellectual expression' ('Architectural Association Journal', 34, 1918, 27). Such a view had been gaining ground in England since about 1905, inspired by French theory and American practice in the classical tradition. In 1911 Brewer went to the United States to study museum design. On his return the competition design was revised in the light of his admiration for American classical work, particularly the entrance hall of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the work of McKim, Mead, and White. The building of the museum was interrupted by the war, so that Brewer never saw the design carried out; the same was true of the firm's designs of 1914-15 for extensions to the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. 
Brewer's last major work was the rebuilding and enlargement, in 1914-16, of part of Heals furniture shop in Tottenham Court Road, London (Ambrose Heal, the furniture designer and manufacturer, was Brewer's cousin). A commercial, steel-framed building, it was as much a departure from their earlier work as the museum in Cardiff and, until it was unhappily extended by Sir Edward Maufe in 1937, its subtle, stripped classical facade was one of the best-proportioned and most expressive modern shop-fronts in London. Brewer was also a founder of the Design and Industries Association, set up in 1915 to bring good design to bear on industry as the Deutscher Werkbund had done in Germany, and as the arts and crafts movement in Britain had failed to do. Brewer was an enthusiast for Germany, and would pester his friends with preaching and photographs of the latest German work. In its early years the association was run from 6 Queen Square and he acted as joint secretary until 1918, despite failing health. 
In March 1916 the doctors told Brewer that the condition of his heart was worsening, and from that date he and Irene spent more time at Town End Farm, Radnage, near Stokenchurch in Buckinghamshire. Though very much a Londoner, he took to the Chilterns. His invalid's couch was fitted with a drawing-board; in one of his last letters, he wrote 'I am designing, mostly in my head, a great church upon a hill' (Brewer to Hope Bagenal, 21 July 1918, RIBA). Cecil Brewer died at Town End Farm, Radnage, on 10 August 1918, aged forty-six, and was cremated at Golders Green on 14 August. The practice continued in his partner's hands until 1933. The National Museum of Wales was partly completed under Smith's supervision, and the designs for the Fitzwilliam Museum were carried out as the Marlay (1924) and Courtauld (1931) galleries. Smith designed other university buildings in Cambridge, and also in Newcastle. On 11 August 1911 he married Clara Ellen Dean (died 1944), becoming stepfather to the folklorist Margaret Josephine Dean-Smith (1899-1997). He died on 7 December 1933 at his home, Pine Court, 4 Gervis Road, Bournemouth.. 


@@@@@


doc= 64091


Ross, George, of Cromarty (1708/9-1786), army agent and agricultural improver, was probably born on the small estate of Pitkerrie, Ross-shire, the only son of Andrew Ross ('fl'. 1670-1710), proprietor of the estate. There is unresolved confusion as to the precise identity of his mother, a Catherine Fraser of the family of Fraser of Achnagairn, who after Andrew Ross's death married John Gray of Overskibo. A grandson of this second marriage, Alexander Gray ('c'.1741-1820), became Ross's business partner in London and ultimately his heir. 
Ross trained as a lawyer and worked for a number of years in Edinburgh and London as confidential clerk to Duncan Forbes of Culloden, lord president of the court of session. This appointment may have come about through family connections, since Forbes's sister was married to a Fraser of Achnagairn, a relative of Ross's mother. Forbes assisted Archibald Campbell, third duke of Argyll, who dominated Scottish politics from the mid-1720s through a system of patronage dispensed on a grand scale. Thus Ross, though a minor figure, was well placed in the web of politics and patronage. On 20 April 1738 he married Rachael Kellow of Broad Street, Golden Square, London; she died in 1742. He seems to have inherited land or money from his wife, since one of Forbes's acquaintances remarked that 'if the stories told of her are true... [Ross] has not any loss by her going' (Menary, 335). The couple had one son, John, who died childless about 1775. 
After Forbes's death in 1747, Ross continued in London, doing business from his residence in Conduit Street. By 1754, under the patronage of Argyll, he had become London agent for two Scottish bodies -- the convention of royal burghs and the board of trustees for manufactures and fisheries. An attempt was made by Argyll's faction in 1755 to have him appointed to a further London agency, the commissioners of the annexed estates, but this failed. In addition to enjoying the patronage of Argyll, Ross was a close friend both of General William Amherst, brother of the future commander-in-chief of Great Britain, and of the Scottish-born Lord Chief Justice William Murray (1705-1793), later first earl of Mansfield. Such influential connections enabled Ross to build up a business during the Seven Years' War (1756-63) as an army or military agent, contracting to supply regiments with equipment and stores. The agency grew further during the American War of Independence. 
In the 1760s, having amassed a considerable fortune, Ross acquired properties in Surrey and the West Indies, and began buying up both land and feudal superiorities in the north of Scotland. He improved the estate of Kinmylies, in Inverness-shire, and was credited with being only the second proprietor in the county to use improved farming methods. In 1766 he assisted Lord Elibank in the purchase of the Cromarty estate and in the legal transactions that enabled Elibank to have his nephew, William Pulteney, elected MP for the county in 1768. The estate was then sold to Ross, reputedly at a discounted price (NAS GD 305/1/159). Ross's legal title to the Cromarty estate was not complete until 1772, but he was in effective control from 1767 until his death in 1786. During this time he spent considerable sums on improvements in agriculture and commerce, and on the embellishment of the estate so that it might become 'worth an Englishman's while coming all the way from London to see' (Miller, 431). Ross's improvements all exhibited a flair for organization, bringing together his political contacts, his knowledge of markets in London and the West Indies, his acquaintance with leading architects and engineers, and his insights into improved agriculture in the south of England. 
Central to his plans was the establishment in the early 1770s of a non-mechanized proto-factory, which used imported Baltic hemp to produce cloth for sacking and bagging, all of which was shipped to London for use in the West Indian trade. The factory employed between 200 and 250 workers in the buildings and more than 600 outworkers. Ross also secured government funds for the construction of a harbour (1782-4), designed by the leading civil engineer James Smeaton; opened a brewery ('c'.1772), which was one of the largest in the north of Scotland; built a court house (1772-3) for the county of Cromarty, partly at his own expense and partly with government support; and, unusually for the time, erected a church (1784) specifically for Gaelic speakers who had come from the neighbouring parishes to seek employment in the town. In these ventures he worked closely with the leading local merchant William Forsyth (1722-1800). 
Ross demolished Cromarty Castle, built an elegant mansion in its place (1772-4), and carried out extensive landscaping of the surrounding policies. The house had an unusual tunnel below the gardens -- a 'tradesman's entrance' through which deliveries might be made to the kitchens. Ross commissioned plans from the architect John Adam for a new parish church in Cromarty: while this was not built, it has been suggested that Adam may have had some influence in the building of Cromarty House. Ross's agricultural improvements followed the common pattern of consolidating, enlarging, and enclosing farms. More unusually, from Buckinghamshire he brought ploughmen and their wives, who taught lacemaking, and he also established a large-scale pig-rearing venture. This included a custom-built 'hog yard', the only one of its kind in Scotland, with breeding, feeding, and slaughtering areas. The pork was salted and, like the bagging produced in the factory, was almost entirely destined for the West Indies. 
Ross became MP for the county of Cromarty in 1780. In parliament he allied himself with Lord North whom he followed into opposition in 1782; his support for the personalities of the Fox-North coalition continued during Pitt's ministry. Since the holding of an army agency was a disqualification from sitting in the House of Commons, he retired from the agency in favour of his partner, his half-nephew Alexander Gray of Overskibo. By this point the agency was under contract to twenty-one regiments, and a decade later, after Ross's death, the annual turnover was in excess of $1 million. Towards the end of his life, however, Ross sustained a substantial financial loss through the failure of John Fraser, a London merchant to whom he was related through his mother. Fraser's debts of over $90,000 included some $43,000 owed to Ross. 
In the absence of any personal papers it is difficult to form an impression of Ross's character. The management of his estate was benevolent, with no eviction of tenants and several acts of generosity, including building houses for the poor and erecting the Gaelic chapel. Hugh Miller refers to a surviving portrait of Ross and the 'air of dignified benevolence impressed on the features of the handsome old man' (Miller, 429). Ross's dignity appeared to others to be excessive. The 'Times' columnist Junius, who was fiercely critical of Mansfield's alleged favouritism towards fellow Scots, wrote of Ross's role in one particular case of back-room dealing, remarking that 'no sale by the candle was ever conducted with greater formality' (ibid.). There is a similar suggestion that Ross had a developed sense of his own importance in a letter from John Mackenzie of Delvin, clerk of the signet, who referred to him with uncharacteristic sharpness as 'the wise and great, and by just consequence, the rich George Ross' (Fraser-Mackintosh, 235). It should be noted that Ross's son reputedly died by shooting himself, in Cromarty House, following a quarrel with his father over the correct way to carve a joint of meat, Ross having remarked that 'little men cannot afford to neglect little matters' (Miller, 437). 
Having sat between 1780 and 1784 for Cromarty, in March 1786 Ross was elected MP for the Northern burghs, only to die at Richmond, Surrey, on 7 April of that year. He was buried as requested in the grounds of Richmond church. 


@@@@@


doc= 64092


Craufurd, Patrick, of Auchenames (c.1704-1778), politician and landowner, was the first surviving son of Patrick Craufurd (died 1733), a wealthy Edinburgh merchant, and his second wife, Jean (died 1740), daughter of Archibald Craufurd of Auchenames and Crosbie. The younger Patrick (or familiarly, Peter) Craufurd began life as a merchant like his father, and inherited a substantial fortune on the latter's death. About 1740 he married Elizabeth Middleton (died 1746), daughter and coheir of George Middleton of Errol, Perthshire, a London banker. By his marriage he acquired another fortune and a life interest in the estate of Errol, where he chiefly resided after his father-in-law's death in 1747. The couple had two sons, John (1742?-1814) and James ('c'.1744-1811). Elizabeth died on 19 July 1746, and on 22 April 1750 Craufurd married Sarah -- also known as Sally -- Sempill (died 1751), eldest daughter of Hew, twelfth Baron Sempill. This marriage produced one daughter, Sarah (1751?-1796), before the elder Sarah's death on 25 April 1751. 
For much of his life Craufurd appears to have been a good-hearted and colourful, if rather naive, individual. While James Boswell described him as 'a very honest and a very generous man' ('Boswell's London Journal', 9 Jan 1763, 130), Lord Eglinton wrote of him in 1760, when Craufurd was in his mid-fifties: '[he] is drinking, hunting and whoring 'com un possede'. I am an eye witness to the drinking, an ear witness to the whoring, and as he has just bought a terrier from a tailor in Ayr I can make no doubt he intends to commence foxhunter. Lord have mercy upon what Peter will cut flying over a five bar gate, with his flowing bob, jackboot, holster, bit and housing. (Eglinton to Bute, 26 Jan 1760, Bute MS 134/1)' Craufurd had no compunction about using his wealth to help forge a political career. In 1740 he was adopted as opposition candidate for Ayrshire, and was elected in 1741, following a contest. In 1747 he was re-elected without a contest, but in 1754 faced serious opposition from James Mure Campbell, Lord Loudoun's cousin, and from Archibald Montgomerie, brother of the tenth earl of Eglinton. Despite using bribery on a massive scale Craufurd was eventually forced to join Eglinton in a coalition, but still suffered defeat when the duke of Argyll and the ministry threw their full support behind Campbell. 
Out of parliament Craufurd divided his time between Scotland and London, where, through his close friend William Mure of Caldwell -- to whose judgement he deferred throughout his political life -- he became connected with the Bute circle. In 1758, with Bute's support, Mure proposed Craufurd as candidate for Ayr burghs; Argyll regarded Bute's intervention as a challenge to his own authority as 'manager' of Scotland and a bitter quarrel resulted. Argyll used his interest against Craufurd, whose campaign, despite the use of extensive bribery again, appeared to be doomed. However, the accession of George III in October 1760 tipped the scales in Bute's favour, forcing Argyll to negotiate a series of electoral compromises that included Craufurd's return as MP in 1761, albeit for Renfrewshire rather than Ayr burghs. 
In parliament, while relying on Mure for advice on Scottish affairs, Craufurd faithfully supported the Bute and subsequent administrations, with the exception of that of Rockingham, who listed Craufurd as 'doubtful'. Craufurd disapproved of but did not oppose the window tax, and, while supporting the creation of a Scottish militia, felt that this should not happen until it could form part of a unified British militia. 
Notwithstanding his own unruly behaviour, Craufurd was a thrifty man as regards his own fortune and estates, and deplored what he perceived as the profligate behaviour and extravagance of his sons: despite his evident affection for his elder son, John, he repeatedly quarrelled with him over financial matters. In 1766, to protect the Errol estate, Craufurd took out an inhibition against John, requiring him to entail the estate and prohibiting anyone from lending to him. A reconciliation followed, whereby the Errol revenues were made over to John, who in return assisted his father in his campaign for the 1768 general election. Craufurd's hold on Renfrewshire was insecure: his only residence there was the ruined castle of Auchenames and he was regarded as an Ayrshireman. He prepared for an expensive campaign, but when two opponents challenged him he seems to have handed over the management of the election entirely to John. After prolonged negotiations he stood down and gave his interest to William MacDowall, on condition that John should be the candidate at the next general election. 
Thereafter Craufurd lived mainly in Edinburgh and in Bath. In 1771 he put John in possession of the Errol estate but later once again became increasingly and obsessively anxious about the need to provide safeguards in the form of an entail. He insisted on John's entailing his estates along with Craufurd's own, a step which John said 'I know I shall repent all the rest of my life' and begged Mure to assist him in undoing (Mure, 2.217). He was successful, but at the cost of another rift with his father. It was reported by David Hume in 1774 that Craufurd 'wanted nothing from you [John] except your friendship which he was sorry he could not obtain and it was the circumstance that embittered his remaining days' ('Letters', 2.283-4). Hume's intervention nevertheless seems to have healed the breach, and Craufurd, despite failing powers, assisted John at the 1774 general election. Patrick Craufurd died in Edinburgh on 10 January 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 64093


Brodie, Alexander, of Brodie (1697-1754), politician, was born on 17 August 1697, the second son of George Brodie MP (died 1715), of Brodie and Aslick, Elgin, and his wife, Emilia, the fifth daughter and coheir of James Brodie of Elgin. He was educated at Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he matriculated in 1710, and, it is believed, at Leiden, where he may have matriculated in 1719. 
Brodie was descended from an ancient Moray family with a long-established interest in politics, his father and grandfather both having represented local seats in parliament. In 1720 he succeeded his brother James (1695-1720), both as laird of Brodie and as MP for Elginshire (James had been returned at a by-election in January 1720, but died the following October). Alexander held the seat without opposition for over twenty years, from 29 December 1720 to 25 May 1741. On 3 September 1724 he married Mary Sleigh (1704-1760), the daughter of Major Samuel Sleigh of the 16th foot; they had a son, Alexander (1741-1759), and a daughter, Emilia ('b'. 1730). 
Brodie was a loyal government supporter and was rewarded by appointment as lord Lyon king of arms by a commission of 6 July 1727, with a salary of $300 a year. He was the first lord Lyon of the Hanoverian dynasty, and his appointment took place under exceptional circumstances, since his predecessor, Sir Alexander Erskine, had been deep in Jacobite intrigues and the office of lord Lyon was viewed as a centre of Jacobite sympathies. In addition, everything Scottish was viewed from London with suspicion bordering on hatred: Brodie's commission was the first made without reference to Scottish sources and the first not to carry the hitherto customary knighthood. Brodie nevertheless adopted the title lord Lyon king of arms and the prefix 'honourable' and maintained the right to walk in the coronation procession of George II. Despite the necessity to be resident in London for a large part of the year to carry out his parliamentary duties, Brodie took an active interest in the business of the Lyon court. He is said to have enforced the laws of arms with vigour and impartiality, and even such exalted offenders as the earl and countess of Wemyss suffered deletion and removal of bogus arms which they had created. Matriculation of arms and the heraldic and genealogical business of the Lyon court seems to have been conducted with understanding and appreciation under his direction. 
Brodie was politically attached to Lord Ilay, Walpole's election manager for Scotland, to the extent of 'giving himself the airs of being my Lord Ilay's minister in the north' (Fraser, 1.379). During intrigues surrounding the 1734 general election he came into conflict with several neighbouring influential landowners, including Lord Lovat, with whom he quarrelled violently in January 1733. According to Lovat, Brodie: 'abus'd me, threaten'd me and insulted me... He first accus'd me sillily that I and all the Frasers had made a league with Culodin against Grant... Then he threatened me, and told me he would blow me up with the Earle of Ilay. I told him that he and all the Brodies on earth joined to all the divels in hell could not blow me up with the Earle of Ilay... I own my temper was much try'd... but bless God, providence stiffled my passion, that I did not send the mad fool to hell as he deserv'd. (Lovat to Sir James Grant, 23 Jan 1733, Fraser, 1.379)' Brodie then set out to gain control of Nairnshire, but the candidate he put up at a by-election in 1735 was unsuccessful. 
In 1741 Brodie was forced to surrender his Elginshire seat to Sir Ludovick Grant, but he was brought in for Caithness by his nephew George Sinclair of Ulbster, its hereditary sheriff. Brodie was a government informer, and at the time of his death he was receiving a secret-service pension of $300 per year. After the Jacobite rising of 1745 he reported to the duke of Newcastle that the earl of Sutherland had been harbouring a prominent rebel. It was also said that he had helped to procure evidence against Lord Lovat, observing that 'it will be of the greatest service to the family of Lovat to have the old man beheaded, which would save the son' (BL, Add. MS 32709, fol. 389). The next year he reported to Newcastle the landing of a Jacobite agent by a French privateer on the west coast of the highlands. He took a hard line over the 'Highland Dress Bill' in 1746, dismissing the doubts of those who felt it should not apply to clans who had taken the government's side during the rising and saying that this 'would not do; the thing must be general or could have no effect' (Brodie to Duncan Forbes, 1 July 1746, Warrand, 5.112-13). 
However, Brodie could show compassion and magnanimity. A number of heralds and other officers on his staff in the Lyon office declared on the side of the Jacobites during the rising, but Brodie used his influence to save them from government vengeance -- including, in one instance, obtaining for one of the clerks a pardon from sentence of death; in 1749 he secured the restoration of their salaries. 
In the 1747 parliament, in which Caithness was not represented, Brodie sat for Inverness burghs under a scheme drawn up by Henry Pelham to prevent contests between government supporters in Scotland. He died of a heart complaint in London on 9 March 1754. His body was embalmed and carried north for burial at Dyke, close to the family seat at Brodie House. 


@@@@@


doc= 64094


Baillie, George, of Jerviswood (1664-1738), landowner and politician, born on 16 March 1664 at Jerviswood Tower, Lanarkshire, was the eldest child of Robert Baillie (d. 1684) and of his wife and cousin Rachel Johnston (died 1697), daughter of the Presbyterian martyr Sir Archibald Johnston, Lord Wariston. 'Intended for the practice of the law' (Murray, 21), Baillie was studying in the Netherlands when news reached him of his father's arrest on charges of high treason arising from the Rye House plot. He returned home to Scotland and witnessed Robert's execution in the Grassmarket of Edinburgh on 24 December 1684. The Jerviswood estates were subsequently confiscated and Baillie fled to the Netherlands, where he joined a band of stalwart Presbyterian exiles, including his father's friend Sir Patrick Hume, whose daughter Grisell (1665-1746) ['see 'Baillie, Lady Grisell] he was later to marry (17 September 1691). With Hume's eldest son, Baillie served in the prince of Orange's horse guards 'till they were better provided for in the army, which they were before the Revolution' (Murray, 50). In 1689 he joined the prince's expedition to England, narrowly escaping shipwreck 'en route'. 
As a staunch supporter of the revolution's principles, Baillie expected and received preferment, though of a modest nature. He was restored to his estates and served as commissioner of supply for Berwickshire and Lanarkshire (1689) and as a commissioner of militia (1689). Tiresome months of solicitation at court proved more productive after his uncle, James Johnstone, became one of the Scottish secretaries of state in 1692; in the following year Baillie was appointed receiver-general (Scotland) at a salary of $300 p.a. He had been elected as a commissioner to the Scottish parliament in 1691 and represented Berwickshire until 1701; although he headed the poll for Berwickshire in 1702, he chose to represent Lanarkshire, for which he also had a commission (1702-7). Baillie had been politically aligned with Secretary James Johnstone's group from 1692 to 1696, but, on his uncle's dismissal from the secretaryship, became associated with the country party, voting against the government in 1701 on both the standing army and Darien questions. As the Jacobite George Lockhart of Carnwath remarked, Baillie gained a great reputation in King William's time 'by standing so stiffly by the interest of his country' (Lockhart, 95). 
At the beginning of Queen Anne's reign Baillie remained part of the opposition and was, with the other members, bizarrely implicated by the duke of Queensberry, the leader of the Scottish administration, in the 'Scotch plot', an alleged Jacobite conspiracy. Early in 1704 the opposition sent him to London, in the company of the earls of Roxburghe and Rothes, to put its views before the queen and to urge the calling of a Scottish parliament. A change in the Scottish ministry shortly followed, with Baillie taking office as treasurer-depute and appointed a member of the Scottish privy council in an administration headed by the marquess of Tweeddale. This government of the 'new party', as the group became known, was not a happy one: Baillie and the rest were castigated as deserters of the country party (although, in fact, they still attempted, perhaps naively, to pursue country party principles in office), Tweeddale was widely considered incompetent, the powerful Scottish magnates were hostile, and the English government was unwilling to allow the new party the patronage powers which might have assured success. Baillie, diligent, principled (he was one of the few politicians brave enough, with the Edinburgh mob in full cry, to attend the meetings of the Scottish privy council during the deliberations on the 'Worcester' affair), and perhaps more astute than most of his colleagues, shared their fate when the new party leaders were dismissed from office (June 1705). It was particularly galling for a man with Baillie's history that his successor as treasurer-depute, the earl of Glasgow, suggested that the main reason for the change in government was so that it would be 'thoroughly upon the Revolution bottom' (Hume Brown, 179). 
The ousting of the new party, however, did not drive it to reunite with the opposition. Indeed, Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun's unsuccessful attempt to keep Baillie out of the 1705 parliament sprang entirely from spleen at what he regarded as Baillie's apostasy from the country party. The quarrel verged on farce when Baillie espoused John Law's land bank scheme. This was a project for remedying the dearth of money in Scotland which had much appeal for those who, like him, had, in 1696, backed the Company of Scotland (in which he had an investment of $1000 and of which he was a director) when it attempted to remedy a similar situation by issuing its own bills. Fletcher's insistence that the scheme was yet another plot to enslave the Scottish nation led to a duelling challenge between Fletcher and Lord Roxburghe: it was only with difficulty that Lord Charles Ker and Baillie, the respective seconds, succeeded in bringing about a reconciliation between the principals. 
In refusing to rejoin the opposition, the new party hoped to hold the balance in the Scottish parliament. However, the 'squadrone volante', as it now became known, was ineluctably drawn in a court direction. Baillie's own, somewhat reluctant conversion to the necessity for Scotland's union with England, a court imperative by 1705, can be traced in his correspondence: union was first a potion which had to be drunk, then the lesser of two evils, and finally 'our onlie game' ('Correspondence', 142, 144, 145). It was the votes of the squadrone which allowed the passage of the union treaty in 1706; the duke of Atholl reportedly asserted that they had 'acted like angels' and that the queen owed union to them (ibid., 174). 
With the other squadrone leaders, Baillie now sought a role on the British stage. He represented Berwickshire in the first British parliament and, with the backing of the whigs, became a member of the Board of Trade, surviving several tory purges before being dismissed in 1712. He joined with other Scots in parliament in successfully urging the abolition of the Scottish privy council (1707) and in unsuccessfully resisting the extension of English treason penalties to Scotland (1709). It was thanks to a campaign organized by him and Lockhart that the imposition of new linen duties on Scotland was delayed for a year; he also opposed the malt tax (1713). As the effects of the Union became more apparent, Baillie came to resent the 'utmost contempt' with which the Scots were treated, even as he recognized that dissolving the Union (a bill was put forward in 1713) might have 'a worse effect and be more fatal to us' ('Polwarth MSS', 1.12). 
A convinced Hanoverian, Baillie welcomed the accession of George I, becoming one of the nine 'chief men in place' in the new House of Commons ('Letters and Works of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu', ed. Lord Warncliffe, 3 vols., 1861, 1.136). He served as a lord of Admiralty (1714-17) and was appointed to the Treasury board formed on Robert Walpole's resignation in 1717. There he remained, retaining his post after Walpole's return to the Treasury in 1721, until 1725, when he was ousted (though with a pension equal to his salary) to satisfy the Argyll interest. He had broken with his long-time friend and 'squadrone' ally the earl of Roxburghe in 1723, correctly observing that Roxburghe's performance as Scottish secretary had reduced Scotland to less weight in the management of affairs than any county in England, and in that year professed himself 'quite out of bussiness' and ready to depart public life were it not for his position as MP, from which he finally stepped down in 1734 ('Polwarth MSS', 3.289, 282). 
Although lacking the social clout which would have enabled him to scale the heights in Scottish or British politics, and impeded, particularly after the Union, by increasing deafness, Baillie possessed, as Lockhart admitted, a 'profound solid judgment' and was 'by far the most significant man of all his party, to whom he was a kind of dictator' (Lockhart, 95). He worked hard to keep the 'squadrone' together, continually urging, though not always successfully, the necessity of acting in concert ('Correspondence', 76, 163). No mere placeman, he was willing to vote against the court, as he did on the Spanish question in 1711, and determined always to act in ways which seemed right to him, in small matters as in large: when he was in the Admiralty he made his children return a present of a parrot from a gentleman who was soliciting something there (Murray, 8). At the time of the Jacobite rising of 1715 he urged mercy for the participants, despite the unpopularity of such a stance and the despoliation of his own Mellerstain lands. He also advised and assisted the relatives of the rebels. Lockhart thought him 'morose, proud, and severe' (Lockhart, 95), and, indeed, his own and his family's history had given him reason to be so. In private life, however, as Lady Murray's memoir indicates, he was very different, enjoying music, hawking, and hunting, and accompanying his offspring to balls and masquerades. 
A devoted husband, Baillie wrote to Lady Grisell by every post during their long periods of separation; not until 1714 did his family move to London. He confided his political secrets only to her, he relied on her substantial managerial capabilities in looking after his Scottish interests, and he conscientiously filled requests for 'muslin with Indian flowers' and other items for her and the bairns. Three children were born of the marriage -- a son, Robert ('b'. 1694), died in infancy; Grisell (1692-1759), who married Alexander Murray, son and heir of Sir David Murray of Stanhope, in 1710, with her father's reluctant consent: a legal separation was obtained in 1714; and Rachel (1696-1773), who in 1717 married Charles, Lord Binning (1697-1732), son and heir to the earl of Haddington. When Lord Binning became ill, Baillie accompanied the rest of the family to Naples (1731-3) in an unavailing attempt to improve his health. 
Baillie devoted his retirement to his friends and his family, to his books and his prayers; he had for many years been representative elder for the parish of Earlston, in which lies Mellerstain, and he remained a devout Presbyterian to the end. This 'honest, serious, religious Man' (monument) died in Oxford on 6 August 1738, after a brief illness. He was buried in the mausoleum he had ordered to be built in the fields of Mellerstain; his estate passed in liferent to his wife and was eventually inherited by the second son of Lord and Lady Binning. 


@@@@@


doc= 64095


Waugh, John (1661-1734), bishop of Carlisle, was born on 2 February 1661 at Scattergate, Appleby, Westmorland, the eldest son of John Waugh (died 1690), yeoman farmer of Appleby, and his wife, Margaret. After attending Appleby grammar school Waugh entered Queen's College, Oxford, as a bateller on 31 January 1679 and matriculated on 4 April aged eighteen. He was elected a tabardar on 3 July 1684, graduated BA five days later, and proceeded MA on 7 July 1687. On 18 January 1688 he was elected a fellow of his college and in that same year was ordained deacon and priest by the bishop of Oxford. He held his fellowship for eleven years, and had the distinction of being described as 'a great tutor' by the usually dismissive Thomas Hearne (Hearne, 1.216). It is possible that Hearne, writing in 1706, was referring to the quantity rather than the quality of Waugh's teaching, as at the same time he argued that Waugh was 'all along a favourer of ye Whiggs' (ibid.) and thus an opponent of the tory and high-church Hearne in national and church politics. 
Waugh left Oxford on his appointment on 23 January 1699 to the lectureship at St Bride's Church, London, serving also in one of the chapels of ease in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. He received the degrees of BD and DD that same year. On 19 October 1699, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, he married Elizabeth Fiddes (died 1716), a thirty-year-old widow, possibly 'nee' Simpson. They had one son and three daughters. In 1704 he was appointed rector of St Peter Cornhill, London, an appointment which he held until his death and which assumed considerable importance in his life. St Peter Cornhill was acknowledged as a 'good Living' (Hearne, 1.216). Its wealth and its location suited Waugh's ambition, although he was an active and attentive rector. In London he was part of the circle of William Nicolson, bishop of Carlisle. Other members of the group, which had a close association with Queen's College, Oxford, were William Lancaster, for whose election as provost of the college in 1704 Waugh campaigned, and Edmund Gibson, a near-contemporary of Waugh at Queen's. Both Lancaster and Gibson were from Westmorland, like Waugh, and exhibited a political pragmatism that drew them towards the whigs; it may be that 'honest Dr Waugh' ('London Diaries of William Nicolson', 500) moved to a whig position with them. He supported Nicolson's campaign to include Carlisle Cathedral in his episcopal visitation and so erode the authority of the dean, the high churchman Francis Atterbury, ultimately vindicated in the 'Cathedrals Act' of 1708. By 1711 both Waugh and Gibson were 'earnest friends to the Duke of Marlborough' (ibid., 538). 
Retaining the rectory of St Peter, he accepted other preferments. On 29 March 1718 he was collated as prebendary of Castor, one of the wealthier stalls in Lincoln Cathedral, probably a consequence of Waugh's friendship with Gibson, by now bishop of Lincoln. He was installed as dean of Gloucester on 5 August 1720. Waugh was not an active dean; in the three years of the post he attended only four chapter meetings and conducted no business of significance. Following Gibson's recommendation to the secretary of state, Charles, second Viscount Townshend, who managed ecclesiastical patronage for George I, on 23 August 1723 Waugh was elected bishop of Carlisle; he was consecrated at Lambeth by William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury, on 13 October 1723. Waugh was the last of a series of local men of yeoman ancestry, all educated at Queen's College, Oxford, who were appointed to the see. He was allowed to retain the living of St Peter Cornhill, because the diocese of Carlisle was too poor to support Waugh in episcopal state. Edmund Gibson told William Nicolson that Waugh regretted leaving Gloucester for Carlisle, as he forfeited an income of $300 a year as dean. The total income of Carlisle diocese was probably not much more than the $800 a year enjoyed by his predecessor but one, Nicolson, and barely enough to cover the expenditure undertaken by the bishop in administering the diocese. Waugh in any case preferred to live close to the centre of power in London and appears to have enjoyed officiating as an episcopal rector at St Peter Cornhill, where the burials of two of his daughters, Bridget (1704-1710) and Margaret (died 1713), and of his wife would have consolidated the bond. 
Hearne thought Waugh had been 'all along aiming at a Bpprick, & never mattered how he got it. He was look'd upon, when at Oxford & in other places, as a tolerable good Preacher, but hath no Reputation for Learning' (Hearne, 8.126). As with his time as dean of Gloucester his achievements at Carlisle were thought negligible and his appearances in the diocese were rare. Like his predecessor he did not conduct a general visitation of the whole diocese, or the cathedral, and evidence for visitations within the diocese is poor. Most years he conducted two ordinations, in May or June and in August, usually at the bishop's residence, Rose Castle, but occasionally in the cathedral. At least eleven of Waugh's sermons were published in his lifetime, but under the terms of his will he left his papers to his son 'with this express order that none of them be printed but that he keep them for his own use or destroy them as he thinks fit' (Wagner, 447). 
From 1727 Waugh relied increasingly on his son, another 
Bishop Waugh died on 29 October 1734 at his home in Queen's Square, Westminster, and was buried beneath the altar at St Peter Cornhill on 3 November. His son, John, was sole executor and residual legatee of his will; a daughter, Humfrida, wife of Thomas Machen Fiddes, vicar of Barking, also survived him. The younger John Waugh remained in the offices his father had given him under bishops George Fleming and Richard Osbaldeston, and he was said to be 'the chief moving spirit of the diocese' (Wagner, 443), undertaking his own visitations as chancellor and becoming known as an efficient administrator. Waugh established his political reputation by the work he undertook for the government during the Jacobite rising of 1745. Although he was driven out of Carlisle by the Jacobite army, from his temporary base at Barnard Castle, co. Durham, Waugh maintained contact with events in the city and, through contacts along the Jacobites' route to and from Carlisle, was able to gather intelligence which was passed on to the government commanders, Field-Marshal George Wade and the duke of Cumberland. He also organized a corps of local guides to help the army. 
In the aftermath of the rising Waugh not only supervised the repair of Carlisle Cathedral, but became established as a major political manager for the government in Cumberland. He hoped for preferment on the death of Bishop Fleming in 1747, but although his claim was recognized by Edmund Gibson he was passed over on that occasion. He drafted Bishop Osbaldeston's primary visitation of 1747. In 1751 he was rewarded for his political service with his appointment as dean of Worcester. He promised the duke of Newcastle that 'I shall be determined always to serve the Whig Interest there and ever be ready to obey all such Commands as your Grace shall at any Time be pleased to honour me with' (5 July 1751, BL Add. MS 32718, fol. 270). Although he made regular visits to Worcester subsequently, his main residence was in Carlisle, where he lived in considerable style at Tullie House, Abbey Street. 
Dean Waugh died in Worcester on 19 April 1765 and was buried in Carlisle Cathedral on 25 April. Despite his lifestyle he died poor and in his will wrote: 'the Provision for the support of my dear wife and our dear children depends greatly on the good will and affectionate tender Love and regard our dear Brother William Tullie Esquire has ever bore to them' (Wagner, 447). Of Waugh's six daughters one, Ann ('b'. 1741), had died young, but the remaining five, Judith (1731-1799), Isabella (1735-1809), Elizabeth (1737-1814), Mary (1739-1815), and Margaret (1743-1803), continued to live, unmarried, at Tullie House as the centre of fashion in Carlisle, supported by the wealth of their uncle William Tullie, keeping a coach and four and 'what was then unique in Carlisle a footman in livery' (ibid., 443). 
The reputation of Bishop John Waugh has benefited retrospectively from the competence and efficiency of his son, and the social standing of his granddaughters. They added distinction and style to the name Waugh to which the bishop contributed his episcopal rank and the abilities of a dedicated whig churchman whose interests lay with his living and clerical circles in London, and whose life was well advanced by the time he adopted diocesan responsibilities. 


@@@@@


doc= 64096


Yonge, Philip (1709-1783), bishop of Norwich, was born at Lisbon, the son of Francis Yonge, who was commissary of the ordnance during the War of the Spanish Succession, and later agent in London for South Carolina. Educated at Westminster School from 1718, Yonge was admitted a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1728, elected a scholar in 1729, and proceeded BA in 1732, MA in 1735, and DD in 1750. He was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1734 and ordained deacon by the bishop of Lincoln in 1735. In 1746 he became public orator at Cambridge. In 1748 the master of Trinity, Dr Smith, urged the duke of Newcastle, as chancellor of the university, to support Yonge for the regius professorship of divinity, describing Yonge as 'a very amiable man, a true friend to the government, an excellent scholar of Westminster, and esteemed by us the greatest ornament of it' (Winstanley, 182). Newcastle declined to support him, and Yonge withdrew, thereby gaining Newcastle's favour by not being importunate. In 1748 Yonge became vicar of Barrington, Cambridgeshire, in 1750 vicar of Over, Cambridgeshire, and in 1752 rector of Loughton, Buckinghamshire, all on the presentation of Trinity College, Cambridge. In 1750 he became a prebendary of Westminster Abbey but resigned in 1754 on receiving a canonry at St Paul's Cathedral, which he held until 1766. In 1757 the dean and chapter of St Paul's presented him to the rectory of Therfield, Hertfordshire, a living he resigned in 1761. On 15 December 1761 he married Anne, daughter of Calverley Bewicke, of Clapham, Surrey. 
Yonge was active in Newcastle's interest in Cambridge. Probably owing to Newcastle's cordial relations with Sir Thomas Gooch, bishop of Ely, Gooch appointed Yonge to succeed Dr Ashton, a suspected Jacobite, as master of Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1752. Yonge also served as vice-chancellor of the university in 1752-5. At Newcastle's behest he took an active part in raising $3650 towards building the east front of the university library, going through college buttery books to identify anyone of distinction whom Newcastle might approach for a subscription. In 1757 Newcastle proposed Yonge as bishop of Peterborough, but was thwarted by George II. Nevertheless, in 1758 Yonge was appointed to the poorly endowed diocese of Bristol where he undertook a primary visitation in 1760. He was translated to the better-endowed diocese of Norwich in 1761. 
As bishop of Norwich, Yonge continued to play an active part in university politics on Newcastle's behalf, managing the campaign in 1763 to elect Philip Yorke, second earl of Hardwicke, to succeed his father as high steward of the university. As a university politician Yonge combined great powers of detailed application with sound judgement. However, he was not servile in his support for Newcastle. He opposed Newcastle's initiative to nominate candidates for degrees granted by royal mandate, because this would endanger the independence and prestige of the university. He avoided voting in the Lords during the debate on John Wilkes's 'An Essay on Woman', which parodied 'Veni Creator'. In reply to Newcastle's rebuke, Yonge pointed out that, on a matter of conscience, 'questions of friendship and attachment, of prudence, and of mere policy are... easily distinguishable from those which call upon every man to think for himself, and to consult his own heart' (Sykes, 55-6). Yonge remained on friendly terms with Newcastle after he lost political power, and conducted Newcastle's funeral. 
In Yonge's primary visitation charge at Norwich he exhorted his clergy to 'dwell among their flocks... administering God's word and sacrament... diligently and frequently', and to preach 'instructive and biblical sermons' (Yonge, 'The Charge'). He also criticized 'field preaching' and Methodism. Preaching in support of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital he strongly advocated medical care for the poor, and criticized the current poor law. He was reckoned to be 'one of the best preachers in the Establishment' ('Diary of Sylas Neville', 175). He regularly spent every summer in his diocese, and undertook improvements to the palace. Parson Woodforde found his behaviour 'exceeding handsome and free' ('Diary of a Country Parson', 150). However, his reputation later suffered from the opinion of his successor, Lewis Bagot, who complained of 'the easiness and inactivity of his predecessor' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.188). Yonge died on 23 April 1783 at Westminster, and was buried in the Grosvenor Chapel, Mayfair, on 1 May. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 64097


Harcourt, Sir Cecil Halliday Jepson (1892-1959), naval officer, was born on 11 April 1892 at Maitland Lodge, London Road, Bromley, Kent, the son of Halliday Harcourt, solicitor, and his wife, Grace Lilian, daughter of Dr Jepson. He was educated at Fonthill, East Grinstead, and from 1904 to 1909 at the Royal Naval College at Osborne and Dartmouth. On passing out from Dartmouth, as midshipman in 1909, he was awarded the term first prize in mathematics. By 1913 he was a lieutenant. He might have considered an alternative career as he was on the retired list in 1915, but in May 1916 he returned to the active list. He served on the battleship 'Centurion' in the Grand Fleet and was present at the battle of Jutland. 
Between the wars Harcourt served with the Atlantic, home, Mediterranean, and reserve fleets in destroyers and mine-sweepers. He was promoted commander in 1926 and captain in 1933. Following staff courses Harcourt was seconded to the Royal Australian Navy as captain (D) in 1935-7. These seagoing and command experiences provided a sound professional background to his appointment in 1938 as deputy director of the Admiralty's operations division. He remained with the operations division until 1941, becoming director in 1939. Thus he was in a crucial staff post at the start of the Second World War, and his contribution to the effective operational use of the navy was recognized by appointment as a CBE in 1940 and command of the modern battleship 'Duke of York'. Winston Churchill was his passenger in December 1941 and January 1942 for two transatlantic journeys to meet President Roosevelt. 
On promotion to rear-admiral in July 1942 Harcourt began a two-year period of service in the Mediterranean as flag officer of force Q, which comprised a cruiser squadron, destroyers, and other attached ships, such as monitors, as needed. While its main task was to give naval gunfire support to allied landings, it also carried out attacks on axis supply convoys. Force Q was part of the supporting force for the operation Torch landings in Morocco and Algeria. Harcourt's personal command contribution was recognized by the Americans by appointment to the Legion of Merit in November 1942. The citation for the award stated that 'His unfaltering support in the face of heavy odds did much to make possible the success of that operation' ('The Times', 24 Dec 1959). After operation Torch, force Q operated from the vulnerable Algerian port of Bone, harassing axis supply convoys between December 1942 and spring 1943. Harcourt's immediate superior, Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham, recognized the risks to Harcourt and force Q but knew that their role was critical and signalled Harcourt that he must 'stick it out' as allied support was coming to the area. For these services Harcourt was appointed CB in 1943. From June to September force Q was in regular action in support of the allied landings at Pantelleria, Lampedusa, and Limosa; in June operation Husky supported the Sicily landings and in September 1943 operation Avalanche, the Salerno landings. Harcourt was mentioned in dispatches for his contribution to the Salerno landings. 
Harcourt returned to the Admiralty from February 1944 to summer 1945 as naval secretary to Cunningham, now first sea lord. He was then appointed to the Pacific Fleet as flag officer 11th aircraft-carrier squadron and then, with his carriers plus three cruisers, four destroyers, a submarine, and mine-sweeping flotillas, he commanded task group 111.2 for the reoccupation of Hong Kong in September 1945. A small number of Japanese suicide motor boats were observed near Hong Kong and Harcourt ordered his carriers' planes to destroy them. Pressure from Chaing Kai-shek meant that Harcourt had to receive the surrender of Major-General Okada and Vice-Admiral Fujita on behalf of both the British and Chinese governments. From September 1945 to June 1946 Harcourt was the 'de facto' governor of Hong Kong as commander-in-chief and head of the military administration. He was a sensitive administrator, and was called by the Chinese name Ha Kok, a reference to a distinguished fourth-century Chinese nobleman Chung Kok. He was knighted in 1945 (KCB), was promoted vice-admiral in 1946, and awarded the grand cordon of the Chinese order of the Cloud and Banner. 
After Hong Kong, Harcourt was appointed flag officer (Air) and second in command of the Mediterranean Fleet. In March 1948 he returned to the Admiralty as second sea lord with responsibility for all personnel and manpower issues. This was an onerous post because government economies required overall manpower reductions in the navy from 178,000 to 147,000 and maintaining even the reduced level by re-engagements was difficult because of the attractions of civilian occupations. The rate of re-engagements had fallen from 61 per cent in 1938 to 22 per cent in 1948. Harcourt was to warn in 1949 of a 'first class breakdown' (Grove, 45) in two years if the shortage of key ratings was not rectified. While second sea lord Harcourt received his final promotion to admiral in June 1949. From 1950 to 1952, when he retired, he was commander-in-chief, Nore command, and he was advanced to GBE in 1953. He was also admitted to the Norwegian order of St Olav in 1951 and the Danish order of Dannebrog in 1952. 
In retirement, living in Eaton Place, London, Harcourt played leading roles in the London and Greater London Playing Fields Association, the Royal Commonwealth Society, and the Victoria League. He had married first, in 1920, the noted concert pianist Evelyn Suart, daughter of Brigadier-General W. H. Suart CMG and widow of Gerald Gould. After her death in 1950 he married Stella Janet Waghorn, the widow of Air Commodore D. J. Waghorn; she survived him. There were no children of either marriage. Harcourt died 'en route' for St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, London, on 19 December 1959, aged sixty-seven. A memorial service was held in January 1960 at St Martin-in-the-Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 64098


Sir Thomas Gorges (1536-1610), courtier, was born in Wraxall, Somerset, the fifth son of Sir Edward Gorges, landowner, of Wraxall, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Anthony Poyntz of Iron Acton, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was a member of the royal household, groom of the privy chamber from 31 December 1571, JP for Huntingdon and Wiltshire from about 1579, special ambassador to Sweden in 1582, and MP for Longford, Wiltshire, in 1586, as well as keeper of many important royal estates. Gorges acted as Elizabeth's 'high grade messenger' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 2.208). He was one of the wealthiest gentlemen in Wiltshire. Gorges, like his wife, was buried in Salisbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 64099


Turner, Hugh Thackeray (1853-1937), architect, was born on 8 March 1853 at Foxearth, near Sudbury, Essex, the fourth of the nine children of the Revd John Richard Turner (1825-1908) and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' Kebbell. His was a peripatetic childhood, as his father moved through a series of livings in Essex, Lincolnshire, and Wiltshire. It was also an artistic upbringing. One brother, Laurence (1864-1957), became an important arts and crafts carver while another, Hawes (1851-1939), was keeper of the National Gallery, London, between 1898 and 1914. Hugh Thackeray Turner was educated at Newbury grammar school and entered the office of the architect George Gilbert Scott as a pupil in 1874. 
Scott's was the largest and most influential architectural practice of the mid-Victorian era. By the time Turner arrived, however, fashions were changing. Scott's work had come to be regarded with suspicion by the most avant garde. It was from his experience with Scott, wrote one obituarist, that Turner 'learned much to be avoided and he acquired an almost instinctive revulsion from 'the Gothic revival'' ('RIBA Journal', 10 Jan 1938, 258). In 1877 Turner began work on his own account, entering -- and losing -- a number of architectural competitions. He was also employed by Scott's sons, John Oldrid and George Gilbert junior, and in the following year he became the latter's chief assistant. The younger George Gilbert Scott was a brilliant but troubled man, his career damaged by his conversion to Roman Catholicism in 1880, and destroyed by his collapse into insanity and alcoholism three years later. 
By 1883, however, Turner had found a way out of Scott's office. The Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, founded by William Morris in 1877, needed a competent secretary -- someone who could be trusted to investigate buildings at risk from insensitive restoration, who could inspect and report on them, and agitate for their preservation. Approached by J. H. Middleton, another graduate of Scott's office, Turner did not hesitate: 'I consider this new work ought to be a grand thing for me', he wrote on 30 December 1882 (Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, archives). 
The post did not bring with it a large salary. Employed for three days a week, Turner received $120 a year (a sum that was never increased), as well as expenses and a second-class rail fare for any travelling required. To some extent this job also limited his career as an architect since the society forbade him from becoming professionally involved in any of the buildings he investigated. The work was also time-consuming. Each year, Turner had to deal with about 250 cases, about a third of which required further investigation. He travelled the country, wrote thousands of letters, and became a familiar name in the correspondence columns of 'The Times'. Indeed, his attacks on the work of individual architects must have alienated him from much of the profession, for -- as an admirer put it -- he was 'born with a liking for controversy and hard-hitting argument' ('The Times', 15 Dec 1937, 18). 
Even though the secretaryship was ill-paid, arduous, and sometimes controversial, it was none the less rewarding. Through the society Turner became a friend of Philip Webb, who advised him on architectural design. He also encountered Eustace Balfour (1854-1911), brother of the Conservative politician A. J. Balfour, and entered into partnership with him in 1885, beginning work on Ampton Hall in Suffolk (1885-9). Five years later Eustace Balfour, who was married to the niece of the first duke of Westminster, became surveyor to the Grosvenor estate. Balfour and Turner were thus granted unrivalled access to the estate at a time of unprecedented building work; indeed, they did so much that Portugal Place was renamed Balfour Place. In addition to numerous houses, they were responsible for the church of St Anselm, Davies Street, London (1894-6; dem.) and Alfred Beit's Park Lane mansion, Alford House (1894-7; dem.). In nearby Kensington they also built the fashionable Campden House Chambers (1894). Although nominally the junior partner, Turner took the leading role in design. 
Among others in the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings whom Turner befriended were members of the wealthy and artistic Powell family. Thomas Wilde Powell (1818-1897) was a successful stockbroker, art collector, and philanthropist. He and his daughters, who included the artist Christiana Jane Herringham, first invited Turner to visit them in 1883. On 19 July 1888 Turner married T. W. Powell's younger daughter, Mary Elizabeth (May) Powell (1854-1907), at St Nicolas's Church, Guildford. May became a leading member of the arts and crafts movement in her own right, exhibiting needlework and founding the Women's Guild of Arts with May Morris. The couple had three daughters, the second of whom, (Christiana) Ruth, married the mountaineer George Mallory in July 1914. Thomas Powell also employed Turner to build the progressive and picturesque Wycliffe Buildings (1894) in Guildford. 
Despite his family responsibilities and his other work, Turner remained secretary of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings for twenty-eight years. If William Morris provided the impetus and Philip Webb the inspiration, then it was Turner who put their ideology of architectural preservation into practice. Believing buildings to be unmediated expressions of the societies by which they were erected, he was unflinching in his determination to prevent any change that would undermine their authenticity. He was equally keen to preserve national monuments like Winchester Cathedral and such local curiosities as the Godalming Pepperpot, or old town hall. Though he was not always successful in opposing restoration work, it was no exaggeration to say that 'There can hardly be a district in England which does not owe some part of its architectural interest to his energy and skill' ('The Times', 15 Dec 1937, 18). His 'Notes on the Repair of Ancient Buildings' (1903), which combined high-flown rhetoric with practical advice, was to be even more influential, not least in its insistence that any additions to old buildings should be 'frankly modern' (p. 17) -- an idea, and a phrase, that remained current a century later. 
In 1898 Turner designed his own home and, as befitted the abode of a member of the Art-Workers' Guild, Westbrook in Godalming was an archetypally arts and crafts house ['see also 'founders of the Art-Workers' Guild]. With Gertrude Jekyll's assistance, he surrounded it with a much admired garden. There he was to live for the rest of his life, becoming a leading figure in local society. His wife died early in 1907, followed by both his partner and his chief assistant in 1911. Turner resigned as secretary to the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings in the same year, though he continued his association with it -- even standing in as unpaid secretary during the First World War. He also continued to design buildings, not least the Phillips Memorial Cloister in Godalming (1913). Increasingly, however, the attractions of home and the loss of his closest associates meant that he withdrew from public life. After a long retirement he died of pyelonephritis on 11 December 1937 at 20 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London. 
Hugh Thackeray Turner was a striking individual, who invariably wore a bright blue tie to match his eyes. He was a gifted amateur musician and ceramic painter. Although an interesting architect in his own right, it is for his influence on other architects' work that he is best remembered. His energy, determination, and willingness to court controversy helped bring about a permanent change in the treatment of ancient buildings. 


@@@@@


doc= 64103


Dundas family of Fingask and Kerse (per. 1728/9-1820), landowners and politicians, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 64104


Thomas [iii] Dundas of Kerse, first Baron Dundas of Aske (1741-1820), politician, was born in Edinburgh on 16 February 1741. The beneficiary of his father's considerable wealth, he followed his education at Eton College with two years at St Andrews University (1756-8). He was introduced by Sir Lawrence to the freemasons of St Giles Lodge, Edinburgh, and in December 1758, aged seventeen, was elected master of St John's Lodge, Falkirk. Between 1759 and 1763 he toured Europe, visiting France, Switzerland, and Italy. He was summoned home in order to enter parliament as MP for Richmond in Yorkshire (for which he sat between 1763 and 1768), and to take his place in metropolitan society. Writing to his wife from Aske Hall, Sir Lawrence Dundas requested that she did not leave London before Thomas (known as Thomie) was: 'properly presented at Court and has seen Lord Bute, Lord Northumberland, [and] if possible the Duke of Bedford... Tell Thomie that I wish my friends to be his and these are the people I desire him to be known to... Order him to have his teeth put in and let him dress like an Englishman. (Ashcroft, 20-21)' On 24 May 1764 Thomas [iii] married Lady Charlotte Fitzwilliam (1746-1833), daughter of the third Earl Fitzwilliam and a niece of the marquess of Rockingham. The couple, who lived principally at the family's Yorkshire estate of Upleatham, had fourteen children, eleven of whom reached adulthood. 
During the late 1770s Thomas [iii] Dundas, now MP for Stirlingshire, actively defended his father's national and local political reputation from the attack led by their kinsman Henry Dundas. Thomas followed his father into the Rockingham camp, a position that, in view of his opposition to political corruption and sympathy for moderate reform, was a more natural association than that effectively forced on Sir Lawrence. On his father's death, in September 1781, Thomas became second baronet and, with property yielding $16,000 per annum, securities valued at $300,000, and numerous art treasures, was the principal beneficiary of Sir Lawrence's will. 
During the 1780s Sir Thomas emerged as a supporter of Charles James Fox and secured a few favours for associates and relatives; a close friend of the prince of Wales, he was also made one of George's councillors of state. With his father dead, Sir Thomas now negotiated the family's removal from the costly world of Edinburgh politics, effected in return for a government loan of $50,000 to the Forth and Clyde Navigation Company, in which, like Sir Lawrence, Thomas was involved. However, he did maintain his political influence elsewhere in Scotland. In 1784 he held Stirlingshire and once more secured Orkney and Shetland for his cousin Thomas (1750-1794). He also contented himself with choosing MPs for his pocket borough of Richmond, one of whom was his cousin, Charles, who sat from 1784 to 1786. He also maintained what proved a never particularly effective parliamentary opposition to Henry Dundas. Thomas's position was later weakened further with the success of a government-sponsored candidate, John Balfour, at Orkney and Shetland in the election of 1790, which also reduced Thomas's influence in the northern burghs. During the 1780s he had combined opposition with a campaign for political reform. However, his appetite for change was deadened by the increasingly violent course of the French Revolution. Shocked by the excesses of the revolutionaries, he left Fox and sided with the Portland whigs in their support of the Pitt administration. His reward was a peerage, and on 13 August 1794 he became Baron Dundas of Aske. Thereafter he was denied further political advancement and was unable to restore the family's former Scottish influence until 1818, when his sixth son, the naval officer George Heneage Lawrence Dundas, agreed with a fellow officer, Captain William Balfour RN, that their families should share representation of Orkney and Shetland in alternate parliaments. 
As a friend of the prince of Wales Lord Dundas enjoyed an active social life, being a member of Brooks's Club, the United Service Club, the Society of Dilettanti, and the Society of Antiquaries. From 1793 to 1813 he was the effective commander of the Yorkshire militia, and was lord lieutenant and vice-admiral of Orkney and Shetland between 1794 and 1820. An enthusiastic agricultural improver, he spent his income from rents on draining and enclosing land, experimenting with new crops and breeds (including merino sheep), using bone and gypsum manures, and building water- or horse-powered threshing mills. The family's alum works at Loftus were enlarged and he ran a successful alkali works at Dalmuir, Dunbartonshire. As governor of the Forth and Clyde Navigation Company (1786-1816), he presided over the canal's completion and the creation of Grangemouth and Port Dundas. He also persuaded the company to test the first practical steam-tug, the 'Charlotte Dundas'. Lady Charlotte had herself always advocated retrenchment, and she was occasionally heeded. In 1785 Dundas sold Moor Park, without its contents, for $25,000 and, three years later, Dundas House, Edinburgh, for $10,000. After selling numerous paintings from the family collection in May 1794, he parted with most of the family's Irish estate in 1809 for $177,490. In 1812 he obtained an act of parliament allowing him to sell feu and teind duties in Orkney and Shetland. 
Lord Dundas died at Aske Hall, near Richmond, on 14 July 1820, and was buried some days later in the Dundas mausoleum at Falkirk parish church, Stirlingshire. He was survived by his wife, who died on 11 February 1833; the barony passed to their eldest son, Lawrence Dundas (1766-1839), a determined whig politician who was created first earl of Zetland in 1838. 
The Dundas family owed its place in late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century national society to the remarkable career of Sir Lawrence Dundas of Kerse. Starting behind a shop counter in the Luckenbooths, Edinburgh, he amassed the wealth that enabled the family to buy its way into the whig oligarchy, to further the careers of other successful relatives, and to play a prominent role in the politics and land management of Scotland. The best monument to Sir Lawrence's success, as well as his determination, underhand methods, and excellent taste, remains Dundas House, St Andrew's Square, Edinburgh, which is still the New Town's finest building. Yet for all their wealth and local influence the Dundases of Fingask and of Kerse remained subordinate to a kinsman whose still crucial attachment to king and prime minister gave him precedence. Appropriately the statue in the centre of St Andrew's Square is not of Sir Lawrence, his brother, or nephew but of their rival Henry Dundas, later Lord Melville. In death, as in life, Harry IX succeeded and overshadows the Nabob of the North and his kind. 


@@@@@


doc= 64105


Thomas [ii] Dundas of Fingask (c.1708-1786), was an insignificant figure in Scottish property markets and politics but rather that Sir Lawrence's immense and rapidly made fortune enabled him to become the principal agent for the advancement, or rescue, of other family members, of which his purchase of Letham, in 1773, was the most eloquent statement. Thomas [ii] had previously worked as Lawrence's agent during his period as an army contractor. It was an association that brought him wealth also and, as in the case of his brother, facilitated his establishment as a significant owner of property. Purchase of Drumdryan House, Edinburgh, was followed by that of Quarrell, near Larbert, Stirlingshire, together with its coalworks and collier serfs, in January 1749. Having sold Drumdryan, Thomas then enlarged the old manor house at Quarrell and renamed it Carron Hall. In 1751 he bought lands at Torwood, north of Larbert. Notwithstanding his involvement with his brother's commercial enterprise Thomas clearly lacked Sir Lawrence's business talent, displaying instead a gentlemanly interest in genealogy and heraldry that led to his appointment as deputy lyon king of arms (1744-54). In 1768 he was elected MP for Orkney and Shetland, from which he retired two years later in favour of his son Thomas (1750-1794). Thomas [ii] died at Carron Hall on 17 April 1786 after a long period of ill health. He was survived by his wife, Lady Janet, who retired to Northumberland Street, Edinburgh, where she died on 29 December 1805. 
Sir Lawrence's only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 64107


Sir Lawrence Dundas of Kerse, first baronet (1712-1781), army contractor and landowner -- both of whom were born at Edinburgh and probably were educated at the city's high school. Lawrence, though the younger son, benefited as the namesake, godson, and favoured nephew of Professor Lawrence Dundas of Edinburgh, who, in 1734, left him $1500 sterling. In 1737 Thomas [ii] married his first wife, Anne, daughter of James Graham, a judge of the Scottish court of admiralty. Following her death he married on 11 November 1744 Lady Janet (1721-1805), daughter of Charles Maitland, sixth earl of Lauderdale, and Elizabeth Ogilvie; the couple had five daughters and two sons, Thomas Dundas (1750-1794) and Charles Dundas, later Baron Amesbury (1751-1832). On 9 April 1738 Thomas [ii]'s brother Lawrence married Margaret (1716-1802), daughter of Alexander Bruce of Kennet, Clackmannanshire. The couple had one son, Thomas [iii] Dundas of Kerse ['see below']. 
At the time of Thomas [iii]'s birth Lawrence Dundas was established as a wine merchant. Shortly afterwards, however, he became involved as an army contractor, in which business he soon made his fortune. In the wake of the Jacobite rising of 1745 he accompanied the duke of Cumberland as commissary for bread and forage in Scotland (1746-8), and by his favour he was appointed commissary for stores in Flanders (1747-8) and in Scotland (1748-57). With seven battalions stationed in Scotland and a major building project beginning at Fort George, Ardersier, Lawrence grew rich. He used his wealth to buy a residence in Argyle Square, Edinburgh, and in 1747 he obtained the estate of Kerse, near the mouth of the River Carron in Stirlingshire, which, bought in the name of his father, passed to him in 1750. In 1747 Lawrence was elected to parliament as MP for Linlithgow Burghs, having paid what Scotland's political manager, the third duke of Argyll, described as 'the greatest sum to purchase an election that was ever known in the country' (HoP, 'Commons, 1715-54', 1.628). He also helped his friend, George Haldane, to win Stirling Burghs. Both Argyll and the prime minister, Henry Pelham, objected to Dundas's successful campaign, for which he had not sought government approval. Argyll collected evidence of bribery against the new MP and displayed his hostility by ensuring that the post of barrack-master in Scotland was given neither to Dundas nor to his nominee, Lord Lauderdale. Dundas was unseated, on the grounds of electoral corruption, in March 1748. His attempt to return to parliament at the election of 1754 was unsuccessful, and it became clear that his political career would be blocked during Argyll's lifetime. 
Thwarted in politics, Lawrence Dundas focused his efforts on social advancement. He joined the Society of Dilettanti in 1750 and sent his son, Thomas [iii], to Eton College. In 1756 he purchased the house and lands of Castlecary, Stirlingshire, formerly owned by members of the Baillie family. Lawrence's career as an army contractor was furthered by the outbreak of the Seven Years' War (1756-63), which generated supply contracts for a combined force of British and allied troops in north-west Germany numbering 100,000 men with 60,000 horses. Dundas was soon involved in creating magazines for forage (1757-8), and on 16 March 1759 he engaged to supply the Hanoverian army with bread for six months. Although this contract was not renewed he secured others for a series of wagon trains, and from these and other activities he had acquired massive profits by the end of the war. James Boswell's claim that Dundas would 'bring home a couple of hundred thousand pounds' (11 Dec 1762, 'Boswell's London Journal', ed. F. A. Pottle, 1950, 75) underestimates the scale of profits, which others have put at between $600,000 and $800,000. Yet whatever the potential for corruption it appears that Dundas's gross profit rate (estimated at 17 per cent in 1762; see Little, 383) was not excessive; rather his success may be attributed to the huge scale of the contracts with which he was involved. 
In 1762, through his involvement with Lord Shelburne, whom he had met in Germany, Dundas negotiated a baronetcy and the purchase of a parliamentary seat. Shelburne accepted a large loan and on 19 August 1762 informed Henry Fox that 'Dundas, the Nabob of the North, writes me to desire I'll get him made a baronet; this made me go to Lord Bute yesterday' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 2.358). He received his title on 20 October, and by the end of the year had become MP for Newcastle under Lyme. 1762 also saw the death of his father, Thomas [i], who was buried in the Old Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh, on 2 June. 
Throughout this period Sir Lawrence continued his series of considerable land purchases. Between 1759 and 1762 he paid $63,696 for an estate in the counties of Sligo and Roscommon, in Ireland, and a further $31,000 for Ballinbreich, Fife. In 1762 he acquired Marske and Upleatham, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and Aske Hall, with its Richmond estate and pocket borough, on the west side of the North Riding. In December he paid about $22,000 for most of the Clackmannan estate, once the patrimony of his wife's relatives, while leaving the last Bruce laird in the castle, which was purchased later. Following the peace of 1763 he purchased the palatial Moor Park, Hertfordshire, for $25,000 and a house in Arlington Street, London, for $15,000. In the following year he added Loftus to his Yorkshire properties, and in 1766 acquired the Earldom estate, Orkney, and the lordship of Shetland for $63,000. Two years later he purchased Burray and its associated lands on other Orkney islands for $16,500. All these acquisitions made him one of the great landowners of the United Kingdom. He also became owner of two slave estates in the West Indies; one in Dominica and the other in Grenada. Later acquisitions were few but significant. In 1773 he bought Letham from his elder brother, Thomas [ii]. His culminating achievement came later that year, in Edinburgh, when he used his influence with the town council to obtain the best site in the New Town, originally intended for a church, and there built Dundas House, St Andrew Square (designed by Sir William Chambers and now head office of the Royal Bank of Scotland). 
Besides his taste for property Dundas was also active in commerce and finance. He had a preponderant interest in the Forth and Clyde Navigation Company and dug the first spadeful of earth when work began on the canal in June 1768. The line surveyed ran conveniently via Castlecary, Carron Hall and Kerse, enhancing the value of these Dundas properties. He was a governor of the Royal Bank of Scotland (1764-77), and in 1767 secured the parliamentary act that led to the building of Edinburgh's New Town. Other campaigns in the Commons included his (only partly successful) attempt to have Treasury commissioners settle war contractors' accounts in full. He also failed in another aim -- elevation to the House of Lords and a leading role in Scotland's political management -- for which he needed more influence than even his wealth and connections could achieve. Re-elected for Edinburgh in 1768, 1774, and 1781, he established himself at the head of a small parliamentary group of relatives and friends whose support was useful for the prime minister, Lord North. Denied a peerage by George III, despite assisting the Grafton ministry to influence the election of East India Company directors, Sir Lawrence was given a consolation position on the privy council in October 1771. 
However, by the mid-1770s relations with North had grown increasingly strained. Dundas was now subject to attacks from a distant kinsman, Henry Dundas of Melville (1742-1811), later Viscount Melville, who entered the Commons in 1774 and became lord advocate in Scotland in the following year. In alliance with the duke of Buccleuch, Henry Dundas was soon in a position to influence Lord North and to challenge Sir Lawrence's control of Edinburgh town council. Sir Lawrence's success, not to mention his often controversial business practices, had provoked envy and opposition for a number of years. Under Henry Dundas's co-ordination he now became the target of a pamphlet war that exposed his alleged corruption and vanity. Trade guilds were encouraged to break free of his control and in 1777 he was ousted from his governorship of the Royal Bank of Scotland. Increasingly disgruntled with North's refusal to curb the actions of his lord advocate, Sir Lawrence began building bridges to the opposition Rockingham whigs. At the election of 1780 he faced a concerted attack from the Henry Dundas-Buccleuch interest but was still able to bargain successfully to retain control of three Scottish seats: Stirlingshire, held by his son, Thomas [iii]; Orkney and Shetland, held by his nephew Charles Dundas; and his own Edinburgh constituency. James Boswell, who met Dundas for the first time during the contest, commented that to his surprise he was not the 'cunning shrewd man of the world as I had imagined' but a 'comely jovial Scotch gentleman of good address but not bright parts... I liked him much. I even felt for him as a man ungratefully used in his old age' (20 Sept 1780, 'J. Boswell: Laird of Auchinleck, 1778-1782', ed. J. W. Reed and F. A. Pottle, 1977, 251). Sir Lawrence was now sixty-eight. He died on 18 September 1781 at Aske Hall, near Richmond, Yorkshire, and was buried in the Dundas mausoleum attached to Falkirk parish church, in Stirlingshire. According to the 'Annual Register' he left $900,000 in personal effects and landed property, together with debts in mortgages, bonds, and annuities amounting to $400,000. 
It was clear, certainly by the mid-eighteenth century, that Sir Lawrence had emerged as the dominant figure in the Dundas family. This is not to say that his elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 64108


Boustead, Sir (John Edmund) Hugh (1895-1980), army officer and colonial official, was born on 14 April 1895 on a tea estate above Nawara Eliya, Ceylon, one of the two sons of Lawrence Twentyman Boustead, whose family had a hundred-year connection with Ceylon, and his wife, Ethel Margaret Alers-Hankey. His maternal grandfather served in the Indian Civil Service; and Sir Maurice Hankey, secretary of the war cabinet in the First World War, was his mother's cousin. 
After preparatory school at Horton Hall and Cheam School he became a naval cadet at the Royal Naval College, Osborne, in 1908, and later at Dartmouth. In 1913 he joined HMS 'Hyacinth' as a midshipman and once had to spend a night 'up the masthead' as punishment for carrying away the admiral's gangway when bringing a sailing launch alongside -- a punishment longer than the commander, who had forgotten to call him down earlier, intended. When war came in 1914 he was up the mast of the 'Hyacinth' again, in the south Atlantic on look-out for the 'Scharnhorst' and 'Gneisenau', and was later involved in actions against the 'Konigsberg' and other German ships off east Africa. With the seas cleared of enemy ships, he did not relish a routine security role on the Cape station, but ardently wished to fight in France, particularly as his brother Clive had been killed at Gallipoli serving with the Dublin fusiliers. After leaving his ship he enlisted in the South African Scottish as a private under the name of McLaren, but when the regiment was posted to Bordon camp in Wiltshire, he was traced by his worried parents. Made to face his formidable cousin, Sir Maurice Hankey, he boldly stated that it was out of the question for him to return to the Royal Navy. He was perhaps fortunate to have such a powerful relation, for Sir Maurice arranged for him to continue his service with the South African Scottish, but under his own name -- and without stigma. 
Boustead fought with his regiment in the brief and successful campaign against the Turks in Libya, marching 180 miles from Mersa Matruh to Sollum with a 94 lb pack, and then went to France in 1916, where his brigade joined the 9th Scottish division between Armentieres and Lille in Flanders. Wounded in the fighting near Delville Wood, he was sent home and, having recovered, was commissioned second lieutenant in the field. He was later awarded the MC for bravery in the battle of Arras, during which he was again seriously wounded; but he returned to France in 1918 to serve with the South African brigade. Just before the armistice he volunteered for service in the British mission to assist the White Russians of Denikin's army against the Bolsheviks. Alongside White Cossacks he saw successful action -- with the Lewis gunners he had trained -- against the Red Cossack cavalry and, while in Russia, received news of a bar to his MC, the Russian order of Vladimir with cross swords (equivalent of the DSO), as well as the welcome news from the Admiralty of the king's pardon for his desertion from the Royal Navy. After the defeat of the White armies, he was withdrawn with the rest of the British force. 
Boustead applied for a regular commission in the army, but first had a spell at Worcester College, Oxford, reading Russian and playing a prominent role as a sportsman. Already a well-known lightweight amateur boxer, having been the army champion at this weight, he was called to London at short notice by the president of the Imperial Boxing Association to fight against a French services team. Having knocked his opponent out in the third round, he changed into white tie and tails on the train back to Oxford and attended the Trinity College 'commem' ball with 'some enchanting young Danish girls', dancing the night through and bathing in the Cherwell early next morning. Selected in 1920 for the British team at the Antwerp Olympic games he competed in the modern pentathlon; and was prevented from taking part in the 1924 Paris Olympics only by a motorcycle accident shortly before the event. 
Boustead joined the Gordon Highlanders and served with them in 1921 in Constantinople and Anatolia during the war between the Greeks and Turks. In 1924 his battalion was posted to India and, fearing more barrack life there, he applied for a transfer to the Egyptian army. He arrived in Cairo, however, just after it had been decided to create a new British-officered Sudan defence force (SDF), following a mutiny by Egyptian troops in Sudan. He was, therefore, told to remove his kilt and other uniform and proceed to Khartoum in the guise of a civilian official. Thus began a period of twenty-four years' service as soldier and administrator in Sudan. 
Boustead joined the camel corps -- which was mounted on camels until the late 1930s -- and his first station was at Bara in Kordofan province, west of the Nile. Here his temperament and style were ideally suited to the family atmosphere of the companies and the manliness and intense sense of fun of the Sudanese soldier, although he was horrified on one occasion to see a rutting camel seize one of his men by the neck, shake him like a rat and grind his neck to pieces. In 1929 he joined the staff of the British general commanding in Sudan, the 'kaid' of the SDF, and in 1931 was promoted commander of the camel corps with its headquarters at al- 'Ubayd. A great admirer of Douglas Newbold (the governor of Kordofan and later civil secretary of Sudan) for his erudition, wit, and humanity, Boustead always co-operated harmoniously with the civil administration, as for instance in 1933 when the camel corps was called on to stop fighting between the Arab Baggara and the Nilotic Dinka. 
A shortish man with -- latterly -- a face wrinkled like a walnut, Hugh Boustead had a great capacity to inspire and lead, and did extraordinary things as if they were a matter of course. Although not unattracted to women and once engaged, he remained single, preferring a challenging life nearly all spent overseas. When on leave he sought new challenges, as when in 1930 he climbed the Matterhorn, and his mountaineering skills gained him a place on the 1933 Royal Geographic Society's Everest expedition. In the interim his 1932 leave was spent on an extensive survey -- led by Ralph Bagnold, founder of the long range desert group -- of the Libyan desert, Jebel 'Uwaynat, and the edge of the Tibeste and Ennedi mountains. Responsible for the fauna collection, he collected sixty-seven specimens of migratory birds and joined in the finds of beautiful and wonderfully preserved rock pictures of giraffe, buffalo, gazelle, and antelope. 
In 1935 Boustead joined the Sudan political service. Posted to Darfur province, he became resident -- with district commissioner's powers -- in Zalingei, a district which marched with French Equatorial Africa along the west side of Jebel Marra, a massif rising to 10,000 feet. Boustead's objectives in this area were to stop oppression by local chiefs, and to set up organized local courts, as well as establishing primary schools. He gave priority to the education of boys and, through emphasis on hygiene and cleanliness, made washing and wearing impeccably white clothes fashionable. He also took strong measures for the conservation of the magnificent forest. 
Recalled to military service on the outbreak of war in 1939, Boustead raised a new SDF frontier battalion composed of men from all over Sudan. Their role was to open the way, in co-operation with Ethiopian forces, against the Italians for the restoration of Haile Selassie as emperor. Orde Wingate, another former SDF officer, was the kaid's staff officer for the operation, but Boustead did not approve of his tactics. After the capture of Belaya, at over 10,000 feet in the Gojjam, Boustead was given the command of Gideon force consisting of his own frontier battalion and the 2nd Ethiopian battalion. This force achieved further notable successes against the Italians and entered Addis Ababa, where Boustead and his officers were invited to dine with the emperor. 'Boustead Bey' was awarded the DSO and won praise from the historian of the SDF for the way in which he harried the Italians: he had taught the British army new lessons in guerrilla warfare and 'defeated and largely captured or dispersed four Italian brigades with all their equipment. The odds in man-power were ten to one against him; the odds in fire-power far greater' (Orlebar, 'Story of the Sudan Defence Force', 108). 
In July 1945 Boustead resumed his previous post in Zalingei, from which he retired in 1949. A chance meeting on leave, however, with Sir Reginald Champion, the governor of Aden, led to his appointment as resident adviser to the Hadhramaut states and British agent to the East Aden Protectorate under the Colonial Office. During his nine years there Boustead came to admire the qualities of the seafaring and mercantile Hadhramis and was enchanted by his new headquarters, the port of Mukalla -- a white-walled city with houses fringing the harbour full of dhows. He plunged enthusiastically into his new task in a wild area, where there was still much tribal fighting despite the many truces which his predecessor, Harold Ingrams, had negotiated. Much preoccupied with law and order, he had no fewer than three forces -- the Qu'aiti armed constabulary, the Mukalla regular army, and the Bedouin legion -- subject to his command. Despite this he was faced with a serious riot in Mukalla, and narrowly escaped a very severe blow to his person. He went on, however, to stamp his unique personality on the area, enjoying the company not only of the Qu'aiti sultan but of qadhis, seyyids, and sultans with their family contacts in Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Far East -- and relishing their spicy cooking. He encouraged education, agriculture, and famine prevention, and also successfully ejected a party of Americans from Aramco, the American oil company, who with the backing of the Saudi king, had begun drilling operations 30 miles inside the (disputed) borders of the Aden Protectorate. 
In 1958 Boustead became development secretary to the sultan of Muscat and Oman, Sayyed Said bin Taimur, whom he found very half-hearted about plans for health, education, and agriculture. When Boustead suggested establishing a school in every governorate, the sultan refused, saying: 'That is why you lost India, because you educated the people' (private information). This post gave Boustead much less satisfaction than his other posts, and in 1961, shortly after oil had been discovered in Abu Dhabi, he became the political agent of its ruler. However, after a honeymoon period with Sheikh Shakhbut bin Sultan, he suffered, as others had, from the ruler's violent changes of mood and unwillingness to face the responsibility of his new oil wealth. 
Boustead nevertheless stayed on in Abu Dhabi as Sheikh Zaid bin Sultan, who succeeded his brother as ruler, persuaded him to look after his large stable of horses in al- 'Ain. He continued to do this until his death in 1980, aged eighty-five. During this time he received many visitors, including young British officers serving in Oman and the United Arab Emirates, who liked to pay a sort of military pilgrimage to an eccentric and lovable figure. Reflecting on his own career, Boustead wrote in his autobiography, 'The Wind of Morning' (1971): 'there can be few deeper satisfactions than to have played a part in helping a country forward to a life of peace' (237). In 1966 he was awarded the Lawrence of Arabia medal by the Royal Society for Asian Affairs, 'in recognition of work of outstanding merit in the fields of exploration, research or literature'. Boustead died in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates on 3 April 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 64109


Aubrey, Sir John, sixth baronet (1739-1826), politician, was born on 4 June 1739 at Boarstall, Buckinghamshire, where he was baptized on 2 July 1739, the eldest of the three sons and one daughter of Sir Thomas Aubrey, fifth baronet (1707/8-1786), landowner, of Boarstall and Llantriddyd, Glamorgan, and his wife, Martha (1713-1788), the daughter of Richard Carter of Chilton, Buckinghamshire, a Welsh judge. Having been educated at Westminster School (1752-8) he went to Christ Church, Oxford (1758-62), and received the DCL in 1763. From 1764 to 1765 he undertook a grand tour of France and Italy, and in Paris he met, and soon deserted, Cornelia (afterwards De Vasse), the mother of his illegitimate daughter Mary ('c'.1765-1843), whom he eventually brought home and endowed generously. Aubrey married first, on 9 March 1771, Mary (1750-1781), the daughter and coheir of Sir James Colebrooke, first baronet, a banker, of Gatton, Surrey, and his wife, Mary Skinner, of Leyton and Walthamstow, Essex; their only son, John (1771-1777), died accidentally from poisoned food. His second marriage, on 26 May 1783, to his first cousin and ward, Martha Catherine (1764-1815), the daughter and coheir of George Richard Carter of Chilton, was childless. He commemorated the 'rare excellence' of both wives in Boarstall church, which he rebuilt in 1818. 
Aubrey's parliamentary career spanned fifty-eight years. He first entered parliament on Lord Abingdon's interest as MP for Wallingford in 1768. Friendly to Chatham and Shelburne when elected, he was opposed to the Grafton and North administrations. His maiden speech, on 17 March 1769, was in defence of the radical John Wilkes. He spoke in favour of curtailing parliamentary privilege, on 15 April of that year, and backed the perpetuation of the Grenville reform act on 25 February 1774. It was at this time that he purchased Dorton, which became his Buckinghamshire home after 1777, when he demolished Boarstall. To Lord Abingdon's vexation, he avoided candidature for the county in 1774 and instead successfully contested Aylesbury. A persistent critic of government policy in North America, he called on North to resign in Chatham's favour on 17 March 1778. He also championed Irish legislative independence at debate on 18 December 1779. In 1780 he resumed sitting for Wallingford, and on 6 May 1782 he supported Edmund Burke's attack on sinecures. Aubrey served under Shelburne as a lord of the Admiralty, from July 1782 to April 1783, and Pitt seated him at the Treasury board in December 1783. He was returned after an expensive contest for Buckinghamshire in 1784, but he was often ill in the ensuing parliament. On 18 April 1785 he backed Pitt on parliamentary reform. After speaking in favour of the opposition's proposal for a regency during the king's illness he ceased to be summoned to the Treasury board, and so abandoned it on 3 March 1789. In October 1789 he renounced the county seat and threatened to quit the county altogether and retreat to his ancestral Welsh estate. 
In 1790 Aubrey returned to parliament as MP for Clitheroe, where his patron Thomas Lister was a Portland whig. While he voted with the opposition, he maintained an obstinate silence in debate. He became a member of the Whig Club on 7 June 1791 and joined Charles James Fox's followers, with whom he voted from December 1792. The opposition whigs found him, in 1796, a seat at Aldeburgh on the Crespigny interest, which he retained unopposed for sixteen years. However, he seceded from the Commons with Fox in May 1797 and returned only occasionally for particular votes until 1801, when he resumed regular opposition with his leader. On Fox's elevation to office in 1806 Aubrey requested a peerage but was told to wait. The fall of Grenville's ministry in April 1807 dashed his hopes, but he continued to act with the whig opposition, though ill health affected his attendance from 1808. Expected to retire in 1812, he came in again, for the duke of Norfolk's borough of Steyning, and resumed fitful attendance. In the 1818 parliament, where he again sat for Steyning, he supported the call for George Tierney to lead the opposition. In 1820 Norfolk returned him for Horsham. Aubrey died 'father of the house' at Dorton on 1 March 1826 and was buried at Boarstall on 11 March. A nephew, the last baronet, succeeded to Boarstall, and his unentailed estates were bequeathed to other relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 64110


Bond, Nathaniel (1754-1823), politician, was born on 1 November 1754 at Creech Grange, Isle of Purbeck, the second surviving of seven children, including four sons, of John Bond (1717-1784), landowner and politician, and his wife, Mary (1717-1787), daughter of Edmund Dummer of Swaythling, Hampshire. He was educated together with his elder brother John at Winchester College (from in or before 1766), Magdalene College, Cambridge, (from 1771), and the Inner Temple (1773), where Nathaniel was called to the bar in 1779. He served as recorder of Dorchester from 1781 to 1806 and enjoyed a king's bench and western circuit practice; he became KC in 1795, and held the offices of bencher, reader, and treasurer of his inn (1795-1801). He was about to retire from the law but his friend Joseph Jekyll dissuaded him, recommending 'bustle' to his 'bilious, nervous' colleague, on 22 December 1800 (Dorset RO, Bond MSS, D367). John Bond opportunely vacated the family's parliamentary seat for Corfe Castle when Pitt resigned, and Nathaniel was elected at the subsequent by-election on 25 February 1801. 
Bond's prospects seemed good, for his school friend Henry Addington was then premier, and in March he was seated at the Treasury board. He declined the Irish chief secretaryship in February 1802, pleading illness: he feared overwork. His maiden speech, on 14 May, eulogized the Amiens peace treaty. He part-framed and defended the Nottingham election and police bills in debate in 1803, and rumour designated him secretary at war. In reality he was sworn of the privy council on 23 November 1803, and was again offered the Irish chief secretaryship, which he again declined in January 1804. He became vice-president of the Board of Trade on 8 February, but lost office in June after Pitt's restoration. 
Like Addington, Bond opposed Pitt, who courted him in October 1804 after George III, having met Bond at Weymouth, suggested him as the next judge-advocate-general. Bond demurred until Addington, by now Lord Sidmouth, rejoined Pitt and solicited for him. He anticipated becoming judge-advocate until the reconciliation between Pitt and Sidmouth faltered. Changing tack, he supported criminal inquiry into naval maladministration on 2 May 1805, but opposed Lord Melville's impeachment; his successful amendment on 12 June for prosecution by the attorney-general, was, however, subsequently overthrown. Pitt's refusal to place Bond, who waived office, and Hiley Addington, brother of the former prime minister, on 27 June ruptured the merger. Bond reluctantly became judge-advocate in Grenville's ministry on 8 March 1806, after he had defended Lord Chancellor Ellenborough's cabinet seat in debate on 3 March. Daunted by William Windham's War Office memorandum awarding the duke of York, commander-in-chief, sole access to the king on all courts martial, Bond offered to resign in June. When a participatory role for him was concocted, he capitulated on 24 July, despite suffering from deteriorating eyesight. 
Bond did not seek re-election in 1807. In November he resigned from office, overwrought and aware that his likely successor, Richard Ryder, had royal approval. He retired to East Holme, Dorset, which he had inherited from his uncle Nathaniel. In better health, he occasionally contacted Sidmouth to discuss current political issues. He died at East Holme, unmarried, on 8 October 1823 and was buried at Steeple, Dorset, on 15 October. He left East Holme to his namesake nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 64111


Bathurst, Charles Bragge (bap. 1754, d. 1831), politician, was baptized Charles Bragge on 28 February 1754, elder son among three children of Charles Bragge (died in or after 1780), landowner, of Cleve Hill, Mangotsfield, Gloucestershire, whose father, from Essex, had married into that estate, and his wife, Anne (1718-1793), daughter of Benjamin Bathurst, politician, of Lydney, Gloucestershire. Educated as founder's kin at Winchester College (from in or before 1770), and at New College, Oxford (from in or before 1772), he entered Lincoln's Inn in 1772, from where he was called to the bar in 1778. He served as bankruptcy commissioner (1778-1800) and secretary to the commissioners of peace (1779-91); his cousin Henry Bathurst was lord chancellor. After practising at Gloucester quarter sessions, he graduated BCL in 1785 and retained his fellowship until he married, on 1 August 1788, Charlotte (1762-1839), daughter of Anthony Addington, physician, and Mary Hiley (died 1778), of Fringford, Oxfordshire; two sons and two daughters of their nine children survived infancy. This match with the sister of his schoolfellow, Henry Addington, promoted a political career already started under other auspices. 
Bragge had been newly appointed recorder of Monmouth through the influence of the duke of Beaufort, whose interest had returned his Bathurst grandfather as MP there, and Bragge too became its member, gratis, on 28 December 1790. He first spoke in parliament against delaying prorogation on 2 June 1791; a contemporary pamphlet upholding impeachments after dissolutions was probably his. Beaufort secured his return in 1796 for Bristol, which he represented until 1812, and he gave strong support to the ministry, championing Pitt against Fox in debate on 14 December 1796. Through the influence of his brother-in-law, Addington, who was speaker, he became counsel to the Board of Control for India in September 1797, and in November chaired the bank committee. Pitt was certain that he would decline his offer of honorary office as queen's solicitor in 1798 as Bragge had opposed Pitt's measure to levy income tax even on taxpayers with large families, such as Bragge's own. He opposed trade unions in 1799, and published a bill to make colliery thefts felonious in 1800. As the first paid chairman of supply, he received $1200 per session from 1799 to 1801. 
Addington, who became premier in 1801, wanted Bragge as speaker, but the king apparently objected, despite Bragge's obvious preference for business, electoral, and procedural matters. He was sworn of the privy council on 18 November 1801, and became treasurer of the navy, which brought him an income of $4000 plus a house. Addington, claiming he followed the king's advice, did not consult him on public affairs, and the speakership was again mooted in 1802. Mocked by Pitt's friends, Bragge rebuked Canning for accentuating policy differences between Addington and Pitt on 24 November. In June 1803 he sacrificed his office for a seat on the Board of Trade and, in August, the secretaryship at war, after having declined the India board. 
Even though the king praised his business ability, Bragge was often harassed in debate; he refused the Irish chief secretaryship, in January 1804. When Pitt had replaced Addington and Bragge had resigned from office, Bragge questioned his military measures, thereby ignoring Addington's advice to abstain from criticism for reasons of self-interest. He had just acquired his uncle Poole Bathurst's encumbered Lydney estate worth $2500, and taken his surname of Bathurst (on 11 May 1804), and was thus in need of a lucrative office to pay his debts and support his family. He none the less deprecated Addington's action in soliciting for him in negotiations to rejoin Pitt, but he did accept the chairmanship of Gloucestershire quarter sessions. He was plainly embarrassed when Pitt and Addington, now Lord Sidmouth, disagreed over Lord Melville's naval administration, for it was his veto on banking navy funds at Coutts that had triggered the malversation by Melville; Sidmouth was then requesting the duchy of Lancaster on his behalf. Bathurst resumed attendance on the naval committee to investigate Melville's alleged embezzlements and advocated criminal prosecution of Melville. He regretted his divergence from Pitt, and did not, as alleged, pen the pamphlet 'A Plain Reply', occasioned by the split between Pitt and Sidmouth. 
Bathurst, as Sidmouth discovered after successfully soliciting a cabinet office for him in Grenville's ministry in 1806, would have accepted the War Office, had it been available. Grenville was well disposed towards him, for he backed ministers, particularly over military reorganization, and eventually Bathurst was appointed to the Royal Mint, although he did not take office until the dissolution of parliament, thereby avoiding the costs of a by-election necessitated by his assumption of office. His allegiance to the Grenville administration wavered although he continued to support it: he preferred gradual to immediate slave trade abolition and approved of royal hostility to measures of Catholic relief, as did Sidmouth, who prompted his vocal defence in April 1807 of the king's dismissal of Grenville. 
Bathurst was offered the surveyorship of woods and forests in the duke of Portland's ministry, but he declined to take office without Sidmouth. He shone in voicing his opposition to military reformation and to the Copenhagen and Peninsular operations. A ministerial ruse to banish him to India with Vansittart, another staunch supporter of Sidmouth, as commissioners, misfired. His proposed censure of the duke of York for allowing his mistress to dispense military patronage was negatived on 20 March 1809. In May 1809 he supported modest parliamentary reform, but denied the charge of ministerial corruption levelled by William Madocks. When Perceval, as premier, proposed a merger with the Sidmouthites in October 1809, he was tempted with the promise of the War Office and a seat in cabinet, but he advised Sidmouth against parleying without consulting other opposition leaders. Following Sidmouth, he voted for the address in 1810, but supported the Walcheren inquiry, favouring censure. Though guardedly critical of the house's handling of the reformer Sir Francis Burdett, he voted against parliamentary reform on 21 May, and opposed piecemeal abolition of sinecures on 1 June. He discouraged Sidmouth from negotiating office for him, dreading the costs of the ensuing by-election. Yet he stood by Perceval over the regency, and abandoned his motion vetoing the queen's interference. Report then assigned him the exchequer or speakership. Courted on his own by Perceval in January 1812, he preferred to wait for Sidmouth to conclude a deal; he anticipated high office. He eventually attained a cabinet post and the duchy of Lancaster in June 1812, when Lord Liverpool, as premier, included Sidmouthites in his government. To avoid the expenses of a Bristol by-election, Sidmouth procured him Bodmin. 
Bathurst subsequently defended ministers on multifarious topics, some beyond his range. He regularly decried Catholic relief and opposed legal and parliamentary reform. A select committeeman on India, he voted for Christian missions in 1813. His championship of the Anglican clergy suggested a wish to represent his university, which created him DCL in 1814. A commissioner for building new churches (1818), he also sat on poor law committees. The chairmanship of secret committees awarded him a new brief denouncing popular radicalism, which he resumed in his last two parliaments, when he represented Harwich. He attributed unrest to abeyant royal authority and foreign example. In 1819 his resignation was rumoured. With additional, unwanted, and unremunerated office as president of the India board from January 1821, he left office and parliament for health reasons in January 1823, having obtained civil-list pensions for himself and his wife that were divisible among their children. Bathurst died at Lydney Park on 13 August 1831 and was buried in Lydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 64112


Anderson, Sir John (1858-1918), civil servant and colonial governor, was born on 23 January 1858 at the Free School, Gartly, Aberdeenshire, the only son among the five children of John Anderson, schoolmaster and later superintendent of the Gordon Mission, Aberdeen, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Smart. He was educated at Old Aberdeen grammar school and Aberdeen University, where he graduated in 1877 with a first-class honours degree in mathematics and a gold medal as the best student of his year. In 1879 he came top in the open civil service examination and entered the Colonial Office and he moved his home, for the rest of his life, to London. On 26 June 1879 he married the 26-year-old Georgina Milne Daniel, daughter of James Daniel, master printer, of Aberdeen. They had four sons and two daughters, but the marriage was later clouded by his wife's permanent ill health. 
While still working at the Colonial Office Anderson enrolled as a student of Gray's Inn and won a Bacon scholarship in 1887 and an inns of court studentship in 1888. Though he was not called to the bar his legal expertise was impressive. He became private secretary to the permanent under-secretary, Sir Robert Meade, in 1892, and special assignments took him to Paris and to Gibraltar. He was promoted first-class clerk in 1896 and principal clerk in 1897, and in the latter year served as secretary to the conference of colonial premiers convened by Joseph Chamberlain, the secretary of state for the colonies. In 1898 he became CMG and in 1901 he was knighted KCMG and went with the future George V on a visit to Australia by way of the Far East. At Singapore Frank Swettenham, then governor, was late in meeting the royal party at the dockside, the start of an enduring antipathy between him and Anderson. In 1902 Anderson again acted as secretary to the colonial conference convened by Chamberlain. 
In 1904 Anderson succeeded Swettenham in the governorship of the Straits Settlements (bringing his elder daughter with him to deputize as governor's lady). He showed himself a forceful governor, 'proceeding 'fortiter in re' but hardly 'suaviter in modo'' according to one of his officials (Macfadyen, 53). In choosing a new head of the Federated Malay States government he passed over two of Swettenham's lieutenants, who soon afterwards became governors elsewhere, and appointed William Taylor, whose previous service as government auditor in Ceylon inclined him to say no to everything. This unfortunate choice ended in 1910 with Taylor's displacement when even Anderson had had enough. When he sought to retire Ernest Birch, the senior resident, the Colonial Office in effect told both men that they must work together -- and they did. In the Straits Settlements towns Anderson stiffened sanitary regulations on building despite opposition by property owners, and he solved the longstanding instability of bimetallism by fixing the value of the local (silver) dollar in a ratio to that of the gold sovereign that lasted for half a century. He brought into public ownership an important part of the Singapore docks, to overcome neglect, and he also set up a specialist customs and excise service to replace some inadequate expedients. The local business community frustrated his plans to introduce a local income tax in substitution for government revenue from opium. The local Chinese community was disturbed by events in China leading to the revolution of 1911, but the Colonial Office ignored Anderson's plan for a new honour to recognize loyal public service in the colony. In the Federated Malay States he established in 1909 a federal legislative council at which the business community could express its views, but hardly addressed the problem of over-centralization that would complicate the situation for years to come. Further north, Siam reluctantly ceded to Britain its suzerainty over four Malay states and in 1909 Anderson assumed responsibility as high commissioner, showing good judgement in dealing with Malay rulers who resented being, as one of them said, bought and sold like a buffalo. He was also high commissioner for the state of Brunei from 1906. Promotion to GCMG in 1909 recognized his achievements and it was intended that he should extend his term to 1912 to oversee the changes he had made. But in 1911 he was recalled to become permanent under-secretary at the Colonial Office, a post he held until 1915. He was made KCB in 1913. 
At the end of 1915 Anderson was again sent overseas as governor of Ceylon, where his predecessor, Sir Robert Chalmers, had over-reacted to riots by declaring a state of martial law. In dealing with the demands of the Sinhalese professional class he was more conciliatory than local European opinion, official and unofficial, deemed appropriate in time of war. He was preparing proposals for the Colonial Office when his death on 24 March 1918, at the hill station of Nuwara Eliya, supervened. 'British officialdom buried him with maimed rites' (Ludowyk, 240) at Colombo, but the Sinhalese planned to raise a fund for educational purposes in his memory. As a governor of the Straits Settlements and then of Ceylon, Anderson's firmness had occasionally hardened into rigidity, and his judgement and treatment of men was not infallible. Of medium build, in appearance he was grave and austere, and nervousness made him a poor public speaker. His ability and integrity earned him respect rather than affection, but he achieved a great deal. 


@@@@@


doc= 64114


Eliot, Edward James (1758-1797), politician, was born at Port Eliot in Cornwall on 24 August 1758, the first surviving of four sons of Edward Craggs-Eliot (1727-1804), politician, of Port Eliot, created Baron Eliot in 1784, and his wife, Catherine ('c'.1735-1804), daughter and heir of Edward Elliston of Gestingthorpe, Essex, an East India Company captain. Schooled at Liskeard, he entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1775, where he became friends with the future premier, William Pitt; he proceeded MA in 1780. Eliot sat in parliament on the family interest, for St Germans, from 1780, and for Liskeard from 1784, though in 1790 he was elected for both. He had acted with the opposition to North but, supporting Shelburne, was placed at the Treasury board from July 1782 to April 1783, and again, after opposing the Fox-North coalition, from December 1783, in Pitt's ministry. That autumn, with William Wilberforce, he had accompanied Pitt to France. 
Eliot was appointed king's remembrancer in the exchequer in 1785, worth $1500 a year, as a prelude to marrying, on 24 September 1785, Pitt's sister Lady Harriot (1758-1786), younger daughter of William Pitt, first earl of Chatham, and Hester Grenville. A year later she died, survived by her newborn daughter, Harriot, on 25 September 1786. In mourning, Eliot espoused religion and a virtuous life. Resident at Broomfield, Clapham, near Wilberforce's home, he participated in his philanthropic causes: the Proclamation Society, prison reform, poor relief, and abolition of the slave trade, for which he voted. He supported a Sunday observance bill in the Commons on 26 March 1795. Wilberforce taxed him with lobbying Pitt for the 'Saints', and with mediating between himself and Pitt. He had been credited with stopping succession by purchase to exchequer clerkships. 
Not a ready debater, Eliot acted as a government teller in the house. His bill to stop corruption in Stockbridge elections was lost on 27 May 1793. Soon afterwards he became joint commissioner for Indian affairs, resigning for health reasons from the Treasury board. He became a captain in the Cornish fencibles in 1794. He invested in East India Company stock, and in February 1797 his friends expected him to become governor-general of Bengal. The return of a chronic stomach disorder ruled him out. Privy that summer to a plan of Pitt's to resign, he died at Port Eliot on 20 September 1797, to the dismay of Pitt and Wilberforce, the latter maintaining that Eliot's unpretentious demeanour had caused his intelligence and character to be underestimated. He was buried at St Germans on 3 October. His brother John, fellow member for Liskeard, succeeded to the barony and was created earl of St Germans in 1815. Eliot's only child, Harriot Hester Eliot, married William Henry Pringle, later lieutenant-general, on 20 May 1806. 


@@@@@


doc= 64116


Goode, Sir William Allmond Codrington (1907-1986), colonial governor, was born at 5 Riverdale Road, Twickenham, on 8 June 1907, eldest son of Sir Richard Allmond Goode (1873-1953), colonial administrator, and his wife, Agnes Codrington. Goode was educated at Oakham School (1920-26) and at Worcester College, Oxford (1926-30), where he held a classical exhibition and graduated with second-class honours. In the civil service entrance examinations of 1931 he was placed high enough to have a choice of joining the UK civil service or taking a Far Eastern cadetship. He decided to follow his father's example of service overseas and joined the Malayan civil service. A spare, athletic figure he had played in his school first fifteen and was captain of his college boat club at Oxford. In 1936 he was called to the bar by Gray's Inn. In 1938 he married Mary Armstrong Harding, who died in 1947. In 1950 he married Ena Mary McLaren, and they had one daughter. 
From 1931 to 1940 Goode held district posts, mainly in the rural, predominantly Malay, east coast of Malaya. In 1940 he became assistant commissioner for civil defence in Singapore. As a serving member of the Singapore volunteer corps he was mobilized in 1941 as a lance-corporal; he became a prisoner of war in 1942 and was sent by the Japanese to work on the Burma-Siam railway project. On returning to Malaya after the war he was appointed deputy economic secretary and in 1949 went to Aden as chief secretary (and acting governor in 1950-51). In 1953 he returned to Singapore as chief secretary (1953-7) and then governor (1957-9). He was then governor of North Borneo (Sabah) (1960-63) and finally, on returning to the UK, became chairman of the Water Resources Board, a post he held from 1964 to 1974. 
Goode was a very able and quietly decisive administrator, who was also trusted and well liked both by political leaders and by the local business community. The post-war years in Singapore, 1953 to 1959, were the most demanding test of his career. By fortunate chance he had served in the volunteers with David Marshall who became chief minister in 1955. In his memoirs Goode remembered Marshall as a 'flamboyant and exciting personality.... not a very good soldier [but] a lovable person [with] incredible courage under fire'. As chief minister Marshall wanted to move very fast, which was his downfall. Then came Lim Yew Hock, who 'steadied affairs in Singapore' in the face of forceful opposition from the People's Action Party leader, Lee Kuan Yew. Lee obviously had the full support of the underground communist movement but Goode believed him -- and made it plain that he did -- when he said that he would not allow Singapore to go communist. Later on, when Lee had become prime minister, he accepted Goode's invitation to weekly sessions at Government House to talk things over. After independence, when Goode was temporarily UK high commissioner, Lee invited him to act also as Singapore's head of state, a unique distinction for a former colonial governor. Of his dealings with the Singapore leaders Goode recalled that 'we could explain things to them, we could advise them, but it was always our policy to make them take the decisions; it was their show'. It had not been possible, during his time in Aden, to bridge the gap created by implacable Arab hostility to British rule, but when he went on to North Borneo, Goode was able to make a friend of Donald Stephens, the Kadazan leader who became the first chief minister of Sabah (North Borneo) in 1963. 
In Aden, Goode had worked hard, and with fair success, to improve the quality and performance of the local administration, and to secure funds for much needed development. When he went to North Borneo in 1960, it was prosperous but still had serious arrears in the development of social services such as education. To remedy these deficiencies took time, and Goode deplored the undue haste with which North Borneo was propelled into an association with Malaya for which it was ill-prepared. 
However, looking back in retirement, Goode felt that he could take pride in having laboured so that 'the new nations had made it all work' (Heussler, 'Completing a Stewardship', 215). It was the pride of an unassuming man, but in his memoirs he rejected as 'quite unjustified' the widespread criticism of civil defence in the debacle of 1941-2. He gave active support and help to the project for a history of the Malayan civil service. 
Goode was deputy lieutenant of Berkshire (1975), and a knight of the order of St John (1958). He became CMG in 1952, KCMG in 1957, and finally GCMG in 1963. He died of cancer on 15 September 1986 at Thames Bank, Goring. 


@@@@@


doc= 64117


Grantham, Sir Alexander William George Herder (1899-1978), colonial governor, was born on 15 March 1899 at Chippenham, The Avenue, Surbiton, the son of Frederick William Grantham, barrister, and his wife, Alexandra Ethelred Marie Sylvie Emilie von Herder. He was educated at Wellington College, the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and Pembroke College, Cambridge. He served in the First World War after being commissioned to the 18th hussars in 1917. 
Grantham joined the colonial administrative service as a Hong Kong cadet in 1922, learned Cantonese, and served mainly in the colonial secretariat for about ten years. Ambitious and determined to rise to a colonial governorship, he requested a transfer in 1934 in order to advance his promotion prospect, accepting in the process a drop of about one-third in salary. In that year he attended the Imperial Defence College and was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. He subsequently served as colonial secretary in Bermuda from 1935 to 1938 and in Jamaica from 1938 to 1941, and as chief secretary in Nigeria from 1941 to 1944, before being appointed governor of Fiji and high commissioner for the Western Pacific in 1945. He was knighted in that year. He assumed the governorship of Hong Kong on 25 July 1947 and retired on 31 December 1957, having been the colony's longest serving governor. Tall, handsome, charming, and intelligent, he was well liked by his subordinates and the non-official leaders of Hong Kong. 
When the Second World War began Grantham was colonial secretary in Jamaica where his main contribution was to promote Anglo-American co-operation, as Jamaica was one of the colonies whose facilities Britain made available to the United States Navy in exchange for fifty old destroyers. He became more involved with the war after he became chief secretary in Nigeria, which was one of the four west African colonies that raised two divisions for operations in south-east Asia and an important source for groundnut oil, rubber, and tin. At the end of the war he was promoted to his first governorship: from 1945 to 1947 he presided over the rehabilitation of Fiji and played a positive role in establishing organs of international co-operation for the development and welfare of the south Pacific. 
It was, however, during his final decade in Hong Kong that Grantham made his most decisive contribution as a colonial governor. When he assumed the governorship Hong Kong was already on its way to economic recovery but it faced the danger of the spilling over of the Chinese civil war (between the Kuomintang and the Chinese Communist Party) into the colony. The threat from China to Hong Kong's survival as a British colony appeared to have reached a near crisis point when the communists won control of the Chinese mainland and marched towards the Sino-British border in 1949. Grantham took the lead in working out a policy to defuse the threat from communist China. He rightly assessed that the communists would not invade Hong Kong provided the latter acknowledged its existence as a borrowed place on borrowed time, and made itself valuable to China. 
At the same time Grantham took the lead to devise a policy of non-provocative firmness in dealing with Hong Kong's communist neighbour and in maintaining strict neutrality in the as yet unfinished Chinese civil war, which turned into a stalemate across the Taiwan Strait after the United States Navy started to patrol the straits when the Korean War broke out in 1950. By a combination of pragmatism, realism, and the ability to remain firm against any unreasonable demands, he played a crucial role in establishing a 'modus operandi' between the governments in Hong Kong and Beijing, which allowed the latter to sidetrack domestic irredentist pressure. It was under his governorship that the Chinese government's demand, raised since 1942, for the return of the leased part of Hong Kong, was put aside. This continued for over three decades and allowed Hong Kong to transform itself from a colonial outpost into a cosmopolitan modern metropolis. 
Grantham played an even more important, indeed a pivotal, role in the shelving of democratic reforms which were strongly advocated by his predecessor, Sir Mark Young. Although both men related the issue of democratization to the future of Hong Kong, Grantham, unlike Young, believed Hong Kong had no other future apart from being either a British colony or part of China's Guangdong (Kwangtung) province, given that 90 per cent of its territories were leased from China until 30 June 1997. Confident in his knowledge of the Chinese people and their politics, Grantham thought Young was misguided in attempting to turn Hong Kong's Chinese residents into loyal British subjects. He did not believe the Chinese of Hong Kong could become either loyal British subjects or good democrats. He was convinced that giving them the vote could only lead to their voting to end British colonial rule and to rejoin mother China, even though they actually preferred the stability and good order offered by the colonial government. Hence, he delayed the implementation of Young's reform plan for almost two years, and then substituted it with a set of more conservative proposals when the Chinese civil war was reaching its climax and distracting public attention in 1949. He remained sceptical about the wisdom of democratic changes in Hong Kong, and did not push hard for his proposals when various officials in the Colonial Office doubted the wisdom of his alternative. After Hong Kong started to suffer from its first recession, which threatened the livelihood of the overwhelming majority of its people and diverted their attention from the reform issue, Grantham adroitly manoeuvred to abandon democratization in 1952 on the ground that it would be 'inopportune', and skilfully sidetracked all subsequent demands to reopen the issue during the remainder of his governorship. 
Grantham was married twice. His first marriage, to Maurine Samson (died 1970) of San Francisco, took place in Hong Kong in 1925. After her death he married on 21 November 1972 Mrs Margaret Eileen Lumley ('b'. 1921/2), daughter of Charles S. Wright, a corn merchant. They had no children. He was appointed CMG in 1941, KCMG in 1945, and GCMG in 1951. In retirement Grantham lived in London, where he kept an interest in the welfare of Hong Kong and spoke and wrote occasionally to discourage others from 'rocking the boat'. He also wrote an autobiography of his colonial service, 'Via ports: from Hong Kong to Hong Kong', which was published by the Hong Kong University Press in 1965. It was his second wife who nursed him through illness before he died on 4 October 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 64118


Jolliffe, William (1745-1802), politician, was born on 16 April 1745, the first son of John Jolliffe ('c'.1697-1771), politician, of Petersfield, Hampshire, and Mary, daughter of Samuel Holden of Roehampton, Surrey. He was educated at Winchester College and at Brasenose College, Oxford, matriculating in 1764. In 1768 he was returned to parliament for Petersfield, a borough controlled by his father, and to which he succeeded as patron in 1771 on his father's death. On 28 August 1769 Jolliffe married Eleanor, the daughter of Sir Richard Hylton, fifth baronet, of Hayton Castle, Cumberland, and Eleanor Hedworth, with whom he had five sons and six daughters. 
In his early years in parliament Jolliffe generally supported the ministry of the day, first that led by the duke of Grafton and then Lord North's long ministry of 1770 to 1782. In February 1772 he was rewarded with a position on the Board of Trade, a post which he held until he resigned in 1779, 'in order to oblige Government' (Jolliffe, 55) by making room for Edward Gibbon. When North's ministry fell in 1782, Jolliffe remained faithful to him in opposition and went on to support the Fox-North coalition ministry in 1783, during which he was a lord of the Admiralty. After the Fox-North coalition was turned out, he persisted in his support for its leaders in opposition. By 1790, having fallen out with his constituents at Petersfield, Jolliffe had demolished his father's house there and moved to Merstham, Surrey, although he maintained his electoral interest at Petersfield. In 1791 he was sentenced to six months in prison and fined for allegedly trying to influence a jury. He regarded his conviction as a consequence of his continued support for North through the 1780s. Eventually the sentence was commuted to a fine only. In 1794 he followed, albeit warily, his new political master, the duke of Portland, when the Portland whigs went over to Pitt, but a rumoured peerage never materialized. On the whole he was to be a supporter of Pitt's ministry in the 1790s, although he did complain of 'Pitt's monstrous injustice' (Thorne, 321) in blocking his peerage and was critical of the ministry's policy in relation to France. By 1801 he can be regarded as in opposition. Jolliffe died at Merstham on 20 February 1802, having broken his neck falling through the trapdoor of his wine cellar. 


@@@@@


doc= 64119


King, John (1759-1830), Home Office official and politician, was baptized on 23 May 1759 at Clitheroe, Lancashire, the fifth son of the Revd James King, curate of Clitheroe and later chaplain to the House of Commons and dean of Raphoe, and his wife, Anne, daughter and coheir of John Walker of Hungrill, Yorkshire. After studying at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1777 and graduated BA (1781) and MA (1784), he went on to study law at both Lincoln's Inn and Gray's Inn, before being called to the bar in 1790. 
King's first governmental post came in January 1791 when he was appointed as a law clerk at the Home Office, on a salary of $300 a year. In December 1791 he was made an under-secretary of state in the Home Office, his salary rising fivefold to $1500 a year. Thus began a career which saw King become one of a group of talented young civil servants that was to be responsible for the administration of government under William Pitt the younger in the 1790s during the war against the French Revolution and the struggle against domestic radicals and reformers: a group which included men such as Francis Freeling, William Wickham, William Huskisson, and Evan Nepean. King was also intimately connected at this time with Edmund Burke and his circle of relatives and admirers, Burke stating that King's 'promotion to so honourable and advantageous a situation made us the happiest people in the world' ('Correspondence', 6.454). George Canning, too, thought highly of King, describing him as 'one of the worthiest and friendliest and best sort of men in the world' ('Letter-Journal', 36); King was clearly part of a set of young Pittites who both worked and socialized together. 
On 9 April 1792 King married Harriot Margaret, daughter of the Rt Revd Charles Moss, bishop of Bath and Wells; they had four sons and a daughter. In December 1794 King took on further duties when he became responsible for much of the correspondence of the alien office, which, as well as monitoring French 'emigres' in Britain under the provisions of the 'Alien Act' of 1793, rapidly became the hub of an intelligence operation which involved counter-revolutionary activity and intelligence gathering at home, in Ireland, and on the continent. King's contribution to this effort was recognized in 1798 when he became one of the joint superintendents of aliens, along with William Wickham and Charles William Flint. In 1806, upon Lord Grenville's assumption of the premiership at the head of the ministry of all the talents, King was promoted to the post of joint secretary to the Treasury, where he superintended ministerial patronage. This position necessitated a seat in parliament and in March 1806 he was returned for the Irish pocket borough of Enniskillen, co. Fermanagh. His parliamentary career was a short one: he gave up his seat in July 1806, having found regular attendance at the House of Commons detrimental to his health. Thereupon King became comptroller of army accounts, a post he held until his death. He died on 30 March 1830 in Grosvenor Place, London, having gone into the office the previous day. 


@@@@@


doc= 64122


Hardinge, Sir Arthur Henry (1859-1933), diplomatist, was born on 12 October 1859 at 10 Chester Square, London, the only son of General Sir Arthur Edward Hardinge (1828-1892) and his wife, Lady Mary Georgiana Frances Ellis (1837-1917). As a boy he served as a page to Queen Victoria, to whom his father was an equerry. He re-established links with the court through his marriage on 4 November 1899 to Alexandra Mina ('b'. 1870/71), goddaughter of the princess of Wales, and daughter of Major-General Sir Arthur Ellis, a member of the household of Edward VII, who became godfather to their second son. The couple also had a daughter. 
At Eton College, where he was known as Hoppy for his peculiar gait, Hardinge was remembered for the elegance of his Latin verse. At Balliol College, which he entered in 1876, he took a second class in classical moderations, but followed with a first in modern history and, in 1881, a fellowship at All Souls. Renowned for his sparkling wit, he had a lasting affection for Oxford, timing home leaves wherever possible to attend college meetings and gaudies at All Souls, and corresponding on college business with Warden Anson until he reluctantly relinquished his fellowship in 1894. 
Hardinge entered the Foreign Office in July 1880, before he had taken his degree, with a nomination from Lord Salisbury, who remained a patron. As an undergraduate he had travelled widely. He subsequently seized every opportunity to travel in remote places and was privately commended by Salisbury for his political reporting. Fluent in French from an early age, his success in Foreign Office language examinations provided welcome additions to his salary. 
After spells in the Turkish and German departments of the Foreign Office, Hardinge's first overseas appointment in 1883 was to Madrid, under Sir Robert Morier. In 1885, following a short period in England as a precis writer to Lord Salisbury, Hardinge followed Morier to St Petersburg as his private secretary and subsequently travelled extensively in Russia and central Asia. There followed a series of appointments to Constantinople, under Sir William White, in 1887; to Bucharest in 1890; as a companion to the tsarevich (the future Nicholas II) to India, where he crossed swords with the redoubtable Lord Harris, governor of Bombay, for which he was commended by Lord Salisbury; and to Cairo in 1891 under Sir Evelyn Baring. Of these, Constantinople made such an impression that it became his ambition to become ambassador to the Porte. When the post went to another (Gerald Lowther) in 1906 his disappointment was such that he nearly resigned, but was dissuaded by Curzon, an old Balliol friend. 
Before this, however, in 1894, Hardinge had been appointed to Zanzibar, as political agent and consul-general, a post which he had accepted with delight. To this was added in 1895 the position of commissioner for the new East Africa Protectorate. The administration of the little known territory between Mombasa and Lake Victoria, acquired for the strategic purpose of building a railway to Uganda, was a challenge to which Hardinge rose with enthusiasm. Whether defeating an Arab rebellion at the coast -- and then championing the cause of dispossessed Arab slave owners -- or demonstrating the efficacy of a maxim gun to potentially hostile 'chiefs', Hardinge revelled in his independence and freedom from protocol. The railway having passed through the protectorate, and rudimentary administration having been established, Hardinge left Mombasa in October 1900 amid general acclamation. The demands of more traditional diplomacy returned when he took up his next appointment, as minister to Persia, later that year. This gave him further opportunities for travel, including a visit to the gulf with Curzon, now viceroy of India, but this period also saw the early death of his first son. 
Summoned to Balmoral when on leave in 1905, Hardinge recounted in his memoirs that, on the urgings of his father-in-law 'anxious for the sake of our two children and his daughter's health', he was invited by Edward VII to become minister at Brussels. His heart 'was and remained for long afterwards in the Mohammedan East' but 'domestic considerations overcame my personal preferences' and 'I decided to accept the King's offer' (Hardinge, 'Diplomatist in the East' 350). From that time, it seems (to quote from a contemporary) 'he was not quite in the same bright spirit we had known', and it became clear that he was not to reach the highest positions in the service that had earlier been predicted ('The Times', 29 Dec 1933). Hardinge's European posts after he left Brussels in 1911 -- minister at Lisbon from 1911 to 1913 and ambassador at Madrid from 1913 to 1920 -- seem to have become increasingly onerous. He retired in 1920, having been knighted in 1897 and made KCB in 1904 and GCMG in 1910. 
The deaths of his two sons, in separate and tragic accidents, and his own failing health marred Hardinge's later years. His 'Life of Lord Carnarvon' is thought by some to have been altered by another hand before publication in 1925. His own memoirs, 'A Diplomatist in Europe' (1927) and 'A Diplomatist in the East' (1928), gave excellent individual portraits of his colleagues, and flashes of his old humour. He died at his home, 31 York Avenue, Mortlake, Surrey, on 27 December 1933 and was buried in the churchyard of Fordcombe church, near Penshurst, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 64124


Montagu, Lord Charles Greville (1741-1784), colonial governor and politician, was born in England on 29 May 1741, the second son of Robert Montagu, third duke of Manchester ('c'.1710-1762), and his wife, Harriet (died 1755), daughter of Edmund Dunch of Little Wittenham, Berkshire, and Elizabeth Godfrey. Through his mother's side Montagu was the great-nephew of John Churchill, first duke of Marlborough. Like most second sons of high-ranking aristocrats, he had the advantages of family connections and money, but did not have the convenience of a life that was mapped out as carefully as that of his elder brother, George Montagu, fourth duke of Manchester. 
Montagu entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1759 and married Elizabeth, daughter of James Balmer of Huntingdon, on 20 September 1765. They had one son and two daughters. He succeeded his elder brother as a member of parliament for Huntingdonshire in June 1762, and voted both with government and with the opposition before settling in as a supporter of the Rockingham administration. Rockingham rewarded Montagu in 1765 with an appointment as governor of South Carolina. After vacating his seat at the end of the session in December, Montagu set his affairs in order and set sail for Charles Town, arriving on 12 June. 
Montagu's South Carolina was a land in turmoil. The combination of the proclamation of 1763, which severely restricted the colonies' westward expansion, and the 'Stamp Act' of 1765, by which the British government sought directly to tax internal colonial American commerce, had created substantial tensions between the South Carolinians and the British. As an associate of the Rockingham administration, which had repealed the 'Stamp Act', Montagu was received in South Carolina with great favour and expectation, but the initial rejoicing soon wore off as new problems with Britain arose and the colonies marched down the road to revolution. Moreover, the Carolinas had numerous internal problems, the worst of which was between the eastern counties, which were wealthier and disproportionately represented in the colony's assembly, and the poorer frontier counties, which erupted in the regulators' rebellion. As governor, Montagu sought to ease tensions by pardoning seventy-five of the failed rebellion's leaders, but this only agitated further the colonists of the more settled areas of the colony, who were becoming increasingly critical of British rule. 
Although he remained the governor in title, Montagu effectively had given up by the summer of 1769, and on 29 July he set sail for England, where he worked as hard for a new position as the South Carolina assembly did for his recall. He returned briefly, arriving on 15 September 1771, but found a colonial assembly more hostile to British rule than ever. Part of the assembly's tax bill, put forward the day after his arrival, included the $10,500 that the assembly had already advanced to John Wilkes's fund, for the support of that English radical's flagrant attacks on the king and his government. At stake was control of the colony's purse. Montagu was under strict instructions from the king and Wills Hill, first earl of Hillsborough, secretary of state for the American colonies, not to allow the assembly to dispose of public money without the consent of the governor and council. The assembly resented such interference as unacceptable infringements on its authority. In the face of such intransigence, Montagu had no choice but to dissolve the assembly time and again. Either unable or unwilling to suffer the situation any further, he left the colony without leave, and officially resigned his post in the first months of 1773. 
Montagu made a bid in the general election of 1774 for a Southampton seat, but without the North administration's support was soundly defeated. With the assistance of his brother, he was placed in charge of raising a corps from among the American prisoners of war for the king's service against the colonies of Spain, which had entered the war in 1779. In New York he toured the prison ships and recruited upwards of 500 men to form the duke of Cumberland's provincial regiment. When it was disbanded in 1783 Montagu and a number of his men, along with thousands of other loyalists, resettled in Nova Scotia. He died in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 4 February 1784 and was buried there in St Paul's churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 64125


Montagu, John, fifth earl of Sandwich (1744-1814), politician and landowner, was born on 26 January 1744, the second but first surviving son of John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich (1718-1792), politician, and his wife, Dorothy (1716/17-1797), daughter of Charles Fane, first Viscount Fane, and his wife, Mary Stanhope. Styled Viscount Hinchingbrooke from birth, at the age of four he was sent to board with his father's old master at Eton College, where he was a scholar from 1753 to 1758. In 1759 he entered the army and in 1761, through his father's influence, he was sent to Germany as aide-de-camp to General Earl Waldegrave and promoted lieutenant and captain in the Scots guards. He retired from the army in 1767. 
Hinchingbrooke was a man of no real ability, but through the connections of his powerful father he became MP for Brackley in 1765. On 1 March 1766 he married Lady Elizabeth (Betty) Montagu (died 1768), daughter of George Montagu, second earl of Halifax, and Anne Dunk; they had two children before her early death. In the year of her death, 1768, his father moved him to the Huntingdonshire constituency, which was dominated by the Montagu interest, and though his first election was hard fought there were no further contests until he succeeded his father to the earldom on 30 April 1792. On 25 April 1772 he married Lady Mary Powlett (1753-1779), daughter of Harry Powlett, sixth duke of Bolton, and his first wife, Mary Munn; they had four children, only two of whom survived infancy. 
Hinchingbrooke's public life was undistinguished. He seldom spoke in parliament, and in the Commons divisions he at first merely followed his father's line. He held the court appointment of vice-chamberlain of the household from 1771 to 1781 and was made master of the buckhounds by the Fox-North coalition in May 1783. In November 1783 he announced his intention of withdrawing his support from the coalition on the grounds that 'he could not prevail upon himself to give additional strength to a combination of men whose purpose was to establish their own power in order to keep the King in perpetual subjection' (Martelli, 282-3). His father soon made him see that he could not oppose a ministry that had appointed him to a lucrative court post but Hinchingbrooke certainly felt easier in his mind when Pitt became prime minister and continued him in his place. Thereafter he remained a Pittite and continued as master of the buckhounds until 1806. From 1807 until his death he enjoyed the post of joint postmaster-general. 
Like his father Hinchingbrooke spent much of his life heavily in debt, and the family's financial problems were the cause of friction between father and son. After the old earl's death an astute agent and a long-anticipated windfall revived the family fortunes, and the fifth earl remained in possession of the Huntingdonshire estates and the family seat of Hinchingbrooke House, continuing to manage and control local parliamentary elections. He died in Upper Wimpole Street, London, on 6 June 1814, passing his earldom and estates to his only surviving son, George John Montagu (1773-1818). 


@@@@@


doc= 64126


Mortlock, John (bap. 1755, d. 1816), banker and mayor of Cambridge, was born at Cambridge and baptized at St Edward's Church there on 17 October 1755, the only son of John Mortlock (died 1775), a prosperous woollen draper and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Davy (died 1800). He is often referred to as John Mortlock III to distinguish him from his father and grandfather. On 3 October 1776 he married Elizabeth Mary Harrison (1756/7-1817), daughter of Stephen Harrison, a wealthy Presbyterian grocer, and they had ten children. 
Mortlock became the first banker to the town and university of Cambridge and achieved rapid success and popularity, for his business was conducted 'liberally and cheerfully' (Gunning, 1855, 1.128) and answered a real need. He entered politics in 1780 as a would-be reformer and supporter of the fourth duke of Rutland, and was rewarded with the receivership of the Cambridgeshire land tax, which he relinquished on his unopposed election as MP for Cambridge in April 1784. His parliamentary career was brief and inglorious; he narrowly avoided censure in 1786 for tampering with a list of commissioners of the land tax, and was equivocal in his allegiance to the administration, causing Rutland to write to Pitt in September 1786: 'Personally he weighs not a feather; but he has decided influence in the town of Cambridge, which I am apprehensive he will throw into the hands of the duke of Bedford' ('VCH Cambridgeshire', 74). 
For part of 1788 Mortlock was mayor, member of parliament, and recorder of the borough, but he resigned the last two of these positions in favour of Rutland nominees, and afterwards continued to enjoy the patronage of the family and of government ministers, while managing Cambridge with its small electorate of freemen as a pocket borough in the Pittite interest. His recompense was a lucrative office as receiver-general in the Post Office, and other preferments for his sons. His power depended on his mastery of the town corporation into which he had bought his way in 1778, becoming alderman in 1782. His election as mayor in 1785 was followed by alterations in the manner of appointment; he held office thirteen times in the following thirty years, turn and turn about with his sons and proteges. Besides his wealth he employed legal tactics ruthlessly and altered by-laws at will to transform an oligarchy into a dictatorship. His use of corporation funds and leases as well as charitable trusts was self-serving. During the danger of the French wars he was strongly conservative and did little to prevent the persecution of his former allies, the dissenters of Cambridge, although he was usually an able magistrate and checked food riots in 1795. He died at his town house in Cambridge, after a short illness, on 7 May 1816, a landed gentleman, owner of Abington Lodge and a substantial fortune possibly worth $120,000. He was buried at St Edward's, Cambridge. 
Mortlock's reputation suffered greatly when Liberal and municipal reformers of the 1830s delved into events of the previous fifty years. The learned town clerk of Cambridge, Charles Henry Cooper, blamed him for most of the corruption in local affairs, remarking that, had he wished, Mortlock could have made his own footman MP for Cambridge. He became the villain of modern studies by Helen Cam and Sir Lewis Namier. His rule, however, 'although despotic was not inefficient' (Gray, 54), and he was probably no worse a grafter than others of his time. His probity as a banker was not undermined and attempts to bankrupt him for political ends always failed. Henry Gunning, that staunch and argumentative whig, who differed markedly in politics, none the less maintained a long and cordial friendship with him. ''Without 'influence',' he would say, 'which you call 'corruption', men will not be induced to support government though they generally approve of its measures'' (Gunning, 1855, 1.127). 


@@@@@


doc= 64128


Parker, George, fourth earl of Macclesfield (1755-1842), courtier, was born on 24 February 1755, second child and eldest son of Thomas Parker, third earl of Macclesfield (1723-1795), politician, of Shirburn Castle, Oxfordshire, and his wife and cousin, Mary (1726-1812), daughter of Sir Thomas Heathcote, first baronet, of Hursley, Hampshire. Styled Viscount Parker from 1764, he was educated at Eton College (1765-9), and at Exeter College, Oxford (1773-6), to which he presented his portrait on leaving. He was returned to parliament for Woodstock, on 1 December 1777, on the Blenheim interest. He seconded the address on 25 November 1779. He married on 25 May 1780 Mary Frances (1761-1823), daughter of the Revd Dr Thomas Drake of Amersham, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Whittington; in December he became a gentleman of the bedchamber to George, prince of Wales. He attended Westminster in February 1783, speaking on the 14th and voting for peace on the 18th. He found no seat at the general election in 1784, as he was haplessly associated with the prince's opposition to Pitt. The prince dismissed his household in 1786-7, and Parker was dismissed again in 1789 after his father's support of Pitt over the regency. This martyrdom prompted him to write to Pitt, on 18 May 1790, requesting a Treasury board vacancy, preferably before he contested Sandwich at the general election in 1790. Defeated at Sandwich, he procured Minehead on the Luttrell interest, armed for the contest with a secret service subsidy. 
Adhering to Pitt's ministry, Parker became comptroller of George III's household, and privy councillor, in April 1791. At Westminster he delivered royal messages. Succeeding his father as earl, and as high steward of Henley, on 9 February 1795, he took his seat in the Lords on 11 March, having informed Pitt of his wish to remain comptroller unless offered a better position. He was created DCL at Oxford, but demoted to lord of the bedchamber in April 1797, despite a plea to Pitt. He was appointed captain of Watlington yeoman cavalry in 1798, and on Pitt's return to power he became, from 1804 to 1830, captain of the yeomen of the guard. His general support for successive governments was silent. In June 1827 he offered the king his resignation when unable to support the 'Corn Bill', but was dissuaded. He also served as president of the board of agriculture (1816-18), and his wife was lady of the bedchamber to Queen Charlotte (1811-18). He later eschewed publicity, and died at 9 Conduit Street, Hanover Square, London, on 20 March 1842, 'a good Conservative', lord lieutenant of Oxfordshire since 1817, FRS, and the second oldest privy councillor ('GM', 548). He was buried at Shirburn on 29 March 1842. A son having died in infancy, he left one daughter, and his brother, Thomas, succeeded as earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 64129


Howe, Sir Robert George (1893-1981), diplomatist and colonial governor, was born at 96 Carrington Street, Derby, on 19 September 1893, the son of Herbert Harry Howe, a railway fireman, and his wife, Minnie. He was educated at Derby School, and at St Catharine's College, Cambridge. During the First World War, as a second lieutenant in the Sherwood Foresters, he fought at Gallipoli, where he was wounded and left for dead. Taken prisoner by the Turks, he later escaped and eventually returned to Britain. On 9 July 1919 he married Loveday Mary Hext (died 1970), daughter of George Hext, of Tredethy, Cornwall. They had one son, Peter ('b'. 1924). 
In October 1919 Howe entered the diplomatic service and embarked on a career that was to take him to many parts of the world. His service began as a third secretary in Copenhagen in May 1920 before promotion to second secretary in December that year. In October 1922 he was appointed as second secretary in Belgrade, where he served as charge d'affaires from July to September 1923. He next went to Rio de Janeiro early in 1924 and while there was promoted to first secretary, before embarking on a longer period in Bucharest from October 1926 to February 1930. He then returned to London for four years before being posted as counsellor in Peking (Beijing) in May 1934. While there he was appointed CMG in 1937. In March the following year he was transferred back to the Foreign Office. With the coming of the Second World War he was sent as minister to Riga, where he served from 1940 to 1942. In the latter year, following the restoration of Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, Howe was sent to Addis Ababa as minister from 1942 to 1945. 
Howe returned to the Foreign Office in 1945 as assistant under-secretary of state with special responsibility for the Middle East. It was a time of great uncertainty, not least because Britain had just elected a Labour government with a forceful new foreign secretary, Ernest Bevin, who had progressive ideas about the region. Bevin wanted Britain to be seen less as an imperial power in the Middle East than as a friend who wished to work with the Arab world. The core of Britain's position in the region was Egypt, where Britain maintained a large military base on the Suez Canal, but successive Egyptian governments were eager to renegotiate the relationship between the two countries following the end of the war. The situation was complicated by the disagreement of the two countries over Sudan, which was legally the Anglo-Egyptian condominium, though actually under British control. King Farouk of Egypt, however, claimed that it belonged to the Egyptian crown, to which it had been restored by the Anglo-Egyptian reconquest of 1898, and he sought recognition of that in return for an agreement over the British base on the canal. After a number of negotiating failures, in October 1946 Bevin and Egypt's foreign secretary, Isma'il Sidqi, agreed what became known as the Sidqi-Bevin protocol, an ambiguous statement that appeared to recognize the Egyptian claim to Sudan, at least while the condominium lasted. 
Officially Sudan was the responsibility of the Foreign Office, rather than the Colonial Office, but in practice it was administered by the self-recruiting Sudan political service. The service was strongly against Egypt's claim, as was the governor-general, General Sir Hubert Huddleston. Huddleston demanded to know what would happen if Sudan later chose independence; and he refused to return to his post in Sudan until he was satisfied with the answer, a move that effectively wrecked the protocol. In April 1947 he was recalled from Sudan, a move that was widely seen by the political service as a sacking. He was replaced by Howe, who was made KCMG in the same year. 
There was much fear in the political service that Howe, having been an adviser to Bevin, was appointed as governor-general to ensure that Egypt's claim on Sudan was recognized in the country. In addition some of the more snobbish members of the political service lampooned Howe for his working-class origins. However, if it was the case that he was expected to push the acceptance of Egypt's claim, once in post Howe swiftly came to see the difficulty of any such endeavour. Within Sudan the political service was working actively for constitutional progress towards self-government, in co-operation with the anti-Egyptian Umma Party, which was under the patronage of Sayyid 'Abd al-Rahman al-Mahdi, the posthumous son of Muhammad Ahmad ibn 'Abdullahi al-Mahdi, the conqueror of General Gordon at Khartoum in 1885. Meanwhile the constitutional process was being boycotted by the other major party, the National Unionist Party, under the patronage of Sayyid Ali al-Mirghani, the leader of the Khatmiyyah sect and rival of al-Mahdi, which was in close alliance with Egypt. Howe soon realized that it was events within Sudan that would determine the way forward rather than negotiations between Egypt and Britain, and he gave his support to the strategy of rapid progress towards self-government that was being strongly led by the forceful civil secretary, Sir James Robertson. Howe's work in this regard was recognized with promotion to GBE in 1949. 
Although progress was made in Sudan, it was the coup of the Free Officers in Egypt in July 1952 that dramatically changed the picture. The new republican government withdrew Egypt's claim to impose its crown on Sudan, and instead won the support of the Umma Party as well as the National Unionist Party for an agreement with Egypt that undercut the alliance of the Umma and the political service. Howe recognized the political defeat and accepted its outcome in the form of the Anglo-Egyptian agreement of 1953, which effectively ended the rule of the political service and handed self-government and the question of unity with Egypt directly to the Sudanese. It also established an international governor-general's commission to oversee Howe's position, and this too Howe handled diplomatically. In the election of December 1953 it was the National Unionist Party that won, and many expected union with Egypt to follow. However, Howe and his dwindling band of senior staff, who were being rapidly replaced under a Sudanization programme, swiftly realized that if they could win over the new prime minister, Isma'il al-Azhari, and the National Unionist Party there might still be a chance of stopping a union with Egypt, which developments in the new regime there were making it appear would be against Britain's interests in the region. Howe worked quietly and effectively, helped by the ineptness of Egyptian diplomacy, and by 1954 it was becoming clear that the large majority of Sudanese no longer wished for a union with Egypt. However, by that time Howe was spending a good deal of time outside the country, especially as his wife was in poor health. He was eventually permitted to retire in March 1954. Sudan's independence was declared on 1 January 1956. 
Following his retirement from Sudan, Howe lived quietly in Cornwall, his wife's home county, where he served as a JP from 1955 to 1968. He always kept in touch with old Sudanese friends and entertained many of them in his home in Cowbridge, near Lostwithiel. He died at the Duchy Hospital, Treliske, on 22 June 1981, of multiple myelomatosis, and was survived by his son. His funeral was held at St Bartholomew's Church, Lostwithiel, on 25 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 64131


Perceval, Charles George, second Baron Arden in the peerage of Ireland, and first Baron Arden in the peerage of the United Kingdom (1756-1840), politician, was born on 1 October 1756 at Charlton, Kent, the eldest son of John Perceval, second earl of Egmont (1711-1770), landowner and politician, and his second wife, Catherine (1731-1784), the daughter of the Hon. Charles Compton. He had four sisters, and six brothers, the youngest of whom was Spencer Perceval, the future prime minister. Their mother was created Baroness Arden in the Irish peerage in 1770, and following her death in 1784 Perceval succeeded as second Baron Arden; he took his seat in the Irish Lords in 1787. He was educated at Harrow School (1771-4), and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1774-7), whence he proceeded MA in 1777; he entered Lincoln's Inn in the same year. 
Perceval was elected to the Commons on 28 November 1780 as MP for Launceston on the duke of Northumberland's interest. A supporter of North's administration, on 27 November 1781 he moved the address. He opposed North's successors until he was appointed a lord of the Admiralty by his friend Pitt, who became premier in December 1783. Despite having several times vocally opposed electoral reform, he voted for Pitt's proposals for parliamentary reform in 1785. On 1 March 1787 he married Margaretta Elizabeth (1768-1851), the daughter of General Sir Thomas Spencer Wilson, sixth baronet, of Uckfield, Sussex, and his wife, Jane Badger-Weller; they had six sons and three daughters. In 1790 he was returned for Warwick on Lord Warwick's interest and in 1796 for Totnes on the duke of Bolton's interest. In August 1790 he obtained the lucrative reversionary sinecure of registrar of the court of Admiralty, which had been granted to him in 1764, and he moved the navy estimates every year from 1792 to 1800 and spoke only on Admiralty questions. He remained a steadfast supporter of Pitt, who refused his resignation during the naval mutinies of 1797, and he contributed $10,000 to the loyalty loan. Rallying to Pitt's successor, Addington, in 1801, he was sworn of the privy council (20 February 1801) and served as master of the Royal Mint (March-July 1802) and an India board commissioner (May 1801-October 1803). At Addington's instigation he was made Baron Arden in the United Kingdom peerage on 28 July 1802. He was a fellow of the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries and a trustee of the Hunterian Museum. 
On Pitt's return to power in May 1804, Arden became a lord of the bedchamber, and he transferred to Windsor from 1812 until George III's death in 1820. His Admiralty registrarship, to which his younger brother Spencer Perceval was reversionary heir, was attacked in the Commons in 1807, and Arden defended his family preserve in the Lords on 4 August by citing the royal prerogative. Brushing aside a government compromise, he further rebuffed his critics on 29 February 1808, 10 March 1808, and 20 February 1810. An act to suspend reversions temporarily was passed in 1812, but the attacks on Arden's sinecure continued in the Commons; in debate on 19 June 1812 Henry Martin alleged that Arden had profited by $30,000 in fees and $7000 annual interest on securities. The attack continued in 1813, and ministers agreed to the abolition of reversions, but not until after Arden's death, which took place at his home in St James's Place, London, on 5 July 1840. Caricatured as an arch sinecurist, Arden was then worth about $800,000 and had spent the last ten years of his life as lord lieutenant of Surrey. He was buried at Charlton, Kent, on 11 July 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 64132


Sargent, John (1750-1831), politician, was the younger of the two sons of John Sargent (1714-1791), draper and MP, of May Place, Kent, and his wife, Rosamund Chambers (1722-1792). He was educated at Eton College (1760-67), where he contributed to the 'Musae Etonienses', and then entered St John's College, Cambridge (1767), and Lincoln's Inn (1770). Introduced to his future wife by his friend the poet William Hayley, on 21 December 1778 he married Charlotte (1754-1841), the daughter of Richard Bettsworth of Petworth and his wife, Charlotte Orme. Through her mother she inherited Woollavington in Sussex, which was rebuilt as their marital abode; they had six sons and four daughters. Sargent, like his father, was a director of the Bank of England (1778-9), and he was also appointed a gentleman of the bedchamber. In 1785 he published a poem, 'The Mine', celebrating fossil life in quicksilver mines; to the third edition of 1796 he appended poems on Stonehenge and Mary Queen of Scots. 
Sargent's neighbour in Sussex, the duke of Richmond, secured his return to parliament for Seaford in 1790, despite a disputed election. Sargent supported Pitt's administration, first speaking in favour of the bank's appropriation of unclaimed dividends on 15 December 1790. In 1791 he joined the public revenue committee, and from 1792 he was a ministerial division teller. He became clerk of the ordnance under the duke of Richmond in November 1793 and exchanged Seaford for Queenborough on the ordnance interest on 15 February 1794. He mostly spoke on departmental matters in the house but occasionally addressed other matters. For example, he introduced a 'Poor Law Amendment Bill' on 12 November 1795 and chaired the committee on the 'Seditious Meetings Bill' on 27 November. Pitt then recommended him warmly, but in vain, to Lord Camden as his chief secretary at Dublin. He secured tax exemption for physicians on 22 December 1797 and chaired the income tax committee in March 1799. Retaining office under Addington, Sargent became junior secretary to the Treasury on 8 July 1802, but he was defeated in the general election. He came in for Bodmin on Lord De Dunstanville's interest on 17 December 1802, but ceased debating to concentrate on managing government bills through the house. In 1803 he joined the board of agriculture. Despite Pittite overtures, he went into opposition in May 1804 with Addington, who procured an annual pension for his wife of $616 to reward his public services. He supported Addington when he joined forces again with Pitt in 1805 and, like him, seceded from Pitt's government that summer. His support for Grenville's administration of 1806 won him a commissionership of public accounts, on condition that he resign his seat. Sargent held office until 1821, and served as chairman of quarter sessions in Sussex for more than forty years. He died on 9 September 1831 and was buried in Lavington, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 64134


Smyth, John (1748-1811), politician, was born on 12 February 1748, the only son of John Smyth (died 1771) of Heath, near Wakefield, Yorkshire, and Bridget, daughter of Benjamin Foxley of London. He was educated at Westminster School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, matriculating in 1766. He married, on 4 June 1778, Lady Georgiana Fitzroy (1757-1799), daughter of Augustus Henry Fitzroy, third duke of Grafton, and his first wife, the Hon. Anne Liddell; they had four sons and two daughters. 
Smyth was closely involved in the petitioning movement in favour of parliamentary reform of 1779-80 that had been initiated by the Revd Christopher Wyvill. In 1783, having turned down a previous invitation in 1780, he stood as a candidate for the borough of Pontefract, Yorkshire, backed by a party of resident householders who were attempting to widen the borough's burgage franchise. He was defeated but seated on petition by the election committee of the House of Commons, which implicitly declared itself in favour of the wider franchise. He went on to represent Pontefract for twenty-four years before losing his seat in the general election of 1807. 
Smyth was a supporter of William Pitt the younger but like Pitt he gradually moved away from his initial enthusiasm for parliamentary reform, while retaining his commitment to the abolition of the slave trade. He spoke in the House of Commons only rarely and then usually in an official capacity but he regularly acted as a government teller in divisions and was chairman of a number of parliamentary committees. Considered by George Canning 'a very pleasant, gentlemanly man' ('Letter-Journal', 69), Smyth was successively a lord of the Admiralty (1791-4) and of the Treasury (1794-1802), describing the latter post as 'quite a sinecure' given Pitt's propensity to undertake, as first lord, all the work himself (Glenbervie, 1.128). He became master of the Royal Mint (1802-4) and was sworn of the privy council (on 22 September 1802) during the administration of Henry Addington. In Pitt's second ministry (1804-6) he initially lost his official position but was later appointed a member of the Board of Trade in May 1805. In 1809 Smyth was appointed a lieutenant-colonel in the Wakefield regiment of the West Riding militia. Smyth died in Bruton Street, London, on 12 February 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 64138


Stuart, John, first marquess of Bute (1744-1814), diplomatist, was born at Mount Stuart on the Isle of Bute, Scotland, on 30 June 1744, the eldest of the eight surviving children of John Stuart, third earl of Bute (1713-1792), prime minister, and his wife, Mary Wortley Montagu (1718-1794), who was created Baroness Mount Stuart in 1761. His siblings included Sir Charles Stuart (1753-1801), William Stuart, archbishop of Armagh, and Lady Louisa Stuart. He was educated at Harrow School and Winchester College and was privately tutored by the Revd James Bladen at Oxford; he was later an honorary DCL of Oxford University in 1793. His grand tour (1761-5), from which he returned tall and handsome, included studies in the Netherlands and Geneva and travels in Italy together with James Boswell. He successfully courted a wealthy heiress, Charlotte Jane (1746-1800), daughter of Herbert Hickman Windsor, second Viscount Windsor and Baron Mountjoy ('bap'. 1707, died 1758), and Alice Clavering ('bap'. 1705, died 1776). They married at St John's Chapel, Hanover Square, London, on 12 November 1766; four of their seven sons and one of two daughters survived infancy. 
Following the deaths of his wife's parents the Windsor estates in south Wales passed to Stuart, who restored Cardiff Castle and was created Baron Cardiff on 20 May 1776. He vacated his seat in the Commons for Bossiney, which he had held on his mother's interest since 1766. Following his father politically he supported successive ministries after Rockingham's, but was miffed by Lord North's indifference towards him. Even North's support did not avail him to carry the 'Scottish Militia Bill' in 1776. In the Lords he was a firm supporter of war with the American colonies, but he was critical of civil list provisions, and his speeches in support of the ministry tailed off after 1778. He served as lord lieutenant of Glamorgan from 1772 to 1793, and again from 1794, together with the lord lieutenancy of Bute, until his death, and raised a company for the war in America. Sworn of the privy council on 4 August 1779, he proceeded to Turin as envoy, styled Lord Mountstuart, for three years. Appointed auditor of the imprest in 1781, he received $7000 a year compensation for its abolition in 1785. He was named ambassador to Spain in 1783, but did not take up his post until 1795-6, by which time he had succeeded his parents to their titles, in 1792 and 1794, and changed his politics when he joined Portland in defecting to Pitt in 1794. He had previously supported the coalition ministry of 1783 as a Portland whig and continued in opposition after Pitt came to power, a position which alienated the king's favour. A mortgage on Luton Park prejudiced his inheritance and he attempted to regain the king's favour in 1792-3. His diplomatic service in Spain and support of the ministry from 1794 onwards led to his creation as first marquess of Bute on 27 February 1796, before Spain's alliance with France brought him home. 
In 1798 Bute renounced diplomacy and petitioned unsuccessfully for the position of lord steward. He failed to receive the Garter in 1799. A fellow of the Society of Antiquaries from 1776 he became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1799 and, in 1800, a trustee of the British Museum. His wife died suddenly of apoplexy on 28 January 1800 and Bute married, on 17 September 1800, Frances (1772/3-1832), daughter and coheir of Thomas Coutts, banker, and his first wife, Susan Starkie; they had a son and a daughter. Bute reverted to political opposition and joined the prince of Wales, who made him one of his councillors of state in 1800. He died at Geneva on 16 November 1814, and was buried on 20 December in the Bute vault at Roath, Cardiff. 


@@@@@


doc= 64139


Carteret, Henry Frederick, first Baron Carteret of Hawnes (1735-1826), politician, was born in London on 17 November 1735, younger of two sons of Thomas Thynne, second Viscount Weymouth (1710-1751), landowner, and his second wife, Louisa ('c'.1712-1736), daughter of John Carteret, second Earl Granville. Educated at Market Street School, Markyate, Hertfordshire, he entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1752, and proceeded MA in 1753 and DCL in 1769. In 1756 he was a possible parliamentary candidate for Wiltshire, where his family resided, but instead came in for Staffordshire on a vacancy on 4 January 1757, backed by a family friend, Lord Gower. In 1761 he was returned on his family interest for Weobley. His elder brother, Thomas Thynne, third Viscount Weymouth, sought office for him, and after refusing the post of groom of the bedchamber, he accepted, in December 1762, the clerk comptrollership of the green cloth, worth $1000 a year. He lost this when the Grenville ministry fell in July 1765, and acted with the opposition. Weymouth joined the duke of Bedford's 'gang', and Thynne regained office, as master of the household, worth $518 a year, in 1768 when Bedford entered Chatham's administration. Weymouth was now a secretary of state, and Thynne was promised the Madrid embassy, but when this failed to materialize, he was awarded a pension of $1000 a year. He was denied the joint vice-treasurership of Ireland in April 1770, apparently because the king was informed that he was inactive in debate. When Weymouth resigned office in December 1770, Thynne obtained the joint postmastership-general, whereupon he vacated his parliamentary seat; this appointment brought him $3000 a year. He was sworn of the privy council on 19 December 1770. 
At the Post Office, Thynne relied on the secretary, Anthony Todd, to handle his paperwork, and also turned to him for loans. In 1776 he changed his surname to Carteret on succeeding his uncle, Robert Carteret, third Earl Granville, to Hawnes Park, Bedfordshire. He was appointed high bailiff of Jersey for life. On 29 January 1784 he was created Baron Carteret of Hawnes. He gave up the Post Office in September 1789, after his brother's elevation to a marquessate. On 9 July 1810 Carteret married Eleanor Smart (1741/2-1817), a spinster from Hawnes, who had been his mistress for forty-three years. They had no children, and when Carteret died at Hawnes on 17 June 1826 he was succeeded in turn by his two nephews, George and John Thynne. As both died without heirs, the barony became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 64140


Townsend, James (bap. 1737, d. 1787), politician, was baptized on 8 February 1737 at St Christopher-le-Stocks, London, the eldest surviving son of Chauncy Townsend ('bap'. 1708, died 1770), MP, and Bridget, daughter of James Phipps of Wiltshire. His father was a London entrepreneur with interests ranging from linen drapery to coal mines. Townsend did not follow his father into business, for, after attending Hertford College, Oxford, in 1756, he achieved financial independence by his marriage on 3 May 1763 to Rosa Peregrina du Plessis (1745-1785), the illegitimate daughter of Henry Hare, third and last Baron Coleraine (1693-1749), antiquary, and Rose du Plessis 
(or Duplessis; 1710-1790)
. Townsend secured possession of Hare's estate in Tottenham, Middlesex, which had escheated to the crown on his death on the grounds that his daughter was an alien. 
Townsend sought a political career, and soon formed a connection with Lord Shelburne, whose influence as secretary of state in the Chatham ministry of 1766-8 enabled him to enter parliament for the government borough of West Looe at a by-election in 1767 and to retain the seat at the 1768 general election ['see 'Chathamites]. In that year Shelburne went into opposition; possession of a government seat did not inhibit Townsend from doing likewise. In 1769 he was involved in a scheme of Shelburne's to split East India Company stock to influence the choice of directors, and he helped Shelburne to meet the financial losses caused by a fall in the stock price. 
Townsend was a vigorous supporter of John Wilkes during the Middlesex election case of 1768-9, and proposed Wilkes for re-election after his first expulsion. He was a founder member of the Society of Gentleman Supporters of the Bill of Rights, formed in February 1769 to support Wilkes, and Wilkite power in the City of London brought him election in June 1769 as a lifetime alderman and annual sheriff. But Townsend was one of those who wished to make the society a radical organization and not merely a milch-cow for Wilkes to exploit, and, with other Shelburne men, he seceded under John Horne in April 1771 to form a new Constitutional Society. In City politics this radical split let in a government supporter as lord mayor in 1771, and so in 1772 Wilkes stood with Townsend on a joint ticket, for the mayor was chosen by the court of aldermen from the two top candidates. Townsend's role was merely to facilitate the election of Wilkes, but he played Wilkes false. Always ambitious for a leading position in London politics, in 1771 he had won cheap popularity by refusing to pay land tax on his Tottenham estate, claiming that Wilkes's exclusion left Middlesex unrepresented in parliament; as a result he had suffered distraint on his goods to the value of $200. Now, in 1772, a coalition of Hornites and courtiers secured his election as mayor. The resulting animosity between the two men led Townsend, according to Horace Walpole, to become 'as active an enemy of Wilkes as the Scotch' ('Last Journals', 1.250). His treachery led to a riot on his lord mayor's day, and made him so unpopular in London that when he was due to forfeit his government seat at the 1774 general election, and appeared on the hustings, vehement abuse forced his withdrawal. 
By the late 1770s mutual self-interest led surviving London radicals to re-unite, and Townsend canvassed for Wilkes in his successful election as city chamberlain in 1779. But he did not seek re-election to parliament until Shelburne returned him for his pocket borough of Calne in April 1782. He then again displayed his radical credentials by speaking for both parliamentary reform and annual parliaments, the latter a cause he had championed in the 1770s. He supported both Shelburne and Pitt against the Fox-North coalition of 1783, but voted against the subsequent Pitt ministry on several occasions. On 9 May 1787 he strongly opposed the impeachment of Warren Hastings, as a man who deserved not the condemnation but the thanks of his country. The diarist Nathaniel Wraxall recalled that 'though he seldom mingled in debate, he manifested whenever he spoke a manly mind, great facility of expression, strong sense, combined with upright principles of action' (Wraxall, 2.329). Townsend died at Bruce Castle, Tottenham, his residence, on 1 July 1787, after a cold turned into fever; he was buried privately in the churchyard of Tottenham church. His wife had died on 8 November 1785 and he was survived by their son, Henry Hare Townsend, and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 64142


John Pryse Campbell, first Baron Cawdor of Castlemartin (1755-1821), politician and army officer, was born on 24 April 1755. He studied first at Eton College (1763-7), before entering Clare College, Cambridge, in 1772. Although he was brought up in Wales and England and knew little of Scotland, his political career commenced north of the border when he sat as MP for Nairnshire from 18 April 1777 until May 1780, when he vacated his seat to take over the Cardigan Boroughs seat vacated by Thomas Johnes. He was then returned for Cardigan Boroughs at the 1780 general election, and thereafter he held the now traditional Welsh seat of the Cawdor family until 1796. A strong supporter of Lord North, he helped to recruit the 75th regiment from south Wales in 1777, and voted against the peace preliminaries in early 1783. Although he was initially neutral on the administration of William Pitt the younger, Campbell's marriage on 28 July 1789 to Lady Isabella Caroline Howard (1771-1848), daughter of Frederick, fifth earl of Carlisle, not only demonstrated the family's final integration into the British landed elite, but also hastened Campbell's drift into opposition circles. He voted for the repeal of the 'Test Act' in Scotland and became associated with the moderate Portland whigs. By March 1794, however, as the scale and scope of the conflict with the French intensified, Campbell, along with the rest of Portland's parliamentary interest, joined Pitt's administration. The posts held by Campbell during this period give some indication of how far the family's horizons were now dominated by their Welsh, as opposed to Scottish, interests. Governor of Milford Haven from 1780 until his death, Campbell was commissioned as a captain in the Castlemartin yeomanry from 1794 to 1802 and captain in the Pembrokeshire Volunteers in 1803, as well as lieutenant-colonel-commandant of the Royal Carmarthenshire militia from 1798 and brevet colonel from 1799 to 1821. In his capacity as an officer of the Castlemartin yeomanry Campbell was to gain the distinction of being largely responsible for repulsing the attempted French landings in Pembrokeshire in 1797. His demonstrable loyalty had in fact already been rewarded when, on 21 June 1796, he was created Baron Cawdor of Castlemartin. His local influence in Wales was confirmed in 1808 when he became mayor of Carmarthen, a position enhanced by his reputation as an improving landlord. He died at Great Pulteney Street, Bath, on 1 June 1821, and was buried in the town's abbey eight days later. 
Mirroring their political development, the Campbell family's commercial concerns during the eighteenth century had focused increasingly on their valuable Welsh estates. By 1789 John Pryse Campbell had an income of $11,000-12,000 per annum. In political terms, however, the connection with the north of Scotland remained strong. A survey of Inverness-shire in 1788 revealed that Campbell held 7 votes of a total of 103; in Nairnshire, meanwhile, the family retained 8 votes out of a total of 20. Moreover, although they were increasingly absentee landlords, the family continued to direct commercial developments on their Scottish estates. During the period from the later 1710s until his death in 1744, another of Sir Hugh's grandsons, Sir Archibald Campbell of Cluny, managed the estate. He initiated various improvements, not least by creating an impressive oak plantation in and around Castle Cawdor during the 1730s. A year after his death an attempt was made to ensure protection for Cawdor tenantry by subscribing to the cattle watch of Ewan Macpherson of Cluny. Later a Welsh factor, Valentine White, was appointed to oversee the estate; he planted large amounts of hedgerow for enclosures and had created a series of planned crofts at Ardersier by the time John Campbell of Cawdor died in 1777. Improvements continued under John Pryse Campbell, with the opening up of marl pits for liming, as well as the abolition of feudal obligations upon the tenantry by the early 1790s. Perhaps only the continuing lack of systematic enclosures in the parish of Cawdor, noted by Sinclair's 'Statistical Account', reveals something of the estate-management drift that was a consequence of the family's evolution from highland lairds to gentry with British political and commercial interests. 


@@@@@


doc= 64143


Pryse Campbell of Cawdor (1727-1768), politician. Having matriculated at Clare College, Cambridge, in 1745, Pryse married on 20 September 1752 Sarah (1726-1767), daughter and heir of Sir Edmund Bacon, sixth baronet, of Garboldisham, Norfolk; they had four sons and three daughters. Initially Pryse seemed destined for a successful political career, not least because, unlike his father, he was a strong supporter of Pitt the elder. In 1754 he was returned as MP for Inverness-shire with the co-operation of Argyll, who, though supportive of the political pretensions of Simon Fraser of Lovat, believed that the erstwhile Jacobite's re-entry into county politics was premature and would certainly offend sensibilities in London. Competition with the Lovat interest remained, however. Clearly aware that Fraser's acquisition of a Highland regiment in January 1757 heightened his political credibility with Inverness-shire voters, Pryse refused to assist in the recruitment process; but it was his support for the 'Irish Cattle Importation Act' during February and March 1759 that deeply damaged his relationship with his constituents. By February 1761 Argyll had made it clear he would oppose reselection of Pryse for Inverness-shire, with the result that the latter, with the support of the earl of Bute, stood for and won the Nairnshire seat. Having been created a lord of treasury in August 1766 and re-elected to parliament on 4 December 1766, he still faced the fact that under the Scottish electoral system Nairnshire would not be represented at the next election. He switched to his Welsh interest and was elected for the Cardigan Boroughs on 24 March 1768, but died on 14 December of the same year. 
His first son, 


@@@@@


doc= 64144


John Campbell of Cawdor (1695-1777), and given his grandfather's actions in 1715 it was perhaps rather fortuitous that John had spent most of his childhood in England and Wales and avoided any real taint of Jacobitism. John was educated in England, entering Lincoln's Inn in London in 1708 and Clare College, Cambridge, in 1711. John succeeded his mother in 1714 and his grandfather in 1716. His actions in the personal, commercial, and political spheres reveal just how far he had moved beyond the traditional concerns and agendas of a highland laird. Following his father's example he married, on 30 April 1726, Mary (died in or before 1777), daughter of Lewis Pryse of Gogerddan, Cardiganshire; they had three sons and three daughters. This new Welsh connection gave John access to coal-rich estates and enabled him, in 1727, to sell the islands of Islay and Jura to the family's major creditor, Daniel Campbell of Shawfield, for $12,000. Initially John Campbell was MP for Pembrokeshire from 1727 to 1747, though in the election of 1734 he was returned for both the Welsh county and Nairnshire, the first MP since the union to be elected simultaneously north and south of the border. Despite his family's Jacobite antecedents, John was very much a supporter of first Robert Walpole, then the Pelhams (to whom he was related through his maternal grandmother), and above all Henry Fox. His political loyalty resulted in his appointment as a lord of the Admiralty from 1736 to 1742, and then as a lord of the treasury from June 1746 until the parliamentary election of 1754. In 1747, unsure of his electoral prospects in Wales, John `had fallen back on his family's traditional power base in Nairnshire, where his hereditary sheriffdom was to be valued at $2000 under the terms of the 'Jurisdictions Act'. Having held Nairnshire from 1747 to 1754 and with the approval of Henry Pelham and the third duke of Argyll, he sat as MP for the Inverness-shire burghs from 1754 to 1761, defeating the strong challenge mounted by Sir Alexander Grant. During the political upheavals of 1755-7, Campbell was very much opposed to the prospect of William Pitt the elder's becoming a leading figure in government. Although he was persuaded by his political ally Henry Fox to sit as MP for Corfe Castle from December 1762 to 1768, he took a much less active role after his return to the Commons. He died on 6 September 1777. 
From as early as the 1761 election, leadership of the family interest had effectively devolved upon John Campbell's first son, 


@@@@@


doc= 64146


Haldane, Patrick (1683/4-1769), lawyer and politician, was the second son of John Haldane of Gleneagles (1660-1721) and his wife, Mary (died 1685), daughter of David Drummond, third Lord Madderty, and Lady Beatrix Graham. He came from an ancient family, settled at Gleneagles since the fifteenth century. His father, a zealous whig, had represented Perthshire and Dunbartonshire in the parliament of Scotland, and represented Perthshire in the first parliament of Great Britain. 
Haldane matriculated at St Andrews University on 22 February 1699, graduated MA on 11 July 1701, and then spent four years reading law in Edinburgh under the eminent lawyer John Spottiswood. In 1705 he became professor of Greek at St Andrews. This appointment was not without difficulty, for though he obtained more votes than his rival for the post he was not selected, and succeeded only after taking the matter to court where the election was annulled. No reason was given for his being supplanted in the first instance, but it appears to have been an early example of the extraordinary unpopularity which he attracted and which was later to blight what was otherwise a most promising career. This first appointment was followed in 1707 by the post of professor of ecclesiastical history. 
In 1711 Haldane left St Andrews for the University of Leiden to resume his legal studies, remaining there for about four years. After completing his studies he returned home, and on 18 January 1715 was admitted advocate. The following two years were noteworthy: on 16 February 1715 he was returned as MP to represent (as a whig) the Perth district of burghs, a position he held until 1721; and in November 1715 was appointed a commissioner of the equivalent. In October 1716 he was elected provost of St Andrews, retaining this office until October 1720, and in May 1716 he exchanged his commissioner's post for that of a member of the commission charged with arranging the sale of estates forfeited after the 1715 Jacobite rising. The salary of $1000 per annum was considered enormous, but was scant compensation for the exceptional enmity he incurred from the Jacobites and other prominent landowners connected with the dispossessed families. To the inherently unpopular nature of this post Haldane added a ruthless enthusiasm for his duties, earning himself a lifelong reputation for severity and harshness, and lack of Scottish patriotism. Nor was his unpopularity confined to the Scots; the whig ministry also came to disapprove of his overzealous approach. 
In the Commons, Haldane voted consistently with the government, but here too there was ample scope for his ability to attract enmity. His speeches are said to have rendered him obnoxious for most of his life. On one occasion at least his vote seemed calculated to incur hatred: having voted in favour of a petition to allow the wives and widows of forfeited estate owners in England their jointures, he opposed a similar proposal for their Scottish counterparts. 
Some time before 1721 Haldane married Margaret ('b'. 1694), daughter of William, fourth Lord Forrester; soon afterwards their son, George, was born, followed by a daughter, Margaret. Domestic happiness, however, was quickly overshadowed by fresh controversy in his career. On the conclusion of the forfeited estates commission's work Haldane had returned to the bar, but, obtaining little work on account of the prejudice against him, put himself forward for a seat on the bench. In December 1721 he succeeded in obtaining the king's nomination to be a judge of the court of session, but this raised a furious outcry from his numerous enemies. The Faculty of Advocates, determined to prevent his appointment, caused the court of session to refuse him admission on a technicality. The House of Lords overruled this decision, whereupon his opponents raised fresh objections, accusing him, 'inter alia', of Jacobitism, bribery, and extortion by threats. The court of session now voted to admit Haldane by eight votes to seven, but two of his supporters were extraordinary (honorary) lords of session and their right to vote was promptly challenged. Again the case was referred to London, where in view of the controversy a reluctant George I withdrew the judgeship nomination for an alternative preferment. Haldane bore with remarkable fortitude this crushing blow, and on 30 May 1724 the promised preferment materialized, in the form of a commissionership of excise in England, which he held until its termination on George II's accession in 1727. 
Haldane again returned to the bar, with greater success, acquiring a reputation of being 'not only the best election-monger, but the best election lawyer of his time' (HoP, 'Commons') and on 5 March 1746 he was appointed joint solicitor-general of Scotland. In 1750, weakened by age, he made an unsuccessful application for a judgeship, pleading that advancing years were diminishing his ability to cope with the rigours of the bar. Further applications also failed, and he retired in 1755, much broken, on a pension. 
In retirement Haldane suffered further pain. His wife had died some time before 3 February 1747, and in 1759 he was to bear the sorrow of the death of his son, George, soon to be followed by that of his daughter, Margaret. His grief was heightened by the necessity in 1760 of selling the family estate of Gleneagles, recently inherited from his brother Mungo, to pay his son's and his own debts, in both cases incurred through electioneering expenses. He died on 10 January 1769 at Duddingston manse, Duddingston, Edinburgh, and was buried in the vault of Sir Alexander Dick, bt, at Duddingston cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 64148


Le Keux family (per. 1800-1885), engravers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 64149


John Brandard (1812-1863), lithographer, was born at Birmingham, and baptized on 13 March 1812 at St Martin's, Birmingham. He began his career as an engraver, mainly of commercial designs. He married on 17 January 1833 Maria Chater at Edgbaston, Birmingham. Their five children were all baptized at St Pancras Old Church, London, between 1835 and 1845. One of the earliest and most skilful English lithographic artists, he became well known in the 1840s for his music-cover illustrations, his reputation enhanced by his close association with the eminent London lithographic printers M. and N. Hanhart, with whom he was exclusively employed for many years. His chromolithographs are characterized by delicate colouring, and smooth, even tone achieved by the use of high-quality paper and a close attention to detail in the preparation of lithographic stones. For this and other tasks John constantly employed two assistants, thus greatly increasing his output. Stage subjects were his speciality, ballet and opera in particular. His prints of dancers, many sketched from life, were admired by Degas, their oval faces and mouths, and pointed hands and feet characteristic of John's figure style. Celebrities depicted include Carlotta Grisi as La Peri in 'Giselle' (1844), and Lucille Grahn in 'Catarina' (1846). Idealized images of Queen Victoria, Prince Albert, and other members of the royal family feature regularly on music covers, notably for titles published by Jullien & Co., such as 'The Court Ball March'. Military and comic scenes recur on song and music sheets, as do portraits of women, later issued as single prints. Many of his colour lithographs appeared also in black and white. Lithographic landscapes include views of Hastings and illustrations to 'Kenilworth and its Castle Illustrated' ('c'.1865) to which Robert also contributed. John also designed fancy title-pages and ornamental borders for various musical albums, books of beauty, and pocket books. A direct reference to the illustrator is included in one of the verses to 'The Polka-Mania': 'And graphic Brandard takes the whim -- But let his pencil speak for him'. The initials J. B. appear on some of the early titles, but more often his work was signed J. Brandard. He made -- and spent -- money freely, often charging as much as 20 guineas for a print. (The average price for a cover was 3's'. to 4's'.) An imposing, dandified figure, he liked to be seen arriving at Drury Lane or Covent Garden in his own coach. He died at his home, 8 Southampton Place, Chalk Farm, London, on 15 December 1863. Extensive collections of his work are held at Reading University; at the Theatre Museum, Covent Garden, Victoria and Albert Museum, and British Museum, London; and at the Bodleian Library, Oxford. His son Walter Brandard ('bap'. 1842) also drew some music titles. 
Another brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 64150


Brandard family (per. c.1825-1898), printmakers, came to prominence with Robert Brandard (1805-1862), printmaker and painter, who was born at Birmingham, and baptized on 31 January 1805 at St Philip's, Birmingham, the eldest son of Thomas Brandard (died 1830), engraver and copperplate printer, of Barford Street, Deretend, Birmingham, and his wife, Ann. A member of the Birmingham school of engravers, Robert Brandard learned the rudiments of his profession from his father, and probably studied also at J. V. Barber's Great Charles Street Academy and under the engraver William Radclyffe. In 1824 he became a pupil in London of the landscape engraver Edward Goodall, and about a year later set up professionally in Islington. He joined the Artists' Annuity Fund in 1827 and signed the 1837 petition to the king on the admission of engravers to the Royal Academy. Robert is primarily known for his landscape and topographical prints after works by contemporary painters such as Clarkson Stanfield, Augustus Callcott, J. F. Herring, Richard Westall, and most notably J. M. W. Turner, whom he met through Goodall. Many of his metal-engraved prints after Turner's paintings were produced under the supervision of the artist, who considered Robert to be one of the six best contemporary engravers (Rawlinson, lxvi). One of his earliest engravings to attract attention was 'Sans souci' after Thomas Stothard, which appeared in the first volume of William Pickering's 'The Bijou' (1828). Other journals to which he contributed include the 'Literary Souvenir', 'Friendship's Offering', 'The Keepsake', the 'Landscape Annual', and 'Heath's Picturesque Annual'. His first important book illustration commission was for eight plates after William Brockedon for his 'Illustrations of the Passes of the Alps' (1828-9). Many others followed, among them twenty-one plates after William Henry Bartlett for N. P. Willis's 'American Scenery' (1840) and 'Canadian Scenery' (1842), seven after Stanfield and William Collins for Walter Scott's 'Waverley' novels, and three vignettes after George Cattermole and others for Baroness Calabrella's 'Evenings at Haddon Hall' (1846). Five engravings of pictures in the Royal Collection were included in S. C. Hall's 'The Royal Gallery' ('c'.1855). Among his wood-engraved work are illustrations to Charles Knight's 'London' (1841-2). Of his various steel- or copper-engraved reproductions of Turner's work, those for 'Picturesque Views in England and Wales' (1838), 'Rivers of France' (1837), 'The Poetical Work of Sir Walter Scott' (1834), and 'The Poetical Works of John Milton' (1835) are among the most successful, the Scott plates earning him 60 guineas each. Between 1851 and 1866 fifteen of his plates appeared in the 'Art Journal', of which the eight after Turner were subsequently published in 'The Turner Gallery' ('c'.1878), most notably 'Rain, Steam and Speed' (1860), 'The Snowstorm' (1861), and 'Whalers -- the 'Erebus'' (1861). The latter, one of Robert's last engravings, was considered by a contemporary to be 'a gem on which his reputation may well rest', while others regarded his large plate of 'Crossing the Brook' (1842), exhibited with 'The Snowstorm' at the International Exhibition of 1862, as his finest (Hunnisett, 24). From his home address in Eynsford, Kent, he jointly published with J. Hogarth 'Scraps of Nature', two volumes of etchings made between 1842 and 1851 of the coast and Weald of Kent, examples of which were included in the 'Art Journal' (1875). According to one obituary 'quiet, unobtrusive, and gentlemanly in manner' ('Art Journal'), Robert was esteemed by everyone who knew him. His pupils included his brother-in-law, Mr (possibly William) Floyd, and James Clayton Bentley. He died at his home, 2 Campden Hill Villas, Kensington, London, on 7 January 1862, survived by his wife, Elizabeth. Between 1831 and 1858 he exhibited frequently at the British Institution, Royal Academy, Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists, and New Watercolour Society. Examples of his work are held at the Victoria and Albert Museum and British Museum, London; the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; Leicester City Museums; and Blackburn Museum Art Collection. 
Robert's brother John Brandard (1812-1863), lithographer, was born at Birmingham, and baptized on 13 March 1812 at St Martin's, Birmingham. He began his career as an engraver, mainly of commercial designs. He married on 17 January 1833 Maria Chater at Edgbaston, Birmingham. Their five children were all baptized at St Pancras Old Church, London, between 1835 and 1845. One of the earliest and most skilful English lithographic artists, he became well known in the 1840s for his music-cover illustrations, his reputation enhanced by his close association with the eminent London lithographic printers M. and N. Hanhart, with whom he was exclusively employed for many years. His chromolithographs are characterized by delicate colouring, and smooth, even tone achieved by the use of high-quality paper and a close attention to detail in the preparation of lithographic stones. For this and other tasks John constantly employed two assistants, thus greatly increasing his output. Stage subjects were his speciality, ballet and opera in particular. His prints of dancers, many sketched from life, were admired by Degas, their oval faces and mouths, and pointed hands and feet characteristic of John's figure style. Celebrities depicted include Carlotta Grisi as La Peri in 'Giselle' (1844), and Lucille Grahn in 'Catarina' (1846). Idealized images of Queen Victoria, Prince Albert, and other members of the royal family feature regularly on music covers, notably for titles published by Jullien & Co., such as 'The Court Ball March'. Military and comic scenes recur on song and music sheets, as do portraits of women, later issued as single prints. Many of his colour lithographs appeared also in black and white. Lithographic landscapes include views of Hastings and illustrations to 'Kenilworth and its Castle Illustrated' ('c'.1865) to which Robert also contributed. John also designed fancy title-pages and ornamental borders for various musical albums, books of beauty, and pocket books. A direct reference to the illustrator is included in one of the verses to 'The Polka-Mania': 'And graphic Brandard takes the whim -- But let his pencil speak for him'. The initials J. B. appear on some of the early titles, but more often his work was signed J. Brandard. He made -- and spent -- money freely, often charging as much as 20 guineas for a print. (The average price for a cover was 3's'. to 4's'.) An imposing, dandified figure, he liked to be seen arriving at Drury Lane or Covent Garden in his own coach. He died at his home, 8 Southampton Place, Chalk Farm, London, on 15 December 1863. Extensive collections of his work are held at Reading University; at the Theatre Museum, Covent Garden, Victoria and Albert Museum, and British Museum, London; and at the Bodleian Library, Oxford. His son Walter Brandard ('bap'. 1842) also drew some music titles. 
Another brother, Edward Paxman Brandard (1819-1898), printmaker and painter, was born probably at Birmingham. He was baptized on 19 September 1820 at St Martin's, Birmingham. On his father's death in 1830 he was apprenticed to Robert, whose studio Turner frequently visited. Edward was said to be the last to work under the personal superintendence of Turner as well as the last of the steel engravers (Hunnisett, 18). Of his prints after Turner, 'Apollo and Daphne in the Vale of Tempe' and 'The Bridge of Sighs' were published in 'The Turner Gallery'. Etchings include 'The Hay Wain' and 'Salisbury Cathedral' after Constable, and his own 'Meadows at Marlow in the Thames' for 'The Portfolio', 14 (1883). Edward frequently contributed to books on topography, history, art, and architecture: engravings after T. Allom for G. N. Wright's 'China' (1843) were followed by a succession of plates and vignettes, many after W. H. Bartlett, for books such as W. Beattie's 'The Danube' (1844), Conybeare and Howson's 'Life and Epistles of St Paul' (1854), and B. Woodward's 'General History of Hampshire' (1863). Some of his prints of the 1860s and 1870s, such as 'Laufenburg' for 'Picturesque Europe' (1876-9), were engraved after Miles Birket Foster. Edward contributed numerous plates to the Art Union of London. Between 1853 and 1887 thirteen appeared in the 'Art Journal'. He exhibited at a number of London galleries from 1849 to 1885, including the British Institution (where his prices ranged from 4 guineas to 25 guineas), Royal Academy, New Watercolour Society, and Society of Painter-Etchers. He died on 3 February 1898 at Aysgarth, Kingston Road, New Malden, Surrey, leaving a widow, Susannah. He was then living at 1 Albion Grove, Thornhill Road, Barnsbury, London. Examples of his work are held at the Victoria and Albert Museum and British Museum, London. A sister, Annie Caroline Brandard, a landscape painter, exhibited at the Royal Academy (1838, 1883, and 1884). 


@@@@@


doc= 64154


Liesching, Sir Percivale (1895-1973), civil servant, was born on 1 April 1895 at 1 Thurlestone Road, West Norwood, London, the son of Henry Selby Liesching, a Trinity House civil servant, and his wife, Elaine Frances Flint. A pupil at Bedford School, in 1913 Liesching was awarded a junior Hulme scholarship to read Greats at Brasenose College, Oxford. But before doing so he volunteered for war service, serving in Europe and east Africa. He was mentioned in dispatches and ended the war as a captain in the tank corps. In 1919 he proceeded to Brasenose, obtaining a distinction in the one-year Greats course for returning soldiers and playing rugby for his college and the university. He formally received his degree in 1921 (and took an MA in 1939). 
In 1920 Liesching entered the Colonial Office but transferred to the newly created Dominions Office in 1925. In 1928 he joined the staff of Britain's first high commissioner in Canada where he made a good impression. 'Reserved, intelligent, efficient', he was sensitive to Canadian susceptibilities and 'as congenial in the drawing room as he was accomplished in the office' (Keenleyside, 1.251). He left Ottawa in 1932 to become political secretary (1933-5) and official secretary (1936-8) to the UK high commissioner in Australia. In 1939 he returned to London as an assistant under-secretary. However, he chafed at the confines of the rigidly run department and in 1942 transferred, as second secretary, to the Board of Trade. There he not only withstood the bullying of the board's president, Hugh Dalton, but won Dalton's grudging respect. Among other things, he skilfully negotiated the commercial side of the 1945 American loan. As permanent under-secretary at the Ministry of Food from 1946 to 1948, he again demonstrated considerable diplomatic prowess when, in 1947, he led a mission to tell Ottawa of drastic cuts in British food purchases. 
Liesching became permanent under-secretary of the Commonwealth Relations Office in 1949. Being utterly different from Sir Eric Machtig, the previous permanent under-secretary whom the Commonwealth secretary, Noel-Baker, had determined to remove, Liesching seemed an admirable choice. He enjoyed exercising power and was decisive, shrewd, diplomatic, and clear-sighted. But to Noel-Baker's consternation, he could not work with Liesching. They disagreed on fundamentals. Liesching was a tough realist who had no time for his minister's idealism. Within less than a year Noel-Baker departed, suspecting Liesching had influenced his removal. 
Liesching was a highly effective permanent under-secretary, not least in the way he reorganized the department. From 1955 until his retirement in 1958, he was high commissioner in South Africa and for Basutoland, the Bechuanaland protectorate, and Swaziland. He was appointed CMG in 1932, KCMG in 1944, KCB in 1947, GCMG in 1951, and KCVO in 1953. In retirement he was a director of the Rio Tinto Company, the Automatic Telephone and Electric Company, and W. J. Fraser & Co. As a member of the Plowden committee (1963), which led to the amalgamation of the Commonwealth Relations Office staff with those of the Foreign Office, Liesching safeguarded the interests of his former department. 
On 26 March 1924 Liesching married a gentle and reserved woman, Ethel Georgina Nicol Williamson ('b'. 1900/01), the daughter of James Williamson, a gentleman of Bishops Down Grange, Tunbridge Wells, Kent. They had three daughters. Liesching was a lean man of average height, with dark hair, an upright bearing, and a very strong, sharp-featured, aquiline face. He had a military mien and was said to have applied a military ethos to his civilian work. Despite his charm, affability, conversational prowess, and skill in personal relations at all levels, he was respected rather than popular. He had practical rather than intellectual wisdom. In retrospect, he lacked vision on some issues (such as the Central African Federation and the exile of Seretse Khama) and, as was then common, had a touch of what would now be seen as racism. None the less, he was described as 'one of the outstanding public servants of his generation' (Garner, 'The Times'). Liesching died of cancer at Holy Trinity vicarage, Hurst Road, Sidcup, Kent, on 4 November 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 64155


Machtig, Sir Eric Gustav Siegfried (1889-1973), civil servant, was born on 21 August 1889 at 46 Merton Road, Wimbledon, the son of Friedrich Gustav Machtig, a professor of music, and his wife, Pauline Petronella, 'nee' Schneider. Both parents were German born. 
After attending St Paul's School, London, where he was a scholar, Machtig proceeded (also as a scholar) to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a first-class degree (second division) in the classical tripos in 1911. He entered the Colonial Office in October 1912 where he worked in the east African department and then in the Tanganyika and Somaliland department. He was promoted to first-class clerk in 1917 and was made a principal in 1920. In 1930 he transferred to the Dominions Office as assistant secretary. In 1934 he became head of the department dealing with the high commission territories in southern Africa and in 1936 rose to be assistant under-secretary. In 1939 he felt slighted when, despite being next in line, he was not made permanent under-secretary. He served as acting permanent under-secretary until Sir Cosmo Parkinson arrived from the Colonial Office on 1 February 1940, at which time Machtig was given the newly invented title of deputy under-secretary. However, in May 1940 Parkinson was recalled to the Colonial Office and Machtig succeeded him. 
Machtig was a pragmatic, honourable, clear-thinking man who cultivated his ministers. He was good at administration. But he was also conservative in all senses, disliked change and, although his placatory instinct was valuable in maintaining reasonable relations with Eire during the Second World War, he was unsuited to head the Dominions Office at a time of rapid transition in the Commonwealth. Moreover, his shyness and dislike of mixing with (or even seeing) people prevented him networking effectively in Whitehall or establishing close relations with dominion leaders and their representatives. He ran the Dominions Office in the manner of a remote, authoritarian Victorian father, centralizing work in his own hands and projecting his own meticulous ways in sometimes petty bureaucratic procedures. Even the war could not alter his office routine: at 5 p.m. prompt he retreated to catch the train to the wartime haven in Peaslake, Surrey, that he shared with his aged mother. After his marriage on 22 March to Nora Marguerite Friend (1892/3-1943) of North Cray, Kent, the 48-year-old daughter of a merchant, his wife also shared this house. However, she fell seriously ill in 1942 and died in 1943. Utterly desolate, Machtig retreated further into himself and his rigidities became more marked. 
When the Dominions Office and the India Office were merged into the new Commonwealth Relations Office in 1947, they initially remained in most respects separate departments under one roof, with Machtig retaining his old responsibilities and having little to do with the Asian side under its permanent under-secretary, Sir Archibald Carter. To bring the office together called for someone with an outgoing personality, organizational drive, readiness to innovate, and (preferably) experience of working overseas. Added to this, Machtig proved incompatible with Philip Noel-Baker, the secretary of state appointed to take charge of the new ministry. After much resistance Machtig left the Commonwealth Relations Office on assignment for special duties in December 1948. He retired in 1949. He was appointed MBE in 1918, OBE in 1926, CMG in 1935, KCMG in 1939, KCB in 1943, and GCMG in 1948. 
Machtig had a satisfying retirement and particularly enjoyed travelling as a director of Barclay's Bank (DCO) from 1949 to 1969. He chaired the working committee of the Lord Mayor's National Thanksgiving Fund in 1950, was chairman of the Sister Trust from 1950 to 1965, and a vice-chairman of the Victoria League from 1950 to 1962. 
Machtig was of average height and fair complexion. He presented an overall impression of roundedness with, owing to his thick glasses, an owlish look. He spoke clearly but sounded as if he had catarrh. He was a keen musician, a skilful violinist, and an enthusiastic and competent squash player. He died, childless, of cerebral thrombosis at his home, 11 Belvedere Drive, Wimbledon, on 24 July 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 64156


Reece, Sir Gerald (1897-1985), colonial administrator, was born on 10 January 1897 in Christchurch, New Zealand, the only son and second child of Edward Mackintosh Reece and his wife, Rose Emily Shaw, of Birmingham. His grandfather had an ironmongery business and cattle farm in New Zealand, as well as a plantation in Fiji. Educated at Rugby School, he was commissioned into the Sherwood Foresters in 1915, and saw active service in France and Belgium. After the war he qualified as a solicitor, and practised in London from 1921 to 1925, also serving as a territorial in the London Scottish regiment. 
Reece joined the Kenya administration in 1925, and was posted as a district officer to West Suk, in the Turkana district. In 1928 he was appointed district commissioner in Mandera, in the northern frontier district, an area of 100,000 square miles of semi-desert covered with thorny scrub between the frontiers of Ethiopia and Italian Somaliland. There were no European settlers and it was sparsely populated by pastoral nomadic peoples, the camel-owning Somali and the cattle-herding Boran. It was a closed district and special permits were required to enter the area: this was an attempt to check the south-westerly drive of the Somali, which threatened the European-settled highlands to the south. The district commissioners spent much of their time travelling on foot among the scattered tribesmen, settling disputes, collecting taxes, and improving grazing and water supplies, but the key issue was the control of grazing. In Mandera, Reece trained a tribal police force known as Dubas after their red turbans, recruited from the leading families, and responsible only to the district commissioner. An elite force, the Dubas were independent of the Kenya police, whom Reece regarded as unreliable. The Dubas were later introduced into the other frontier districts. As district commissioner in Moyale from 1932, Reece was seconded to the Foreign Office in 1934 as British consul for southern Ethiopia, at Mega, where he had to cope with the refugees who poured over the mountains after the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in 1935. He was appointed district commissioner in Marsabit in 1936. 
Since 1934 the officer in charge of the northern frontier district had been Vincent Glenday, who was district commissioner in Turkana when Reece first arrived in Kenya. Glenday expected his junior officers to remain unmarried until they had done at least two tours of duty, and it was not until 20 March 1936 that Reece married Alys Isabel Wingfield ('b'. 1912/13), daughter of Horace Ernest Humphrey Tracy of Bury St Edmunds, a retired RAF squadron leader, and sister of the writer Honor Tracy; they had two sons and two daughters. Alys Reece later wrote an account of their life in Kenya, 'To my Wife: Fifty Camels' (1963). 
While Glenday was on leave in 1938, Reece acted as officer in charge at Isiolo, headquarters of the northern frontier district; and when Glenday left Kenya to become governor of the Somaliland protectorate in 1939, Reece was appointed in his place. Very similar in outlook to Glenday, Reece loved the tough frontier life, and wrote that the northern frontier district was where 'real life' was to be found: 'there was something genuine and real about it all... those of us who'd had hard lives in the war found a certain peace in the solitude of the desert' (Allen, 96). He was very demanding, expecting his officers to work long hours, and to spend at least half of each month on foot safari. He was a stickler for detail, and bombarded his young officers with detailed orders and circulars. Reece was admired and respected by all, and inspired great affection in many, even among the Goan clerks serving in remote districts, to whose welfare he paid great attention. He came to be universally known as Uncle. A man of many interests, he was especially fond of the poetry of R. L. Stevenson. Reece was made an OBE in 1937 and a CBE in 1943. 
When Italian forces invaded Kenya in June 1940, the British abandoned the frontier area, including Mandera and Moyale, but when the Italians were pushed out of Italian east Africa and Haile Selassie was restored to the throne of Ethiopia in 1941, Reece argued the case for establishing a British military administration in Borana, in southern Ethiopia. When the occupied enemy territory administration took over in 1941, he was appointed senior political officer for the Borana province, in addition to his position in the northern frontier district. He faced the task of trying to keep the peace among warring tribesmen armed with rifles, and he managed to extract compensation from them for years of raids south of the border with Kenya. He moved his wife and family from Isiolo to Marsabit, and often did not see them for months on end. In 1942 the Ethiopians took over from the occupied enemy territory administration, but the raids from Borana into the northern frontier district continued until the end of 1943. After the war Reece was appointed the first provincial commissioner of the new Northern Province, which was expanded in 1947 to include Turkana. He faced the problem of the increasing political activity of the Somali Youth League. Formed in 1943 in the former Italian Somaliland as the Somali Youth Club, it aimed to unite all Somali in an independent Somalia. Reece banned the movement in Garissa as subversive, and later extended the ban to the whole province in 1948. 
Reece left Kenya in 1948 to become the first post-war governor of the Somaliland protectorate and military administrator of the Haud and reserved areas along the Ethiopian border. Since 1941, a British military administration had controlled British Somaliland, the former Italian Somaliland, and the Ogaden area of Ethiopia. However, the Bevin Plan of 1946, proposing the formation of a united Somali state under the trusteeship of the United Nations, was rejected, and Somalia was divided again, with Ogaden handed back to Ethiopia in 1948, Italian Somaliland placed under United Nations trusteeship administered by Italy, while British Somaliland reverted to protectorate status. Under Reece's governorship, the civil administration was restored, the Somalization of the civil service and the police began, in preparation for independence, although no date had been set, and he devoted himself to educational and economic development. A trade school opened in Hargeisa in 1952, and the first government school for girls and the first secondary school for boys in 1953, while water storage basins were excavated along the southern boundary of the protectorate. He also managed to get funds from the Colonial Office to build a road over the Daloh Pass, from Erigavo in the mountains down a 7000 ft escarpment to Mait on the coast of the Gulf of Aden, which he opened himself in 1953. Despite the bias of the British government towards the Ethiopians, Reece had grown to respect the Somali, and he was remembered long after his retirement. He was bitterly disappointed when the Foreign Office decided to return the Somali grazing areas of the Haud and reserved areas to Ethiopian control according to the treaty of 1897, and he decided to retire in 1953, rather than have to implement this decision. He was made a KCMG in 1950. 
Reece settled in East Lothian, Scotland, and in his retirement he worked for prison reform as Scottish chairman of the Howard League for Penal Reform from 1961 to 1973, and chairman of the managers of Loaningdale Approved School from 1968 to 1976. He continued to take an interest in Somali affairs, and in the 1960s argued the case for the secession of the Somali part of the Northern Province of Kenya to Somalia. He was patron of the Anglo-Somali Society from 1978. He also took part in local affairs, serving as honorary sheriff of East Lothian from 1962 to 1973, and as deputy lieutenant in 1971. Reece died on 14 October 1985 in Roodlands Hospital, Haddington, East Lothian. 


@@@@@


doc= 64157


Reilly, Sir Bernard Rawdon (1882-1966), colonial governor, was born on 25 March 1882 at Durrington, Wiltshire, the son of Colonel Bradshaw Lewis Phillips Reilly, an officer in the Bombay staff corps, and his wife, Eleanor White. He was educated at Bedford School and entered the Indian army in 1902, transferring to the political department in 1908. He went to Aden, then under the control of the Bombay presidency, as political officer in the Arab town of Shaykh 'Uthman, in the Aden settlement, and remained in Aden throughout the war. He was a member of the delegation to the Yemen led in 1919 by Lieutenant-Colonel Harold Fenton Jacob, assistant resident in Aden, which was intercepted by hostile tribesmen and detained for four months. 
Reilly was appointed resident of Aden in 1931. His title changed to chief commissioner in 1932, when the administration of Aden was transferred to the government of India in Delhi, and governor in 1937, when Aden became a British colony, under the control of the Colonial Office in London. The Aden settlement itself covered 75 square miles, but Reilly also had to deal with the Aden protectorate, twenty-five independent states to the north and east of Aden which had signed protection treaties with Britain. As Yemeni raids into the protectorate increased, Reilly persuaded the government that it must honour its treaty obligations and reach an agreement with the imam on the boundary between the Yemen and the protectorate states. In 1933, with Britain and the Yemen close to a state of war, while Yemeni troops occupied the Audhali plateau in the amirate of Dhala and had taken hostages, Reilly was authorized to go to San'a' to open negotiations with the imam, who had accepted a draft treaty. The treaty of San'a', signed in 1934, secured peace on the frontier for a number of years. Britain recognized the imam as king of the Yemen and while the imam never abandoned his claim to the whole of south-west Arabia, on the grounds that the Zeidi imams had ruled there between 1630 and 1730, whereas Britain defined Yemen as the area that had been part of the Ottoman empire, he was prepared to make a temporary settlement, intended to last for forty years. The 1934 treaty marked the beginning of a new phase in the history of the Aden protectorate. Reilly was knighted in 1934. 
With the danger of Yemeni raids removed, Reilly turned his attention to internal security in the protectorate. British policy had always been to avoid involvement in internal affairs, but the government could not ignore the interruption of the main trade routes. In 1934 Reilly found money to form groups of tribal guards in each state to police the roads, and trained a force of government guards to escort British officials in the protectorate, and garrison forts on the Aden-Yemen frontier. In addition, there were the Aden protectorate levies, regular soldiers under the command of the RAF regiment. But the bombing of villages by the RAF squadron based in Aden continued to be the favoured method of punishing tribesmen: this was defended by Reilly as plenty of warning was given, there was no loss of life, and the houses were easily rebuilt. 
As part of his policy of expanding British involvement in Aden and the protectorate, Reilly appointed a political officer for the protectorate in 1935. He also managed to find government funding for social welfare programmes, including the appointment of an agricultural adviser in 1937. In 1937 he initiated the conclusion of advisory treaties with the main protectorate states, binding the ruler to co-operate with the government of Aden over welfare and development. In 1935 he opened a college for the sons of chiefs and boys from the leading families in the protectorate. It was Reilly who persuaded the British government to take over direct control of Aden in 1937, in response to the desire of the Arab population of Aden to sever the link between Aden and India, worried that Aden might turn into an Indian colony. Although his low-key style meant that he was not widely known outside official circles, Reilly knew how to make the administration work, and he was respected by those who served under him, and revered by the Arabs. 
In 1940 Reilly left Aden to join the Colonial Office, and spent the war in London. He continued to be involved in Aden affairs and his advice was often sought. He was present at the Anglo-Yemeni conference in London in 1950 to try to settle recent frontier disputes following the assassination of Imam Yahya in 1948, but there was no hope of a final settlement, and no boundary commission was set up. He also attended the meetings held in London in 1957 on the future of the Aden protectorate. He published 'Britain and the Yemen' in 1960. He had few interests outside his work, but he was chairman of the Royal Empire Society for the Blind from 1950 to 1959. Sir Bernard Reilly died unmarried on 28 October 1966 at Westminster Hospital in London, and was buried on 3 November at Magdalen Hill cemetery, Winchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 64159


Warburton, John Paul (1840-1919), police officer in India, was born on 28 August 1840 in Kabul, Afghanistan. His mother was Shah Jahan Begum (died in or after 1866), a member of an Afghan noble family and relative of Shah Shuja, king of Kabul. His adoptive father was Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Warburton (died 1864) of the Bengal army. The identity of Warburton's natural father is not certain. Warburton was born Jahan Dad Khan, and it is most likely that his father was Shah Jahan Begum's first husband, Sirdar Faiz Talab Khan, a high official in the service of the emir of Kabul. Warburton embraced the culture of his adopted father and typically dressed in English rather than Indian fashion. According to his biographer, G. D. Martineau, 'He never saw England, but anyone glancing at him or meeting him casually at a party would have taken him for an Englishman wearing an immaculate suit, of fashionable cut, and often a topi' (Martineau, 73). Warburton had one younger half-brother, Sir Robert Warburton (1842-1899), Royal Artillery officer and author of 'Eighteen Years in the Khyber'. There was a marked difference in the treatment of the two sons. While Robert Warburton was educated in England and secured a commission in the Royal Artillery, John Paul was educated at a Roman Catholic school in Agra. In 1864, possibly through his father's influence, he received a much less prestigious appointment as an assistant superintendent in the Punjab police. A year earlier he had married Mary Whayman (1842-1889), the widow of a British army ensign. They had six children. In 1872 Warburton became superintendent of police in Ludhiana district in the Punjab, where he served for thirteen years. 
Warburton gained a reputation as the greatest detective of nineteenth-century India. He was aided in police work by his fluency in several Indian languages, and, according to British observers, his Afghan background was believed to give him an important 'native' insight into the workings of the Indian criminal mind. Among Punjabis, Warburton earned the nickname of Button Sahib, and a reputation as 'a controller of many devils' that allowed him to gain information about criminal activities. Warburton also had a reputation of being a master of disguise, and popular stories attributed to him the power to change his shape into that of a tiger. In reality, Warburton's success was based on patient and painstaking detective work. According to Percival Griffiths, 'It can safely be said that few men have possessed his power of unravelling criminal problems.... He achieved his results by a remarkable understanding of criminal psychology and by a capacity for relentless, logical deduction from ascertained clues' (Griffiths, 405). 
Much of Warburton's work involved the investigation of 'criminal tribes', such as the Sansiahs, which the colonial state considered to be one of the greatest threats to public order in late nineteenth-century India. He was particularly successful at a common method for dealing with collective crime in British India: persuading gang members to turn approver (or king's witness) in exchange for pardon or reduced sentences. In two of his most famous cases, Warburton broke up a gang of dacoits (gang robbers) who were believed to be responsible for over 600 robberies in the Punjab, and a gang of poisoners who had been active for over two decades. On several occasions he was selected by the government of India for special duties in the investigation of important criminal cases in other provinces. Rudyard Kipling interviewed Warburton about the nature of Indian police work while he was writing the stories that became 'Plain Tales from the Hills' (1888), and Warburton provided the model for Rudyard Kipling's police character Strickland. In 'Miss Youghal's Sais', the story that introduces Strickland, the narrator writes that Strickland took for his model the one man 'in the whole of upper India... who can pass for Hindu or Mahommedan, hide-dresser or priest, as he pleases. He is feared and respected by the natives from the Ghor Kathri to the Jamma Musjid; and he is supposed to have the gift of invisibility and executive control over many Devils' (Kipling, 24). 
Warburton retired from the Punjab police in 1900, after reaching the rank of assistant inspector-general. After his retirement he served as inspector-general of the Patiala police under Maharaja Rajinder Singh. At George V's 1911 coronation durbar in Delhi, Warburton was made a CIE for his rescue of a British doctor during riots against plague measures in Patiala in 1902. He also received a grant of land in the Punjab for his services, and a village and railway station there were named for him. Warburton died in October 1919 at Kasauli, in the Punjab, following a riding accident. 


@@@@@


doc= 64160


Trench, Sir David Clive Crosbie (1915-1988), colonial governor, was born at Quetta, India, on 2 June 1915, the son of William Launcelot Crosbie Trench, an irrigation engineer, and his wife, Margaret Zephanie Huddlestone. He was educated at Tonbridge School and from 1935 to 1937 at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he gained a reputation as a sportsman and respect both as a student journalist and social activist, in his third year running a camp for the unemployed. Joining the colonial service in 1938, he was posted to the British Solomon Islands protectorate. A secondment in Fiji to the secretariat of the western Pacific high commission, to which he was to return as high commissioner, was followed by secondment to Tonga from where he was recalled in September 1942 to be district officer, Guadalcanal, after the Americans under General Vandergrift began the difficult campaign to dislodge the Japanese. Within a year he was acting resident commissioner and commanding officer of the Solomon Islands defence force, the youngest combatant unit in the empire. He remained in this post until 1946. The defence force was responsible for reconnaissance, the rescue of crashed American airmen, and liaison with the 'coast watchers', who manned observation posts behind the Japanese lines. Respected by the islanders whose loyalty was crucial, fluent in the local pidgin, bold and quick-witted, Trench earned the American Legion of Merit in 1943 and the Military Cross in 1944. In 1944 he married Margaret Gould, an American nursing officer. They had one daughter. 
The war over, Trench, appointed secretary to the protectorate government in 1947, enthusiastically planned the rehabilitation and development of the Solomons, displaying his strength as a generalist for whom human relationships outweighed institutional structures. He earned a place at the Joint Services Staff College in 1949, after which he was posted to Hong Kong where he worked initially as assistant and deputy defence secretary, and clerk of councils. After promotion in 1956 he served as deputy financial secretary and as commissioner for labour and mines, gaining a valuable insight into both Communist and Kuomintang communities whose politics were powerful in the trade unions movement. 
Highly regarded, Trench's attendance at the Imperial Defence College in 1958 was followed by promotion to deputy colonial secretary, Hong Kong, in 1959. His circle of friends was wide, among both Chinese, with whom he spoke Cantonese easily, and expatriates, whose company he particularly enjoyed at the American and foreign correspondents' clubs where his ready humour and deep belly laugh were appreciated. His own background also gave him an empathy with staff transferred from other colonies, sometimes regarded as interlopers. Consolidating his reputation as a forthright and innovative administrator, in 1961 he was given an opportunity to show his paces back in the Western Pacific, where the high commission was now located in the Solomon Islands. 
Welcomed enthusiastically as 'ol' friend bilong yumi', Trench encouraged the Solomons to catch up with what was happening elsewhere by accelerating constitutional development. His understanding of Melanesian society and the difficulties of administering isolated communities in a scatter of islands led him to promote progress by a steady series of comparatively short steps, starting with the election of a majority of unofficial members to the legislative council. 
In 1964 Trench returned to Hong Kong as governor. Always a social reformer, he actively promoted low-cost housing and the improvement of factory working conditions. He also sought ways to involve the growing and sophisticated middle class, for whom Hong Kong was both home and future, in areas of government which concerned them without creating the democratic institutions which might have encouraged local conflict between the Communist Party of China and the Kuomintang. His attention to tertiary education resulted in the widespread growth of local tertiary institutions and a university grants committee. Seeking a representative and active grass roots level of local administration, Trench appointed a working party of middle seniority staff, some with experience of other dependencies, to report. 
To Trench's regret their recommendations had to be shelved when the shock waves of Mao Zedong's cultural revolution spilled over the frontier. Students were among the first both to express dissatisfaction with the 'status quo' and to become aware of the reality of 1997 and the end of the New Territories lease. 1966 and 1967 were troubled years in Hong Kong with strikes and spasmodic riots, including demonstrations outside Government House. A big man in every sense, Trench was firm and cool, insisting on a low police profile. With his colonial secretary, Michael Gass, he established under his direct control a strong team of able staff, irrespective of seniority, who effectively began to win the hearts and minds of the people. Trench commented at the time that 'people make an awful fuss about these disturbances because we have so few of them' ('Keesing's Contemporary Archives', July 1967). There was, indeed, less than a 2 per cent outflow of bank deposits from what was already a significant and fast growing economy. 
On retirement to Dorset, despite the ill health of his wife, Trench selflessly put to local use his administrative skills and experience. He served as county councillor, from 1973 to 1981 as chairman of the Dorset Area Health Authority, and as deputy lieutenant. He never commented on those who had followed him in Hong Kong and never lost the respect of those who had served under him. He was appointed CMG in 1960 and advanced to KCMG in 1962 and to GCMG in 1969. He died at his home, 6 Allen Close, Child Okeford, Dorset, on 4 December 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 64162


Early, Charles (1824-1912), blanket manufacturer, was born on 29 December 1824 at West End, Witney, Oxfordshire, the eighth child and youngest son in the family of four sons and five daughters of John Early (1783-1862), blanket maker, and his wife, Elizabeth (Betsy), 'nee' Waine (1782-1864). He was sent away to boarding-school in Oxford at a young age, before being apprenticed to his father to learn blanket weaving in 1839, the last apprentice bound with the Witney Company of Blanket Weavers. After finishing his apprenticeship he went to London to work for his uncle, Thomas Early, who had a clothing business. There he met, and in 1848 married, Sarah (1824-1906), daughter of John Vanner of Stamford Hill, Stoke Newington. John Vanner was one of the founders of the City Bank and the Star Life Insurance Company and was descended from Huguenot silk weavers in Spitalfields. They had two sons, who became partners in the family firm, and one daughter. 
Shortly after his marriage Charles Early returned to Witney to take charge of the family business, John Early & Co., which was in difficulties, and in 1851 one of their patterned blankets won a bronze medal at the Great Exhibition. His father took him into partnership in 1851, the firm becoming John and Charles Early & Co., one of several blanket-manufacturing firms in Witney owned by members of the Early family. There had been weaving in Witney since before the Norman conquest, and a flourishing blanket-making industry had developed along the River Windrush, using wool from Cotswold sheep. The founder of the firm, Thomas Early (1655-1733), was the first master of the Blanket Company between 1711 and 1712. A cottage industry in the eighteenth century, blanket making was moving into mills by the early nineteenth century. The introduction of Kay's 'fly shuttle' in Witney in the early 1800s meant that only one weaver was needed to work the hand loom, and by 1838 John Early & Co. employed seventy weavers, working in two mills a mile apart. 
Following John Early's death in 1862 the firm became Charles Early & Co. in 1864. Charles Early continued the firm's expansion and modernization, always keeping abreast of the latest innovations. He had already installed his first self-acting spinning mule at New Mill in 1853, and from 1860 onwards he introduced power looms at Witney Mill. He built a large new warehouse at Newland, where he lived and had his office, in 1881-2, and by the end of the century he owned three mills and had taken over Edward Early & Son, concentrating the blanket manufacturing at Witney Mill. He remained head of the firm until 1910, when it became a private limited company, with his elder son, Charles William Early, as chairman, and he continued to play a part in the business until early in 1911. 
Charles Early was one of the blanket manufacturers who brought a successful legal action in 1908-9, limiting the description 'Witney blankets' to blankets made in Witney, so that rival blankets made in the West Riding of Yorkshire could no longer be called 'Witney' blankets. By then Witney blankets were famous: a Witney blanket was soft and loosely woven, containing mainly merino wool. 
A Wesleyan Methodist, Early became a local preacher in 1848, and he preached on the Witney circuit for the rest of his life; he also held all the offices open to laymen in the Wesleyan church. He was a member of the first Wesleyan conference open to lay representatives, in 1878. A teetotaller and temperance reformer, he managed to turn the New Inn in Witney into a temperance hotel. Although a JP from 1890, Early did not take much part in public life in Witney, but he was one of the promoters and first directors of the Witney Railway Company, later taken over by the Great Western Railway Company. 
Charles Early died on 17 May 1912 at his home, Newland House, Harcourt Street, Witney. He was buried at Witney cemetery on 21 May. A new organ for the Wesleyan church in Witney was donated by the family in his memory in 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 64163


Stansby, William (bap. 1572, d. 1638), printer and bookseller, was baptized on 8 July 1572 in the parish of St Mary Major, Exeter. His father, Richard (died 1594), was a cutler who had lost his first wife and family in the plague of 1570 and his mother was Elizabeth Maunder (died 'c'.1608). His parents married the following year on the anniversary of William's baptism in the neighbouring church of St Mary Arches. Stansby was indentured as the apprentice of the London printer John Windet from Christmas 1589, and was freed as a member of the Stationers' Company on 7 January 1597. Windet, who had moved to the Cross Keys in Thames Street in London in 1588, came from the same parish in Exeter as Stansby, and was a cousin of the theologian Richard Hooker. 
Stansby appears to have spent all of his early career with Windet, who printed a mix of godly books, psalm books, music, some poetry, and history as well as proclamations and other official material for the City of London. The business had close connections with Lambeth Palace. In June 1607 Windet lost his apprentice George Vokes, two other workmen, and his wife to the plague. As Windet had no children, Stansby became Windet's co-partner early in 1609. Windet made his will on 21 November 1610 and he died before 17 December. 
Following Windet's death Stansby transformed the Cross Keys printing house by investing in a large quantity of new type. Windet's emphasis on small godly books with long print runs was replaced by an emphasis on substantial works of antiquarian and historical interest that were printed in much smaller quantities. The shift in production was reflected in the authors and, perhaps, customers who frequented Stansby's printing house. 
Stansby is best-known as the printer of Ben Jonson's 'Workes' (1616), though many of his other books are almost as famous. He was to print books by John Donne, Sir Walter Ralegh, William Camden, John Selden, Michael Drayton, Sir Francis Bacon, Samuel Purchas, and several others of note. He provided specialist composition in Anglo-Saxon, Greek, Arabic, and Hebrew, as well as being the first English printer to print woodblocks of Japanese and a number of other languages. The establishment was probably the second largest press in London after the royal printing house and appears to have employed at least fifteen to seventeen staff. Stansby usually produced work of a better quality than most of the trade. 
As with any printing house of the time, Stansby printed many sermons and other religious tracts. His religious beliefs appear to have been conventional, although the clues are few. He rarely wrote prefatory material for the books he published. Two fines for swearing recorded in the records of the Stationers' Company, however, suggest a forthright temperament that is also reflected in the determination with which he built up the business. He avoided senior positions within the Stationers' Company and on occasion came into conflict with the authorities. 
Although Stansby had printed questionable authors such as John Traske, his reputation suffered a more serious setback when he printed John Selden's 'History of Tithes'. As Selden later described to Nicolas Claude Fabri de Peiresc, the bishop of London raided Stansby's printing house, seizing both type and manuscript. When the book returned to the press, Stansby reprinted three further editions surreptitiously. For the next few years he became a recalcitrant and difficult member of the trade. 
Most of the entries in the Stationers' Company records relating to Stansby during 1620-21 are a record of conflict: foreigners ordered to be put away, fines imposed and unpaid, a book not properly licensed, and a dispute over the right to reprint Ralegh's 'A History of the World'. To make matters worse, Stansby and Nathaniel Butter were arrested at an unknown date during the early 1620s for printing a pamphlet concerning the succession of Ferdinand II to the crown of Bohemia. In order to obscure its origins, the pamphlet had been given a false imprint. Stansby nearly lost his business and reformed his behaviour. Thereafter, he was granted a share in the company's joint-stock venture, English Stock, and was elected to the livery of the Stationers' Company. 
During the plague years of 1624-5 Stansby served as a churchwarden for St Peter Paul's Wharf. It was shortly after this that he acquired the rights to all the copies of the printer Thomas Snodham. The matter was disputed at the time by the printer George Wood, but Wood's relationship with the company had been, if anything, worse than Stansby's and the assignment stood. The most important part of this transfer involved a great many books covered by the music privilege. Although Stansby did not print any music books between 1614 and 1628, he was one of the partners in the music stock at his death. 
During the mid-1620s the character of Stansby's business also changed. He became a wealthier, more established member of the company. The death of the printer Richard Field in 1624 allowed him to reclaim Windet's former privilege for printing psalm books which Field had held since Windet's death. He increasingly printed almanacs and catechisms. All three were highly profitable and depended upon long print runs rather than intensive composition. Much of his output of this material, when it survives, survives only in very small quantities. 
By the early 1630s Stansby's output appears to have diminished. It is unclear whether this is largely an illusion, the result of lost material, or whether upon reaching the age of sixty he decided to take things easier. Probably an element of both is true. The records of the Stationers' Company at this time show him not printing one book, badly printing a second, and being bought out of his share of the copy for a third. A degree of recalcitrance seems to have replaced his earlier determination. On 13 December 1635 he was granted a third share of a patent to print music and music paper but in early 1636 he sold his business to Richard Bishop for $700. According to Stansby's will his share in the English Stock was worth $160, and of the music patent $60. The value of his estate as a whole was probably in the region of $1000. 
Stansby died at some point between 9 September 1638, when his will was made, and 14 September, when the will was proved. He left a wife, Elizabeth (died 1649), but their marriage had been childless. As a consequence, apart from Elizabeth, the principal beneficiaries of Stansby's estate were his sister Ruth and her husband John Dove, of Exeter, and his cousin Ruth and her husband Jonathan Shelborne, of London. Stansby also left bequests to the daughter of his uncle John Stansby, his former apprentice John Carwithing, the publisher John Smethwick, and the grocer Thomas Finch. He was buried in the chancel of St Peter Paul's Wharf on 17 September. Elizabeth continued to live at the Cross Keys, and was later buried with her husband in the chancel on 11 September 1649. John Stansby, the scrivener, was a cousin. 


@@@@@


doc= 64165


Sotheby family (per. 1778-1861), auctioneers and book collectors, came to prominence in the book trade in the mid-eighteenth century with 


@@@@@


doc= 64166


Davis, Thomas (1749-1807), estate steward and agriculturist, was born on 11 July 1749 at Penton Mewsey, Hampshire, son of Thomas Davis, an itinerant excise officer then based there, and his wife, Elizabeth. Davis received a good classical education at a school in Devizes, Wiltshire, and in December 1763 he was taken into the estates offices of Thomas Thynne, third Viscount Weymouth, later first marquess of Bath. These were in the west front of Longleat House, Warminster, under the chief steward, Simon Jude Cole (1703-1787). On 9 June 1772 Davis married Mary Coombs (1744-1814) at Longbridge Deverill. They had six surviving children, three sons and three daughters. In 1777 Cole was superannuated and moved to nearby Horningsham. Davis took over his apartments and offices at Longleat, after fourteen years as Cole's assistant, and became chief steward to the first and second marquesses, serving their houses in Wiltshire and London and their extensive estates in England and Ireland. Davis's salary was an annual $100, which was considerably supplemented by receipts from the sale of timber, from lands he leased nearby, and from his other occupations. He proved a wonderful manager, having in 1787 improved accountability by introducing separate household and land accounts. In November 1796, after the death of the first marquess of Bath, Davis moved from Longleat House into offices in Horningsham. 
Davis also started a notable career as an agriculturist. He had joined the Bath and West of England Agricultural Society by 1782, and started contributing to their published 'Letters and Papers' from volume 3 (published 1786). In 1793 he was asked by the board of agriculture to contribute the volume on Wiltshire to their series of county agricultural reports. This was one of the first to be delivered to members, in January 1794, and has ever since been regarded as 'perhaps the best of all the agricultural 'Reports'' (R. E. Prothero, Baron Ernle, 'English Farming, Past and Present', 1961, 233). It divided Wiltshire between the north-west vale lands lying under the chalk hills and the south-east Wiltshire chalk downs. These were divided by geology along the foot of the chalk hills. 
In 1792 Davis had surveyed the enclosure of Bagendon, near Cirencester, with the surveyor Edward Webb (1751-1828), an estate which then belonged to the marquess of Bath. At a meeting of the Bath Society, Davis met the geologist William Smith, a recent pupil of Webb's. In 1796 Davis introduced Smith to the Revd Benjamin Richardson (1758-1831), who started to champion Smith's remarkable geological results, as did Davis, who, as soon as he heard of Smith's pioneering work on strata, had commented that 'the only way to know the true value of land' was in the light of such geological knowledge (J. Phillips, 'Memoirs of William Smith', 1844, 16). At some early point during his stewardship a shaft in search of coal was put down on an outlying part of the Longleat estate; geological enquiry would help to prevent similar unprofitable investments. 
Davis started to make use of Smith's results in his other careers as land agent and valuer. The best example of this work is the discreet and careful way he negotiated the purchase of the Eastbury and Gunville estates in Dorset for the Wedgwood family between 1800 and 1806. Davis also encouraged Smith with his work on water meadows, published in 1806. Their connections had been cemented in 1802 when Smith took on as his Bath partner Jeremiah Cruse (1758-1819), whose son of the same name (1781-1861) served the Longleat estates under four stewards for more than sixty-seven years. Davis's own gratitude to him is shown by the $100 he left in his will to the younger Cruse, 'his faithful clerk as a token of my esteem and regard for him'. 
Many agricultural papers flowed from Davis's prolific pen between 1786 and 1808. These were on woodland and marshland management, dairy and arable farming, planting, wool, sheep, oak for the navy, grassland, blight in wheat, compensation for tithes, leasing on lives, plans for labourers' cottages, and other philanthropy, including the supply of milk to the poor. Davis's papers went not only to the Bath Society, but to other publications of the board of agriculture, to William Nicholson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy', and to Arthur Young's 'Annals of Agriculture', though he was not always on good terms with Young because of 'a very rude illiberal attack' which Young made on him concerning sheep management at a public meeting of the Bath Agricultural Society in the 1790s (Stone, 196). 
Davis was also long active as an independent land surveyor throughout the western counties, from the duchy of Cornwall's lands into Gloucestershire. He also served as clerk, surveyor, commissioner, and solicitor (although not in the modern legal sense) in enclosure work from 1763. Here he was regarded as 'a Commissioner of great reputation' (Sinclair, 331), particularly in Wiltshire. The words on his monumental inscription in Horningsham church, Wiltshire, which Davis composed himself, reveal his pride that such 'works have contributed so much to the beauty of [that] country and the comfort of its inhabitants'. Davis was a notable improver who became active in the affairs of his local canal, the Dorset and Somerset Canal, sadly one of the least successful after its promotion in January 1793. He served on its first committee (1793) and in 1803 became a proprietor. Davis was also active as a botanist and a historian, contributing to the work of his fellow Wiltshire historian John Britton, and for a short time (1802-04) he was a member of the London-based Society of Arts. 
On 9 November 1807, at a meeting of the court baron at Frome, Somerset, Davis suffered a paralytic stroke. He died the next day and was buried inside Horningsham church on 16 November 1807. The extent of the loss his sudden death created can be gauged from this, from the printed funeral sermon issued in 1807, from the fine monument by Henry Westmacott (1784-1861) put up to his memory in Horningsham church, and from the attendance at his funeral by the second marquess and both his brothers, Lord George Thynne (1770-1838) and Lord John Thynne (1772-1849). This was a solemn occasion which 'testified how much their departed friend was beloved in life, and lamented in death' ('Monthly Magazine', 24.511). The wording of a tablet which the Bath Society intended to erect was equally impressive. Its secretary William Matthews (1747-1816) paid his own tribute: 'whoever was personally acquainted with Thomas Davis, and 'thousands' were, cannot fail to regret his removal, as a kind and warm-hearted associate; as a skilful arbiter of human rights; as a peace maker and as a good example in civil and social life' (Matthews, 271). 
After his death Davis's agricultural report on Wiltshire was improved and re-issued in enlarged second (1811) and third editions (1813) by his eldest son Thomas Davis (1777-1839), who succeeded him as steward of the Longleat estates and retained the post until his own death. William Marshall, 'not finding this any improvement', could still write that he 'preferred the original' version in 1818 (W. Marshall, 'Review and Abstract of the County Reports', 1818, 184). 


@@@@@


doc= 64167


Stone, Thomas Brace (bap. 1753, d. 1815), agricultural writer and land surveyor, was baptized at Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, on 26 November 1753, the fifth son of Richard Stone (died 1782/3), and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Arnold, who died before her husband. Richard Stone was a prosperous draper and a churchwarden in Leighton Buzzard, and the owner of considerable property there and in neighbouring Buckinghamshire. 
Thomas Stone is known to have lived for many years in the East Indies. Confirmation comes from his letter of July 1776 to Governor-General Warren Hastings. This, from Pondicherry, acknowledges his 'distressful situation... occasioned by folly and indiscretion' (BL, Add. MS 29137, fol. 283). He had been based in Calcutta but had been forced to escape his creditors there by fleeing to a place then safely under French control. Whether his appeal for help to Hastings was answered is unknown, but he soon returned to England. He now started farming in 'the Eastern part of Norfolk, where I was bred up a farmer' (T. B. Stone, 'General View of the Agriculture of the County of Lincoln', 1794, 86). He next moved to Tong, Shropshire, where he farmed 1300 acres and met John Bishton sen. (1735-1806) of Kilsall, who was to write the 'General View of the Agriculture of the County of Salop' for the board of agriculture, published in 1794. 
After inheriting property from his father in 1783 Stone moved on to land surveying and valuing estates. He settled in Bedford, where his first book was produced, 'Essay on Agriculture', 1785, dedicated to the Norfolk MP Harbord Harbord, whose Norfolk land agent had been fellow agriculturist William Marshall. Despite castigation by the eminent agricultural reformer Arthur Young, the 'Essay' 'contrived to lead many persons of distinction to believe that he possessed superior talents in the management of estates' (Shoberl, 447). Stone married Mary Purser at Ampthill on 21 November 1786 and then became active as an estate manager in Bedfordshire, where he was principal acting manager for the duke of Bedford's estates from 1794, and in Lincolnshire, where he valued Sir Joseph Banks's 3400 acre estate in 1796. His work for both, which involved his partner Charles Chadwick Cremer ('c'.1765-1818), was soon criticized as overpriced and inaccurate. Stone was also a commissioner for some Bedfordshire inclosures (on which he published a pamphlet in 1787) and roads. 
Meanwhile Stone was asked by Sir John Sinclair, whose inconsiderate manner in choosing his authors so riled Young, to write reports for his board of agriculture. Late in 1793 (when Stone had opened a Gray's Inn office in London) his 'Agriculture of Huntingdon' was published, followed by those for Lincolnshire (February 1794) and Bedfordshire (July 1794). These were welcomed by his friend Marshall, but not by his new enemy Young. In 1796 the board of agriculture asked its contributors to prepare improved reports on their counties but immediately realized that, in its new financial plight, it would be unable to support them. Stone was certainly asked to prepare an improved report for Bedfordshire in May 1796, an invitation rescinded in June. Stone felt bitter, especially when in June 1797 Young (secretary to the board) was asked to prepare the new report on Lincolnshire. Stone now made himself obnoxious to the board by continual demands for compensation between 1797 and 1799. He had leased Ampthill House by mid-1797, thereby probably overextending himself financially. 
Young's new report on Lincolnshire was published in 1799 and Stone took immediate revenge in the long and vicious 'A Review of the Corrected Agricultural Survey of Lincolnshire', published in 1800, in which Young was called 'the worst farmer in Suffolk' (p. 21), together with a printed 'Letter to Lord Somerville' (the board's new president) 'with a view to shew the inutility of the plans and researches of that institution' published that same year, in which he, probably with Marshall, joined forces as a Society of Practical Farmers. Stone had by now been appointed a commissioner for draining the Isle of Axholme in Lincolnshire. His two last published works were 'Letters on Drainage in Lincolnshire' (a scheme being proposed by John Rennie sen.), published in 1800 and 1801 (of the latter no surviving copy is known). 
Francis Russell, fifth duke of Bedford, who had been disputing Stone's charges between 1796 and 1798, decided to take his own revenge in 1800 and arraigned Stone, who 'combined such a love of rural sports, and of convivial enjoyments, as interfered with his business' ('GM'), before the local magistrates for killing game on estates at Maulden without a licence. Stone immediately countered with the same charge against two of the duke's employees. The Bedfordshire magistrates found Stone guilty in January 1801 but he appealed to the court of king's bench in London, whose four judges, in June, were split in their legal opinion, so failing to confirm or deny his conviction. 
By now Stone was clearly again in deep financial difficulty. He had written in 1796 of having 'lain under a Cloud of Obloquy for many years' (Bedfordshire RO, R3/2009) and by July 1801 had been seized for rent and ejected from Ampthill House. He is last heard of in England in September 1801 at Wansford, near Peterborough, probably busy with drainage work. By October 1801 the legal case against him had been discontinued, probably because he had already 'suddenly eloped with twelve thousand pounds belonging to one of his noble employers [surely the duke of Bedford] and various smaller sums' (Shoberl, 447). Bedford died suddenly in March 1802 leaving unsettled accounts of $400,000 and when irregularities were found in these, his steward at Woburn, John Farey, was summarily dismissed by the sixth duke, Farey later writing, in 1813, of Stone's 'merited exile and oblivion' (Farey, 375). Stone had certainly emigrated again to French protection by the time of the peace of Amiens in May 1802. There he died in poverty in Paris in October 1815, much attacked by gout, leaving his wife and daughters in real difficulty. 


@@@@@


doc= 64169


Goodall, Sir Stanley Vernon (1883-1965), naval architect, was born on 18 April 1883 at the fire station, West India Road, Poplar, London, the son of Samuel Goodall, fireman, and his wife, Eliza Summers. He was educated at Owens School, Islington, and intended to become a naval engineer officer but soon, in July 1901, transferred to the Royal Corps of Naval Constructors. He graduated from the Royal Naval College in 1907 with one of the highest marks of all time and excellent records in tennis and rugby. 
After a short appointment to Devonport Dockyard, Goodall went to work under Edmund Froude at the Haslar ship model tank. In 1908 he married Helen (died 1945), daughter of C. W. Phillips of Plymouth. By 1911 he was at the Admiralty in charge of the design of the novel light cruiser 'Arethusa'. His later description of this design in a lecture to American naval constructor students forms the best account of the way in which designs were carried out in that era. 
At the outbreak of war Goodall was lecturer at the Royal Naval College, a prestigious post, but was recalled for other wartime duties. He was part of a team which studied damage to Royal Navy ships after the battle of Jutland though his report was later suppressed. When the USA entered the war he was sent to Washington as assistant naval attache, working within their design office and serving as the focus for exchange of information between British and American designers. It was a valuable experience meeting senior American officers and corresponding directly with the British director of naval construction, Sir Eustace Tennyson-D'Eyncourt. Goodall's views on American ships were reported at length and summarized in 'Engineering' in 1922. His work was acknowledged with appointment as MBE and the award of the American Navy Cross. 
On his return to the UK, Goodall worked on the design of post-war battleships and battle cruisers, culminating in the mighty G3, which was ordered in 1921 but cancelled under the Washington treaty. After a short time in Malta Dockyard he returned to head the destroyer design section -- and the departmental concert party. It was in this appointment that, in response to a rather dull draft from his assistant, he wrote that he just wanted the facts and 'I will impart the enthusiasm', a phrase which might be seen as his motto. A number of his proposals for novel designs failed to materialize in the quest for economy. 
Goodall became chief constructor in 1930 and assistant director in 1932, mainly concerned with the modernization of older ships and trials of protection though including the early studies for the 'King George V' class battleships. In 1934 he was made OBE, which he attempted to refuse seeing it as an insult to an officer of his rank. In 1936 Goodall became director of naval construction, the principal technical adviser to the Board of Admiralty. The appointment as CB in 1937 and KCB in 1938 went far to offset the earlier, insulting, OBE. He took a very direct view of his responsibility for the design of a ship; in signing the building drawings he took personal responsibility for success or failure. This responsibility and poor health seem to have caused the loss of his sense of humour and several of his staff used the word 'austere' to describe his wartime manner, though he was always fair. 
The department of the director of naval construction was moved to Bath in September 1939. Goodall opposed this more as he lost the personal contact with ministers and other board members which he saw as essential; but this was partially remedied in October 1942 when he and a small staff returned to Whitehall. In the early part of the war Churchill was first lord of the Admiralty and Goodall saw him frequently and admired him greatly -- though some of the minister's bright ideas were off-centre. As well as the overall direction of the department, Goodall continued to carry out a number of personal duties such as the 'viva voce' exam of constructor students. During the war 971 major warships from battleships to fleet mine-sweepers were built, together with innumerable landing craft and coastal forces. In addition, some 1700 requisitioned merchant ships and trawlers were converted for war purposes. 
After retirement Goodall continued an active professional life as prime warden of the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights, vice-president of the Institution of Naval Architects, and with the British Welding and Ship Research associations. He died on 24 February 1965 at the Bolingbroke Hospital, Battersea, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 64171


Baker, Sir Rowland (1908-1983), naval architect, was born on 3 June 1908 at Upchurch, Sittingbourne, Kent, the eldest son of Isaac Baker, a sailing bargee, and his wife, Lizzie Palmer. He had a brother and three sisters. Always top of the class in school and successful at sports, he became an apprentice at Chatham Dockyard, where, after four years of dockyard school, he won a place as a constructor cadet at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, graduating in 1931 and completing his sea training in 1932. He was married on 28 November 1931 to Frances Edna Cornish (1912-1994), with whom he had four children: daughters born in 1932 and 1934, and twins (another daughter and a son) born in 1943. 
As an assistant constructor Baker held a number of appointments in both the Whitehall design office and in dockyards. On promotion to constructor in 1938 he took charge of sloop design, for which his principal task was the structural design of the 'Seagull', the first all-welded ship for the Royal Navy. It was a brilliant design, well ahead of its time with longitudinal framing and flush butt joints. No commercial shipyard would build it so it was built in Devonport Dockyard, showing considerable savings in both time and cost over a riveted half-sister on an adjoining slip. He then designed the very cheap 'Bangor'-class mine-sweepers followed by the 'Algerines', both built in large numbers. He was also responsible for the highly successful improved 'Black Swan'-class sloops. 
Baker continued to make an important contribution to naval design during the Second World War. After the fall of France, the need was felt for large numbers of ships and craft to carry men and vehicles for a beach landing. The majority of landing ships and craft for both the Royal Navy and United States Navy were conceived by Baker, working for Earl Mountbatten. The combination of light weight for shallow draught, simplicity of construction, and seaworthiness made their design very difficult. A particular feature was his conviction that bow doors would always leak and, unlike modern ferries, his vessels would float upright with the vehicle deck flooded. In November 1941 he was granted a special pay allowance in recognition of his unusual responsibilities. Late in 1941 he spent some time in the USA initiating the design of the LST(2), the backbone of the allied invasion fleet, for which he was awarded the American medal of freedom after the war. In 1947 Baker described the design of landing ships and craft in two papers to the Institution of Naval Architects. After the war he was lent to the Canadian navy as constructor commodore, designing a successful icebreaker, the novel 'St Laurent'-class frigates, and other vessels -- and making many new friends. 
On return from Canada in 1956 Baker was put in charge of the nuclear submarine programme as technical chief executive, 'Dreadnought' project, again under Mountbatten. It was a strange organization with many staff having dual line of authority but Baker transmitted his own enthusiasm and the project was completed at cost and on time, very rare among defence projects of that day. Baker had proved that his managerial skill was as great as his design skill. 'Dreadnought' used American machinery in order to get her into service quickly but while she was being built the first British nuclear submarine machinery was installed for test at Dounreay and 'Valiant', the first all-British nuclear submarine, was being built, all under Baker's direction. Even before 'Dreadnought' was completed he was put in charge of the Polaris submarine project, which was also completed within time and cost budgets. 
Baker was appointed KB in the new year's honours of 1968, an unusual honour for a civil servant of his rank, and he retired in November of that year. He was persuaded to return to sort out problems with the mark 24 torpedo; later he tried, unsuccessfully, to develop a plant for the offshore oil industry. 
Baker was an unforgettable man for whom to work. His command of the English language, learned on a working Thames barge, was unusual for a senior civil servant and very disconcerting to those unfamiliar with his ways. His staff worshipped him in classical mode: his thunderbolts were as effective as those of Zeus -- he would often throw files at his staff. On the other hand, his kind and valuable support was there when the going was tough. One junior officer (the author of this memoir) received a note reading 'Cor mate, you aint 'arf sticking your neck out! Don't worry, I'll back you if it goes wrong.' 
Baker's design skills were shown in the advanced longitudinal structure of 'Seagull', the safety of his flimsy landing craft, and the many novelties in the Canadian 'St Laurent'-class frigates, further developed in later classes. He very strongly believed that a new design of ship should be 25 per cent novel and 75 per cent well-tried practice in order to be both up to date and reliable. In the submarine projects he pushed the use of network scheduling used in 'Dreadnought', a technique then unfamiliar in the UK, and then the more advanced PERT (programme evaluation and review technique) system for Polaris. It was no coincidence that both held to budget. Following a divorce, he married on 15 March 1972 Barbara Mary Comley (1921-2008). Baker off duty was full of fun and his ribald performance at the annual submarine dinner was unforgettable. He died at the Royal United Hospital, Bath, on 25 November 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 64175


Shakespear, Olivia (1863-1938), novelist, was born on 17 March 1863 at Southlands, Chale, on the Isle of Wight, the second of the three children of Major-General Henry Tod Tucker CB (1808-1896), who served with the British army in Bengal from 1824 until ill health forced his retirement in 1856, and Harriet Maria (1821-1900), second daughter of Sir Henry Allen Johnson (1775-1860). In 1866 the family moved to Framfield in Sussex, and then to Bayswater in London in 1878. Olivia Tucker was privately educated at home; like her cousin Lionel Johnson (1867-1902) she read voraciously from an early age. On 8 December 1885 she married Henry Hope Shakespear (1849-1923), a solicitor from a family with a long history of civil and military service in India. They lived first at 18 Porchester Square, Bayswater, where their only child, Dorothy (1886-1973), was born on 14 September 1886. 
The marriage, though outwardly tranquil, was not, from Olivia Shakespear's point of view, a happy one. In April 1894, at the inaugural dinner for the 'Yellow Book', she first encountered William Butler Yeats (1865-1939); thus began a lifelong relationship which developed, during 1895-6, into a love affair. Olivia Shakespear broke off the affair early in 1897, owing to Yeats's continuing obsession with Maud Gonne (1867-1953), but by 1899 they had resumed contact, and thereafter remained close friends. Olivia Shakespear is a significant presence in Yeats's 'The Wind among the Reeds' (1899), and her fourth novel, 'Rupert Armstrong' (1898), a 'roman-a-clef' about the life of John Millais that attributes his artistic decline to the influence of Effie Ruskin, takes some of its emotional colouring from her affair with Yeats. 
Between 1894 and 1909 Olivia Shakespear published six novels, of which the first three, 'Love on a Mortal Lease' (1894), 'The Journey of High Honour' (1894), and 'The False Laurel' (1896), though elegantly written, are conventional 'society' novels. With 'Rupert Armstrong' her work becomes more distinctive; 'The Devotees' (1904) is a study of a son in thrall to a feckless mother, while 'Uncle Hilary' (1909) explores the plight of a young woman who unknowingly marries her stepfather and eventually finds peace in a quasi-Buddhist detachment from the world. 
Though not personally ambitious -- Yeats remarked that she seemed content 'to have no more of life than leisure, and the talk of her friends' (Yeats, 'Memoirs', 74) -- Olivia Shakespear remained actively involved in London literary circles throughout her life. In 1909 she introduced Yeats to Ezra Pound, who married her daughter, Dorothy, in 1914; in 1911 her brother Henry Tudor Tucker (1868-1943) married Edith Ellen Hyde-Lees (1868-1942), whose daughter Bertha George Hyde-Lees (1892-1968) was later to marry Yeats. 
After her husband's death in July 1923, Olivia Shakespear moved to 34 Abingdon Court, Kensington. There she died of a heart attack on 3 October 1938. On hearing the news of her death Yeats wrote: 'She was not more lovely than distinguished -- no matter what happened she never lost her solitude' ('Letters of W. B. Yeats', 916). 


@@@@@


doc= 64176


Atkinson, Thomas (bap. 1729, d. 1798), architect and mason, was baptized on 22 June 1729 at Holy Trinity Church, King's Court, York, the son of Thomas Atkinson (died 1765), a mason, and his wife, Jane Marshall. He worked with his father on York Minster and in 1760 obtained his freedom at York as a stonecutter. He was in business with Joseph Atkinson (died 1792) until the partnership was dissolved in May 1765. He then opened a stone yard in St Andrewgate, York, where he produced statuary chimney-pieces and church monuments, in conjunction with his developing practice as an architect. He can be identified with the Thomas Atkinson of York who drew plans of Fountains Abbey and Kirkstall Abbey for John Burton's 'Monasticon Eboracense' (1758-9), but his first known architectural commissions were for a gateway (1763-5) and the new north front (1766-9) at Bishopthorpe Palace for the archbishop of York. 
Around 1765 Atkinson converted to Roman Catholicism, under the influence of the family of his first wife, Anne Russell ('c'.1731-1774), whom he married on 7 July 1761. After her death he was remarried by 1776; his new wife was Mary ('c'.1751-1796). In 1765 he began his long association with the convent of the Institution of St Mary (the Bar Convent), York: here he was responsible for both the design and building of the chapel (1766-9) and the main front (1787-9), among other buildings. This work brought Atkinson to the attention of the Roman Catholic gentry families of Yorkshire, from whom came his principal patrons: they included the Langdales, for whom he designed Houghton Hall, near Sancton ('c'.1765-8), the Stapletons of Carlton Hall (later Towers), the Lawsons of Brough, the Gascoignes of Parlington, the Cholmleys of Brandsby, and the Constables of Burton Constable. Atkinson worked for the Constables for over thirty years from 1766, carving chimney-pieces, designing rooms and their fittings as well as an orangery and the Roman Catholic church at Marton. His final work was the Constable family mausoleum at Halsham (1792-1802), which he hoped would 'speak' of his 'character as a work-man for centrys to come' (Constable of Burton Constable deposit, East Riding of Yorkshire Archives Service, DDCC 43/125). 
Thomas Atkinson was one of the most able architects working in northern England in the second half of the eighteenth century. His works, almost wholly confined to Yorkshire, include town houses, country houses, churches, and public buildings and demonstrate that, in ability, he rivalled the more prolific and better-known John Carr. His Palladian-style houses, particularly in the use of full pediments and flanking pavilions, owe much to James Paine, but greater originality is shown in the lively Gothic of Bishopthorpe Palace and the accomplished classicism of Halsham mausoleum and the interior of the Bar Convent chapel. Atkinson died on 4 May 1798 at home at 20 St Andrewgate, York, and was buried at St Saviour's there; there is a monument in the church to him and his two wives, Anne and Mary, erected by his son John, who inherited a business heavily encumbered with debt. 


@@@@@


doc= 64177


Foster, John (1759-1827), architect and engineer, was born in Liverpool, the son of John Foster (died 1801), master joiner, and his wife, Isabella. Although little known outside Liverpool, Foster's career was the archetypal tale of success in a boom town. Apprenticed as a joiner under his father, he purchased his freedom of the borough for 12 guineas in 1773. 
Foster proved himself a competent, if derivative, architect, and was involved in such projects as the new gaol (1786), the Athenaeum (1799), the major modifications to the town hall (1789-92, 1795-7, 1802, 1811), and the new exchange (1807). He was also responsible for the public dispensary (1781), extensions in 1802-3 to the Theatre Royal (built 1772), St John's market (1822), and the corporation church of St Luke, begun in 1811 and completed, massively overspent, to a much altered design by his son John Foster in 1831. However, he was more important as an early town planner: under his direction -- for he gained significant political influence in the 1780s -- street widening, paving, and lighting were coupled with control over building heights, spacings, and fire resistance. 
In 1799 Foster was appointed dock surveyor (chief engineer) in place of Thomas Morris, who was dismissed for seeking an allegedly unreasonable pay increase. Foster, who was not a qualified engineer, was paid three times as much as Morris, who was. Such were his talents that he was able, lacking both qualifications and experience, adequately to discharge these heavy new responsibilities. Working to the advice of John Rennie (1761-1821), he doubled the area of Liverpool docks, and modernized every dock already existing when he was appointed. In 1802 he became corporation surveyor as well, by equally suspect means but with equally successful results. 
A flawed genius, Foster was the master, and sometimes inventor, of almost every known form of local government corruption. His sister Jane married Matthew Gregson, who came of an old family of merchants, bankers, and manufacturers: Matthew disliked his parvenu brother-in-law and acquired some incriminating papers which give a glimpse of Foster's personality. His funding of his son John's 'archaeological' trips to Greece with C. R. Cockerell, for example, is exposed as speculation in the acquisition of antiquities for resale to the highest bidder, whether in Britain, Bavaria, or France. Ethically this equated with his property speculations in partnership with Stanistreet and Eden, the corporation solicitors, to whom Thomas Foster was articled. Insider knowledge enabled them to appropriate profits which rightly belonged to the corporation. 
Foster established a dynasty which temporarily controlled the fastest-growing town and port in Britain, from offices rather than from the council chamber. His son Thomas became town clerk, William was secretary to the dock committee, and John the younger was borough architect. Corrupt as they undoubtedly were, all the Fosters were very able men, and were pioneers of the new system of employing expert local government officers to manage the corporation's large and valuable estate rather than merely to organize banquets. 
Dissenting merchants engineered Foster's fall: gaining power as dock audit commissioners, they investigated his largest single project, Princes Dock, opened in 1821 at a cost of about $650,000, and found serious malpractice. The work itself was excellent, employing innovative techniques learned from Rennie, but gross overcharging by contractors connected with or related to Foster made the completed job cost at least double what it should. Among the accused was Timothy Grindrod, masonry contractor for St Luke's Church. In 1824 a compromise was reached: Foster resigned and the audit commissioners, rather reluctantly, dropped the matter. He died a rich but deeply disgraced man on 27 April 1827 at his home at Newington Bridge, Liverpool. His death was briefly noted by just two Liverpool newspapers: none carried any obituary or account of the funeral of the 'city boss'. He might have been lauded as an architect, engineer, and town planner, a key man in the growth of professional local government. His dishonesty ensured that none of these professions wished to own him: instead, recitals of his misdeeds contributed to the passage of the 'Municipal Reform Act' of 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 64178


Keck, Anthony (1726/7-1797), architect, was first recorded in the register of Lugwardine parish, Herefordshire, on 29 June 1761, when he married Mary Palmer by special licence. He was said to be of Randwick, Gloucestershire, and was probably engaged at this time in the rebuilding of the central section of Longworth Hall, in the same parish. Randwick remained his home until 1768 when he moved to Beech House, King's Stanley, where he lived for the rest of his life. Nothing else is known about Keck's background but it seems likely that he was a member of a minor gentry family settled at Great Tew in Oxfordshire or Mickleton in north Gloucestershire, and came to his profession as a gentleman rather than an artisan. During the next three decades he was, according to his obituary in the 'Hereford Journal' of 11 October 1797, the most 'celebrated architect' in Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, and south Wales. 
Much of Keck's earliest recorded work around Stroud is of a minor character. He provided new pews for Standish church in 1764 and new wings for Bownham Park (1766-70); his first complete house was the modest Ferney Hill (1768), near Dursley. Keck's career developed beyond Gloucestershire with the support of the Revd Dr Treadway Nash, the author of 'Collections for the History of Worcestershire' (1781-2). Nash was a powerful force in Worcestershire in the late eighteenth century, an indefatigable promoter of public works who was a member of an influential group of local gentry. About 1758 he acquired an estate at Bevere, north of Worcester, where Keck was employed to convert his farmhouse into a neat Palladian villa. Thereafter, Nash assiduously promoted Keck's skills among his friends. In 1764, for instance, he was vice-president of a committee established to build a new infirmary in Worcester, which chose Keck as its architect from a shortlist of four architects which included the nationally respected Henry Keene. Nash's influence probably enabled Keck to secure his next commission, St Martin's Church, Worcester (1768-72), where he was once again in competition with Keene and may eventually have worked to his design. Nash was also a trustee for the rebuilding of the Severn Bridge: in August 1770 Keck was paid $50 'for his plans and estimate' (Bridge book of orders, 1 Aug 1770, Worcs. RO), presumably for a scheme to repair the old bridge which Nash was promoting. 
Nash's influence can next be detected at Upton upon Severn, where the lord of the manor was John Martin of Ham Court, Nash's brother-in-law: Keck provided a lead-covered cupola for the parish church (1769) and rebuilt the court (1772). With its end-on bows, pedimented centrepiece, and austere treatment, it was the prototype for several of Keck's later houses. Another of Nash's close acquaintances was the Revd Dr Davenport, rector of Bredon, who seems to have employed Keck in 1771 to add a bay to his rectory. In August, Davenport's former pupil Thomas Mansel Talbot stayed at Bredon; on returning to south Wales in November, he made a note to himself to write to 'Mr. Keck' (Martin, 30). The result was Keck's finest house, Penrice Castle, Glamorgan (1775-80). Like his earlier houses, the facade is sparsely ornamented, but a single sea-facing bow runs from basement to attic; inside, the simple but refined rooms are arranged around a top-lit staircase following the typical villa plan. 
Two years before work commenced at Penrice, in April 1773, Keck refurbished Kentchurch Court, a medieval manor in west Herefordshire for John Scudamore MP. His neighbour was Sir George Cornewall of Moccas Court, where Keck stepped into the shoes of Robert Adam, exploiting his design but also repeating his own success at Penrice. This is one of several projects where Keck seems to have been employed to adapt the design of a more eminent architect for his patron. By the mid-1770s Keck had established himself as the premier architect in the region: houses in his individual style -- bows or canted bays, crisp facades, and chaste interiors -- appear throughout the Cotswold-Severn area. But some are poorly documented and can only be connected to Keck by style or his association with Nash. Works at Castleditch, Underdown, Canon Frome Court, Hanbury Hall, Burghill Court, and Sufton Court, all in Herefordshire and Worcestershire, have been attributed to Keck; better-documented are Forthampton Court, near Tewkesbury, for the daughter of Bishop Isaac Maddox, and the great bows of Longworth Hall, about 1788. In south Wales there is one documented work, the magnificent Margam orangery, designed in 1787 for Thomas Mansel Talbot. Meanwhile, several commissions are recorded in Gloucestershire: Flaxley Abbey (1777), Moreton in Marsh church (1790), Barnsley Park ('c'.1780), alterations to Batsford Park (1778-81), and finally, his most important Cotswold commission, the rebuilding of Hill House (1784-92; now Rodborough Manor) for Sir George Paul. 
Towards the end of his life Keck was increasingly involved in institutional work. Earlier in 1779 he had designed a new lock on the Stroudwater Canal; between 1784 and 1788 $3431 was spent providing a 'thorough and complete repair' (V. Green, 'History and Antiquities of the City of Worcester', 2, 1796, 28-9) of Worcester gaol, where Nash was on the restoration committee. 
On the day after the collapse of Hereford Cathedral in April 1786, Keck was on the scene providing plans for temporary repairs to the cathedral. In August 1788 the 'Hereford Journal' announced that Keck was to provide plans for the restoration of the county gaol, but owing to illness they did not materialize until July 1789; by this time the justices had decided to build a new gaol to the designs of John Nash. Keck and Nash were jointly consulted in September 1793 by the trustees of the new asylum in Hereford, where Nash also succeeded as architect. A stone in King's Stanley churchyard recorded Keck's death on 4 October 1797, aged seventy. A daughter was also buried in the same churchyard: Mary, wife of Samuel Sadler, vicar of Sandhurst, Gloucestershire, who died in August 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 64179


Leadbetter, Stiff (c.1705-1766), architect and builder, was possibly the eldest son of William Leadbetter ('fl'. 1705-1715), a tailor at Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire. He rose from humble origins to be one of the most successful architect-builders of the 1750s and 1760s, working for many leading aristocratic families. Apprenticed in 1719 as a carpenter for the modest sum of $5 to Henry Leadbetter of Sherfield-on-Loddon, Hampshire, Leadbetter worked as a journeyman carpenter in the 1720s and 1730s. By the 1740s he was employed as a builder in his own right; in the 1750s and 1760s he was responsible for a steady stream of new country houses, hospitals, and speculative urban development, along with alterations and mundane surveying work. He was so busy at the peak of his career in 1759 that he had to turn work away. 
Although in the 1750s and 1760s Leadbetter designed most of the buildings for which he was responsible, his principal activity was as a builder. He also carried out the designs of other architects, including Robert Adam and James Stuart, principally decorative work in shells which he had designed and built. He was an innovative and possibly influential planner at a time when the design of the British country house was undergoing rapid change. His country houses, though plain in their interior and external detail, are imaginative, varied, and above all practical in their planning. Although he was not a leader in stylistic development, Elvills, Surrey (1758-63), was the first completely new house of the Georgian Gothic revival. 
Most of Leadbetter's commissions were either centred around Eton or can be explained through a network of closely allied aristocratic families. Leadbetter had settled at Eton by 1731; he acted as carpenter to Eton College from 1740 and leased the Eton College wharf, his principal home and workshop, from 1744. Many of his buildings can be found within 5 miles of Eton, an area popular for suburban villas. Others can be traced through family links, particularly to his patron Francis Godolphin, second earl of Godolphin. Through Godolphin, Leadbetter gained work from the dukes of Portland, Marlborough, and Bedford, the countesses of Essex and Pomfret, Lord Foley, Admiral Boscawen, Sir John Elvill, and others. Leadbetter also had a network of ecclesiastical patrons thanks to his position (from 1756) as surveyor of St Paul's Cathedral, to which he was appointed by the dean, Thomas Secker, later Archbishop of Canterbury. 
In 1731 Leadbetter married Elizabeth Hill ('b'. 'c'.1709), daughter of a London timber merchant; she predeceased him in 1737, as did four of their five children, leaving only their eldest son, Henry. Leadbetter died at his house at Eton College wharf on 18 August 1766. He had raised himself to a position of respectability, being described at the time of his death as 'Stiff Leadbetter, gent'. A trustee of the Eton parish almshouses and treasurer of the Colnbrook turnpike trust, he died worth over $3000, with leases of four houses in Eton, a house and workshop in Berwick Street, Soho, London, and Spencer's Farm, near Cookham in Berkshire, which he appears to have used as an occasional retreat. 


@@@@@


doc= 64180


Lindley, William (1739-1819), architect, was born on 4 June 1739, possibly at Heath, near Wakefield, the eldest of five children. About 1754 he joined the office of the important provincial architect John Carr of York, as draughtsman; he engraved Carr's stables at Harewood House, Yorkshire, in 1758. 
A neo-classical architect, Lindley derived his simplified and unadventurous style from James Paine, Robert Adam, and Carr himself. After twenty years with Carr he advertised his architectural skills in the 'York Chronicle' on 18 October 1773. As a result, the corporation of Doncaster appointed him to design a new theatre in 1774, which he completed in 1774-5 (dem.); soon afterwards he moved to Doncaster and was made a freeman in 1783. For the corporation Lindley undertook whatever was required in the way of public architecture: he enlarged Paine's mansion house (1800-01, 1805) and Carr's racecourse grandstand (1804; dem. 1969), improved the town hall (1784-6; dem. 1846), and designed a gaol (1779; dem.) and a dispensary (1793-4; dem. 1969). He was also responsible for civic architecture in Sheffield, where he designed the market (1784-6; dem. 1851) and the Ecclesall court house and gaol (1791; dem.). 
Lindley also built domestic architecture, lining the streets of Doncaster with handsome late Georgian houses; one, his own, provided lodging for the prince of Wales when he was attending the races. He designed others at Sheffield, Bawtry, Knaresborough, and Leeds. Wakefield gave him the opportunity to design a 'new' town of stately terraces centred on a classical church (1791-5; with Charles Watson). His grandest town house was undoubtedly Denison Hall (1786-8), built for John Denison, one of Leeds's wealthiest merchants. Lindley went on to design alterations to Denison's country house, Ossington Hall, Nottinghamshire (1788-90, 1805-6; dem. 1963). Lindley's letters to Bryan Cooke of Owston, Yorkshire, in which he constantly pressed Cooke to build a new house by reference to his work for others, enable a number of other country houses to be attributed to him. These include: Ferham House, Rotherham (1781), for Jonathan Walker; Thundercliffe Grange (Grange Hall), near Ecclesfield (1794-5), for the fourth earl of Effingham; and Newhill Hall, Wath-on-Dearne (1784-5; dem.), for John Payne. 
A bachelor uncle, whose sister, nephews, and nieces inherited his estate, Lindley never sought office. He paid 'as a gentleman' in guineas (Stapleton, 37) and, sure of his worth, was direct with patrons. His mortification at receiving a dismissal at the hands of a workman was sharply expressed in a letter to St Andrew Warde of July 1798. Lindley had several pupils: in 1790 Charles Watson, the son of an architect, entered his office, before becoming a partner in 1792. John Woodhead became Lindley's partner about 1810, and William Hurst, another partner, was articled 'c'.1815. William Lindley died on 28 February 1819, probably at his home, 20 South Parade, Doncaster, and was buried in the parish church on 1 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 64181


Potter, Joseph (c.1756-1842), architect, began his career as a joiner in Lichfield. He was employed by James Wyatt as clerk of works in the restoration of Lichfield Cathedral (1787-93) and later at Hereford Cathedral (1790-93) and St Michael's Church, Coventry (1794); and in 1794 he succeeded Wyatt as cathedral architect at Lichfield, a position he held for the rest of his life. In this capacity he was responsible for the repair of the spires, the choir and transepts, and other structural work, but he made few major alterations to the fabric. Through Wyatt's influence he carried out work in the Gothic style at Plas Newydd, the Anglesey seat of the first marquess of Anglesey, in 1793-9 and again in 1805-9 and 1823-6; he was subsequently employed by Lord Anglesey to design the new baths and assembly rooms in Caernarfon ('c'.1822-1828). 
From 1797 until his death Potter was county surveyor of Staffordshire, and he also served for many years as engineer to the Grand Trunk Canal Company. His official commissions include the lunatic asylum (1818; dem.) and house of correction (1832-3) at Stafford and two graceful cast-iron bridges over the River Trent, at Alrewas (1823-4) and Armitage (1829-30). He also ran a successful private practice in Staffordshire and Warwickshire, designing several schools, parsonages, and country houses in the Tudor-Gothic style, of which he was an able if not a very original practitioner. But his main claim to fame comes from his involvement in the design of St Mary's College for training Roman Catholic priests at New Oscott, near Birmingham (1835-8). 
Apparently a Catholic himself, Potter was employed by the Catholic priest John Kirk, missioner at Lichfield, to design or extend Catholic churches at Tamworth (1829-30), Newport, Shropshire (1832), and Lichfield itself (1835) in the wake of Catholic emancipation. Through Kirk he was introduced to Thomas Walsh, vicar apostolic of the midland district from 1826, and it was Walsh who conceived the idea of Oscott as a focal point of the Catholic revival. Potter's buildings at New Oscott were competently designed in the 'collegiate Gothic' style favoured for such establishments throughout the nineteenth century; in 1839, however, he was superseded by that most passionate of Gothic revivalists A. W. N. Pugin, and it was Pugin who was responsible for the chancel and decoration of the chapel, as well as the gate lodges. 
Potter was essentially a provincial builder-architect in the eighteenth-century mould. He spent his whole working life in Lichfield; he became a city councillor in 1835 and died there in St John's Street on 18 August 1842. He had three sons: Robert ('c'.1795-1854), who established an architectural practice in Sheffield; Joseph ('c'.1797-1875), who took over his father's practice in Lichfield; and James (1801-1857), a civil engineer. His pupils included the Lichfield architect Thomas Johnson (1794-1865). 


@@@@@


doc= 64182


Blyth, Francis (c.1705-1772), Carmelite friar, was born to protestant parents and raised in their beliefs. He converted to Catholicism when a youth and in 1723 entered the noviciate of the Discalced Carmelites in Modena, Italy, taking in religion the name Simon Stock of the Blessed Trinity. After receiving a dispensation from irregularity due to defective vision he proceeded to Malta to study for the priesthood, and was ordained there. He returned to England in 1730, working first on the mission in Wiltshire and then in the London district under the alias Francis Courtney. He was a noted preacher and in 1740 he published a pastoral letter entitled 'A Caution Against Prejudice' and the sermon 'Eternal Misery the Necessary Consequence of Infinite Mercy Abused' (repr. 1742, 1745). In the same year a new chapel was built at the Portuguese embassy, and in 1741 Blyth was appointed assistant chaplain, a position which usually demanded a fine singing voice. The ambassador at this time was Dom Sebastiao-Jose de Carvalho e Mello, the future marques de Pombal, and Blyth was later to deny having aided him in his anti-Jesuit machinations. 
Blyth was vicar provincial of the English Carmelites from 1742 to 1755, years which saw such bitter dissension between monastic and secular missioners that Pope Benedict XIV issued a brief on the matter in 1745, and on 30 May 1753 the bull 'Apostolicum ministerium', delineating the respective rights and privileges of the religious and the seculars. In 1756 Blyth became chaplain major at the Portuguese embassy in London, remaining in that post until his death at the embassy on 11 December 1772. He was buried in the cemetery of St Pancras. In his will, drawn up on 20 June 1760, he made the midwife Jane Chevalier his residuary legatee, 'that I may to the last discharge with Fidelity the great Trust of honour and humanity I took upon me for the protection of injured Virtue', after other bequests including 'the small beginnings' of a literary collection, left to the British Museum (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/984/22). 
During his chaplaincy at the embassy Blyth published several sermons and discourses, the most famous of his works being the 'Devout Paraphrase on the Seven Penitential Psalms' (1741; repr. 1742, 1749, 1751, 1873) and 'Sermons for every Sunday in the Year' (4 vols., 1742-3). 'The Passion of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: a Sermon on Good Friday' was published posthumously in 1775. 
The priest Francis Blyth was a close relation of the printer of the same name (died 1787), part proprietor of the 'Public Ledger', a daily morning newspaper, and of the 'London Packet', a thrice-weekly evening paper. 


@@@@@


doc= 64183


Coghlan, James Peter (1731?-1800), Roman Catholic printer and publisher, probably born on 22 October 1731 in Preston, Lancashire, was the son of James Coghlan (died 1776), stonecutter, and Elizabeth Coghlan (died 1760). In 1754, after an apprenticeship with Samuel Cope, bookbinder of the parish of St James, Westminster, Coghlan established his own business as a bookbinder and stationer. Coghlan's own 'Memorandum book', in which he noted down detailed technical information about the material and the tools purchased when he started his business, gives a unique insight into the practical background of the bookbinding trade in the 1750s. At least two of Coghlan's early bindings have been preserved and they are admired for their outstanding quality: Charles Barbandt's 'Sacred Hymns, Anthems etc.' (1766) and Thomas Meighan's 'The Office of the Holy Week' (1766). 
On 6 February 1760 Coghlan married Elizabeth Brown (1728-1799) of Clifton-cum-Salwick, near Preston. There were six children of this marriage, four of whom, Peter, Elizabeth, Ann, and William, entered the religious life, William becoming a secular priest. Coghlan soon added printing to his business. Certainly as early as 1764 he brought out his own edition of the 'Laity's Directory' as a rival publication to the one published by James Marmaduke. This 'Directory', published on Marmaduke's own authority from 1758 onwards, was a simple religious calendar to which were added some small features such as lives of saints and martyrs. Coghlan's rival edition, published 'by permission and with approbation' of the Roman Catholic episcopate, easily eclipsed Marmaduke's edition. Growing steadily from thirty pages to more than ninety by the end of the century, Coghlan's 'Directory' came to contain all the elements of a Catholic newsletter: pastoral letters, instructions for the observation of Lent and other directives, obituaries, and advertisements for Catholic educational institutes, besides Coghlan's own book catalogues. 
After Coghlan had taken over the stock of Thomas Meighan's declining firm in 1774, he was the most important printer, publisher, and bookseller for the English Catholic community. In the 1780s Coghlan published a large number of documents relating to the Catholic struggle for emancipation that were issued by the Catholic Committee. He played an important part as an intermediary in the Catholic community of his time. He had contacts with a great many prominent Catholics, notably George Hay, who was the leading prelate of the Catholic church in Scotland. For many years he took care of young students who went by ship from London to the continent to be trained at one of the Catholic colleges abroad. From 1790 onwards Coghlan was closely involved in the relief operations for the benefit of English Catholic religious orders when the revolution forced them to abandon their monasteries and houses in northern France and Belgium. Coghlan used his influence with members of parliament and customs officials to obtain passports, collect funds, and find accommodation for the refugees. 
Coghlan's correspondence gives a very good picture of the life of English Catholics during the final quarter of the eighteenth century. Coghlan was a devout and deeply religious person and a confirmed Catholic. He died at 37 Duke Street, Grosvenor Square, London, on 20 February 1800, and the 'Laity's Directory' for the year 1801 had the following obituary: 'Mr. J. P. Coghlan... upwards of 40 years Catholic Printer and bookseller, No 37 Duke Street, Grosvenor Square, age 68'. His last will and testament, signed 18 February 1800, was proved 15 March 1800 by the oath of his son William. Coghlan's business was taken over by his nephew Richard Brown, who, soon acting under the name of Keating, Brown, and Keating, continued to use Coghlan's name in the imprints of his publications for some time. 


@@@@@


doc= 64184


Eyre, Francis (c.1732-1804), Roman Catholic apologist, was the younger son and one of five surviving children of Thomas Eyre (1684?-1749), a Roman Catholic landowner of Hassop Hall, Derbyshire, and Eastwell, Leicestershire, and his wife, Mary Holman (died 1759), daughter and coheir of George Holman of Warkworth, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Lady Anastasia Howard. His maternal grandfather, William, Viscount Stafford, was beheaded after the Popish Plot. Eyre was educated at the English College at St Omer in France, and then at the Jesuit academy at Liege ('c'.1751-1753). He lived principally at Warkworth, Northamptonshire, the estate settled on him by his father in 1746, and he was twice married. His first marriage, on 11 February 1755, was to Lady Mary Radcliffe (1732-1796). Her father, the staunchly Jacobite Charles Radcliffe, who styled himself the fifth earl of Derwentwater (although legally no longer a peer), was executed after the rising of 1745. They had three sons and one daughter. The eldest, Francis (1762-1827), became the sixth earl of Newburgh in 1814 (a title held by his maternal grandmother in her own right). Lady Mary Eyre died on 27 May 1796. Eyre's second marriage, in 1801, was to Sarah Hernon, sister of a Smithfield druggist, Robert Hernon, also a Catholic. 
Although Eyre was a country squire for most of his life, his father's bequest in 1749 of all his books to the young Francis suggests strong scholarly interests. His first two published works, in 1778 and 1779, were pamphlets criticizing Edward Gibbon's irreligiosity in his 'Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire'. In 1778 Eyre signed the 'Humble Address of the Roman Catholic Peers and Commoners' declaring loyalty to the crown. On the death in March 1792 of his childless nephew Thomas Eyre, he inherited the family estate at Hassop in Derbyshire. He first offered this as a refuge to an exiled community of Catholic nuns from Liege, where he had been educated, and then gave it to his eldest son, Francis. This coincided with Eyre's appointment as one of three conciliators, with John Webbe Weston and William Sheldon of Brailes, in the religious disputes between the Catholic Committee, a body predominantly of lay gentry, and the vicars apostolic, representing the Roman Catholic clergy and their supporters. The mediators' report was accepted and printed in May 1792. 
In 1795 Eyre published anonymously (as 'a sincere friend of mankind') 'A short essay on the Christian religion... the whole proposed as a preservative against the pernicious doctrines which have overwhelmed France with misery and desolation'. In the same year, under his own name, Eyre responded to attacks on Roman Catholicism in 'A Letter to the Rev. Ralph Churton MA'. Churton, a scholar and writer, rector of Middleton Cheney, Northamptonshire, since 1792 (and archdeacon of St David's, Wales, from 1805), replied in 'A Short Defence of the Church of England' that 'Popery' was a lie from beginning to end. Undeterred, Eyre closed the controversy in his 1798 'Reply to the Rev. Ralph Churton', remarking on the happy decline of hostility between Anglicans and Roman Catholics. 
A representative of traditional English Catholicism through his family connections and active in the internal disputes among co-religionists at the time of the passing of the second 'Catholic Relief Act' in 1791-2, Francis Eyre came to public notice as an impartial arbitrator. He died on 7 October 1804 in London, where he was then living. 


@@@@@


doc= 64185


Hornyold, John Joseph (1706-1778), vicar apostolic of the midland district, was born on 19 February 1706, the eldest of the six children of John Hornyold (1679-1771), gentleman, of Blackmore Park and Hanley Castle, Worcestershire, and his wife, Mary (died 1731), eldest daughter of Sir Piers Mostyn of Talacre, Flintshire. Originally destined for a worldly career, he entered the English College, Douai, on 7 August 1728 and took the student's oath on 24 December 1730. Having survived an accident that deprived him of sight in his left eye, he was ordained at Arras on 22 December 1736, and left for the English mission the following September with the hope of the college authorities that he would be 'a good missionary in the future' ('Douay College Diaries', 214). For nearly two years he was based in Grantham, Lincolnshire, where he was noted for his pastoral zeal. 
In 1739 Hornyold became chaplain to Mary, the widow of Thomas Giffard of Chillington, Brewood, Staffordshire, who lived in the dower house, called Longbirch, from 1718 until her death in 1754. After this date, and until 1804, Longbirch was rented as a residence for the vicars apostolic of the midland district. During his time as chaplain Hornyold published three works: 'The Decalogue Explained' (1744), 'The Sacraments Explained' (1747), and 'The Real Principles of Catholics' (1749), based on the writings of his predecessor at Longbirch, John Johnson. 
By 1750 Bishop John Talbot Stonor, vicar apostolic of the midland district, decided that he needed a coadjutor and that 'no body, within my acquaintance, was as fit as good Mr Hornyold' (Stonor to Mrs Giffard, 27 Sept 1750, Birmingham Archdiocesan Archives, A183). The bulls confirming Hornyold's appointment as bishop of Philomalia 'in partibus infidelium' and coadjutor with right of succession were dated 20 December 1751 (ibid., A939), and he was consecrated by Bishop Stonor at Stonor Park, Oxfordshire, on 10 February 1752, succeeding to the vicariate on Stonor's death on 29 March 1756. 
Hornyold continued to live at Longbirch, but was assiduous in making pastoral visits throughout his vicariate, which comprised fifteen counties and the Isle of Ely, and numbered 8760 Catholics, served by 42 secular and 48 religious priests (draft letter to Propaganda, 1773, Birmingham Archdiocesan Archives, A793). He often supplied for priests who had to be absent from their missions and, whenever possible, received newly ordained priests into his house to prepare them for their pastoral duties. His reputation was that of a quiet, hard-working prelate who continued to live as far as possible the life of a holy and dedicated pastor. 
By 1765 Hornyold complained that his constitution was 'much broken', that his eyesight was failing, and, being unable to ride, he could not visit his district (J. Hornyold to T. Talbot, 15 Sept 1765, Birmingham Archdiocesan Archives, A142a). He tried to obtain Thomas Joseph Talbot as his coadjutor, offering 'with utmost Pleasure to resign the whole Government of the Distr[ict] to your Sole Care and to retire' (J. Hornyold to T. Talbot, 6 May 1766, ibid., A153), but Talbot steadfastly refused until prevailed upon by others, and he was consecrated in June 1766. 
Although Talbot undertook the active care of the vicariate, Hornyold continued to interest himself in its affairs. He took over responsibility for Sedgley Park School on the death of William Errington in 1768, he bought land and caused the house and chapel at Oscott, Birmingham, to be rebuilt as a possible future residence for his successors, and he maintained a wide correspondence. 'Though he was most abstemious and mortified in his way of living,' wrote Bishop Milner, 'he was cheerful and good humoured, as his friends in general testify, and particularly those clergymen, who, in succession were his chaplains.' His health continued to decline, and he died at Longbirch on 26 December 1778, leaving the bulk of his estate, after some personal, pious, and charitable legacies, to his successor. He was buried on 30 December in Brewood parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 64186


Newby, Peter (1745-1827), Roman Catholic schoolmaster and author, was born at Horncop Hall, near Kendal in Westmorland, the son of William Newby (1702-1772), a waller and land agent, and his wife, Elizabeth Carter ('c'.1707-1772), of Thistleton, Lancashire. After attending the Catholic preparatory school operated by Dame Alice Harrison at Fernyhalgh, near Preston, Lancashire, Newby was an ecclesiastical student at the English College, Douai, from 1757 to 1764. On returning to England in January 1764, having decided not to proceed to holy orders as his parents had hoped, Newby was rejected by his family and forced to seek his own way in the world. 
Two major influences shaped Newby's subsequent career. Employment as a steward on a Guineaman from November 1764 to January 1766 awakened his humanitarianism. On a return voyage from Liverpool to Jamaica via west Africa, where he stayed for five months, Newby witnessed at first hand the horror of the transatlantic slave trade. Next, the inspiring mentorship of the Revd Bartholomew Booth (1732-1785), an enlightened and unorthodox Anglican schoolmaster, completed his education and perfected his teaching skills. As a teacher of French and Latin at Booth's two highly successful private academies, at Woolton Hall near Liverpool (1766-72) and at High Beach near Waltham Abbey in Essex (1772-3), Newby discovered the many advantages of offering an unusually wide curriculum. 
In 1773 Newby opened his own academy for boys at Burton in Kendal, Westmorland, even though Catholic schools were still officially proscribed. There his pioneering approach to education attracted significant patronage from the rising Catholic middle class of the north of England. The growth of the academy caused it to move, first in 1775 to Great Eccleston, in the Fylde area of Lancashire, and in 1780 to Gerard Hall, Haighton, near Fernyhalgh, where it remained until 1797. 
Though Newby was the first schoolmaster in Lancashire to register his academy officially after the passing of the 1791 'Catholic Relief Act', his success was short-lived. The migration of English Catholic schools from continental Europe to England during the French Revolution created new competition, forcing Newby to abandon teaching in 1797. He set up as a printer and bookseller in Preston, specializing in Catholic devotional literature. When this venture failed around 1805, he was once again forced to offer private tuition, but soon fell into the penury which characterized the last twenty years of his life. 
Newby's marriage at Childwall, Lancashire, on 15 May 1768 to Elizabeth Gant ('c'.1743-1782) of Prescot, and the couple's happy family life following the birth of their five children between 1769 and 1782, first inspired the schoolmaster to write poetry. Composed between 1771 and 1790, Newby's verse never received wide public acclaim owing to the poet's natural diffidence. His 'Six Pastorals' (1773), of which the copy in the Beinecke Library at Yale is the only known surviving example, was published anonymously; and his longest single work, 'The Wrongs of Almoona, or, The African's Revenge' (1788), an anti-slavery poem dedicated to William Cowper, appeared under the pseudonym A Friend to All Mankind. Newby's 'Poems' (1790), published in two volumes with the support of some 340 subscribers, were written essentially for private purposes, 'to alleviate disappointments, or to encounter domestic misfortunes' ('Poems', Preface). The combination of their late classicism and limited readership resulted in their being soon forgotten. 
Newby's most enduring achievement was in founding the Broughton Catholic Charitable Society, created in 1787 to alleviate distress following a smallpox epidemic in the Fylde. Acting as its secretary for twenty years until 1807, he established an organization which was still carrying out its charitable work at the close of the twentieth century. Taken together, Newby's career exemplifies the vitality of Catholic life in pre-emancipation England. Peter Newby died on 16 December 1827 at his home in Hill Street, Friargate, Preston, and was buried in the cemetery attached to the Catholic churches of St Wilfrid and St Mary, Preston, on 19 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 64187


Perry, Philip Mark (1720-1774), Roman Catholic priest and scholar, was born on 5 March 1720 at Bilston, Staffordshire, the son of Peter Perry and his wife, Joan Westwood. The family had resided in the area for many years and the name Perry occurs in the recusant lists of 1641 and 1705. In 1740 he went to the English College at Douai, where he completed the two-year philosophy course. In 1742 he was sent to St Gregory's English College, Paris, to join the select band of students who were following the demanding theological course at the Sorbonne. His studies were interrupted by ill health and he returned to England for two years. He resumed the course in 1746, obtained his MA in 1748, was ordained priest on 18 December 1751, proceeded to the licentiate, and finally gained his doctorate in theology on 22 May 1754. 
On his return to England Perry took up residence as chaplain to Rowland Eyre at Hassop Hall, Bakewell, Derbyshire. After eight years he moved to Heythrop Park, Oxfordshire, to be chaplain to the earl of Shrewsbury. From 1765 he resided at Longbirch, Brewood, Staffordshire. On the expulsion of the Jesuits from Spain in 1767 Bishop Challoner appointed him rector of the English College of St Alban, Valladolid. Having arrived in Spain with no previous experience of the country or language, Perry succeeded in putting into effect the agreement that had been reached between Challoner and the Spanish court that the three English seminaries at Valladolid, Madrid, and Seville should be amalgamated into one establishment at Valladolid and administered by the English secular clergy. He negotiated the sale and transfer of college properties and established good relations with both the civil and ecclesiastical authorities. 
Perry had hoped that his appointment to Spain might enable him to further his researches into the life of John Fisher and the divorce of Katherine of Aragon, and he obtained permission to visit Spanish libraries. However, his administrative duties curtailed these activities. He had a lifetime friendship with Alban Butler, the author of 'Lives of the Saints', with whom he corresponded and who expressed the wish that Perry would be his literary heir. The wide range of his interests is shown in his acquisitions for the college library at Valladolid and the numerous manuscripts on historical topics that are to be found among his papers. After his death John Geddes, whom he had assisted in the re-establishment of the Scots College in Spain, brought some of his works to Britain with a view to publication. They included lives of John Fisher and Robert Grosseteste and a continuation of Bede's 'History'. Perry's activities on behalf of the college meant that he had to make prolonged visits to Madrid. In his absence he corresponded with his vice-rector in Valladolid, and these letters afford an insight into the domestic situation as well as his scholarly concern for precision and accuracy. 
It was during a stay in Madrid in the very hot summer of 1774 that Perry caught a fever and died on 4 September, in the Hospice of San Andres de la Nacion Flamenca. He was buried in its chapel the following day. In his will he left any goods and property in England to his surviving brother and two sisters in Staffordshire and his possessions in Spain to the college at Valladolid. During his lifetime his contemporaries remarked on his moroseness and rigidity; at his death they praised his learning, zeal, and prudence. We are told that he looked older than his fifty-four years and this is attributed to the time he had spent in study. John Kirk, in 'Biographies of English Catholics' (1909), relates that Perry's nephew, the Revd John Perry, told him that after his death his uncle had appeared to him to prevent his taking evil ways. 


@@@@@


doc= 64188


Petre family (per. 1633-1801), Roman Catholic nobility, in the eighteenth century were owners of the most extensive estates in Essex and were among the leaders of English Roman Catholic society, intermarrying with most other similar families. A succession of minor heirs gave dowagers (usually occupying the family homes at Thorndon Hall, near Brentwood, and Ingatestone Hall) lengthy periods of authority. Two members of a junior branch of the family became vicars apostolic; the sixth baron ventured briefly and ineffectively into local politics; otherwise the family kept quiet and no doubt prayed for better times, their position in county society securing them against the strict application of the penal laws. 



@@@@@


doc= 64191


Rogers, William (b. 1646/7, d. in or before 1730), Roman Catholic convert, was born at Castle Hale, Painswick, Gloucestershire, the son of William Rogers (died 1674), reeve of the manor. He came from an armigerous Dorset family associated with Castle Hale from the time of his grandfather. Educated at the College School, Gloucester, his first contact with Catholicism came when, as a young man, he met John Theyer of Cooper's Hill near Painswick, a convert with bibliographic interests and friend of Anthony Wood. In 1663, aged sixteen, Rogers matriculated from University College, Oxford, and later made a gift of books and manuscripts to the college, including the twelfth-century Durham version of Bede's life of Cuthbert, which had once belonged to Theyer. 
In 1666 Rogers became a member of Lincoln's Inn, and was called to the bar in 1673. He became well known to the group of Catholic intellectuals gathered around the Franciscan Christopher Davenport, and joined them in the literary warfare then being fought over the claims of the Church of England to participation in the apostolic succession. He became a friend of Anthony Wood, for whom he unsuccessfully sought an office in the College of Arms, introduced Wood to Davonport, and in correspondence with Wood commented on many of the Catholic controversialists of the time. He disseminated an anonymous pamphlet exposing the activities of Hippolyt du Chastle de Luzancy, a French convert from Catholicism who became a member of Oxford University and an Anglican priest. In 1676 the privy council was informed that 'there are divers Popish and unlicensed books lodged in the chambers of William Rogers of Lincoln's Inn' and ordered that his rooms should be searched. Described as 'a zealous proselyte for the Roman Catholic cause' he was brought before the council 'from whom receiving several checks and threatenings he was at length released' (Fendley, 295, 289). 
Rogers flourished under James II. University College was openly Catholic, with Obadiah Walker as master, and on the second anniversary of James's accession Rogers was able to demonstrate his loyalty by donating a statue of the king to the college. By now personally known to James he was among the royal retinue when the king visited Oxford and had the satisfaction of being present when James attended vespers at University College and received a loyal address. Royal favour extended to him in Gloucestershire where he was among the Catholics appointed to the commission of the peace in 1686-7. 
After the revolution of 1688 Rogers fell from grace and retired to Painswick. Having seen Walker committed to the Tower he was understandably apprehensive; all his acquaintances 'were so scattered through the iniquity of the times' and commerce with them would be difficult and dangerous (Fendley, 292). Little is known of his domestic life: a daughter Susanna was baptized at Painswick in 1677, and his wife, Susanna, and infant son died in London in 1682. His epitaph for her in the churchyard of St Giles-in-the-Fields was considered provocative and offended the churchwardens. He disposed of Castle Hale about 1701 and thereafter fades from view, apparently no longer a landowner. He was probably still alive in 1708 but by 1730 was referred to by Thomas Hearne as 'old Will. Rogers, now dead' (Fendley, 293). 
Rogers was a man of wide acquaintance and friendship. A friend of Wood, he shared with John Aubrey an enthusiasm for inscriptions and epitaphs and was on familiar terms with the Catholic bibliophile Ralph Sheldon. He earned respect in Gloucestershire for his unswerving devotion to his faith and was seen as 'always constant and unalterable in the face of great changes in his fortunes' (Fendley, 293). His learning may not have been profound but his collection and preservation of books and manuscripts deserves to be remembered. The happy informality and erratic style of his correspondence reflects a headstrong nature that led him to push the relative tolerance of the times beyond its limits, and shows a lack of discretion in pursuing his own aims, reflected in Ralph Sheldon's comment that 'honest Will. Rogers' was 'as hot in the head as ever' (Fendley, 294). 


@@@@@


doc= 64195


Birch, Sir Thomas (c.1690-1757), judge, was born at Harborne, in Staffordshire, the eldest son of George Birch and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Foster. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1709, and called to the bar in 1715, but did not become a bencher until he was a serjeant-elect. He took the coif in company with Chief Justice Lee in 1730, and was one of the last serjeants admitted to Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street, which the serjeants vacated that year. In 1740 he was appointed one of the king's serjeants, and was knighted for his services in that office after the 1745 uprising. Although he retained a connection with Staffordshire, serving as sheriff in 1745-6, he resided at Southgate, near London. In June 1746 he succeeded Mr Justice Fortescue-Aland as one of the puisne justices of the common pleas, and retained that office until his death. Birch and his wife, Sarah (died 1754), daughter and coheir of John Teshmaker, had three sons and two daughters. On 16 February 1757 Lord Hardwicke wrote to George II that: 'Mr Justice Birch... is dangerously ill, and it is thought cannot recover' (Harris, 3.3); his death followed on 15 March 1757. On 22 March he was buried at Edmonton, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 64196


Andrews, Philip Walter Sawford (1914-1971), economist, was born at 124 Adelaide Road, Southampton, on 12 March 1914, the son (there was also a daughter) of Frederick Walter Andrews, a railway shunter and later chief traffic inspector at Southampton docks, and his wife, Ethel Alice Sawford, an agricultural labourer's daughter. He was a grammar school pupil in the town (1925?-1931), and in 1931 he entered University College, Southampton, as a scholar. His second-class degree in economics (1934) he attributed to the teaching of economic theory piecemeal rather than as a single body of analysis. 
On 27 July 1936, while a research assistant at the college, Andrews married at Ryde, Isle of Wight, Mary Margaret Hawes ('b'. 1911), daughter of Thomas Charles Hawes, a plumber; they had two sons. Encouraged by Professor D. H. Macgregor, a year later he joined the Oxford Institute of Statistics to work on company accounts, and became secretary of the Oxford Economists' Research Group, which quizzed selected businessmen on economic issues. One of the group's findings was that entrepreneurs who competed under conditions of uncertainty in oligopolistic markets priced their goods according to the full cost of producing them. This finding, which was greatly to influence the future direction of Andrews's work, challenged the basic tenets of the then current theory of the firm, a static one that assumed perfect certainty. 
During the Second World War, Andrews, a conscientious objector, became part of a Nuffield College team undertaking economic and social surveys. With the financial support of Samuel Courtauld he embarked on research into the relative efficiency of large and small firms, concentrating on the rayon and footwear industries. He soon had a more comprehensive practical knowledge of the economics of business decision making than any of his British contemporaries. In 1949 he published 'Manufacturing Business' as an account of current business practice. However, for reasons of confidentiality, he could not cite his basic industry data. Like Alfred Marshall before him, he wrote for both economists and businessmen, thus greatly weakening his book's impact among fellow academics. Having declined to present his pioneering ideas in the context of the conventional theory of the firm, he allowed critics scope to dismiss their significance. 
As an official fellow of Nuffield from 1947, Andrews continued to develop his ideas, despite their disappointing reception. In his own theory of firms' operations he discovered parallels with the work of Marshall, of whom he regarded himself as the true heir. Thus he found that firms set their prices according to normal (rather than full) costs, as the risk of entry by rivals in related industries imposed an upper limit on prices. In 1952 Andrews founded the 'Journal of Industrial Economics', offering a platform to academics and business economists alike. He acted as consultant for several restrictive practice court cases, including that of the net book agreement, and extended his analysis to retailing and corporate investment. However, not until 1964 did he publish his long-awaited critique of the static theory of the firm, 'On Competition in Economic Theory', which covered both manufacturing and retailing firms. 
Since 1942, Andrews's assistant and collaborator had been Elizabeth Brunner (died 1983). A graduate in English, she was taught economics by him, and her quick perception and clear style (his own did not make for easy reading) markedly benefited their subsequent joint publications. He was at his best in the cut and thrust of graduate seminars, from which former students conveyed his teachings to many parts of the world. 
Andrews dressed very conventionally, and kept his Hampshire burr to the end. A cultivated man, he adorned his handsome rooms in Nuffield with statues, paintings (some his own handiwork), and sculptures. He played the viola and read widely outside economics, especially in philosophy and literature; he would often bubble with enthusiasm over something new he had learned. Sensitive and in some ways immature, he could be genial and kind; friends and colleagues were warmed by his open, welcoming smile, but remained watchful for passing thunderclouds. A constant hurt for him was the hostility of some (by no means all) senior Oxford economists, one of whom publicly hoped he would not indoctrinate undergraduates with his heterodoxy. 
In 1967 Andrews left an increasingly uncongenial Oxford for a chair in economics at Lancaster University, and Elizabeth Brunner became a lecturer (and later a professor) there. With characteristic energy he threw himself into the busy life of a new university, inspiring a large department of young colleagues with his commitment and interest in their work, despite the inexorable progression of a mortal illness. In 1966, during a lecturing visit to Harvard, he was diagnosed as having cancer, and he died of the disease on 5 March 1971, at his family home, Eskrigge House, Gressingham, near Carnforth, Lancashire. Four years later Elizabeth Brunner published -- with Andrews named as co-author -- 'Studies in Pricing', which contains some of the most satisfying expositions of their lives' work. The significance of Andrews's original and often subtle ideas was not appreciated at all widely until decades after his death. However, the rise of evolutionary (as contrasted with equilibrium) economics, and a revival of interest in the work of Marshall on firms, promised that Andrews's analysis, decades ahead of its time, would in due course receive broader recognition. 


@@@@@


doc= 64197


Beauclerk, James (1709-1787), bishop of Hereford, was born at Windsor, the seventh surviving son of Charles Beauclerk, first duke of St Albans (1670-1726), illegitimate offspring of Charles II and Nell Gwyn. Some say his facial characteristics resembled those of his royal grandfather. His mother, Lady Diana de Vere (died 1742), being the only surviving child of the last earl of Oxford was heraldic heir of England's oldest noble family. Three brothers were at court and others included Vere Beauclerk, admiral of the blue, and Aubrey Beauclerk, a courageous naval commander, who was killed in action in 1741. Thus well connected, James Beauclerk's ecclesiastical ascent was predictably rapid. 
Beauclerk was educated at Oxford, not at Christ Church, by then more popular with the aristocracy, but at Queen's College, which he entered in 1727. From there he graduated BA (1730), MA (1733), and BD and DD (1744). Nothing is known of his early career, except that in 1743/4-1746 he was canon of Windsor. In 1746 he was consecrated bishop of Hereford at the early age of thirty-six. He remained bishop of Hereford until his death there forty-one years later. With a royal and aristocratic lineage such as his, historians might characterize Beauclerk as the archetypal absentee, lacklustre prelate, neglectful of his distant diocese and living at ease in London. This was not the case. Certainly he tried to use his connections to gain more preferment, but without success. Twice, in 1747 and 1752, he schemed for the clerkship of the closet, a valued court post, and then in 1763 for the deanery of Windsor, an aristocratic perquisite which he hoped to hold 'in commendam' with his Hereford bishopric. In 1764, without his overt connivance, his brother Admiral Lord Vere sought to have him preferred to the senior diocese of London. All these approaches met with rebuff. 
Despite all these manoeuvrings Beauclerk's activities as bishop suggest that he was clearly no political crony. His House of Lords attendance record, which averaged eight sittings per year, was scant compared with most of his Hereford predecessors. Philip Bisse, for instance, achieved an annual average of thirty-six, and the aristocratic Henry Egerton almost forty-eight. Nor was Beauclerk careless of his flock; throughout his long episcopate records reveal his outstanding conscientiousness and persistent determination to raise diocesan standards. Until a year before his death, at the age of seventy-eight, he personally conducted almost every diocesan ordination, not in London but in his cathedral, and usually as often as four times a year, the greatest frequency in the Hereford diocese since before the civil war. He demanded the highest standards from his ordinands. Candidates for the diaconate found him an unusual stickler over the required canonical age for ordination while non-graduates learned to fear the tests that he demanded. Even his officials had to meet his exacting standards. For instance he insisted that the required ordination documents were presented to him at least three weeks before the ceremony, because 'his lordship requires them in proper time' (ordination papers, 1757). He was also prepared to break with custom, for instance by signing schoolmasters' licences personally and by taking his chancellor's place in court proceedings over an incumbent's neglect of duty. Undoubtedly he was one of three Hereford bishops, with Herbert Croft and Bisse, to make the most conspicuous impact on diocesan life between 1660 and 1800. 
Beauclerk never married but kept contact with his family. On 23 December 1752 he performed the marriage, at St George's, Hanover Square, London, of his nephew George Beauclerk, third duke of St Albans; in 1760 he temporarily took St Albans's place as registrar of the court of chancery during the duke's absence abroad. But at his death he left most of his possessions not to his family but to his secretary, Richard Jones. He died in Hereford on 20 October 1787 and was buried in Hereford Cathedral. His only extant publication is one sermon, preached to parliament on 30 January 1752, the anniversary of Charles I's execution. Despite his royal and aristocratic background here was a prelate devoted to his diocese. 


@@@@@


doc= 64198


Gwilliam, Freda Howitt (1907-1987), educationist, was born on 29 July 1907 at Feltham, Middlesex, the only daughter of Frederick William Gwilliam, a prison governor, and Kate Elizabeth Howitt. She was educated at Rochester Girls' Grammar School, Kent, at Notting Hill high school, London, and at Girton College, Cambridge, from where she graduated with a BA honours degree in history in 1929 (MA, 1934). She subsequently taught at Falmouth county high school from 1929 to 1931 and the Francis Holland School, London, from 1931 to 1936 before becoming a lecturer at the Bishop Otter Teachers' Training College in 1936 and then principal of the Brighton Training College from 1941 to 1946. In May 1947, aged almost forty and after much soul-searching, she abandoned the security and status of a senior teaching position for the uncertainty of the newly created post of woman educational adviser at the Colonial Office. 
During the next twenty-three years (from 1947 to 1970) Freda was to play a unique role in the promotion of education, and in particular teacher training and the education of women and girls, throughout the British colonial empire. From the outset she proved to be an inveterate and indefatigable traveller in an age which largely preceded jet air travel and one of the best-known of the Whitehall advisory staff to numerous directors of education in Britain's far-flung outposts of empire. Her visits provoked mixed feelings from colonial officials, her initial question invariably being 'Now what are you doing for the girls?' Woe betide the director of education who did not have a convincing answer ready to hand. Over the years she was also a constant and invaluable source of inside knowledge to her immediate superior, Sir Christopher Cox. Her many letters to him from abroad were always highly informative and exceedingly frank, and reflected a very close working relationship with him. When not away on tour, Freda spent much of her time recruiting and interviewing prospective female staff for service abroad. 
Throughout her life Freda was a staunch Anglican with a strong social conscience which manifested itself in a variety of roles. These included a member of the house of laity and the World Council of Churches, a JP, a youth worker in Battersea in the 1930s and later with the Red Cross Society and the Girls' Training Corps, the chairperson of the executive committee of Voluntary Services Overseas, a council member of the Associated Country Women of the World, and an honorary fellow of the College of Preceptors. 
Freda made no claim to academic scholarship -- writing reports reduced her to pulp -- but she was a popular and frequent lecturer to students in the colonial department of the London Institute of Education in the 1950s. When in London she also regularly attended the monthly meetings of the advisory committee on education in the colonies and served on its numerous subcommittees. She was also deeply involved in the staging of the Cambridge conference on African education in 1952 and the first Commonwealth education conference held at Oxford in 1959. Her services to colonial education were formally acknowledged by her appointment as OBE in 1954 and CBE in 1966, and the award of an honorary DLitt from the New University of Ulster, Coleraine, in 1973. 
By the late 1960s Freda was aware that it was time to make way for new blood. To Cox she wrote 'I should go.... I'm the Great Aunt figure -- the batterer at doors that are opening ajar -- unable to move with the young (why should I -- with my life behind me)' (Gwilliam to Cox, 2 May 1968, Cox MSS). Her last major educational assignment was to lead the British delegation to the conference on education in rural areas held at the University of Ghana in March 1970. 
Freda Gwilliam never married. She lived out her well-earned but characteristically busy retirement with her late brother's family in the village of Frant in Sussex where she became a much loved and respected figure. Her last major public duty occurred in 1972 when she served as the only woman member of the commission of inquiry led by Lord Pearce, which visited Rhodesia to determine whether the people supported proposals for a settlement of the constitutional crisis. She died unexpectedly at her home, One Ash, Frant, on 14 August 1987, aged eighty. Freda Gwilliam belonged to that breed of tough and tireless ladies who fostered the education of girls across the globe. She was no feminist but she helped many thousands of women in developing countries. She was equally no do-gooder, but she did untold good. 


@@@@@


doc= 64199


Bedford, Francis (1815-1894), lithographer and photographer, was born on 13 August 1815, probably at 8 Southampton Street, Bloomsbury, London, and baptized at St George, Bloomsbury, on 31 January 1816, the son of Francis Octavius Bedford (1784-1858) and his wife, Sophie Curtis. His father studied under Sir John Soane to become a well-respected architect responsible for a number of London churches. Nothing is known of Bedford's early education, but the implication that he trained formally as an artist and draughtsman is confirmed by his regular submission of architectural studies to the annual exhibitions of the Royal Academy between 1833 and 1849. 
During this same period Bedford illustrated several publications concerned with the ecclesiastical architecture of London and York. It is thought that these brought him to the attention of the celebrated publishers and lithographers Day & Sons, whose innovative and costly production techniques placed them at the forefront of printing technology. Bedford's role at Day & Sons was to transfer the drawings and designs of artists intended as illustrations directly on to the lithographic stone in preparation for printing, a procedure that was both exacting and highly regarded. In this role he was responsible for the complex lithographs in colour and gold for both Digby Wyatt's 'Industrial Arts of the Nineteenth Century' of 1851 and J. B. Waring's 'The Art Treasures of the United Kingdom' of 1857. Working with a team of four assistants Bedford completed the hundred plates for Owen Jones's 'Grammar of Ornament' (1856) in less than a year, and was credited by Jones for having taken personal responsibility for their perfection. 
Given his training as an artist and his meticulous attention to detail, it is not surprising that Bedford turned to photography about 1853, just at the time when the medium was emerging more fully into the public domain following the introduction of the collodion process. This process offered a delicacy and tonal balance that must have appealed to Bedford's acutely sensitive eye, for throughout his long career as a photographer it remained his preferred medium. He first came to public notice in 1854 when Queen Victoria and Prince Albert bought examples of his work from the first annual exhibition of the Photographic Society, of which they had recently become patrons. Later in the year they commissioned him to photograph the works of art from the Royal Collection on public exhibition at Marlborough House. As a further mark of her regard the queen commissioned Bedford to travel to Germany incognito in order to photograph scenes associated with her husband's childhood in Coburg. The album she gave the prince as a surprise birthday present in August 1857 was warmly received and as a consequence Bedford was sent to photograph the adjoining principality of Gotha in 1858. When the prince of Wales undertook an educational voyage of the Mediterranean, Egypt, the Holy Land, and Syria in spring 1862, Bedford was chosen to accompany the royal party and document the tour. Despite the many discomforts of heat, dust, and insects Bedford made over 200 negatives. A comprehensive selection was shown in London at the German Gallery, Bond Street, and published as a series of portfolios by Day & Sons, the most expensive of which cost 43 guineas, a price placing it well beyond the reach of all but the most wealthy. Doubtless royal patronage helped to establish Bedford's status among the growing band of artist-photographers who were starting to define the professional future of the medium during this period. Bedford became an active member of the Photographic Society shortly after its formation in 1853; he was elected to its council in 1858 and twice became vice-president, first in 1861 and then again in 1878. 
Even before his trip to the Middle East, Bedford was well established as a leading photographer and publisher of topographic and architectural views for the burgeoning middle-class market. Francis Frith, George Washington Wilson, and James Valentine dominated this market in England and Scotland respectively, leaving Bedford to range freely in Wales, which he effectively colonized as his own photographic territory. Initially he specialized in publishing stereoscopic views when they were the height of fashion. In the latter half of the 1860s he published a series of portfolios of 'Photographic Views' of Wales, Devon, and Warwickshire and consolidated the repertoire of his catalogue by travelling widely in his specially built carriage which functioned both as darkroom and living quarters. His surviving prints are characterized by their rich tonalities and deep purple-brown colour. Throughout his career as a photographer Bedford exhibited widely both in Britain and abroad, winning numerous medals and awards for the excellence of his landscapes and topographic studies. Examples of his work are preserved at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, Bradford; in the Royal Archives at Windsor; and at George Eastman House, Rochester, New York, among other repositories. 
On 1 November 1840 Bedford married Mary ('b'. 1807/8), daughter of William Graham, upholsterer. According to the 1881 census their only son William, born in 1846, was living at the same address with his own wife and son. By this date William was shouldering the day-to-day responsibilities of his father's business, and he went on to become an eminent photographer in his own right. Francis Bedford died at his home at 326 Camden Road, Islington, on 15 May 1894, and was buried on 26 May in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 64200


Kar, Ida (1908-1974), photographer, was born in Tambov, Russia, the daughter of Melkon Karamian, a professor of science and mathematics. It is not known from what date she became known as Kar rather than Karamian. Her early childhood was spent in Russia and Persia and the family eventually settled in Alexandria, Egypt, when Kar was thirteen. There she was educated at the Lycee Francais and then in 1928, aged twenty, she was sent to Paris to study medicine and chemistry. In Paris, Kar abandoned her studies and took courses in singing and the violin. Much of her time was spent working and socializing with avant-garde writers and artists in the Left Bank of the city. She was exposed to the work of international artists and photographers and it was during this time that she became aware of the potential of photography and established an interest in left-wing politics. She returned to Alexandria in 1933. 
Kar began to lose her singing voice and so abandoned her musical career and began to work as a receptionist and assistant in a local photographer's studio. In the late 1930s she married Edmond Belali, an Egyptian government official and a very keen amateur photographer. They moved to Cairo and set up their own studio, Idabel. In 1943 and 1944 their work was exhibited in two surrealist exhibitions staged in Cairo. Her photographs attracted the attention of Victor Musgrave (died 1984), the British artist, art dealer, curator, and critic, and in 1944, when Kar was thirty-six, she divorced Belali and married Musgrave. 
In 1945 Kar and Musgrave moved to London and Kar pursued her career as a photographer. The portraits she took of the many artists and writers living and socializing in Soho during the early 1950s were to become the foundation of her subsequent work. Her most famous portraits include those of Jacob Epstein (1953), Bertrand Russell (1952), and Gino Severini (mid-1950s). Throughout her life she craved recognition as an artist and continuously struggled financially. At times she isolated herself by her autocratic and somewhat overbearing personality: 'everyone started off loving her and her personality but they ended up saying, 'My God, I can't stand any more of this'' (Williams, 'Ida Kar -- Photographer', 18). 
In 1954 Kar held an exhibition entitled 'Forty artists from Paris and London' at Gallery One but it received little critical acclaim. Her portraits were confrontational, simple, but dramatic, showing none of the glamour of earlier portrait photography. Surrealist elements were apparent in some of the work and she often placed her subjects in their studios and homes using only natural lighting. She used a large old plate camera for these portraits but later changed to a rolleiflex for her documentary work. In 1956 Kar embraced a more documentary style and a number of her pictures of London life were published in 'Tatler' and 'The Observer'. In 1957 she returned to Armenia on a commission from 'The Observer'. There she exhibited her photographs of local rural communities and found that she and her work were respected and revered. Optimistic, she returned to London and for the next three years embarked on a period of intense work and travel. 
In 1960 Kar exhibited her work at the Whitechapel Art Gallery -- it was the first solo photography show held in a major public art gallery in London. The show concentrated on her portraits of artists and writers with a small number of images from Russia and Armenia. It was a great success for Kar and for the future status of photography, generating a huge amount of press. The exhibition was the pinnacle of her achievement and the catalyst for some of her best work. The exhibition design was also innovative, with some of the photographs blown up to a huge scale -- in some cases as large as 4 by 5 feet. In 1962 Kar held another successful exhibition at Moscow's House of Friendship but her biographer, Val Williams, recorded that 'her major projects were invariably accompanied by storms and upsets... to many potential clients and gallery curators, she was a difficult woman, and better avoided' (Williams, 'Ida Kar -- Photographer', 53). In 1963 Kar became a regular photographer for 'Animals' magazine -- but it was a post that lasted only a year. During this time she exhibited some work in Birmingham and London and opportunities for teaching and lecturing were frequent. However, her rather formal approach to portraiture was becoming increasingly unfashionable and financial worries continued to dominate her life. 
After a trip to Cuba in 1964 Kar began to show signs of acute manic depression, paranoia, and obsessive behaviour. She separated from her husband in 1969. After this, and up until her death, Kar suffered several breakdowns and was frequently hospitalized. She died on 24 December 1974 of thrombosis, virtually forgotten, at Inverness Terrace, a Bayswater bedsit. She was cremated at Golders Green. Her work did much to advance the status of photography in Britain and provided an important social record of London in the 1950s. Her archive is now held at the National Portrait Gallery and her work is widely collected by museums around the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 64201


Moore, Raymond Ethelbert (1920-1987), photographer, was born on 26 August 1920 at 43 Liscard Road, Wallasey, Cheshire, the son of Alfred Ethelbert Moore, an architect's assistant, and his wife, Winifred Ethel Agnes Mayne; he had one brother. Nothing is known of Moore's early education but in 1937, intending to become a painter, he enrolled at the Wallasey School of Art. In 1940 he joined the RAF, spending the war years in the Middle East. After winning a scholarship to study painting, he enrolled in 1947 at the Royal College of Art (RCA) in London, graduating in 1950 as an ARCA. While at the RCA Moore began to experiment more with photography, a medium familiar to him since his teenage years: examples of this early work are found in the Moore archive. Among his influences at this time were Henri Cartier-Bresson, Edward Weston, Walker Evans, Hugo Van Wadenoyen, and the two publications 'Subjektive Fotografie' (1950) and 'Subjektive Fotografie 2' (1956). The work in these books by international photographers emphasizes modernist trends and displays a strong graphic awareness. It tends to consider the photographic potential within the mundanities of man-made and natural phenomena, rather than the conventionally beautiful. 
From 1950 to 1975 Moore taught lithography and painting at the Watford School of Art, while continuing his interest in photography. In 1956 the principal of the school asked him to start a photography course for graphic design students. He based the course on Ansel Adams's books, later published as 'The Camera' (1980), 'The Negative' (1981), and 'The Print' (1983), and simultaneously gave up painting, destroying all but one of his works, 'Skomer 1949'. With the painter Ray Howard-Jones, he spent nine summers on Skomer, off the Pembrokeshire coast. There, among the craggy rock formations and tactile stretches of sand, he began to develop his photographic 'voice'. His first exhibition of seventy prints was held in 1959 in the architectural department of the Regent Street Polytechnic, but more significant was an exhibition in 1962 which he shared with painter Malcolm Hughes and sculptor Peter Startup at the Artists' International Association Gallery in Soho. At this event he met the renowned photo-historian Helmut Gernsheim, who bought some prints and became a supportive lifelong friend. 
In 1967 Moore was invited to participate in Modfot 1 by a breakaway group from the Croydon Camera Club; other exhibitors included Don McCullin and Roger Mayne. The exhibition was opened by the Arts Council chairman, Lord Goodman, and was a valiant attempt to balance the preponderance of pictorialism then prevalent by showing radical, modern photography. In 1968 the Welsh Arts Council asked Moore to mount a retrospective exhibition of his work at its principal gallery in Museum Place, Cardiff. It was the first time a British arts council exhibited work by a living British photographer, and it marked the first time Moore's work would be seen in such an auspicious gallery. The exhibition subsequently toured Wales. 
In 1970 Moore visited America where he met Minor White, Harry Callahan, and Aaron Siskind, three of the most influential American photographers of the time. Although the nature of their work differed greatly within the genre of the black and white fine print, they all had in common with Moore a need to express an inner, personal truth through their photography. In America Moore found stimulus and support: six exhibitions of his work were mounted there during the 1970s. Appreciation in America bolstered his reputation at home and in 1973 the Photographers' Gallery in London mounted a one-man show. In 1975 eight prints were included in 'The Land', selected by Bill Brandt for the Victoria and Albert Museum. Also in 1975 Moore became senior lecturer on the diploma in creative photography course at Trent Polytechnic and moved to Clipstone. However, his career here was brief: in 1977 he was awarded a bursary by the Arts Council to pursue personal work, which he did after resigning from Trent Polytechnic and moving to Carlisle in 1978. 
In 1979 Moore took part in 'Three Perspectives on Photography', a controversial exhibition at the Hayward Gallery which included politically slanted work. He was invited back to the Hayward in 1981 to mount a major retrospective, becoming the second living British photographer, after Bill Brandt, to be given this honour. A book, 'Murmurs at every Turn', was published to coincide with the exhibition. A further book of Moore's photographs, 'Every so Often', was published in 1983 by BBC North East to coincide with a film portrait of that title. 
Raymond Moore found his mature photographic voice working in the abandoned areas between town and country and deserted seaside towns out of season, where man's presence was only apparent in the traces left -- the marks of car tyres, litter, or a game of hopscotch abandoned in the sand. He said 'For me -- the no-man's land between the real and fantasy -- the mystery in the common place -- the uncommonness of the commonplace' (Moore, 12). Moore's work observed those forgotten, overlooked fragments of life, making the viewer aware of the extraordinary residing within the ordinary. It was founded on a strong sense of design and impeccable technique, and he cast magic on the most immemorable scene. Latterly working exclusively with a 35 mm camera in black and white, he meticulously crafted prints which annotated the tones of the grey scale with the precision of the notes in a musical score. He has been described as the first 'independent' photographer to have made his mark in British photography during a career founded upon personal, artistic work, rather than that dependent on commissions. 
Raymond Moore was of medium build, with piercing eyes set in a somewhat hawk-like face. He was an essentially private person whose strength of character enabled him to develop his photographic voice in a cultural environment which was not sympathetic to 'art' photography. He was twice married: first to Pauline in the late 1960s at Hemel Hempstead and then, on 11 November 1978, to Mary Margaret Cooper ('b'. 1954/5) at Mansfield register office. Moore moved to Chapelknowe, Canonbie, Dumfriesshire, in the early 1980s, where he died on 6 October 1987. He was buried at Chapelknowe, and was survived by his second wife. Posthumously Moore was represented in two major exhibitions in London mounted to commemorate photography's 150th anniversary in 1989, 'The Art of Photography' at the Royal Academy and 'Through the Looking Glass' at the Barbican Centre. His work is held in several American collections, as well as major British institutions including the Victoria and Albert Museum and Welsh Arts Council. 


@@@@@


doc= 64202


Smith, Edwin George Herbert (1912-1971), photographer, was born on 15 May 1912 at 2 St Paul's Road, Canonbury, London, the only child of Edwin Stanley Smith, a clerk, and his wife, Lily Beatrice, 'nee' Gray. He attended an elementary school in Great College Street, Westminster, which he left at the age of twelve -- just after it was discovered that he was severely short-sighted -- to attend the Northern Polytechnic, in Holloway, to learn building crafts: bricklaying, carpentry, and decorating. He transferred to the polytechnic's architectural school when he was sixteen, and at eighteen won a scholarship to the Architectural Association. He had to abandon his course two years later, as his mother (whose unhappy marriage had ended in divorce) could no longer support him. Thereafter he worked as an architectural draughtsman for several architects in the offices of Marshall Sisson, notably for R. Myerscough-Walker. From 1935 he turned to the life of a freelance photographer as a potential means of supporting a determined interest in painting. On 7 September 1935 he married Rosemary Monica Louise ('b'. 1914/15), of Mitcham, Surrey, the daughter of Albert Henry Ansell, a confectioner. 
Smith's passion for architecture was subsumed in his career as a prolific and gifted photographer. While his reputation rests largely on his acute eye for the essence of the built environment, his repertory was substantially larger than the recording and interpretation of architecture. Stillness and silence are the most widely cited attributes of his photographic work; he has also been described as an English Atget -- the French recorder of the architectural details of Paris and its environs. (The only book of another photographer's work that Smith ever purchased was Atget's 'Photographe de Paris', 1930.) His early photographic subjects were London, the mining community of Ashington, in Northumberland, the docks and quays of Newcastle, cats, and the fairground and the circus. By the end of the 1930s he had -- from an acquaintance with Paul Nash, the painter, designer, and photographer -- learned to develop and print his own work. He worked briefly for 'Vogue' as a fashion photographer, for which he cared little, and subsequently took pictures for an advertising agency. He conceived the photographer as the self-effacing recorder of reality -- a reality recorded in a spirit of admiration and celebration. He wrote, to commission for Focal Press, five photographic handbooks, including 'All the Photo Tricks' (1940). His own technical progression had been from a Box Brownie to a Contax II and a Tenax, both 35 mm cameras made by Zeiss. After the war he used a Ruby mahogany and brass stand camera of 1904, with a mahogany tripod for architectural subjects. He worked in black and white but experimented with colour photography. Significant holdings of his original work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum and in the Museum of London. 
Smith's best-known photographs are of architecture and landscapes, the results of commissions for publications such as 'English Parish Churches' (the first of his visual essays, commissioned by Thames and Hudson in 1950; new edn, 1976), 'English Cottages and Farmhouses, The English Garden, England' (text by Geoffrey Grigson), 'England' (text by Angus Wilson), 'Scotland' (text by Geoffrey Fraser), and 'Ireland' (text by Micheal MacLiammoir). Many had texts by Olive Muriel Cook ['see below'], his second wife, whom he married on 7 September 1954, his first marriage having been dissolved in 1943. He and Olive also collaborated on many contributions to the 'Saturday Book'; they had first met under the aegis of its editor, Leonard Russell. Smith published over thirty books of his photographs of buildings, gardens, and landscape during his lifetime; a further four were published posthumously. Much of his work was done in continental Europe, notably France, Italy, Greece, and Germany. In her introduction to 'Edwin Smith Photographs, 1935-1971' (1984), Olive Cook revealed that her husband spoke of himself 'as an architect by training, a painter by inclination and a photographer by necessity' (p. 5); he was described as a painter on their marriage certificate. Only at the end of his life did he describe himself as a professional photographer; in his heartfelt preference to be regarded as an artist (that is, as a painter, printmaker, or draughtsman) he resembled other photographers such as Atget and Henri Cartier-Bresson. He painted or drew every day, and edited Ralph Mayer's 'The Artist's Handbook of Materials and Techniques' (1951, with subsequent editions). 
Smith took more than 60,000 photographs. He once said 'I have come to worship with my eyes' (Vaizey, 954); his severe myopia, once corrected, effectively sharpened his vision and enhanced his ability to coax the essence from his inanimate subjects. His images define the ways in which light, from dawn to dusk, illuminates the essential features of land and landscape, garden and building. If they do not recognize his name, millions know his images through the continued publication and exhibition of his photographic work. 
Smith died of cancer on 29 December 1971 at his home, the Coach House, Windmill Hill, Saffron Walden, Essex, where he had lived since the early 1960s. His legacy is an imaginative documentation of the countryside, churches, palaces, and vernacular buildings of the British Isles and much of Europe. As his second wife and collaborator described it, he 'lived by looking' (Vaizey, 954). 
Smith's second wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 64204


Branston family (per. c.1800-c.1880), engravers, came into prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 64205


Frederick William Branston (bap. 1805) was baptized on 20 January 1805 at St Luke, Old Street, Finsbury, London. He spent his life in London, residing for some time at 4 Crescent Place, New Bridge Street (1848), and 48 Paternoster Row (1849). Many of his engravings of the 1830s were produced for French publications: for magazines, including the 'Magasin Pittoresque', and books, including Leon de Laborde's 'Essais de gravure' in 1833 and 'Les evangiles' in 1838, which had designs after Theophile Fragonard. He also produced wood-engravings by well-known native artists for best-selling English publications, for instance, after William Harvey's designs for James Northcote's 'Fables' (1828); and after J. Franklin, E. M. Ward, H. J. Townsend, and J. Paton for Samuel Carter Hall's publications, such as his 'Book of British Ballads' (1842) and 'Nursery Tales' (1845). He signed his work: F. W. Branston, Fred Branston, or 'F. Branston sc'. 
More obscure members of the family include the wood-engravers Charles Branston ('fl'. 1856-1878) and Elizabeth Branston ('fl'. 1832-1834). Some addresses from London trade directories are known for them. Charles is listed as working at 21 Tavistock Terrace, Upper Holloway (1856); 4 Beaufort Buildings, the Strand (1863); 6 Fetter Lane, Fleet Street (1866); 4 Salisbury Court (1876-7); and at 13 Edith Road, Peckham (1876), from where he established the firm of Branston & Co. ('fl'. 1878-1891). Elizabeth, meanwhile, worked for a time at 13 Golden Terrace, White Conduit Fields (1832-4). Proof impressions of engravings by members of the Branston family are in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 


