@@@@@


doc= 64206


Robert Edward Branston (bap. 1803, d. 1877) was baptized on 26 June 1803 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London. Like his father, he was prolific. It is sometimes impossible to disentangle their work for on occasion they both signed themselves Branston. Like his brother, Frederick, Robert produced several plates for French publications, notably 'Paul et Virginie' (1838), and, like his father, he produced a plate for William Savage's 'Practical Hints on Decorative Printing' (1822): 'Passage Boats' after A. W. Callcott, about which Savage remarked positively. On 26 May 1830 he married at St Giles, Camberwell, Surrey, Caroline Martha Lunn (died 6 Sept 1880), with whom he had a daughter, Ann Mary, baptized in the same church on 26 March 1832. 
During his life Robert Edward Branston went into business with several engravers. Between 1829 and 1835 he formed a partnership with John Wright at 4 New London Street. The majority of their work (signed B&W or BW) was printed by Charles Whittingham the elder. They produced, for instance, engravings for publications by Edward Turner Bennett, including 'The Tower Menagerie' (1829) and 'The Gardens and Menageries of the Zoological Society Delineated' (2 vols., 1830-31), and for John Britton's 'Picturesque Antiquities of the English Cities' (1830). They apprenticed John Greenaway. Branston's second business partner was Charles Whiting, with whom he collaborated at Beaufort House, the Strand, until 1840. Whiting had acquired William Congreve's process for security printing in colours, so Whiting and Branston specialized in polychrome lottery tickets and banknotes. After the firm disbanded, Branston moved to 35 (later 76) Fleet Street, and immediately created an association with James Henry Vizetelly and a Mr Whitehead, while Ebenezer Landells acted as an engraving supervisor. By the time the firm folded in 1841 it had published 'The Boy's Own Book' and had trained W. H. Wills (as well as, for a while, his cousin G. W. Bonner). Robert's last joint venture was with a pupil, William Dickes, who later became a prominent colour printer. Branston and Dickes worked from 36 St Andrew's Hills, and together they developed a method for printing in relief from a metal plate, a technique used to reproduce a drawing by A. W. Callcott in William Savage's 'Dictionary of the Art of Printing' (1841). Robert Edward Branston died at his home in Denmark Hill, Camberwell, on 6 January 1877. 



@@@@@


doc= 64207


Swain, Joseph (1820-1909), wood-engraver, was born at Oxford on 29 February 1820, the second son of Ebenezer Swain, a printer, and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' James, and the grandson of Joseph Swain, pastor of East Street Baptist Church, Walworth, and a religious poet. The family moved to London when he was nine, and in 1834 he was apprenticed to Nathaniel Whittock, a drawing-master and commercial artist with Oxford connections. Swain wanted to learn wood-engraving, in which Whittock was not expert, so he went to work for Thomas Williams, one of a family of wood-engravers who were among the leading practitioners of the craft in the generation after Bewick. With Williams, he moved away from Bewick's way of suggesting texture by means of various ingenious notations towards facsimile engraving -- the precise reproduction of an artist's drawing. 
Swain set up independently -- at 18 Elder Street, Spitalfields -- in 1842, and the following year he married Martha Cooper; they had three sons and a daughter. Swain's advancement resulted from a commission handed on to him by the engraver Orlando Jewitt in 1843. Bradbury and Evans, the publishers of 'Punch' (begun 1841), were seeking new engravers and asked Jewitt to engrave a design by John Leech. Jewitt passed the job to Swain, whose efforts so pleased Leech that Swain was employed as manager of the engraving department of 'Punch'. In due course, 'Punch' agreed that Swain could expand his work in other directions, while still retaining responsibility for 'Punch' engravings (which the firm continued to deal with until 1900). In 1855 Swain reappeared in trade directories as an independent engraver, at 58 Fleet Street, and from 1858 until almost the end of the century at 6 Bouverie Street, Fleet Street. 
A member of Swain's staff (said to number six or eight in the early days) recalled that at first everyone -- masters, journeymen, and apprentices -- worked together in the same room around a large baize-covered table. In due course, hierarchy was asserted. The masters went to a room downstairs with 'No Admittance' posted over the door, while 'Mr. Swain removed to the first floor, had his room papered; put matting on the floor, and pictures on the walls, and was thus quite up to date' (Groves, 17). For a time the firm employed as manager W. H. Hooper, who later became better known when, after retirement, he engraved for William Morris at the Kelmscott Press. 
The effectiveness of wood-engravings depends largely on the type of drawing provided. Those with tone need adaptation by the engraver, while those with clear lines can be exactly replicated. Engravers tended to specialize in either tint or facsimile. For the latter kind of work Swain's firm received many tributes: 'How is it you are able to preserve the character of each artist's drawing in the way you do? When I look over any engravings I can generally tell who the engraver is, but when I look at your work I can see at once who the artist is. (Ewart, 240-41)' 'The proof is simply exquisite -- I never had and never saw anything more perfectly engraved. It seems so strange to see anything like my own drawing on a proof that I am quite upset and unmanned' (Fred Barnard, letter to Swain, 11 Sept 1872, V&A). Swain used photography to assist in the engraving process as soon as this became possible. For instance, he wrote to Ford Madox Brown about a proposed design: 'Will you draw it on paper & have it photographed on to the wood or draw it on the wood direct? If you do it on paper I would advise that it be done larger than required so that it be reduced in the photograph. (letter, 18 March 1867, V&A)' This refers to transferring an image photographically to a woodblock for hand engraving; later it became possible for a photographed image to be mechanically engraved on zinc using acid, and Swain adopted this process. 
Swain carried out a great variety of work, artistic and everyday, without becoming especially associated with any in particular. Unlike the Dalziel brothers, he did not try to act as artistic patron or originator of publications. But he had some artistic sensibility. He is credited with urging his workmen 'to search the drawing for the motive of the artist and work up to that' (Hartley, 10). Furthermore, he showed his firm's engravings at the Royal Academy, and went into print (apparently for the one and only time) with a series of short tributes to artists he had known who died before achieving fame (first in 'Once a Week', then reprinted in H. C. Ewart, 'Toilers in Art', 1891). Among the artistic achievements to which his firm contributed, one of the largest and most brilliant was Arthur Boyd Houghton's 'Graphic America' series in 'The Graphic' (1870-73). The firm's engravings were signed 'SWAIN Sc'. Swain died at Ealing on 25 February 1909. 
Swain's son, Joseph Blomeley Swain (b. 1844), was also a wood-engraver, at first working semi-independently (according to Engen) as John Swain, from 1860 at 266 Strand, an address shared by several wood-engravers. He took over the family firm on his father's retirement and expanded its activities into half-tone and colour printing. 


@@@@@


doc= 64208


Byfield family (per. c.1814-1886), wood-engravers, came to prominence with the siblings John, Ebenezer, and Mary, three of the six children of James Byfield (died 1813), carver and gilder in Soho, and his wife, Susanna, 'nee' Elliott ('c'.1759-1818), whom he had married on 10 September 1775 at St Marylebone, Middlesex. While 


@@@@@


doc= 64209


Mary Byfield (1795-1871) were baptized on 23 August 1790 and 11 November 1795 respectively in the Providence Chapel, Great Titchfield Street, where the eccentric and charismatic dissenter William Huntington preached. Having been taught, probably by his father, to engrave on wood, John Byfield collaborated with his sister Mary to provide illustrations for several books, including some for the celebrated bibliophile Thomas Frognall Dibdin: 'Bibliotheca Spenciana', 4 vols. (1814); 'Bibliographical Decameron' (1817; also with Ebenezer); and 'Reminiscences of a Literary Life' (1836). This pair also produced many woodcuts for celebrated publications of William Pickering, printed by Charles Whittingham the younger at the Chiswick Press, including 'Icones veteris testamenti' (1830) and Francis Douce's edition of 'The Dance of Death' (1833). John alone contributed cuts to John Martin's 'Bibliographical Catalogue' (1834) and an edition of Gray's 'Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard' (1835). Additionally, he created several bookplates between 1830 and 1840, including a monogram and armorial design for John Gage Rookwood, after designs by Thomas Willement. John lived all his working life in London and several of his addresses are known: Paradise Row (1817) and Cornwall Place, Holloway (1822-7); 4 Brooksby Street (1832-4); and 30 Upper Park Street, Liverpool Road, Islington (1836). He signed his engravings 'J. Byfield'. He married Elizabeth Maylam Tucker of Lydd, Kent, and they had six children ['see below']. John Byfield died in 1841. 
Mary Byfield also conducted work independently of her brother John. She produced engravings for Dibdin's 'Typographical Antiquities' (1819) and 'Bibliomania Spenciana' (1842), for Joseph Hunter's 'South Yorkshire' (1828-31), Orlando Jewitt's 'Memorials of Cambridge' (1841), and for Edward Jesse's 'A Summer's Day at Windsor, or A Visit to Eton' (1841). In 1841 she also designed a version of the university arms which formed part of the imprint of Oxford University Press. She was given most of her work by the printers Charles Whittingham, nephew and uncle, who employed her almost full time until her death in 1871, aged seventy-six. Consequently, the vast majority of Chiswick Press ornaments were engraved by her. Often she engraved alphabets, witness her work for Oliver Byrne's 'First Books of 'Elements' of Euclid' (1847), where each proposition is headed by an initial engraved by her and continues in Caslon italic font, printed in red, yellow, or blue ink. Alternatively, she engraved head and tail-pieces, borders, and vignettes, and this sort of work is best seen in the 'Queen Elizabeth's Prayer Book of 1569' (1853), for which she cut over one hundred blocks, some based on designs by Holbein and Durer, all of which harmonize perfectly with Whittingham's printing. A number of these engravings were reused in later books printed at the Chiswick Press. Mary taught not only several of her nephews and nieces to engrave on wood, but also Charlotte and Elizabeth Whittingham, the daughters of Charles Whittingham the younger, who often provided the designs for woodcuts. Various of her places of abode are recorded, either in Holloway: Cornwall Place (1822-7), or Islington: 4 Brooksby Street (1832-4), Canonbury Place (by 1842), and 30 Upper Park Street, Liverpool Road (1844). She signed her engravings 'Mary Byfield Sc' or 'BYFIELD SC'; the latter signature is confusing for much of her early work done with John was signed 'BYFIELD, Sc'. 
The middle sibling, Ebenezer Byfield, apparently produced less work than his brother or sister. His main contribution was to Dibdin's 'Bibliographical Decameron' (1817), although he died in 1817 before its publication that year. One address is known for an 'E. Byfield': Eden Grove, Holloway. 
Several of the offspring of this generation followed in their forebears' footsteps. John Byfield had six children of whom Ann, Edward, and Mary were taught to engrave on wood by their aunt Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 64210


Ebenezer Byfield (1790-1817) and 


@@@@@


doc= 64211


Edward Byfield (1838-1860) also engraved borders for Chiswick Press books, the extant proofs of which are marked 'engraved by Mary and her nephew Edward Byfield'. He died, tragically young, on 24 November 1860, at 30 Upper Park Street, Islington. 


@@@@@


doc= 64212


Ann Byfield (b. 1830) and 


@@@@@


doc= 64213


Mary Byfield (b. 1840) were active too, producing, for instance, new illustrations for the eighth edition of John William Bradley and J. G. Goodwin's 'Manual of Illumination', published for Winsor and Newton (1861). The sisters advertised themselves as 'artist engravers on wood' at 47 Florence Street, Islington. 
Ebenezer Byfield died early, leaving only one son. The boy, 


@@@@@


doc= 64216


Adler, Jakub (1895-1949), painter, was born on 26 July 1895 in Tuszyn, near Lodz, Poland, the eighth of the twelve children of Eliasz Adler, a timber and coal dealer, and his wife, Hana Laja, 'nee' Fiter. Adler grew up in Lodz in the world of Hasidic Jewry, which had a lasting influence on his subject matter. After training as a goldsmith in Belgrade, he moved to Barmen, Germany, in 1913. He stayed there until the end of the First World War, studying at the Kunstgewerbeschule in Barmen (under Gustav Wiethuchter) and at the Akademie der Kunste in Dusseldorf. In 1918 he returned to Lodz, where he co-founded the Jewish artistic association Ing Idisz ('Young Yiddish'). 
After lengthy visits to Warsaw, Paris, and Berlin, Adler lived in Dusseldorf from 1922 to 1933. Throughout this period he was active in the artistic life of both the Rhineland and Berlin, participating in various exhibitions, among them a show with Franz W. Seiwert at the Barmen Museum in 1928, the Internationale Ausstellung revolutionarer Kunstler held in Berlin in 1922, and several exhibitions of the Novembergruppe, the latter demonstrating his left-wing attitudes. In 1923 he became a member of the Rheingruppe, and in 1932 joined the Selection e. V., a Berlin-based artists' association to which, among others, Wassily Kandinsky and Lyonel Feininger belonged. In the 1920s Adler won his first prizes, including a gold medal for 'Katzen' (1927, Cologne, Museum Ludwig). His paintings of this period are dominated by static human figures and heavy facial features and limbs derived from expressionism and cubism. 
In the 1930s Adler's works grew more objective. He also produced abstract paintings, for example, 'Composition' (1933, priv. coll., Tel Aviv). This development may have been influenced by Paul Klee, with whom he worked from 1931 in the Akademie der Kunste in Dusseldorf, where they both had studios. Their time together is the basis of an article later published by Adler: 'Memories of Paul Klee' ('Horizon', 6, 1942, 264-7). In 1933 he participated in a show of the Collective Artists' Association, held at the Rockefeller Center in New York. In the same year he signed, with other left-wing artists and intellectuals, the 'Urgent Appeal' against the newly elected Nazi government. Because he was Jewish, his works were included in the exhibition Kulturbolschewistische Bilder, held in Mannheim in 1933 and labelled 'degenerate'. As a result of further discrimination, he left Germany. 
From 1933 to 1940 Adler lived in France, in Paris, Argeles-sur-Mer, and Cagnes-sur-Mer, except for a two-year stay in Poland (1935-7) during which he was reunited with his wife, Betty Kohlhaas (1899-1971), a drawing teacher, and his daughter, Nina ('b'. 1927). His works were shown in the Exhibition of German-Jewish Artists' Work held in the Parsons' Galleries, London, in 1934. This was organized by Carl Braunschweig in order to draw attention to the Nazis' infamous art policy, but it did not prevent the notorious Entartete Kunst ('Degenerate art') exhibition in Munich in 1937, where Adler's paintings hung under the slogan 'Offenbarung der judischen Rassenseele' ('Revelation of the Jewish racial soul'). 
In 1940 Adler left France with the Polish foreign army, in which he was a volunteer, and went to Scotland, where he was soon demobilized on health grounds. Except for a brief visit to the artists' colony in Kirkcudbright, he stayed in Glasgow from 1941 to 1943. He soon showed his works in one-man exhibitions, at the studio of the sculptor Benno Schotz, who introduced him to his supporters, Moray Glasser and Fred Nettler, and at the Annan Gallery, Glasgow. Together with his fellow countryman, the painter Josef Herman, whom he had met in Poland in 1936, he became one of the early members of the Glasgow New Art Club, founded by John Duncan Fergusson in 1940. 
In 1943 Adler moved to London, where he eventually settled in one of the studios at 77 Bedford Gardens. There he met the poet Michael Hamburger (who dedicated a poem to him entitled 'Flowering cactus: in memoriam Jankel Adler') and the three painters Robert Colquhoun, Robert MacBryde, and John Minton, who were his neighbours. Although all of them were affected by Adler, it was Colquhoun who most reflected his influence. As well as giving stylistic advice (regarding surface patterning and treatment of form), he encouraged Colquhoun to study his Celtic roots. At the same time, Adler's own paintings grew more expressive and the shapes of the objects more angular. Further, in addition to Jewish subject matter, the fate of mankind became significant, as in 'The Mutilated' (1942, Tate collection). Besides his contacts with British artists he also met fellow refugee painters, including Martin Bloch and Ludwig Meidner, in the Ohel, a club run by the brothers Alexander and Benjamin Margulies in 1943-4. In 1945 he moved to Aldbourne, Wiltshire, where he died at his home, Whitley Cottage, of a heart attack on 25 April 1949; he was buried in Aldbourne. His death occurred just after his application for British citizenship had been rejected because of his contacts with anarchist groups. 
Since the end of the Second World War Adler's works have been shown in one-man exhibitions held at home and abroad, including a memorial show organized by the Arts Council in 1951 and a touring exhibition in Germany organized by the Wuppertal Art and Museum Association in 1955. The largest exhibition of his work, including over 150 paintings and drawings, was held in Dusseldorf, Tel Aviv, and Lodz in 1985-6. Examples of Adler's work are in the Tate collection, the Tel Aviv Museum of Art, Israel, the Museum Ludwig, Cologne, and the Kunstmuseum im Ehrenhof, Dusseldorf. 


@@@@@


doc= 64218


Anrep, Boris Vasilyevich, Count Elmpt in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1883-1969), mosaicist, came of a noble Russian family. He was born on 28 September 1883 in St Petersburg, the son of Vasily Konstantinovich von Anrep (1852-1927), a doctor who became the minister of education for south Russia and was a member of the third Duma (parliament), and his wife, Prascovya Zatsepina (died 1918). His father founded the first hospital for women and the Institute of Pharmacology in St Petersburg. His mother was descended from Peter the Great's black slave, but adhered to the strict conventions of the late nineteenth century. 
Anrep was training as an international lawyer when he made friends with a sculptor, Dmitry Stelletsky, who convinced him that he should be an artist. He went to Paris and studied art assiduously and afterwards mosaic-making. There, through the painter Henry Lamb he became friends with Duncan Grant and Augustus John. In 1906 he married Yuniya Khitrovo in Nice. When in 1912 Roger Fry asked him to choose Russian pictures for the second Post-Impressionist Exhibition, including drawings of his own, he also wrote a section of the introduction to the catalogue. 
During the First World War, Anrep returned to Russia and got to know the poet Anna Akhmatova, who fell in love with him. He fought across the Carpathian mountains, where he discovered that the Orthodox church had turned Catholic. Priests had cast out the icons into the open or sheds where they mouldered. At night Anrep would go with his Cossacks and a cart into no man's land to collect these religious paintings. Most of those he retrieved are now in the Hermitage Museum. Following his divorce in 1918 Anrep married Helen Ann (1885-1965), daughter of William Maitland, on 12 April 1918 in Hampstead. On his marriage certificate his rank and profession were described as 'Captain Russian Artillery, Military Secretary to the Russian Govt. Committee'. Living in London after the war he took up mosaics to earn a living for his wife and two children. The floor in the Tate Gallery was a success from which other commissions followed, both public and private. In the National Gallery he created three floors, one portraying his Bloomsbury and other friends as Greek gods and goddesses. On the Bank of England pavements the governor, Montague Norman, is to be seen as Janus looking both ways. Anrep always enjoyed making intricate jokes in his mosaics; he also used many symbols, such as zigzag electric sparks for fast modern communication; banking and finance were indicated by two entwined snakes writhing round a caduceus. These mosaics are down long corridors and halls and are among his finest. 
Anrep taught his many helpers in the Parisian studio to assist in the making of mosaics, for they could take up to six years to complete. These workers were Russian emigres, who found it hard to make a living in France. Among these refugees was Mariya Volkova, who had lived with the family since 1917, much to his wife's disgust. He had a quantity of lovers, including Jeanne Reynal, and was very attractive to women. But when Helen Anrep left him to live with Roger Fry, Anrep was furious. He threatened to tar and feather Fry, though he never carried out the threat. 
For private commissions Anrep created a Byzantine party on Ethel Sands's hall floor; for Augustus John a huge mantelpiece, with mistresses, wives, and children dotted all over the scene (V&A). For Lady Jowitt he made a pavement showing a modern lady of fashion of the 1920s in black and white marble (Birmingham Art Gallery). In various panels she was seen trying on a dress, gossiping on the telephone, and at the theatre. 
During the Second World War, Anrep worked for Reuters, doing concurrent translations from Russian into English. In 1946 he became a naturalized British citizen, having given up the idea that he could ever return to his estates and house in St Petersburg. Then the fourth National Gallery floor was arranged, where he showed Winston Churchill in his siren suit defying a monster, with Professor Hoyle scaling a tower, the height of lucidity. Besides this, his mosaics for Greek and Catholic cathedrals and chapels in England, Ireland, and Scotland, including ceilings and walls, and the chapel of the blessed sacrament in Westminster Cathedral, are on a magnificent scale. 
Anrep was adventurous and bold; his physique was like that of a big, blond, medieval knight; when in company his wit, vivacity, charm, and story-telling were irresistible. But he could become deeply depressed over criticism or personal troubles. He died in London on 7 June 1969 at the home of his last mistress, Maud Russell, 6 Hyde Park Gardens, and was cremated on 11 June in Golders Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 64220


Armour, Mary Nicol (1902-2000), still-life and landscape painter, was born at Blantyre, Lanarkshire, on 27 March 1902, the eldest of six children of William Steel, a metal dresser in the steelworks at Blantyre, and his wife, Jabina Gilbert. She won a scholarship to Hamilton Academy where the art teacher, Penelope Beaton (1886-1963), noticed her; Beaton persuaded Armour's father to allow her to enrol at Glasgow School of Art in 1920. Armour often said in later life that although there were many students at the school from more privileged backgrounds than her own, none had a better basic training in drawing and painting than she had received at Hamilton Academy. 
Armour's principal tutor was Maurice Greiffenhagen, assisted by David Forrester Wilson. From Greiffenhagen Armour learned the elements of composition but his own style was at variance with the more painterly handling of many Scottish painters. An early indicator of Armour's straightforwardness of manner is her clash with Greiffenhagen over the subject of her final-year diploma painting. He required that all students should produce a work from the traditional iconography but Armour chose a modern subject, a gathering of women at the pithead. Although she was allowed to complete the painting, she failed to win the final year prize which was undoubtedly her due. 
In 1925, after a post-diploma year and teacher training, Mary Steel became an art teacher, working in schools in Glasgow and Cambuslang. In 1927 she married the landscape and figure painter William Armour (1903-1979) and settled in Milngavie just outside Glasgow. At that time married women were not allowed to teach and Armour was forced to resign and take up painting full time in order to earn a living. An attack of peritonitis and subsequent surgery left her unable to have children. 
Armour gradually made a name for herself in the 1930s, exhibiting at the Royal Scottish Academy (where she won the Guthrie prize in 1937), the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour, and the Royal Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts (RGIFA). In 1941 she was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy and ten years later became a lecturer in still-life painting at Glasgow School of Art. At first a substantial proportion of her students were returning servicemen or others whose careers had been interrupted by the war and they brought with them a youthful enthusiasm for more recent European painting. Armour found herself influenced by their interests and as a result her palette and handling changed, bringing a brightness of colour missing from her earlier painting and a looseness of brushwork. 
In 1953 the Armours moved to Kilbarchan, a Renfrewshire weaving village. Mary Armour retired in 1962 and returned to full-time painting but now she found her work in considerable demand. Awards and honours came her way -- full membership of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1958, the Cargill prize at the RGIFA in 1972, full membership of the latter in 1977, an honorary LLD from Glasgow University in 1982, and later she was elected honorary president of both the Glasgow School of Art and the RGIFA. Critical and commercial success did little to change Mary Armour, other than facilitate her financial assistance to her siblings, nephews, and nieces. Her patience with students and kindly advice to them, continuing after she had retired from teaching, will long be remembered. It was always given with a straightforward, somewhat impersonal delivery, for Mary Armour was not afraid of plain speaking -- a product, she said, of the deprivations and common-sense approach of her north Lanarkshire upbringing. She never lost her sense of humour, even through her last ten years, when she had to give up painting owing to failing eyesight and poor health. Even in her most severe moments a smile or chuckle was not far behind her sternest words of advice or encouragement. 
Armour's contribution to the art and artistic life of her era was the celebration of traditional painterly virtues in a manner which made them relevant to the period. She was not an iconoclast or artistic rebel but she realized that traditional qualities still had a contemporary value. After 1950 she translated her early training into a more contemporary manner and provided a route for her students to assimilate her experience. These new paintings proved an immediate success with collectors in Scotland and further afield who valued the craftsmanship and vision of an artist who had been trained in the grand style of the Glasgow School of Art in the 1920s. 
Mary Armour died at Paisley on 5 July 2000. Her work is represented in many Scottish public and corporate collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 64221


Armstrong, John Rutherford (1893-1973), painter, was born at 16 Priory Avenue, Hastings, Sussex, on 14 November 1893, the third son of the Revd William Alexander Armstrong and his wife, Emily Mary, 'nee' Cripps. Educated at St Paul's School, London (1907-12), he went on to read law briefly at St John's College, Oxford, before starting a short period of studies at the St John's Wood School of Art, London, just before, and then again for a short period after, the First World War. Although he was not in regular attendance there he came from a family who encouraged him to draw; it seems that, as an artist, he was largely self-educated. Having been brought up in the wooded downland countryside near West Dean in Sussex, Armstrong had developed an early interest in natural history that resurfaced much later in some of his meticulous depictions of plants and leaves. While at art school he developed his visual memory by close observation of his surroundings and built up an eclectic collection of photographs of works by Botticelli and Landseer, Masaccio and Millais. When he finally set about painting it was in a highly systematic way, with a clear idea in mind of what he wanted to achieve; he worked from the top left to the bottom right of a canvas without any preparatory drawing. During his war service as an officer in the Royal Field Artillery, the period he spent in Salonika fostered a lifelong interest in the painting and pottery of ancient Greece, a subject that appeared repeatedly in his later work. 
As a successful soldier, mentioned in dispatches, Armstrong found his return to civilian life after the war difficult; during the early 1920s his life in London was beset by economic hardship. The turning point in his career came through his friendship with the celebrated actress Elsa Lanchester, later the wife of Charles Laughton, who at that period ran a bohemian late-night theatre club, the Cave of Harmony. His work there designing scenery and costumes and, for a while, running the cafe, gave him an income and led to commissions for further design work. These included the sets for 'Riverside Nights', presented by the impresario Nigel Playfair at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, in 1926; decorative paintings for Lillian and Samuel Courtauld in their home at 20 Portman Square; and a frieze for the ballroom at 1 Kensington Palace Gardens, the home of the politician George Strauss. Although all have been destroyed, they appear in photographic records to have been witty, stylish designs in a typically light-hearted but sophisticated art deco style. 
At the same time Armstrong's easel paintings also began to achieve recognition. His first solo show at the Leicester Galleries in 1928 sold well and attracted thoughtful critical reviews. Still strongly influenced by his theatre work, it comprised an eclectic selection that incorporated art deco-ish clown and acrobatic subjects painted in light, high colour, and quieter, more complex works based on mythological scenes such as the rape of Persephone, whose style owes something to the Russian ballet and to Renaissance art. Armstrong, in short, had not yet found his own voice artistically, and the need to blend his concern with realism was as yet unreconciled with the poetic and imaginative aspects of his work. By the end of the decade, however, he had discovered the work of the Italian metaphysical painter Giorgio De Chirico, and in it the means of resolving these divergent strands. By the time Paul Nash came to select his influential grouping of British surrealist and abstract artists, Unit One, in 1933, Armstrong was among those chosen. About 1932 he married Benita Jaeger, with whom he had one son and one daughter. Following their divorce he married, as his second wife, Veronica Sibthorpe. 
The economic slump during the 1930s forced Armstrong to continue earning his living as a designer, his most successful designs being perhaps the scenery and costumes for Frederick Ashton's ballet 'Facade' (1931). He also designed costumes for film productions, notably those directed by Alexander Korda starring the recently married Elsa Lanchester and Charles Laughton. Among these were 'The Private Life of Henry VIII' (1933), 'Rembrandt' (1936), 'I Claudius' (1936, unfinished), 'Things to Come' (1938), and 'Hobson's Choice' (1958). Like many of the best avant-garde artists of his generation Armstrong was commissioned by Jack Beddington of Shell-Mex to make paintings, including 'Artists Prefer Shell' (1933) and 'Farmers Use Shell' (1939), for Shell advertisements, notably posters. The first, and one of the most characteristic of these works, 'Everywhere you Go you can be Sure of Shell', comprises a witty, slightly sinister landscape, filled with anthropomorphic trees, at Newlands Corner, Merrow, Surrey. 
Armstrong's design commissions took him away from painting, and it was not until 1938 that he regained confidence as a painter with an exhibition that year at the Lefevre Gallery. Surrealist influences on his work were successfully melded into a restrained, English variant of the style, as in, for example, 'Dreaming Head' (1937), bought by the Tate Gallery. This style formed the basis of the work Armstrong undertook from 1940 onwards as an official war artist. His eye for the odd and incongruous combined with an unmistakable gentleness of feeling showed to effect in describing, on the one hand, the melancholy ruin of bombed buildings and, on the other, the cool beauty of industrial and manufacturing processes. During the war, spent near Dunmow in Essex, Armstrong evolved a new technique. He moved away from the smooth surfaces of his pre-war painting towards a method of working in which he covered the base surface of the canvas with a single colour, at first often black; on that foundation, using a square-headed brush, he built up the painting in short strokes of colour. He employed this distinctive, almost sculptural style up to his death in 1973. Initially, in his wartime paintings, this produced a rather sombre effect, though later, after the war was over, their mood began to lighten psychologically. Now living in Cornwall, Armstrong developed through the late 1940s and 1950s a series of ambitious symbolical paintings which, with titles such as 'The Storm', 'The Battle of Propaganda', and 'The Battle of Money', synthesized, to powerful effect, many of his interests in the theatre, architecture, religion, mythology, and politics. His sympathies, politically, were always to the left; in 1945 he designed a leaflet cover for the Labour Party, and he was an active campaigner for nuclear disarmament. In 1958 his 'Victory', in which he painted the imagined results of a nuclear holocaust, drew considerable attention when shown at the Royal Academy summer exhibition. Armstrong was elected an associate member of the Royal Academy in 1966. 
Having achieved these major syntheses of his ideas and beliefs, Armstrong diversified in the last two decades of his working life to include still lifes (of mostly fruit, vegetables, and pottery), a small group of serene, abstract paintings, a series of paintings on the story of Icarus, and, finally, the tocsin series, in which a church bell appears to sound a warning of growing dangers and threats to civilization. Though it was not publicly successful this series may now be seen as the poetic and sensitive expression of his cultured mind, a view that became apparent to a wider audience only with the retrospective memorial exhibition of his work at the Royal Academy in 1975. 
Armstrong was distinguished in appearance, with a thin, ascetic face. His reserved manner could at times mask his dry wit and gentle nature, as well as his awareness of the world and openness to new ideas. He was a man of physical and intellectual courage; although he was increasingly disabled by Parkinson's disease in the last ten years of his life, he continued to paint and travel. In the year before his death he went with his third wife, Annette Sylvia, formerly Heaton, whom he had married about 1956, to Italy for the first time -- visiting Venice, Ravenna, Florence, and Arezzo. Armstrong died at his home, 40 Erpingham Road, Putney, on 19 May 1973. He was survived by his wife and their daughter. His work is held in numerous public collections, including the Tate collection, the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff. 


@@@@@


doc= 64222


Vorticists (act. 1914-1919), group of artists and writers, were conceived as British art's independent alternative to French cubism, Italian futurism, and German expressionism. The word 'vorticism' was coined by the poet and critic Ezra Pound (1885-1972) early in 1914, and he explained in the vorticists' magazine 'Blast' that: 'the vortex is the point of maximum energy. It represents, in mechanics, the greatest efficiency. We use the words 'greatest efficiency' in the precise sense -- as they would be used in a text book of Mechanics. (E. Pound, 'Vortex Pound', 'Blast', 1, 1914, 153)' The most substantial and active vorticist artists were Edward Alexander Wadsworth (1889-1949), Henri Gaudier-Brzeska (1891-1915), and William Patrick Roberts (1895-1980). Gaudier-Brzeska and Roberts contributed written material to 'Blast' as well as illustrations of their work, and in 1914-15 the sturdy Roberts executed some of the most impressive vorticist drawings and watercolours. Pound also contributed essays to 'Blast', and played a crucial part in supporting and defining the vorticist movement as a critic. But (Percy) Wyndham Lewis (1882-1957) was the dominant vorticist, performing a multi-faceted role as editor, artist, critic, and writer of fiction. 
The arrival of vorticism was announced with great gusto, wit, and belligerence in the first issue of 'Blast' (July 1914), edited by Lewis. Aggressive, cheeky, and wildly uninhibited, its opening manifestos set out to attack a wide range of targets. England was blasted first, 'from politeness', and its climate cursed 'for its sins and infections, dismal symbol, set round our bodies, of effeminate lout within' ('Blast', 1, 1914, 11). Vorticism was self-consciously virile in character, and wanted to wage war on the legacy of the Victorian era. Lewis and his friends aimed at freeing England from the stifling influence of the past, and their magazine shouted: 'Blast years 1837 to 1900' (ibid., 18). They used laughter 'like a bomb', in order to discredit the forces which prevented England, and English art in particular, from realizing its full potential. The vorticist manifesto maintained that 'we are Primitive Mercenaries in the Modern World... a movement towards art and imagination could burst up here, from this lump of compressed life, with more force than anywhere else' (ibid., 30, 32). 
The list of signatures at the end of the movement's rumbustious group manifesto included eleven names. But not all of them were closely involved with vorticism itself. Richard Aldington (1892-1962), who had collaborated with Pound in the poetic imagist movement, was a writer with only a marginal commitment to the vorticist aesthetic. Malcolm Arbuthnot (1874-1967), an innovatory photographer who had organized a post-impressionist exhibition in Liverpool in 1913 and met Wyndham Lewis the following year at the Rebel Art Centre, London, never made vorticist photographs. Alvin Langdon Coburn (1882-1966) performed that role in 1916-17 when he invented vortography with Pound, but his signature did not appear in the 'Blast' manifesto. The other nine names were all directly caught up in the vorticist cause: of these Gaudier-Brzeska, Lewis, Pound, Roberts, and Wadsworth are noticed elsewhere. The remaining members: Lawrence Atkinson, Jessica Dismorr, Cuthbert Hamilton, and Helen Saunders are noticed below. 

Lawrence Atkinson (1873-1931), artist, writer, and musician, was born on 27 January 1873 at 10 Leamington Street, Chorlton upon Medlock, Lancashire, the son of Leonard William Atkinson, a salesman of cotton goods, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Barnes. After attending Bowden College, Chester, he studied singing and music at Berlin and Paris, which he then taught in Liverpool and London, and gave concert performances. Self-taught as an artist, he first exhibited at the Allied Artists' Association in 1913, and moved from fauvism to vorticism when he joined Lewis's Rebel Art Centre in 1914. After appearing in the 'Invited to Show' section of the 'First Exhibition of the Vorticist Group' at the Dore Gallery, London, in 1915, he published a book of poems called 'Aura'. A solo exhibition of his painting and carving was held at the Eldar Gallery, London, in 1921, and that year his sculpture 'L'oiseau' gained the grand prix at the Milan Exhibition. In later life he concentrated on sculpture, executing some remarkably abstract carvings. Atkinson died on 21 September 1931 in the American Hospital, Paris. He had been living at the Villa les Topares, Cannes. Examples of his work are in the Tate collection, including 'The Lake' (pen and watercolour, 'c'.1915-1920). 

Cuthbert Francis Hamilton (1884-1958), artist, was born at 29 Talbot Road, Paddington, London, on 15 February 1884, the son of Thomas Sharp Hamilton, of the Bombay civil service, and his wife, Katharine, 'nee' Sharp. After studying at the Slade School of Fine Art from 1899 to 1903 (about the same time as Wyndham Lewis), he taught art at Clifton College, Bristol (1907-10). Though he played a more minor role in the vorticist movement, he collaborated with Lewis on his decorations for Madame Strindberg's Cabaret Theatre Club in 1912, having previously been involved in the avant-garde cabaret club the Cave of the Golden Calf, decorated with murals and sculpture by Jacob Epstein, Eric Gill, Charles Ginner, Spencer Gore, and Wyndham Lewis. The art critic Roger Fry included Hamilton in the last month of the 'Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition' held in London in 1912, and he joined the Omega Workshops designing furniture and interiors in the summer of 1913. But Hamilton joined Lewis in storming out of Omega later that year, and contributed to the 'Post-Impressionist and Futurist Exhibition' in the autumn. Then, having been included in the 'Cubist Room' section of a 'Camden Town Group and Others' exhibition at Brighton, Hamilton joined the Rebel Art Centre and contributed an explosive, mechanistic illustration called 'Group' to the first issue of 'Blast'. He did not contribute to the vorticist exhibition in 1915, but rejoined the vorticists in 1920 when they exhibited together for the last time in Group X at the Mansard Gallery, London. One of Hamilton's few surviving works, his vigorous 'Reconstruction', is in the Tate collection. In later years he turned to pottery and sculpture, founding the Yeoman Potteries. Hamilton died on 5 January 1958 at his home, Shelleys, High Street, Cookham, Berkshire. 
The two women associated with the vorticist movement are more substantial artists than Hamilton. Jessica Stewart Dismorr (1885-1939) was born on 2 March 1885 at Hillcrest Lodge, West Hill, Gravesend, Kent, the daughter of John Stewart Dismorr, a colonial merchant, and his wife, Mary Ann Rebecca, 'nee' Clowes. She attended the Slade School of Fine Art in 1902-3 before studying painting under Jean Metzinger, J. D. Fergusson, A. Dunoyer de Segonzac, and J.-E. Blanche at the Atelier La Palette, Paris, from 1910 to 1913. There she became a fauviste, and contributed to several issues of 'Rhythm' magazine. Dismorr exhibited with S. J. Peploe and Fergusson at the Stafford Gallery, London, in 1912, and at the Salon d'Automne the following year. At about this time she met Wyndham Lewis and by 1914 had become an ardent member of the Rebel Art Centre. By the time she signed the vorticist manifesto Dismorr was working in a strongly abstract style. Her work was illustrated in the second issue of 'Blast' (1915), where her writings were also published. The girder-like forms of her 'Abstract Composition' (1914-15; Tate collection) are suggestive of '
the new machinery that wields the chain of muscles fitted beneath 

my close coat of skin. 
(Dismorr, 'Monologue', 'Blast', 2, 1915)' She showed in the vorticist exhibition in London in 1915, after which she left to carry out war work in France. Her work was included at the vorticist exhibition in New York in 1917, and her first solo exhibition was held at the Mayor Gallery, London, in 1925; the following year she was elected to the London Group and the Seven & Five Society. Her involvement with the avant-garde continued throughout her life: during the 1930s she exhibited with the Association Abstraction-Creation, and in 1937 contributed to 'Axis' magazine. At the end of her life Dismorr was living at 17 Willoughby Road, London. She committed suicide by hanging herself at 21 St Edmund's Terrace, St Marylebone, London, on 29 August 1939. 
Dismorr's friend Helen Beatrice Saunders (1885-1963) was born on 4 April 1885 at 10 Addison Road, Bedford Park, Chiswick, London, the daughter of Alfred Robert Henry Saunders, a solicitor, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Daley. After being educated at home, Saunders studied at the Central School of Arts and Crafts and at the Slade School of Fine Art (1906-7), and exhibited with the Friday Club in 1912. By then her interest in post-impressionism was evident, and she showed her work at the Allied Artists' Association in 1912 and 1913. One of the first in Britain to work in a non-figurative style, Saunders reached her most extreme stage as a painter in 1914 when she exhibited at the Whitechapel Art Gallery's 'Twentieth Century Art' exhibition and joined the Rebel Art Centre. Like Dismorr, she contributed a poem as well as an illustration to the second issue of 'Blast', and was included in the vorticist exhibitions in London and New York. But she came closest to Lewis when together they painted murals in the Vorticist Room at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel, Percy Street, London. At the end of her life Saunders was living at 39 Gray's Inn Road, Holborn, London. Following her accidental death by gas poisoning on new year's day, 1963, three of her works -- 'Monochrome Abstract Composition' ('c'.1915), 'Abstract Composition in Blue and Yellow' ('c'.1915), and 'Abstract Multicoloured' ('c'.1915) -- were that year presented to the Tate Gallery in memory of her sister by Ethel M. Saunders. 
The list of signatures in 'Blast' excluded several artists whose work had much in common with the vorticists. Frederick Etchells (1886-1973) certainly executed paintings and drawings which can confidently be described as vorticist. Jacob Epstein's (1880-1959) 'Rock Drill' (1913-16; Tate collection) put many vorticist ideas into compelling sculptural form. But he was almost as determined to distance himself from vorticism as David Bomberg (1890-1957), who adamantly rejected Lewis's invitation to contribute to 'Blast'. Bomberg also refused advances from the Italian writer and theorist Filippo Marinetti, who only succeeded in attracting the loyalty of one English artist: Christopher Nevinson (1889-1946). 
Most of the artists associated with the vorticist movement had previously been impressed by Marinetti and the Italian futurists, who first exhibited in London at the Sackville Gallery in March 1912. The vorticists sympathized with Marinetti's call for an art directly expressive of the new machine age, and they also admired the Italian leader's dynamic ebullience as a performer of his own poetry. But by 1914 they had begun to resent Marinetti's attempts to enlist them as members of the futurist movement. Pound, who had become dissatisfied with his earlier commitment to the imagist movement in poetry, was eager to involve himself with a new group. So was Wyndham Lewis, who explained his conception of the vortex by telling a friend to think 'at once of a whirlpool... At the heart of the whirlpool is a great silent place where all the energy is concentrated. And there, at the point of concentration, is the Vorticist' (D. Goldring, 'South Lodge', 1943, 65). 
The stillness of the 'great silent place' was far removed from Italian futurism, which preferred to rhapsodize about the machine age and convey its excitement through blurred, multiple images stressing the exhilaration of movement. Vorticisim valued energy, too, and Ezra Pound defined the vortex as 'a radiant node or cluster... from which, and through which, and into which, ideas are constantly rushing' (E. Pound, 'Vorticism', 'Fortnightly Review', 1 Sept 1914). But the vorticists preferred to define single forms rather than embrace flux, vagueness, and rapid motion. A vorticist picture is often explosive in its implications, using diagonal forms redolent of pistons and girders which reach out towards the edges of the composition. Alongside this restless energy, though, there is a counter-emphasis on firm, clear-cut forms, often enclosed by strongly defined contours. The vorticists were fascinated by the modern world, and wanted to incorporate its mechanistic structures in their work. But they tempered this enthusiasm with a cool, hard awareness of the machine age's impersonal harshness. They knew how dehumanized the modern urban world could be, and they saw no reason to echo the ecstatic romanticism of Marinetti's attitude towards twentieth-century dynamism. 
The vorticists wanted to place this 'modern world' at the very centre of their work. They filled their pictures with what 'Blast' described as the 'forms of machinery, Factories, new and vaster buildings, bridges and works'. But they had no desire to depict the world in too representational a style. Lewis criticized the futurists for 'their careful choice of motor omnibuses, cars, aeroplanes, etc.' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 1, 1914, 144) and declared that 'the Automobilist pictures were too 'picturesque', melodramatic and spectacular, besides being undigested and naturalistic to a fault' (ibid.). Cubism, which had also influenced many of the vorticists at an early stage in their careers, was likewise criticized. Lewis announced that Picasso's cubist sculpture 'no longer so much interprets, as definitely makes, nature (and 'dead' nature at that)' (ibid., 140). 
The vorticists believed that their intentions could best be conveyed by a more abstract language. Not because they regarded total abstraction as a desirable end in itself: the vorticists thought that the machine age demanded a severely simplified, hard, bare approach. 'Blast' proclaimed that machinery 'sweeps away the doctrines of a narrow and pedantic Realism at one stroke' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 1, 1914, 39), enabling the vorticists to develop a language which contained many layers of reference. A vorticist picture can therefore be read in several different but equally legitimate ways. It might be seen as a map, a vision, an aerial view of the earth, a diagram, a blueprint for a machine, or a distillation of an urban scene with buildings and robot-like figures. All these possibilities were contained in a single image, and Lewis had no desire to restrict them in any way. He wanted vorticism to be richly allusive even as it refined and simplified its formal vocabulary. In 1915 he explained that the vorticist work of art should be 'a hallucination or dream (which all the highest art has always been) with a mathematic of its own' (W. Lewis, 'Note', 'The First Exhibition of the Vorticist Group', 1915, exhibition catalogue, Dore Galleries, London). 
Despite the rivalries within the group, vorticism stood a good chance of establishing itself as a major force. So indeed it did, but only for a short time. A few weeks after 'Blast' was published, the First World War erupted. The militancy of vorticism was rapidly overtaken by the outright militarism of a call-to-arms. So the vorticists had little more than a year to develop their ideas. They enjoyed boisterous evenings at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel where Vorticist Room murals by Lewis and Saunders made an appropriately clangorous impact. The meetings were commemorated, nearly half a century later, in Roberts's monumental painting 'The Vorticists at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel, Spring 1915' (Tate collection). That year, which saw the first vorticist exhibition and the first issue of 'Blast', Lewis claimed in the magazine that 'we have subscribers in the Khyber Pass, and subscribers in Santa Fe' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 2, 1915, 7), but Gaudier-Brzeska had already been killed fighting at the front. He was widely mourned by other members of the movement, and by 1916 most of the vorticists were fighting in France. 
Left at home, Pound persuaded the major American collector John Quinn to purchase vorticist work on a grand scale, and stage an 'Exhibition of the Vorticists' at the Penguin Club, New York, in 1917. But when the vorticists returned from the war, they soon discovered that the world had changed irrevocably. They could not recapture the pre-war context of heady experimentation, in a cultural climate dominated by the need for a 'return to order'. By 1920, despite Lewis's stillborn attempt to launch a third issue of 'Blast', the movement had ceased to exist. 


@@@@@


doc= 64224


Bell, (Frank) Graham (1910-1943), painter and writer, was born on 21 November 1910 near Brakpan, Johannesburg, Transvaal, the eldest of the three sons of Frank Graham Bell (1874-1948), a British mining engineer, and his wife, Marjorie, 'nee' Hewitt (1888-1979). The family spent from 1915 to 1922 in England, where Bell attended schools in Berkshire and Dorset, then went back to South Africa and settled in or near Durban. From 1923 Bell, a strong and intelligent boy, was at Michaelhouse School, Balgowan, Natal, leaving in 1926 with unrealistic dreams of being an artist. He intermittently attended art classes at the Natal Technical College and exhibited pictures in Durban; but under family pressure he took work in a bank, then in 1929 undertook to manage a sugar farm in Zululand bought by his father. Within a year, however, he decamped to Durban, where he subsisted precariously, living with friends and devoting himself to painting to such effect that he could exhibit some forty oils at the Durban Art Gallery in March 1931. These post-impressionist essays were thought daringly 'modern'; public attention ensured enough sales to enable Bell, aged twenty, to sail for England that April, accompanied by Eileen (known as Anne) Bilbrough (1909-2001), a designer and gallery assistant, who contributed substantially to their support. They married in London on 23 February 1937, when it was stated that they had been previously married in South Africa on 5 March 1931. Their daughter was born later in 1937; however, increasing discord culminated in a separation in January 1938. 
In London, Bell encountered paintings previously known to him only through reproductions, becoming temporarily infatuated with Duncan Grant's work. Hoping to paint and exhibit, he sought friends among fellow painters, many of them former students of the Slade School of Fine Art. But chronic lack of money deflected him: he decorated pottery for Phyllis Keyes, served as an assistant at the Contemporary Arts Society, helped to edit the short-lived journal 'London Week', and, increasingly, reviewed for the 'New Statesman and Nation'. Aesthetic speculations shared by his friends Rodrigo Moynihan and Geoffrey Tibble led him in March 1934 to contribute three amorphous canvases to the exhibition 'Objective abstractions' at the Zwemmer Gallery in London; but sensing that this constituted a dead end, he virtually abandoned painting for the next two years. 
Discussions with his friend William Coldstream, who was in a similar quandary, eventually rekindled Bell's belief in painting. The two devised 'A Plan for Artists', submitting it early in 1937 to Kenneth Clark, the young (and wealthy) director of the National Gallery. Clark responded by creating a fund offering painters in their situation modest financial support. Artistically, the plan proposed -- against the contemporary prevalence of abstraction and surrealism -- a return to the exploration and expression, through observation, of the visible world. This approach, corresponding to that of their friends Victor Pasmore and Claude Rogers, led to the opening in October 1937 of a school of drawing and painting. Although Bell was not formally a director of the Euston Road School (as it was later known), its strength, according to Pasmore, largely stemmed from his conviction and sense of purpose. 
Following this renewal of confidence, Bell's painting prospered during the next years, albeit against a background of the gathering menace of reactionary political and military forces, which concerned him deeply. He was active in anti-fascist initiatives through exhibitions and his writing; his pamphlet 'The Artist and his Public' was published in 1939. While effectively homeless (in London he was given house room by Clark, his patron and now his friend), he shared studios with Coldstream and worked frequently with students at the school; he spent weeks at a time painting in Bolton, Lancashire (the seat of the Mass-Observation movement), Dover, Hampshire, Dublin, France, and Suffolk, producing landscapes, portraits, and still lifes. When war came he awaited his call up with undeceived impatience, being finally accepted for aircrew training in September 1940. He passed much of the next year marooned by the RAF on Anglesey with his leg badly broken as a result of playing football. Subsequent training took him back to South Africa, where he was reunited with his parents and gained his commission as an observer. Further intensive training in England was brought to an end on 9 August 1943, when his Wellington bomber crashed on landing at RAF Ossington, near Newark, Nottinghamshire, killing the entire crew. His funeral took place at Golders Green crematorium, London, on 13 August. The one fixed point in these six final itinerant years was his attachment to the art historian (Anne) Olivier Popham ('b'. 1916) -- the subject of a 1938 portrait in the Tate collection -- whom, owing to the divorce laws and the disruptions of wartime, he was never free to marry. 
The force of Graham Bell's personality and the combative vigour of his writing contrasts with the sensitive restraint and scrupulous tenderness of his painting; yet both uphold realist values with lean, self-critical distinction. In his death British art lost a cohesive and potentially commanding figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 64225


Moynihan, (Herbert George) Rodrigo (1910-1990), painter, was born on 17 October 1910 in Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands, the elder son and elder child of Herbert James Moynihan, fruit broker, and his Spanish wife, Maria de la Puerta. His childhood and youth were peripatetic and between 1924 and 1927 he attended high school in Madison, New Jersey. In 1927-8 he was once more in Europe and declared his intention to study painting. In 1928 he was enrolled as a student at the Slade School of Fine Art, University of London, where he studied under Professor Henry Tonks. A break in his progress occurred after his first year, when paternal pressure banished him to a broking office in the City; Tonks intervened on his behalf and from then onwards (he graduated in 1931) painting was his life. 
An early cosmopolitanism in his outlook and tastes distinguished Moynihan from the run of his fellow students. At the same time there emerged characteristics of both innate conservatism and decided radicalism which were to shape the rest of his career and were marked features of his personality. 
Moynihan first came to public notice through the exhibition 'Objective Abstractions' held at Zwemmer's Gallery, London, in March 1934, which he shared with Geoffrey Tibble, Graham Bell, and others. His works, evolved from elements of still life, were thickly encrusted, non-figurative paintings, indebted to the later paintings of J. M. W. Turner and Claude Monet; in this, they ran counter to the prevailing geometric abstraction of, for example, Ben Nicholson or Piet Mondrian. Although the works caused interest, he received little encouragement and, by the late 1930s, he returned to representational painting and gained considerable and increasing success over the following fifteen years. He was associated with, although not a member of, the Euston Road School (1937-9) through his friendship with William Coldstream, Victor Pasmore, Tibble, and Bell. Unlike them, he was not especially drawn to proletarian subject matter and his suave handling of paint and restricted colour range were distinct from, for example, those of Pasmore or Claude Rogers at that time. 
In the 1940s Moynihan became a celebrated 'conservative' artist known for his wartime paintings such as 'The Medical Inspection' (1943; IWM) and 'Private Clarke, ATS' (1943; Tate collection). He was called up in 1940, trained as a gunner, joined the camouflage section, and was invalided out after two years. He was an official war artist (1943-4) and became ARA (1944). After the war he became professor of painting at the Royal College of Art, London (1948-57), and in 1951 he produced his one book, 'Goya'. In 1953 he was appointed CBE and in 1954 RA. It seemed he was cast in a mould all too familiar in the history of British art -- of brilliant early achievement followed by establishment renown. By the mid-1950s he sensed he was trapped. The renewed possibilities of abstraction, the break-up of his first marriage, and his resignation from the Royal College and the Royal Academy (both 1957) all contributed to remarkable changes in his art and his personal circumstances. 
The painterly daring of Moynihan's early objective abstractions was harnessed to boldness of scale and dramatic colour to produce a handful of outstanding works. He was at first encouraged by the example of contemporary French 'tachisme' and later by Sam Francis and American abstract expressionism, which he came to know well on several extended visits to New York in the 1960s with his second wife. It was during this period that they jointly edited (with Sonia Orwell and John Ashbery) the influential quarterly 'Art and Literature' (1964-8). 
Gradually the gestural freedom and liberality of options of this phase became burdensome; a hard-edged abstraction resulted in which areas of discrete colour are enlivened by bands, chevrons, and diamonds of contrasting hues. A 'sense of place' collides with severe geometric organization. At the same time Moynihan continued drawing from nature in the landscape near his homes in France (near Aix-en-Provence) and in Canada (New Brunswick). 
In 1971 Moynihan resumed painting from life, chastened yet enriched by his second foray into abstraction. There then began what is perhaps his most notable contribution to painting -- a series of still lifes of the quotidian objects on shelf or table top in his studio. They are painted in a light but intense scheme of colour, combining utmost dexterity of handling and subtle, unfussy composition. Such qualities also inform the portraits of the 1970s and 1980s which include penetrating studies of Francis Bacon, Sir William Coldstream, Friedrich von Hayek, and Benedict Nicolson (the last two in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery, as is his 'The Rt Hon Margaret Thatcher, PM', 1984). In 1979 he was re-elected to the Royal Academy, the year after his full-scale retrospective was held there. He had been honoured by a fellowship of University College, London, in 1970. 
Moynihan's personality mixed Spanish hauteur, English conservatism, and a mercurial intellectual curiosity. He was well read and well travelled and in conduct was both confidential and secretive, sybaritic yet disciplined. Attractive, attentive, and amorous, he had several love affairs. Early good looks, Mediterranean in cast, continued to give distinction to a face he recorded in a series of perceptive self-portraits. In later years poor health diminished his activities. In painting, his place is assured by the still lifes of his last decades in which visual values alone effect a brooding and magical transformation of the oppressive material of day-to-day life. 
On 26 November 1931 Moynihan married the painter Elinor Bellingham Smith ['see below']. They had one son. They were divorced in 1960 and in the same year he married the painter Anne Diana Wishart ('b'. 1929), divorced wife of Michael Wishart and daughter of Sir James Hamet Dunn, first baronet, industrialist. They also had one son. Moynihan died in London in his South Kensington studio on 6 November 1990. 
Moynihan's first wife, Elinor Bellingham Smith (1906-1988), painter, was born in December 1906, the daughter of Guy Bellingham Smith, obstetrician and registrar at Guy's Hospital, and a noted collector of drawings and prints. She trained as a ballet dancer, but injury forced her to abandon her career. She then went to the Slade School of Fine Art, where she studied under Henry Tonks and met Rodrigo Moynihan. Following their marriage she found herself at the centre of Moynihan's artistic coterie, latterly at Old Church Street, Chelsea, where she 'dispensed gallons of soup and not a little whisky, and supervised hilarious and crazy get-togethers' ('The Guardian', 12 Nov 1988). A painter whose style was often compared to Berthe Morisot's, she had seven shows at the Leicester Galleries, London, and was one of the prizewinners in the 'Sixty Paintings for '51', exhibition as part of the Festival of Britain. After the collapse of her marriage she moved to Suffolk, where despite hip trouble and ill health she painted a remarkable series of landscapes, conveying in particular the bleakness and beauty of East Anglia in winter. Her London exhibitions included those at the New Art Centre in 1972, the Fitzroy Gallery in 1980, and the New Grafton Gallery in 1987, and a retrospective at the Royal Academy in 1990. She died on 4 November 1988. Examples of her work are in the Tate Gallery, Aberdeen Municipal Gallery, Wolverhampton Municipal Gallery, Preston Municipal Gallery, and elsewhere. 
Richard Shone', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 64228


Bevan, Robert Polhill (1865-1925), painter, was born at 17 Brunswick Square, Hove, Sussex, on 5 August 1865, the fourth of the six children of Richard Alexander Bevan (1834-1918), a banker of Brighton, and Laura Maria Polhill (died 1906). After four terms at Winchester College (1880-81) he was educated at home in Horsgate, near Cuckfield, Sussex, by private tutors, one of whom, A. E. Pearce, a designer for Doulton from 1873 to 1930, taught him drawing. His artistic education continued in London at the Westminster School of Art in 1888, in Paris in 1889-90 at the Academie Julian, and from 1890 to 1891 in the village of Pont-Aven in Brittany, the centre of an artists' colony dominated since 1886 by Paul Gauguin. In 1891 he spent time in Madrid to study the works of Velazquez and Goya on his way to Tangier, where he stayed until 1892 or 1893. He then returned to Pont-Aven where, in 1894, he met Gauguin. During his years in France he also met Renoir and Cezanne. 
Because he enjoyed a degree of financial independence, Bevan was able to discover and nurture his talent slowly and to integrate his art and his life. He loved the country; above all he loved horses. In Tangier he was master of foxhounds for a season. Horses are the subject of his earliest surviving paintings, all done in Brittany. On his return to England in 1894 he went to live at Hawkridge on Exmoor where he could combine painting and hunting. In 1897 he met the Polish painter Stanislawa de Karlowska (1876-1952) and on 9 December they married in Warsaw. Their first child, Edith Halena, was born in December 1898; their second, Robert Alexander, in March 1901. Over the next ten years, in England (from 1900 in London at 14 Adamson Road, Swiss Cottage) and on long summer visits to Poland, Bevan worked largely in isolation, sustained by his early acquaintance with many-faceted French post-impressionism. For the rest of his career as a painter and lithographer he sought nourishment in Van Gogh's rhythmic draughtsmanship and directional brushwork, Gauguin's expressionist use of pure colour, and the schematic simplifications of definition evolved within the Pont-Aven school. 
The Polish village scenes included in Bevan's first one-man exhibition in 1905 -- probably the most radical paintings by a British artist then to be seen in London -- were barely noticed by the critics. It was not until 1908, when he contributed to the first Allied Artists' Association non-jury exhibition, that he was discovered by Spencer Gore and Harold Gilman and introduced into the circle orchestrated by Walter Sickert at 19 Fitzroy Street. Bevan was a founder member of the Camden Town group established in 1911, of the London group set up in 1913, and in 1914 of the Cumberland Market group. The last group was named after Bevan's studio at no. 49 where, in 1914 and 1915, he painted the horse-drawn carts in the great cobbled Camden Town square which served as London's hay market. 
By 1906-7 the brilliant colours and joyous freedom of Bevan's earlier painting had given way to a more traditional, light-toned, impressionist palette and a more considered, broken touch. His unique contributions to the urban vocabulary of Camden Town group painting were cab-horse scenes and, from 1912, horse sales at Tattersalls, Aldridges, the Barbican, and Wards. He also painted his own neighbourhood, but his sunny views of spacious avenues on the borders of St John's Wood have little in common with the mean back streets of Camden Town painted by Sickert, Gore, and Gilman. 
During the summer Bevan painted in the country, most often in the Blackdown hills on the Devon-Somerset borders. In 1912, 1913, and 1915 he was at Applehayes as a guest of the retired rancher and amateur painter H. B. Harrison; from 1916 to 1919 in a cottage rented near by, in the Bolham valley; and in 1920 and 1923-5 on Luppitt Common, further south in Devon. He responded energetically to the west country scenery, with its strong patterning of fields, woods, and clustered cottages, producing a series of paintings expressive of both the angular structure and the poetry of its landscape. 
In 1925 Bevan was diagnosed as having cancer; he died -- still little known outside his own circle -- on 8 July in St Thomas's Home, Lambeth, London, following an operation. He was survived by his wife. 'The Cab Yard, Night' (exh. 1910, purchased 1913 by Brighton Art Gallery) was the only painting to enter a public collection during his lifetime. Despite memorial shows in 1926 and an Arts Council exhibition in 1956, his unique contribution to British art was not widely recognized until 1965, the centenary of his birth. In that year the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford arranged a comprehensive retrospective and R. A. Bevan, the artist's son, published his informative and well-illustrated memoir. 


@@@@@


doc= 64230


(Edith) Wendela Boreel (1895-1985), artist, was born on 18 March 1895 at Pau in France and came to England when her father, Jonkheer Boreel, a Dutch diplomat, was posted as minister to London. Her mother, Edith Margaret ('nee' Ives), was American. In 1911 she went to the Slade School of Fine Art and to Sickert's evening classes at the Westminster Technical Institute. Her sultry beauty appealed to Sickert as much as her evident talent. Believing that her potential was as a painter in oils, he gave her the use of one of his painting studios in Mornington Crescent. Marjorie Lilly recalls (Lilly, 67-8) that in 1917 Boreel's remarkable aptitude for gouache painting inspired Sickert, and through him his wider circle of colleagues and pupils, to experiment with this difficult medium. Boreel was also a skilful etcher. Her subject matter included portraits, landscapes, townscapes, and figures. She exhibited with the Allied Artists' Association, the London Group, the New English Art Club, the Royal Academy, and the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers (of which she became an associate in 1923). After her marriage in 1924 to Leslie George Wylde, a New Zealander, she went to live in Bray, Berkshire. They assembled a fine collection of paintings by Sickert, including his self-portrait, 'The Juvenile Lead' of 1907, now in the Southampton Art Gallery. After her husband's death in 1935 she spent much of her time away from England, mostly in France and, during the Second World War, with her son in the United States of America. She died at home in Castelnau-le-Lez, France, on 13 April 1985. Her etchings can be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum; a polymorphic painting, 'Landscape in Nude', bearing no trace of Sickert's influence, belongs to the Government Art Collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 64232


Bradley, Helen (1900-1979), painter and writer, was born on 20 November 1900 at Lees, near Oldham, Lancashire, the first of the four children of Frederick Layfield and his wife, Jane Anne, 'nee' Shaw. Her father was a supplier of small items of hardware to shops in the Oldham area. In 1911 the family moved from Lees to Frederick Street in Oldham, where Helen Layfield attended Clarksfield School, which she left at the age of thirteen. At the prompting of the headmaster she entered for, and won, the John Platt scholarship at Oldham Art School. Despite the fact that her uncle, Charles Edward Shaw ('fl'. 1879-1895), was a professional artist, her father thought it an unsuitable career for a young woman. He allowed her to study jewellery and embroidery instead but she was forced to postpone her education in 1914 with the outbreak of the war. 
In 1926 Helen Layfield married the flower painter and textile designer Thomas Bradley (1900-1993), who had also studied at Oldham Art School; they had two children, Peter and Elizabeth. It was not until Helen Bradley was sixty-five years old that she first exhibited the nostalgic narrative paintings for which she became well known. Her intention, at first, was to show her grandchildren what life had been like when she was a child. Over the next fourteen years, until her death only a week before she was due to be appointed MBE, she developed and popularized a unique style combining image and text, lucid description, and high fantasy. 
L. S. Lowry's industrial scenes provide the most obvious parallel to Helen Bradley's work and, indeed, Lowry knew of and commented favourably on her paintings. Her style is far more anecdotal, however, and unashamedly sentimental, reflecting the homely, down-to-earth personality which would make her as popular a television chat-show guest as she was an artist. Her paintings and accompanying texts illustrate the period from 1904 to 1908. The main characters are her three maiden aunts, her mother, Helen herself, her younger brother George Bradley (died 1989), Miss Carter (who wore pink), and the object of her affections, Mr Taylor, the bank manager. They are usually pictured on holiday in Blackpool or Southport, taking walks in Salford's Peel Park, or on excursions to the shops or the market. A strain of whimsical, even bizarre, humour runs through the later series of paintings, 'In the Beginning', based on stories recounted by Helen's great-aunt Jane in which God makes some very unexpected personal appearances in the streets of Oldham and Manchester. 
Sometimes dismissed as a 'naive' painter, the distinctive appearance of Helen Bradley's work represents a fusion of specific sources adapted to a very particular purpose. The absence of shading and her use of rich colours, decorative patterning, and simplified forms can be traced back to an interest in Persian and Mughal miniatures. As she said: 'All these people painted a story... The Turks also painted stories, about a kind of super-giant, and they simplified their art. They painted horses which had generals on them very big, and all the men very little, which absolutely tickled me pink. (Stafford, 5)' When she lived in London in the 1940s, she saw an exhibition of paintings by the Dutch artist Hendrick Avercamp (1585-1634), whose skies, similar to those in the paintings of J. M. W. Turner, inspired the atmospheric backdrops to her scenes of the industrial north. She also encountered works by the Chinese artist Gao Qipei (1672-1734), whose lyrical and calligraphic approach to landscape is most evident in her watercolours. 
Helen Bradley wrote and illustrated four books, the first of which, 'And Miss Carter Wore Pink: the Diary of an Edwardian Childhood', was published in 1971. Practically a household name in the 1970s, she appeared twice on Russell Harty's television chat shows and was a frequent guest on the television programmes 'Pebble Mill at One' and 'Jackanory'. Helen Bradley died at her home, 2 Green Villa Park, Wilmslow, Cheshire, on 19 July 1979. She was cremated at Prestbury crematorium on 23 July and a service of thanksgiving was held at the United Reformed church in Wilmslow on the same day. Her estate was valued for probate under the name Nellie Bradley. Her paintings have continued to command high prices at auction and have regularly featured in retrospective exhibitions in the 1980s and 1990s, including Warrington Museum and Art Gallery in 1991 and in Osaka, Japan, in 1993. The Museum and Art Gallery, Salford, owns 'It was a Beautiful Place...', a view in Peel Park, and there are further works in the Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport, and Oldham Art Gallery. Miss Carter Publications, which Helen Bradley and her husband, Tom, were instrumental in setting up, continued in the late twentieth century to promote her work through limited-edition prints and reproductions. 


@@@@@


doc= 64235


Brodzky, Horace Asher (1885-1969), artist and writer, was born on 30 January 1885 in Pakington Street, Kew, a suburb of Melbourne, Australia, the second of the seven children of Maurice Brodzky (1847-1919), journalist and publisher, and Florence Leon (1860-1958), daughter of Szymanski Leon and his wife, Selina Asher. His parents were both Jewish. The name Brodzky means 'of Brody', a small town in western Ukraine, though the nomadic wanderings of the family took them through much of Europe before, and after, reaching Australia. It was a peripatetic existence: in 1904 the Brodzkys sailed for the United States, and four years later they migrated to England. 
Horace Brodzky showed artistic talent from an early age. His art education was haphazard and included two short spells in the drawing class at the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne (1901 and 1904) and a brief period in London at the City and Guilds Art School (1911). He dated the real beginning of his artistic career to his arrival in Britain and the determination to learn all he could from others. He taught himself enough to be selected as one of the artists representing Britain at the Venice Biennale of 1912 -- the first Australian to do so. 
As a visual artist Brodzky worked chiefly in three media: painting, drawing, and printmaking. His early work in oils -- dramatic, strongly coloured, and structured -- reveals a number of influences, chief among them that of David Bomberg and Mark Gertler. Walter Sickert encouraged him, and it is possible that he looked at Frank Brangwyn's work. The one great source of inspiration which he himself always claimed was Piero della Francesca. 
Brodzky's portraits of Jacob Epstein and Jacob Kramer (both 1915, priv. coll.) and Eugene O'Neill ('c'.1920) show that he was a good character draughtsman, but his nude studies are often uninspiring. He would have done well to concentrate his energies on the telling masses of the linocut, for it was in this medium that he excelled. He made forty-four in all, mostly between 1912 and 1919, all of which are bold powerful designs of stark black and white contrasts. As regards other kinds of prints, he made a handful of woodcuts in 1912 and again in 1921, and he produced some sixty-two etchings. Many examples of his prints are in the British Museum, London. 
The biggest event in Brodzky's life was his friendship with the sculptor Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, whom he met in January 1912 and with whom he became close friends. His 1933 biography of Gaudier is by far the most substantial book he wrote. (His two others were short descriptive texts on Jules Pascin and on Gaudier's drawings, both published in 1946.) According to Brodzky, Ezra Pound in his book 'Gaudier-Brzeska: a Memoir' (1916) misunderstood Gaudier's sculptural ideas. Brodzky always stressed Gaudier's emotional and human strengths, whereas Pound, he felt, encouraged a purely intellectual reading of the work which distorted its humanism and led to a form of spiritual decadence. Although Brodzky was no great stylist, his pen portrait is very readable, vigorously anecdotal, and entertaining. For a man who spent his life largely in the shadow of Gaudier, and whose subsequent reputation has similarly suffered, he was remarkably even-handed and generous in his judgements. 
Brodzky was slight in build, but striking. He stooped, as if under the weight of his noble head. (When Gaudier did Brodzky's bust, the head was appropriately larger than life-size.) He had a love of music, and of good food and drink, though he could rarely afford to indulge himself. His was a life of chronic hardship and little success, with too much energy spent as a jobbing artist painting stage decorations or designing book jackets. While in New York for the second time (1915-23) he married, in 1919, Bertha Greenfield (1899-1982), a nanny. The couple had three sons, but the marriage broke down in 1934 after the family had moved to London. From 1948 until 1962 Brodzky was art editor of the 'Antique Dealer and Collector's Guide', a magazine founded by his brother Vivian. He lived long enough to see a modest revival of interest in his work and died on 11 February 1969 in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 64239


Sydney William Carline (1888-1929), born in London on 14 August 1888, from taking up the precarious career of painting. (Later, by contrast, he did everything to foster the precocious talent of his youngest child, Richard Cotton Carline (1896-1980), born on 9 February 1896 at 72 Woodstock Road, Oxford.) Not to be deflected, in 1908 Sydney began his training at the Slade School of Fine Art under Henry Tonks, financing himself through commissions for portrait medallions and illustrations. (In the First World War he received several official commissions for commemorative medals.) At the Slade he met Christopher Nevinson, Edward Wadsworth, Mark Gertler, and Stanley Spencer, among others, and in 1912 he joined Nevinson in Paris. This was to be a crucial awakening as, in the wake of Roger Fry's pioneering exhibitions of 1910 and 1912, he discovered the work of the post-impressionists, fauves, and cubists. Tonks was notorious for implacably opposing modernism, and Sydney reacted against the strict training in draughtsmanship for which the Slade was renowned. He enrolled at the private academy in Paris run by the eccentric symbolist painter Percyval Tudor-Hart, who advocated reliance on memory and an abstract, harmonic system for using colour and tone which had some affinity with the theories of Wassily Kandinsky. On Sydney's urging, Richard Carline abandoned plans to study at the Slade and joined him in Paris at the start of 1913. When Tudor-Hart transferred his school to Hampstead that October, they followed him there, and were joined by their sister, 


@@@@@


doc= 64240


Daintrey, Adrian Maurice (1902-1988), artist and art critic, was born on 23 June 1902 at Foulsa Road, Balham, London, the youngest of the three children of Ernest Daintrey, solicitor, and his wife, Lucy Mary Blagdon. His talent for drawing was the only distinction to emerge from his schooldays at Charterhouse, but this was sufficient for his father to encourage him to enter the Slade School of Fine Art, London, in 1920. Daintrey blossomed with the companionship of other students such as Allan Gwynne-Jones and Rex Whistler, and on the strength of one of his paintings, he was awarded a scholarship. However, he smarted under the stern academic regime imposed on the Slade by Henry Tonks (much preferring Philip Wilson Steer). Seeking encouragement in a less rigid approach to art, he introduced himself to Augustus John, and a thirty-five-year relationship began. He frequently joined the circle gathered round John at La Tour Eiffel restaurant in Percy Street, and he visited John's home, Fryern Court, in Hampshire, where he and his fellow painter George Lambourn sometimes helped John's painting speed and concentration by working with him in the studio. Another lifelong friendship established at this time was with Anthony Powell, whom Daintrey met through his neighbour, the artist Nina Hamnett. 
Daintrey sought to break out of the strictures of the Slade by copying old masters. He often made use of the National Gallery's copying-days for students, in common with Duncan Grant and Vanessa Bell. He found them convivial company and shared an enthusiasm for European art. In pursuit of wider horizons he enrolled at the Academie de la Grande Chaumiere in Paris when he had finished at the Slade in 1924. During his stay in Paris he became friends with the painter Matthew Smith, who shared his enthusiasm for impromptu outings. He continued his copying activities at the Louvre but an unhappy love affair and money difficulties made him decide to return to England, and he took up a post of art-master at Dean Close School in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire. (Daintrey loved women, from prostitutes to high-society ladies, and he devoted time and attention to their pursuit, often at the expense of his painting.) He was rescued from the spiritual discomforts of teaching by an introduction to Dorothy Warren, who ran a gallery which attracted an affluent and aristocratic clientele. On the strength of the exhibition she offered him, he handed in his notice at Dean Close and his career began in earnest. His first show in 1928 was shared with Paul Nash and included a portrait of Augustus John. Among his purchasers from this exhibition was Sir Augustus Daniel, then director of the National Gallery. Through an introduction by John, he met Lord Alington and began his lifelong association with landed and aristocratic patrons from whom he gained many commissions (among the many houses he painted were Chatsworth, Derbyshire; Cliveden, Buckinghamshire; Mereworth Castle, Kent; and Crichel House, Dorset), though he was never entirely free from money worries. 
Daintrey had an unfussed painting style reminiscent of the French painter Albert Marquet. Although his portraits were successful, it is for his paintings and distinctive pen-and-wash drawings of landscape and architecture, especially London streets, that he is remembered. His loose yet rhythmic line gave a vitality and deceptive casualness to his draughtsmanship which ensured that it was never laboured or dull. In 1935 he moved to Oakley Street, Chelsea, London. Donald MacLean had a flat at the same address and they quickly developed a sympathetic companionship as 'last-minute men', frequently playing golf (a passion of Daintrey's) together at one of the unfashionable clubs on the outskirts of London. MacLean's extreme political views puzzled Daintrey but he interpreted these attitudes as wild rather than sinister and they were rarely discussed. Certainly MacLean remained on sufficiently intimate terms to act as best man at Daintrey's brief wartime marriage to Pamela Mary Hardy ('b'. 1919), a Red Cross nurse, on 27 September 1941. (The couple divorced in 1949.) 
With the declaration of war, Daintrey joined the air-raid precautions (ARP) and then in June 1940 enlisted in the army as a driver. As an untidy though debonair man, he coped inadequately with the trials of kit-inspections and parades, but was rescued from the increasing nightmare by a commission into the camouflage organization. After training at Farnham, he was posted to the Middle East. Egypt was a revelation to him visually and brought back the desire to paint and draw. He was then moved to Italy for which he developed a lasting passion, returning often after the war, on occasion for specific commissions (such as a set of drawings of Siena for Aubrey Baring). 
At the beginning of the 1950s Daintrey found himself out of step as far as London galleries were concerned. He resolved the situation by holding exhibitions of paintings and drawings in his studio, and with the support of his pre-war clientele these provided him with a fairly constant source of income. Sir David Eccles, then minister of works, began buying drawings in series for distribution to British embassies and government houses around the world. In the 1960s there was a revival of a more general, public interest, and he mounted eleven one-man exhibitions between 1964 and 1988. During this period Daintrey did not neglect his literary talents, writing for 'Punch' as their art critic from 1953 to 1961, and in 1963 publishing a volume of reminiscences, 'I must Say', with Chatto and Windus. From the late 1960s he returned to teaching at the City and Guilds (of London) Art School, where he took a highly successful Sunday class for part-time students. Having moved on to become librarian there, he retired finally in the late 1970s, but nevertheless continued to keep up a prodigious output of paintings and drawings from his studio in Little Venice, London, and his trips abroad. 
In 1984 Daintrey moved into sheltered accommodation at the old Charterhouse School in London. On 11 October 1988 he died in his sleep at Sutton's Hospital there after a series of small strokes. He was buried at Christ Church, Chelsea, London, on 31 October. His former wife survived him. The British Museum, the Imperial War Museum, St Thomas's Hospital, London, and the Government Art Collection have examples of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 64242


Sausmarez, Lionel Maurice de (1915-1969), painter and writer on art, was born on 20 October 1915 in Sydney, Australia, the second son of Clarence Montgomery de Sausmarez (1880-1918), a marine engineer of an old and distinguished naval family from Guernsey, and Jessie Rose Macdonald, 'nee' Bamford (1878-1963). She was the widow of an explorer, and had become a professional pianist and teacher. The family moved to Grenada in the West Indies when Maurice was one year old, and he was first educated there before attending St Michael's, Highgate, when the family moved to England, and then going to Harvest Road primary school, Willesden. He was awarded a scholarship to Christ's Hospital in 1926. At school he excelled in playing the piano and organ as well as in art. 
From 1932 to 1936 de Sausmarez attended Willesden Art School and from there had to choose whether to go to the Royal College of Music or to study art; in the event he became a royal exhibitioner at the Royal College of Art (1936-9). He won a continuation scholarship in 1939 but relinquished it because of the outbreak of war. That year he married Kate Elizabeth Lyons (died 2000), with whom he had a daughter. During the war he was exempt from military service as he had suffered rheumatic fever as a child, and became a volunteer firefighter in Sheffield when teaching at the Edward VII School. 
De Sausmarez's first one-man show of paintings was at the Paul Alexander Gallery in Kensington in 1949. He was commissioned by the Pilgrim Trust to contribute work to 'Recording Britain', the four illustrated volumes of which were eventually published between 1946 and 1949. He also began showing in mixed exhibitions, which included those of the Royal Academy (from 1945), the New English Art Club (member, 1950), the Royal Society of British Artists (member, 1953), the Leicester Galleries, and the London Group. 
From 1942 de Sausmarez taught part-time at Harrow School, Goldsmiths' College, and the Willesden, City and Guilds, and Camberwell schools of art. He became chairman of the Artists' International Association (1946-8), and helped to establish its permanent home in Lisle Street. In 1947 he became head of the school of drawing and painting at Leeds College of Art, and in 1950 was invited to set up the department of fine art at the University of Leeds, as its first head, a post he held until 1959. Leeds City Art Gallery possesses three of his paintings of this period, including 'Winter' (oil on canvas, 'c'.1955). His work is also in the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Ferens Art Gallery, Hull, Bedford Art Gallery, the Whitworth Art Gallery, the City of Wakefield Art Gallery, and the National Gallery of New Zealand, Wellington. He had pictures in Contemporary Art Society exhibitions at the Tate Gallery in 1951 and 1956. 
In the late 1950s de Sausmarez had a close relationship with Bridget Riley, who became one of the most distinguished abstract painters of her generation, and about whom he later wrote a book ('Bridget Riley', 1970). He was appointed head of fine art at Hornsey School of Art in 1958, and in 1962 became principal of the Byam Shaw School of Drawing and Painting, a post in which he remained until his death. 
As a painter, de Sausmarez's work was characterized by a classical approach to composition, and he was preoccupied with the use of colour to explore light and space. A fine draughtsman, his earlier work included landscapes, still lifes, interiors, and a number of commissioned portraits, including those of Vice-Chancellor Nicholson of the University of Hull and the poet James Kirkup. He later mostly painted landscapes directly from the motif, and he also worked in the studio from colour studies and drawings, on compositions which became essays in fragmented and faceted shapes, analogous to those of Jacques Villon, whose works, after those of Cezanne and Poussin, he particularly admired. In 1964 he was elected associate of the Royal Academy and in that year also published his widely acclaimed and frequently reprinted book 'Basic Design: the Dynamics of Visual Form' (1964). He subsequently wrote books on Poussin ('Poussin's Orpheus and Eurydice', 1969) and on his friend Ben Nicholson (1969), as well as giving broadcast talks and writing many articles on the visual arts and on art education. A deep commitment to art teaching led him to become president of the Society for Education through Art, and he was a member of the Council for Diplomas in Art and Design from 1968, among many other official appointments. 
De Sausmarez travelled before the war in Belgium, the Netherlands, France, and Germany, and later in Italy and east Africa. He had a house in the Vaucluse from 1962 and subsequently worked there every year. In 1963 he was divorced from his first wife and in May that year he married, second, Jane Elisabeth Boswell ('b'. 1938), artist and printmaker, with whom he had two sons. Having bought a house in north London in 1943, he lived there, in Leaside Avenue, for the rest of his life after his years in Yorkshire. He was a handsome, saturnine man, tall and slim, who wore a beard at earlier periods in his life. He died in London of heart trouble on 27 October 1969, and was cremated at Golders Green. A thanksgiving service was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 15 December of that year. His second wife survived him. A memorial group of his pictures was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 64243


Dewhurst, Wynford (1864-1941), artist and writer on art, was born in Manchester on 26 January 1864. He was educated by a private tutor and subsequently at Mintholme College. Although originally destined for the legal profession, he showed an early artistic flair, contributing pen drawings and descriptive articles to journals in Lancashire and Cheshire, and to the 'Pall Mall Budget' and 'St James's Budget'. He spent five years studying art, in Paris, attending the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, where he was a pupil of Jean-Leon Gerome, and the ateliers of Julien and Colarosis, where he worked with William Bouguereau, Ferrier, and Benjamin Constant. Despite this eclectic bunch of teachers, Dewhurst's style was very strongly influenced by the impressionists, especially Monet, whose work he particularly admired and on whom he published an article in the 'Pall Mall Magazine' in 1900. 
In 1896 Dewhurst exhibited at the Champ-de-Mars salons: over the next decade his work could be seen at a number of international exhibitions (including St Louis in 1904 and New Zealand in 1906), and in shows in Paris, London, and Venice. He exhibited in Buenos Aires in 1910, in Rome in 1911, and at the Royal Academy between 1914 and 1926. He also held two one-man shows in London (at the Walker Galleries in 1923 and at the Fine Art Society in 1925), and a series of solo exhibitions in Germany. Views of the countryside around Dieppe and of the Seine valley became his speciality: examples of his work are owned by Manchester City Galleries and by the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff. Dewhurst lectured on modern painting, and published on French landscapists in 'The Artist' and 'The Studio', drawing attention to the influence of such artists as Constable, Turner, and Bonington on their work, and thus claiming English origins for the impressionist movement. Dewhurst was not the first to advance this thesis -- P. G. Hamerton had presented a similar argument some thirteen years earlier -- but his one book-length study, 'Impressionist Painting: its Genesis and Development' (1904), dedicated to Monet, was more innovative. It anticipated developments in modern scholarship, looking at American and other continental painters in addition to the French; it also included a whole chapter on women painters, since 'modernity is the note of Impressionism, and that movement was the very first artistic revolt in which women took part' (Dewhurst, 'Impressionist Painting', 77). 
In other respects, however, Dewhurst was wary of the new, claiming in 1913 that 'Philistine materialism grips the country as a vice' (Dewhurst, 'Wanted', 26), and singling out both the cinema and advertising hoardings for his disapproval. He was an active campaigner for artistic causes, particularly those with a conservationist bent. Lecturing, pamphleteering, and setting up committees, he argued for the formation of a ministry of art: the result was the establishment in 1913 of a council of royal commissioners for art. In 1922, concerned with the deteriorating condition of royal palaces, he started a press campaign in France to save these buildings. J. D. Rockefeller jun. gave $100,000 towards the maintenance of Versailles, and Dewhurst's efforts also led to the introduction of entrance fees to state-owned palaces. 
After a spell in Paris, Dewhurst was living in Leighton Buzzard in 1898, and again in 1907: he sat on Buckinghamshire county council between 1907 and 1910. Subsequently he moved to Tunbridge Wells, and then, in 1917, to Hampstead; he also maintained a house in France, in the department of Creuse. Dewhurst died on 9 July 1941, at 145 Belvedere Road, Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire, and was buried at Repton, in Derbyshire. He was survived by his wife, Antonia, with whom he had had three sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 64245


Malcolm Cyril Drummond (1880-1945). The son of Arthur Hislop Drummond and his wife, Anna Harriup, 'nee' Dodsworth, Drummond was born on 24 May 1880 at the vicarage in Boyne Hill, near Maidenhead, Berkshire, where his father was a canon of the Church of England. Drummond did not immediately choose painting as his career. After leaving the Oratory School, Birmingham, where he converted to Roman Catholicism, he read history at Christ Church, Oxford (1898-1902), then spent a year in Yorkshire training as an estate agent before studying at the Slade School (1903-7). In 1906 he married Zina Lilias Ogilvie, herself an artist and illustrator, with whom he shared a deep love of music. He was Sickert's pupil from 1908 to 1910 at the Westminster School of Art, in 1909 at his private etching class, and in 1910 at Rowlandson House. By 1910 paintings such as 'Brompton Oratory' (exh. 1910; Arts Council of England) demonstrate his sophisticated grasp of form, colour, and design. His most innovative work was done during the Camden Town period, and his finest paintings were exhibited at the three Camden Town Group exhibitions, beginning with 'Paddington Station' exhibited in June 1911, when it was much praised by the critics. He was a founder member of the London Group (1913) and its treasurer in 1921. During the war he worked in the War Office and later taught at the Westminster School of Art (1925-31). Following the death of his wife in 1931, he left London and settled in Moulsford, Berkshire. In 1934 he married Margaret Triquet Browning. He died at his home, Grange Cottage, Moulsford, on 10 April 1945, having been totally blind since 1943. 



@@@@@


doc= 64246


Drury, (Alfred) Paul Dalou (1903-1987), artist and teacher of art, was born on 14 October 1903 at Crescent Lodge, 2 Tressillian Crescent, Brockley, in south-east London, the elder of the two sons of (Edward) Alfred Briscoe Drury RA (1856-1944), sculptor and painter, and Phebe Maud Turner ('c'.1884-1928), painter, daughter of the Revd George Lyon Turner. In 1912 the family moved into Lancaster Lodge, a purpose-built house with a large studio in Lancaster Road, Wimbledon; this was Paul's home until his marriage, and there he not only assisted his father but also shared the studio for his own work. Drury displayed an early talent for drawing and by the age of ten had decided to be an artist. He attended King's College School in Wimbledon (1910-13) and then Bristol grammar school (1913-17), where in 1914 he suffered the tragic loss of an eye in a shooting accident. Undeterred he continued to draw; while at Westminster School, in London (1917-21), he honed his draughtsmanship by making architectural drawings of the abbey cloisters, and his considerable talents in both art and music received particular encouragement. 
Drury's enrolment in 1921 at the University of London's Goldsmiths' College, where he remained until 1926, marked the formal beginning of his artistic career and his lifelong association with the college's school of art (where his father still taught). Among his contemporaries were Graham Sutherland, William Larkins, and Edward Bouverie Hoyton, part of the group of landscape etchers in the pastoral tradition who came to be known as the Goldsmiths' School; in Sutherland particularly he found a kindred spirit and lifelong friend, and their landscape subjects reveal many similarities in ideas, motifs, and stylistic influences. 
Drury was a gifted portraitist, and even his earliest student print is a work of astonishing virtuosity and maturity: 'Old Frost' (1922; needled by Drury but etched by his tutor) demonstrates not only his masterly draughtsmanship, a sharp eye, and command of mass and form but also his sensitivity and humanity. A year later, after several more portrait heads, he etched his first landscape, 'Hayling Island: Barn with Cart' (1923), a straightforward rural scene. In 1924 he won the British Institute scholarship for etching but later sacrificed the prix de Rome in order to assist his father, whose health was failing; he also exhibited for the first time at the Royal Academy, and continued to do so almost annually until 1985. In 1926 he was elected an associate of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers; he was also invited (with Sutherland) by F. L. M. Griggs to take his plates to Griggs's studio to watch him print from them. His technical development was further enhanced by a major exhibition of Samuel Palmer's prints and drawings at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, which displayed working proofs in progressive states accompanied by the artist's detailed notes. Drury's admiration of Palmer's glowing landscape etchings had already led him to experiment with the expressive use of light but it was not until 'September' (1928), Drury's most important work, that the mystical influences were fully assimilated and he transcended the tranquil countryside to enter a visionary world of his own. 
At the same time Drury was working on a series of portrait drawings (1927-8) commissioned by New College, Oxford, and by Trinity College, Cambridge; he also produced 'A Man of Fifty' (1928), a particularly sensitive portrait etching. Following an article, 'The etchings of Graham Sutherland and Paul Drury', in the authoritative journal 'Print Collector's Quarterly' in January 1929 his first one-man show was held at the Twenty-One Gallery, London; he also co-founded the National Society of Painters, Sculptors, Engravers and Potters. Helping his father to complete his statue of Sir Joshua Reynolds, commissioned by the Royal Academy, left little time for his own work during 1929-31. 
In the 1930s Drury was busy teaching at several art schools, including Goldsmiths' College, the Royal Academy, the Central School of Arts and Crafts, Heatherley's, the Sir John Cass, and Kingston School of Art. His work began to be acquired by both public and private collections, and he continued to exhibit in Britain and (through the British Council) abroad. In 1932 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers. He had been exhibiting regularly since 1926 and was to play an increasingly active role in the society, ultimately becoming its president, in 1970-75. His reforms modernized and revitalized the society, broadening the membership, widening the scope of techniques, and establishing a more democratic ethos. 
In 1936 Drury fell in love with and subsequently married one of his students. Though born into a Jewish family Enid Marie Solomon (1910-1996), a talented painter, had already embraced Christianity, and they were married on 21 December 1937 in the parish church of St Marylebone, London. Having settled in London at 114 Haverstock Hill they joined the British Red Cross Society in 1938, when war was looming. Drury used his modelling experience to create plaster casts for limb prostheses at Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, prompting a move to Athelenary Cottage, 8 King's Road, Richmond, Surrey. War casualties provided subject matter for his constant drawing habit, and two small works from this period are in the Imperial War Museum's collection. 
A son, Jolyon Victor Paul, was born on 19 November 1946, when the Drurys were living at Greville Lodge, 9 Greville Road, Richmond. They moved once more, to 13 King's Road (1956), before leaving Richmond in 1958 for Ranger's Cottage, Nutley, near Uckfield, Sussex, where Drury was to live for the remainder of his life. He had left Goldsmiths' in the late 1930s but returned to teaching there after the war. In 1947 he was elected chairman of the exhibitions committee of the Artists' International Association and also of the National Society of Painters, Sculptors, Engravers and Potters. He joined the faculty of engraving at the British School in Rome (1948-74) and during the 1960s and 1970s also taught drawing and composition at summer schools at Urchfont Manor, near Devizes, Wiltshire, and at Attingham Park, Shropshire. 
Drury was an inspirational if demanding teacher driven by his own love of the creative process to exact the highest standards through meticulous craftsmanship and attention to detail, yet he dispensed advice gently and with humour. His extended association with the school of art at Goldsmiths' College culminated in his appointment as principal (1967-9), shortly before he retired. A witty and convivial character never without a cigarette, he was popular with both students and staff, and was renowned for his prowess as raconteur and songwriter at Goldsmiths' social events. He was an erudite man of scintillating intellect who spoke Latin fluently, read musical scores with ease, adored Bach, and played the piano; one of his compositions for harpsichord was broadcast on BBC Radio 3. He also enjoyed watching cricket. He was dark-haired, with intense and sparkling grey eyes; in middle age he wore glasses or a monocle. 
Drury continued to create and exhibit in his retirement, and also joined the governing body of the West Surrey School of Art (1969-74). Two exhibitions of his work were held in his last years -- one, a major retrospective, in 1984 at Goldsmiths' College Gallery, and the other at Garton and Cooke, London, in 1987. He died at his home, Ranger's Cottage, Nutley, on 19 May 1987, after a succession of small strokes, and was buried in Putney cemetery on 26 May. 
Drury created ninety-two prints, most unpublished and unsigned, all but a few being intaglio processes. The portrait etchings, which form the majority, are striking in their humanity; among the best are 'Head of a Negro' (1925), 'Old Man Reading II' (1932), 'Mrs. Douglas James' (1936), and 'Carel Weight' (1938-9). Published works, in editions varying up to 100, were sometimes signed in the plate with the initials 'PD' (or 'P. D.') and date, or 'Paul Drury' and date, but were just as likely to be unsigned; a catalogue raisonne of the prints was published by Robin Garton in 1992. Drury also left a large body of richly-coloured oil paintings (landscapes and portraits), most of which remain in the family but some major works were sold at the Royal Academy's summer exhibitions. With their loose and freely applied brushstrokes his paintings are the antithesis of the controlled precision of his delicately drawn etchings. A substantial archive, including sketchbooks, drawings, and prints in several states, is held by the Art Gallery of Greater Victoria, British Columbia; other works are held in Boston Public Library, Massachusetts; the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; the British Museum, London; the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff; the National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa; and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 
Drury was a leading printmaker and accomplished painter who strove after perfection and devoted himself to instilling his values in the young. A modest man, he shunned the limelight, and his works were therefore little known, even by his pupils. But his importance lies in his contribution to the continuity of traditional printmaking skills, both in his own work and through his influence on generations of art students during a lifetime of teaching. A major biography and critical appreciation was prepared by Jolyon Drury to celebrate his father's centenary in 2003. 


@@@@@


doc= 64247


Fell, Sheila Mary (1931-1979), landscape painter, was born on 20 July 1931, at 69 Queen Street, Aspatria, Cumberland, where she was baptized in the Methodist chapel. Her home was in an area that was associated with agriculture and coalmining, an industry that was then declining. Her father, John (Jack) Fell (died 1976), was a miner who came from a long line of farmers, and her mother, Anne Murray (died 1982), was a seamstress. Both parents were intelligent and musical. Sheila Fell's account of her childhood is remarkable for its clear recall of her early visual memories, artistic nature, and acute sensitivity. She recalled 'the lozenge shapes, dots and daisy patterns' on her mother's aprons, and the 'hard blue ovals, delicate green, pink or lemon smudges scrawled with thin lines, luminous and strange, they ran over the coverlet of my bed' (a description of some tiny spiders in rolled-up leaves which her mother gave her and which fascinated her as she was recovering from a serious childhood illness) (Goldman, 58, 60). 
At five Sheila Fell went to the primary school in Aspatria; later she attended the Nelson Tomlinson Girls' Grammar School in Wigton. She took her music exams with no difficulty -- gifted in anything she attempted. A former teacher, Catherine Campbell-Taylor ('nee' Rooke), recalled that 'Her work was outstanding and she had fantastic concentration' (private information). Torn between studying music, ballet, or art, after a year in the sixth form she went to Carlisle School of Art. From the age of sixteen she felt a need to get away from Aspatria despite the pain of separation from her parents to whom she was close. In 1947 she travelled every day to and from Carlisle School of Art and it was suggested that she should study textile design. Sheila argued, 'I want to be a painter. I don't want to do design or teach or anything but PAINTING' (private information). She began reading about the lives of painters, sculptors, and poets. After taking the first part of her diploma she went to St Martin's School of Art, London (1949-51). 'Bitterly homesick for years, longing for the holidays, living on nothing with little food' were her memories of this period ('Sheila Fell', South Bank Centre, 42). Her mother used to send food parcels. Sheila could not afford paint so she drew a lot at that time. 
Fell's capacity for work was enormous. Teachers included Vivian Pitchforth, John Napper, and Josef Herman, and in her many black and white studies of miners in Aspatria there is a strong connection with the work of Herman, whose drawings and paintings of Ystradgynlais miners are similarly rugged, bold, and economically stated. The work of Cezanne and Van Gogh was also important to her development as an artist. The painter Helen Lessore, who ran the Beaux Arts Gallery in London, saw some of her work in a friend's house and in 1955 offered Sheila the first of five exhibitions. Still under twenty-five years old, she was the youngest person to be given a one-man show there. 
At her first show three of Fell's pictures were bought by L. S. Lowry, who became her lifelong friend and patron. He arranged to meet her after the show and then her parents, hiring a car to take him to their house in Aspatria. Hunter Davies in his interview with her in 1979 described the meetings. Lowry called her Miss Fell until nearly the end of her life and at their home referred to her as 'the child'. 'Without the friendship of L. S. Lowry my life would have been infinitely poorer', she said ('Sheila Fell', South Bank Centre, 43). 
In 1957 Fell was a prize-winner in the biennial John Moores exhibition in Liverpool, and in 1958 she travelled to Greece on a Boise scholarship and had her second exhibition at the Beaux Arts Gallery. She began teaching at the Chelsea School of Art. This year she also met the local GP in Aspatria, Dr Dalzell, and his wife, Kathleen, also a doctor, and both became for her important patrons and friends. Her early work, often on vertical canvases, rather than on the more frequent horizontal of later works, was immensely powerful and appeals to a deep level of consciousness. Her preoccupation with the landscape of north Cumberland forced out of her an intensity of feeling in snow scenes and mysterious dark charcoal drawings which reveal an intense search for expression. 
In 1957 Fell had a baby girl, Anna. Articles began appearing about her work in major journals. In 1961 Kathleen Dalzell arranged an exhibition in Cockermouth. This was followed by one at Middlesbrough Art Gallery, 1962, and Maryport Educational Centre, 1964. In 1965 she began exhibiting at the Royal Academy besides holding exhibitions at Abbot Hall, Kendal, and in Leeds. In 1966 a show of her work was held at Hampstead New Art Gallery, and Melvyn Bragg made his first television film about her. In 1967 and 1969 she showed at the Stone Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne, at the instigation of L. S. Lowry. The latter was delighted when she was elected an associate of the Royal Academy. In 1970 she received an Austin Abbey award. In 1974 she was elected Royal Academician and in 1976 exhibited in 'British painting, 1952-77' at the Royal Academy. Her last exhibition was in 1979 at the New Grafton Gallery, London. 
Despite her great beauty, dynamic personality, and talent for friendship, Fell was prone to lonely bouts of depression, when she smoked and drank to excess. On 15 December 1979 she fell down the stairs at her home, 41 Redcliffe Square, London, and died. She was cremated on 24 December in London. In 1990 the South Bank Centre put on a touring exhibition organized by Caroline Collier showing seventy-six paintings selected from Fell's early work of 1949 and that of the next thirty years. Apart from charcoal sketches of miners, and a few brilliant portraits, for example those of her mother and father, her subject matter was mainly rural north Cumberland and its inhabitants, typified by 'The Potato Pickers' (1960; Arts Council). She greatly admired Van Gogh. Occasionally she used watercolour, but usually worked in oil paint. At St Martin's College Sheila Fell had come into contact with other Beaux Arts artists, Leon Kossoff and Frank Auerbach, whose work she held in high regard. Perhaps her use of very thick paint resulted from the influence of their expressionist work. Although in her later pictures paint was applied more thinly it still retained its vibrancy. 
Sheila Fell was 'one of the most outstanding landscape artists of her generation' with a 'vision that ranges from the dark and fiercely oppressive to the tender and elegiac' ('Sheila Fell', South Bank Centre, 43). The powerfully expressed relationships between sky and land, the intensity of atmosphere, and a 'monumental quality' (private information) are all conveyed in the beautiful quality of her paint. From the sculptural, unsentimental portraits of her mother, to the solid, timeless rolling landscapes of north Cumberland she used colour with supreme skill and the liquid effect of light on cloud, water, undulating ploughed fields, and harvests makes her a rare painter. Examples of her work are in the Tate collection; the Royal Academy, London; the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool; Sheffield Art Gallery; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne; Abbot Hall, Kendal, Cumbria; the Government Art Collection; and the Arts Council collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 64249


Rogers, Claude Maurice (1907-1979), painter and art teacher, was born on 24 January 1907 at 28 Sutherland Avenue, Maida Vale, London, the elder son and eldest of the three children of David De Sola Rogers (died 1920), dental surgeon, and his wife, (Rebecca) Ida, fifth daughter of Bernard Rubinstein of Maida Vale. His father's family were Sephardi Jews (the family name was probably an Anglicized version of Rodriguez), and his mother's family were Ashkenazim from Latvia. Rogers spent his first six years in Buenos Aires, where his chief memories of his father were the trinkets which he made out of dental gold, but thereafter he lived with his mother, who remained in London after the outbreak of war in 1914. He was educated at Colet Court, Kensington (1914-19), Cheltenham Junior School for Boys (1919-20), and St Paul's School, Hammersmith (1920-25), and entered the Slade School of Fine Art, University College, London, in 1925, after the painter Gerald Moira intervened to overcome his family's objections to painting as a profession. By the time he arrived at the Slade he already possessed a distinctive appearance and personality -- round-faced and bespectacled, short in stature, exuberantly fleshed, and legs stoutly astraddle, with a loud stamping gait and a high voice rising to a squeak when excited. With later additions of beard and pipe, these remained his salient features. His enthusiasm, affectionate joviality, and lively sense of humour made him many friends throughout his life, among them such Slade contemporaries as Rodrigo Moynihan and William Coldstream. Among many female friends at the Slade he met Elsie Evelyn Few ['see below'], whom he married in 1937. 
Rogers was one of Henry Tonks's star pupils, and he was awarded Slade scholarships in 1926 and 1927, obtained his certificate for drawing in 1926, won first prize for figure drawing in 1927, and prizes for landscape painting and figure composition in 1928 and 1929. On leaving the Slade he continued to paint, wandering around London making drawings and Sickertian oil sketches on which he worked further in a shed in his mother's garden. In 1930 he completed his first commission, obtained for him by Tonks -- a portrait of Sir Clive Coates and his family. He first exhibited with the London Group in 1930, and in 1931 was elected a member of the London Artists' Association, under whose auspices he held his first solo exhibition in 1933. Although for most of his life he used his own visual experience as subject matter for his paintings, for a short time in the 1930s he experimented with abstract art, showing work in the 'Objective abstraction' exhibition at Zwemmer Gallery, London, in 1934. From 1935 to 1937 he became a part-time art-master at Raynes Park County School for Boys, Wimbledon, where his enthusiastic and eccentric teaching was admired. He continued to paint and in 1936 exhibited at the Carnegie International Exhibition in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
In 1937, with William Coldstream and Victor Pasmore, Rogers founded a school of drawing and painting in premises at 12 Fitzroy Street, London, and later at 314-16 Euston Road. Many friends helped with the inception of the new school, which was unofficially christened the Euston Road School by Clive Bell when reviewing work by its members in the 1938 exhibition '15 Paintings of London'. Its prospectus emphasized that its chief discipline would be the observation of nature, with no preconceived idea of a final result, and the method of exploration would be measurement. Although the threat of war forced the school to close in 1939, its informal approach and serious purpose had an influence disproportionate to its brief existence. Rogers continued to paint through the early part of the war, in 1940 holding a successful solo exhibition at the Leicester Galleries in London, where his painting 'Mrs Richard Chilver' was bought through the Chantrey bequest for the Tate Gallery. He became an air raid warden, was appointed to St Pancras first aid post in 1940, and in March 1942 joined the Royal Engineers, becoming a corporal in 1943. Nobody could have been less suited to the army than Rogers, who was clumsy at all the drill and merely pined to paint. His attempts to become a war artist had resulted in only one commission, 'The Wiring Party' (1942, in records of the Imperial War Museum, London). A nervous breakdown led to his exit from the army in August 1943, and in 1944 his son Crispin was born. He resumed painting with a series of remarkable still lifes -- 'Still Life with Globe', 'Still Life with Cast', and 'Cast over the Mantelpiece' (1945, all priv. coll.) -- and landscapes such as 'Clover Fields Near Toppesfield Church' (1946, priv. coll.) in which he combined rigorous observation and strong design with a new exuberance of colour. To help support his family he took part-time teaching jobs at St Martin's School of Art and at Hammersmith College of Art (1944-5) and became a part-time painting tutor at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts (now Camberwell College of Arts) from 1944 to 1949. He also exhibited at the UNESCO exhibition in Paris in 1946, and in 1947 held a second solo exhibition at the Leicester Galleries. 
In 1949 Rogers became a visiting teacher at the Slade School of Fine Art, becoming a fine art assistant (1950) and lecturer (1955), later being recognized as a teacher of the university in the faculty of arts (1961). He continued to combine teaching with painting, exhibiting regularly in mixed shows and undertaking portrait commissions of notable academics, including 'Professor Haldane' (University College, London), 'Professor Tawney' (London School of Economics), and 'Dame Janet Vaughan' (Somerville College, Oxford). In 1951 he was one of sixty British painters invited to contribute to the Arts Council's Festival of Britain exhibition, winning a purchase prize with his immaculately painted 'Miss Lynn' (City Art Gallery, Southampton). A series of exceptional paintings followed, notably 'The Hornby Train' (1951-3, priv. coll.), 'The Patient Opposite' (1952), and 'The Blowlamp' (1953-4, both Tate collection). His third solo exhibition at the Leicester Galleries in 1954 was followed by a retrospective show which toured to Bristol, Leicester, Manchester, and Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Teaching and art administration gradually took up more of Rogers's time. In 1952 he became president of the London Group, a post which he held for thirteen years, and was co-opted onto the national committee of the International Association of the Plastic Arts created by UNESCO. He was a member of the art panel of the Arts Council (1955-63), the Gulbenkian Foundation's advisory committee on art (1960), and the National Council for Diplomas in Art and Design and chairman of the fine arts panel (1961-8). He was an influential teacher, whose obvious commitment to his subject and readiness to help his students tackle their problems in a practical way made him much in demand as a visiting tutor and examiner in many art schools throughout Britain. In 1959 he was appointed OBE, and was elected fellow of University College, London, in 1965. In 1963 he became professor of fine art at the University of Reading, retiring as professor emeritus in 1972. During these years he experimented with 'painting the unpaintable', fire and flight, in two long series of paintings of burning stubble fields and views from aeroplanes. Following his retirement, a major retrospective exhibition was held at the Whitechapel Art Gallery in London, which toured to Birmingham, Bradford, Reading, Southampton, and Sheffield. Exhibitions at Fischer Fine Art Ltd, London, in 1975 and 1978 followed, at Gainsborough's House, Sudbury, in 1976, and in Harlow, Essex, in the month of his death. Rogers had been ill for some time with complications resulting from his diabetes (diagnosed in 1952) and had spent long spells in hospital in 1976. He died at his home at 36 Southwood Lane, Highgate, London, on 18 February 1979. At his funeral at Golders Green crematorium an address was given by Sir William Coldstream. 
Claude Rogers clearly enjoyed his position as a painter, teacher, and administrator at the heart of the British art establishment. In this he was supported by his wife, Elsie Evelyn Few (1909-1980), also a painter and teacher, whose opinion he always respected. She was born on 4 February 1909 in Kingston, Jamaica, the eldest child of Jethro Few, drapery merchant, and his wife, Evelyn, 'nee' Redwood White (died 1919). She studied at the Slade School of Fine Art, London, and the Bartlett School of Architecture, University College, London (1928-31) and, after some years of living abroad, returned to London and worked part-time at the Euston Road School. She was elected a member of the London Group in 1943, and after the war moved into education as art editor of a series of picture books for Chatto and Windus (1945-8) and then as head of the art department at Gipsy Hill College of Further Education in south London (1949-69). She combined painting with teaching, and for most of her life painted sensitive observations of nature. In 1970 she suffered a stroke and was paralysed on her right side. She trained herself to use her left hand and then embarked on a long series of collage works, helped by her husband. These were exhibited at the Whitechapel Art Gallery, London, in 1973. She died on 17 December 1980 in London. Her work is represented in many public and private collections, and the Tate collection owns her painting 'Bradfields' (1947) and collage 'Wrapping Paper' (1977). 
Rogers and his wife had an enormous circle of friends whose work encompassed a wide range of attitudes and artistic allegiances. Rogers's own painting and teaching remained firmly committed to the figurative tradition which had come to England via France through the Camden Town painters. This did not prevent his appreciation of other influences, and he used his powers of appointment to promote many abstract artists. His importance as a teacher lay chiefly in the example he set as a working painter with exacting standards of his own. He perceived the history of painting as a progression in man's ability to depict and celebrate the visible world. He adhered to what he himself had learned, resisting fashions in art and relying on careful observation and representation of the odd realities of shape and colour and form which he perceived. His unusual painting motifs, particularly the intimate portraits of patients in hospital, are drawn from his own experience and combine a concern for visual truth with a painterly excitement and a warm humanity. His paintings are distinguished by an honest and plain-spoken realism in which delicate responses to observed fact and a sure sense of colour are assembled in solid and satisfying designs. 


@@@@@


doc= 64251


Vorticists (act. 1914-1919), group of artists and writers, were conceived as British art's independent alternative to French cubism, Italian futurism, and German expressionism. The word 'vorticism' was coined by the poet and critic Ezra Pound (1885-1972) early in 1914, and he explained in the vorticists' magazine 'Blast' that: 'the vortex is the point of maximum energy. It represents, in mechanics, the greatest efficiency. We use the words 'greatest efficiency' in the precise sense -- as they would be used in a text book of Mechanics. (E. Pound, 'Vortex Pound', 'Blast', 1, 1914, 153)' The most substantial and active vorticist artists were Edward Alexander Wadsworth (1889-1949), Henri Gaudier-Brzeska (1891-1915), and William Patrick Roberts (1895-1980). Gaudier-Brzeska and Roberts contributed written material to 'Blast' as well as illustrations of their work, and in 1914-15 the sturdy Roberts executed some of the most impressive vorticist drawings and watercolours. Pound also contributed essays to 'Blast', and played a crucial part in supporting and defining the vorticist movement as a critic. But (Percy) Wyndham Lewis (1882-1957) was the dominant vorticist, performing a multi-faceted role as editor, artist, critic, and writer of fiction. 
The arrival of vorticism was announced with great gusto, wit, and belligerence in the first issue of 'Blast' (July 1914), edited by Lewis. Aggressive, cheeky, and wildly uninhibited, its opening manifestos set out to attack a wide range of targets. England was blasted first, 'from politeness', and its climate cursed 'for its sins and infections, dismal symbol, set round our bodies, of effeminate lout within' ('Blast', 1, 1914, 11). Vorticism was self-consciously virile in character, and wanted to wage war on the legacy of the Victorian era. Lewis and his friends aimed at freeing England from the stifling influence of the past, and their magazine shouted: 'Blast years 1837 to 1900' (ibid., 18). They used laughter 'like a bomb', in order to discredit the forces which prevented England, and English art in particular, from realizing its full potential. The vorticist manifesto maintained that 'we are Primitive Mercenaries in the Modern World... a movement towards art and imagination could burst up here, from this lump of compressed life, with more force than anywhere else' (ibid., 30, 32). 
The list of signatures at the end of the movement's rumbustious group manifesto included eleven names. But not all of them were closely involved with vorticism itself. Richard Aldington (1892-1962), who had collaborated with Pound in the poetic imagist movement, was a writer with only a marginal commitment to the vorticist aesthetic. Malcolm Arbuthnot (1874-1967), an innovatory photographer who had organized a post-impressionist exhibition in Liverpool in 1913 and met Wyndham Lewis the following year at the Rebel Art Centre, London, never made vorticist photographs. Alvin Langdon Coburn (1882-1966) performed that role in 1916-17 when he invented vortography with Pound, but his signature did not appear in the 'Blast' manifesto. The other nine names were all directly caught up in the vorticist cause: of these Gaudier-Brzeska, Lewis, Pound, Roberts, and Wadsworth are noticed elsewhere. The remaining members: Lawrence Atkinson, Jessica Dismorr, Cuthbert Hamilton, and Helen Saunders are noticed below. 

Lawrence Atkinson (1873-1931), artist, writer, and musician, was born on 27 January 1873 at 10 Leamington Street, Chorlton upon Medlock, Lancashire, the son of Leonard William Atkinson, a salesman of cotton goods, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Barnes. After attending Bowden College, Chester, he studied singing and music at Berlin and Paris, which he then taught in Liverpool and London, and gave concert performances. Self-taught as an artist, he first exhibited at the Allied Artists' Association in 1913, and moved from fauvism to vorticism when he joined Lewis's Rebel Art Centre in 1914. After appearing in the 'Invited to Show' section of the 'First Exhibition of the Vorticist Group' at the Dore Gallery, London, in 1915, he published a book of poems called 'Aura'. A solo exhibition of his painting and carving was held at the Eldar Gallery, London, in 1921, and that year his sculpture 'L'oiseau' gained the grand prix at the Milan Exhibition. In later life he concentrated on sculpture, executing some remarkably abstract carvings. Atkinson died on 21 September 1931 in the American Hospital, Paris. He had been living at the Villa les Topares, Cannes. Examples of his work are in the Tate collection, including 'The Lake' (pen and watercolour, 'c'.1915-1920). 

Cuthbert Francis Hamilton (1884-1958), artist, was born at 29 Talbot Road, Paddington, London, on 15 February 1884, the son of Thomas Sharp Hamilton, of the Bombay civil service, and his wife, Katharine, 'nee' Sharp. After studying at the Slade School of Fine Art from 1899 to 1903 (about the same time as Wyndham Lewis), he taught art at Clifton College, Bristol (1907-10). Though he played a more minor role in the vorticist movement, he collaborated with Lewis on his decorations for Madame Strindberg's Cabaret Theatre Club in 1912, having previously been involved in the avant-garde cabaret club the Cave of the Golden Calf, decorated with murals and sculpture by Jacob Epstein, Eric Gill, Charles Ginner, Spencer Gore, and Wyndham Lewis. The art critic Roger Fry included Hamilton in the last month of the 'Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition' held in London in 1912, and he joined the Omega Workshops designing furniture and interiors in the summer of 1913. But Hamilton joined Lewis in storming out of Omega later that year, and contributed to the 'Post-Impressionist and Futurist Exhibition' in the autumn. Then, having been included in the 'Cubist Room' section of a 'Camden Town Group and Others' exhibition at Brighton, Hamilton joined the Rebel Art Centre and contributed an explosive, mechanistic illustration called 'Group' to the first issue of 'Blast'. He did not contribute to the vorticist exhibition in 1915, but rejoined the vorticists in 1920 when they exhibited together for the last time in Group X at the Mansard Gallery, London. One of Hamilton's few surviving works, his vigorous 'Reconstruction', is in the Tate collection. In later years he turned to pottery and sculpture, founding the Yeoman Potteries. Hamilton died on 5 January 1958 at his home, Shelleys, High Street, Cookham, Berkshire. 
The two women associated with the vorticist movement are more substantial artists than Hamilton. Jessica Stewart Dismorr (1885-1939) was born on 2 March 1885 at Hillcrest Lodge, West Hill, Gravesend, Kent, the daughter of John Stewart Dismorr, a colonial merchant, and his wife, Mary Ann Rebecca, 'nee' Clowes. She attended the Slade School of Fine Art in 1902-3 before studying painting under Jean Metzinger, J. D. Fergusson, A. Dunoyer de Segonzac, and J.-E. Blanche at the Atelier La Palette, Paris, from 1910 to 1913. There she became a fauviste, and contributed to several issues of 'Rhythm' magazine. Dismorr exhibited with S. J. Peploe and Fergusson at the Stafford Gallery, London, in 1912, and at the Salon d'Automne the following year. At about this time she met Wyndham Lewis and by 1914 had become an ardent member of the Rebel Art Centre. By the time she signed the vorticist manifesto Dismorr was working in a strongly abstract style. Her work was illustrated in the second issue of 'Blast' (1915), where her writings were also published. The girder-like forms of her 'Abstract Composition' (1914-15; Tate collection) are suggestive of '
the new machinery that wields the chain of muscles fitted beneath 

my close coat of skin. 
(Dismorr, 'Monologue', 'Blast', 2, 1915)' She showed in the vorticist exhibition in London in 1915, after which she left to carry out war work in France. Her work was included at the vorticist exhibition in New York in 1917, and her first solo exhibition was held at the Mayor Gallery, London, in 1925; the following year she was elected to the London Group and the Seven & Five Society. Her involvement with the avant-garde continued throughout her life: during the 1930s she exhibited with the Association Abstraction-Creation, and in 1937 contributed to 'Axis' magazine. At the end of her life Dismorr was living at 17 Willoughby Road, London. She committed suicide by hanging herself at 21 St Edmund's Terrace, St Marylebone, London, on 29 August 1939. 
Dismorr's friend Helen Beatrice Saunders (1885-1963) was born on 4 April 1885 at 10 Addison Road, Bedford Park, Chiswick, London, the daughter of Alfred Robert Henry Saunders, a solicitor, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Daley. After being educated at home, Saunders studied at the Central School of Arts and Crafts and at the Slade School of Fine Art (1906-7), and exhibited with the Friday Club in 1912. By then her interest in post-impressionism was evident, and she showed her work at the Allied Artists' Association in 1912 and 1913. One of the first in Britain to work in a non-figurative style, Saunders reached her most extreme stage as a painter in 1914 when she exhibited at the Whitechapel Art Gallery's 'Twentieth Century Art' exhibition and joined the Rebel Art Centre. Like Dismorr, she contributed a poem as well as an illustration to the second issue of 'Blast', and was included in the vorticist exhibitions in London and New York. But she came closest to Lewis when together they painted murals in the Vorticist Room at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel, Percy Street, London. At the end of her life Saunders was living at 39 Gray's Inn Road, Holborn, London. Following her accidental death by gas poisoning on new year's day, 1963, three of her works -- 'Monochrome Abstract Composition' ('c'.1915), 'Abstract Composition in Blue and Yellow' ('c'.1915), and 'Abstract Multicoloured' ('c'.1915) -- were that year presented to the Tate Gallery in memory of her sister by Ethel M. Saunders. 
The list of signatures in 'Blast' excluded several artists whose work had much in common with the vorticists. Frederick Etchells (1886-1973) certainly executed paintings and drawings which can confidently be described as vorticist. Jacob Epstein's (1880-1959) 'Rock Drill' (1913-16; Tate collection) put many vorticist ideas into compelling sculptural form. But he was almost as determined to distance himself from vorticism as David Bomberg (1890-1957), who adamantly rejected Lewis's invitation to contribute to 'Blast'. Bomberg also refused advances from the Italian writer and theorist Filippo Marinetti, who only succeeded in attracting the loyalty of one English artist: Christopher Nevinson (1889-1946). 
Most of the artists associated with the vorticist movement had previously been impressed by Marinetti and the Italian futurists, who first exhibited in London at the Sackville Gallery in March 1912. The vorticists sympathized with Marinetti's call for an art directly expressive of the new machine age, and they also admired the Italian leader's dynamic ebullience as a performer of his own poetry. But by 1914 they had begun to resent Marinetti's attempts to enlist them as members of the futurist movement. Pound, who had become dissatisfied with his earlier commitment to the imagist movement in poetry, was eager to involve himself with a new group. So was Wyndham Lewis, who explained his conception of the vortex by telling a friend to think 'at once of a whirlpool... At the heart of the whirlpool is a great silent place where all the energy is concentrated. And there, at the point of concentration, is the Vorticist' (D. Goldring, 'South Lodge', 1943, 65). 
The stillness of the 'great silent place' was far removed from Italian futurism, which preferred to rhapsodize about the machine age and convey its excitement through blurred, multiple images stressing the exhilaration of movement. Vorticisim valued energy, too, and Ezra Pound defined the vortex as 'a radiant node or cluster... from which, and through which, and into which, ideas are constantly rushing' (E. Pound, 'Vorticism', 'Fortnightly Review', 1 Sept 1914). But the vorticists preferred to define single forms rather than embrace flux, vagueness, and rapid motion. A vorticist picture is often explosive in its implications, using diagonal forms redolent of pistons and girders which reach out towards the edges of the composition. Alongside this restless energy, though, there is a counter-emphasis on firm, clear-cut forms, often enclosed by strongly defined contours. The vorticists were fascinated by the modern world, and wanted to incorporate its mechanistic structures in their work. But they tempered this enthusiasm with a cool, hard awareness of the machine age's impersonal harshness. They knew how dehumanized the modern urban world could be, and they saw no reason to echo the ecstatic romanticism of Marinetti's attitude towards twentieth-century dynamism. 
The vorticists wanted to place this 'modern world' at the very centre of their work. They filled their pictures with what 'Blast' described as the 'forms of machinery, Factories, new and vaster buildings, bridges and works'. But they had no desire to depict the world in too representational a style. Lewis criticized the futurists for 'their careful choice of motor omnibuses, cars, aeroplanes, etc.' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 1, 1914, 144) and declared that 'the Automobilist pictures were too 'picturesque', melodramatic and spectacular, besides being undigested and naturalistic to a fault' (ibid.). Cubism, which had also influenced many of the vorticists at an early stage in their careers, was likewise criticized. Lewis announced that Picasso's cubist sculpture 'no longer so much interprets, as definitely makes, nature (and 'dead' nature at that)' (ibid., 140). 
The vorticists believed that their intentions could best be conveyed by a more abstract language. Not because they regarded total abstraction as a desirable end in itself: the vorticists thought that the machine age demanded a severely simplified, hard, bare approach. 'Blast' proclaimed that machinery 'sweeps away the doctrines of a narrow and pedantic Realism at one stroke' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 1, 1914, 39), enabling the vorticists to develop a language which contained many layers of reference. A vorticist picture can therefore be read in several different but equally legitimate ways. It might be seen as a map, a vision, an aerial view of the earth, a diagram, a blueprint for a machine, or a distillation of an urban scene with buildings and robot-like figures. All these possibilities were contained in a single image, and Lewis had no desire to restrict them in any way. He wanted vorticism to be richly allusive even as it refined and simplified its formal vocabulary. In 1915 he explained that the vorticist work of art should be 'a hallucination or dream (which all the highest art has always been) with a mathematic of its own' (W. Lewis, 'Note', 'The First Exhibition of the Vorticist Group', 1915, exhibition catalogue, Dore Galleries, London). 
Despite the rivalries within the group, vorticism stood a good chance of establishing itself as a major force. So indeed it did, but only for a short time. A few weeks after 'Blast' was published, the First World War erupted. The militancy of vorticism was rapidly overtaken by the outright militarism of a call-to-arms. So the vorticists had little more than a year to develop their ideas. They enjoyed boisterous evenings at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel where Vorticist Room murals by Lewis and Saunders made an appropriately clangorous impact. The meetings were commemorated, nearly half a century later, in Roberts's monumental painting 'The Vorticists at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel, Spring 1915' (Tate collection). That year, which saw the first vorticist exhibition and the first issue of 'Blast', Lewis claimed in the magazine that 'we have subscribers in the Khyber Pass, and subscribers in Santa Fe' (W. Lewis, 'Blast', 2, 1915, 7), but Gaudier-Brzeska had already been killed fighting at the front. He was widely mourned by other members of the movement, and by 1916 most of the vorticists were fighting in France. 
Left at home, Pound persuaded the major American collector John Quinn to purchase vorticist work on a grand scale, and stage an 'Exhibition of the Vorticists' at the Penguin Club, New York, in 1917. But when the vorticists returned from the war, they soon discovered that the world had changed irrevocably. They could not recapture the pre-war context of heady experimentation, in a cultural climate dominated by the need for a 'return to order'. By 1920, despite Lewis's stillborn attempt to launch a third issue of 'Blast', the movement had ceased to exist. 


@@@@@


doc= 64252


Henderson, Nigel Graeme (1917-1985), artist and photographer, was born on 1 April 1917 in St John's Wood, London, the second of three children, born in successive years, of Captain Kenneth Henderson, contracting engineer, son of Lord Farringdon, and Winifred (Wyn) Ellen Lester, a former music hall artiste, the illegitimate child of an illegitimate mother. Married in 1915, his parents were divorced in 1924. His mother, an unconventional and creative woman, was to remain an important influence on her son. Henderson attended Stowe School, which he hated, and left after only two years in 1933. His schools, and unhappy holidays at his paternal grandparents' house in Wimbledon, induced a lifelong distaste for upper-class conventionality, and a romantic identification with outsiders. Happier times were spent in his mother's artistic circle in Bloomsbury. Informally adopted by Adrian Stephen, a well-known psychoanalyst, brother of Virginia Woolf, and his wife, Karin Stephen, he stayed frequently with them in Gordon Square and at Landermere Quay in Essex. 
In his late teens Henderson pursued an erratic and peripatetic self-education. He joined the Group Theatre, meeting Rupert Doone, Robert Medley, Louis MacNeice, W. H. Auden, Christopher Isherwood, and others. He spent time in the company of scientists, including J. D. Bernal and Solly Zuckermann, and in 1935 he enrolled at Chelsea Polytechnic to study biology. Restless and indecisive, in 1936 he became a junior picture restorer at the National Gallery. He experimented with collage, a sympathetic medium for an obsessive collector of ephemera and discarded objects, and recognized in the collages of John Piper and Julian Trevelyan, and the poetic surrealism of Humphrey Jennings, a sympathetic challenge to aesthetic orthodoxy. His mother's management of the Guggenheim Jeune gallery (1938-40) brought contacts with European artists, including Yves Tanguy, Laurence Vail, and Marcel Duchamp. 
In 1939 Henderson joined Coastal Command as a pilot. Alternately exhilarated and terrified by flying, in 1942, after many sorties, he suffered a nervous breakdown and was moved to lighter duties. In 1943 he married (Karin) Judith Stephen (died 1972), an anthropologist, daughter of Adrian and Karin, and moved with her to Bethnal Green, where they lived and worked (Judith as a social observer and teacher) until 1955, when they moved to Landermere Quay. They had four children. In 1945 Henderson enrolled at the Slade School of Fine Art on a former serviceman's grant. His art studies were haphazard and inconclusive, but it was there he met Eduardo Paolozzi, a formidable friend and collaborator. They shared enthusiasms for science, unregarded ephemera, children's drawings, popular magazines, folk art, and cinema. When Paolozzi left for Paris in 1947, the artist Richard Hamilton became a close companion. The ground was prepared for future collaborations. 
After leaving the Slade in 1949, Henderson at last began to find himself as an artist. He started taking the documentary photographs of street life in Bethnal Green that remain among his most enduring work. With Paolozzi he experimented with photograms, placing degraded and unconventional materials (for example, rubbish, coffee grounds, and gouache) directly on to the negative. These he recombined in photo-collages, with what he called 'stressed' photographs, to achieve chance expressive effects. From 1951 to 1954 he taught creative photography at the Central School of Arts and Crafts, undertaking at the same time commercial photography for 'Vogue', 'Architectural Review', and 'Flair'. Through the 1950s he was an initiating participant in many influential Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA) events. In 1951 he showed photograms at the ICA Festival of Britain exhibition 'Growth and form'; in 1953 he organized, with Paolozzi and the architects Alison and Peter Smithson, the exhibition 'Parallel of life and art', for which he made several 'stressed' photoworks; his contribution, with Paolozzi and the Smithsons, to the influential 'This is tomorrow' exhibition in August 1956 was seen as a seminal contribution to the discussion of new brutalism; and he was a founder member, in 1952, of the Independent Group at the ICA, formed to promote interdisciplinary discussion. The relation of art to everyday life, and the environmental integration of architecture, design, technology, and art, were recurring themes in his work. In spite of his own aversion to formal education Henderson became a much admired teacher, at Colchester School of Art from 1957 to 1960, and at Norwich School of Art from 1965 to 1968, and from 1972 (the year of Judith's death) until 1982. His retirement in 1982 was marked by 'Heads eye Wyn', an exhibition of Dada-influenced photomontage images of his own head, an obsessive theme in his later work. In 1983 Henderson remarried; his new wife was Janet Allan ('nee' Murray), a potter and noted amateur gardener. He died on 15 May 1985, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 64253


Houthuesen, Albert (1903-1979), painter, was born on 3 October 1903 in Albert Cuypstraat, Amsterdam, the eldest of the four children of Jean Charles Pierre Houthuesen (1878-1911), a pianist and artist, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Wedemeyer. Following the unexpected death of their father, in 1912 the Houthuesen children moved with their mother to London, settling at Constantine Road, Hampstead. Desperately poor, and unable to speak English, Houthuesen left school at the age of fourteen to work in a variety of menial jobs. He attended evening classes in art at St Martin's School of Art, and his spare time was spent drawing in the British Museum and the National Gallery. In 1922, aged nineteen, he became a British citizen, and in 1923 his paintings were recommended to William Rothenstein who offered him a scholarship to the Royal College of Art, of which he was the director. This began a lifelong friendship with the Rothenstein family, particularly with Sir John Rothenstein, who became Houthuesen's foremost supporter. 
While studying at the Royal College from 1923 until 1927, Houthuesen met the painter Catherine Dean (died 1983). They were married in 1931 and settled at 20 Abbey Gardens, moving in 1938 to a studio flat at 37B Greville Road, St John's Wood. The couple had no children. Unable to make a living through selling his own work, Houthuesen gave evening classes in painting. For three decades until 1961 he endured poverty and neglect, making a very occasional sale and receiving a few portrait commissions. His subjects included scenes of London life and sketches made on Hampstead Heath. He first visited Trelogan in north Wales in 1932, staying for a month in a cottage to which he and Catherine returned annually until 1940. Here he was greatly inspired by the people and landscape: his portraits and drawings of Welsh miners and farmers are among his finest work. 
It was, however, as a painter of the sea that Houthuesen was later recognized, and his first interpretations of violent waves lashing against jagged rocks date from the 1930s, when he also visited the coasts of Sussex and Devon. Rejected by the army as medically unfit, he worked as a tracer in the technical drawing office of the London and North Eastern Railway Company in Doncaster, Yorkshire. During his absence from London over forty oil paintings stored in a neighbour's cellar were destroyed beyond repair by damp. The effect of this calamity, combined with the tedium of tracing engine designs for the railway company, led to a nervous breakdown. Houthuesen returned to London at the end of the war and met a family of Russian clowns who inspired him to work on a series of studies of clowns, a theme he continued to explore until his death. In 1952 he and Catherine settled permanently at 5 Love Walk, Camberwell, never leaving London again. His expressionist, sometimes violent, colourful paintings of the imagined sea dominated his prodigious artistic output, which remained unseen outside a small circle until 1961 when he had his first one-man exhibition, at the Reid Gallery, Cork Street, London. Houthuesen was fifty-nine years old, and although his work was virtually unknown to private collectors of art, three of his paintings, including 'Crown of Thorns' (1939-40), were by then in the collection of the Tate Gallery, London, two ('Grain Barrels' and 'The Collier') in the Sheffield City Art Galleries collection, and others in museums in Nottingham, Leeds, and Carlisle. During the 1960s a series of exhibitions in London brought him both critical acclaim and income through sales. His second exhibition at the Reid Gallery was in 1963; the Mercury Gallery then mounted five exhibitions between 1967 and 1977. Despite the recognition he received during his final decade, Houthuesen continued to be dogged by ill health, which at times made it impossible for him to paint. He died at his home in Camberwell on 20 October 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 64256


Inlander, Heinz Kurt (1925-1983), painter, was born on 14 January 1925 in Vienna, Austria, the son of Rudolf Inlander ('b'. 1893) and his wife, Elly. The family, who were Jewish, lived in Trieste from 1935 to 1938, when they moved to London. 
Inlander's schooling took place in Vienna, Trieste, and London (1939-41). He became a British subject on 13 December 1947 when he was single and living with his parents at 33 Greencroft Gardens, London. He married twice, the second time to Antonia Josephine O'Brien (died 1982), a painter. He had no children. He studied at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts (1945-9) and the Slade School of Fine Art (1949-52). Here he won first prize in the summer competition with 'The Expulsion from Eden (Paradise Lost Book XII)' (oil, 1951), the first of several prizes and awards. Most importantly, in 1952 he won the prix de Rome, a scholarship to work at the British School in Rome, where he remained until 1956. He was appointed art adviser to the school in 1955-6 and again in 1971. Inlander spoke Italian and loved Italy sufficiently to buy a house in Anticoli Corrado, in the hills to the east of Rome, which he owned for thirty years and where he and his wife worked for several months every year. It is said that, because of his beard and, perhaps, his penchant for dressing up as a member of the Mafia, he was known locally as Il diabolo (private information). 
Though the countryside around Anticoli Corrado became his preferred subject, Inlander worked and exhibited principally in London. Here he shared a studio complex in the 1960s with the sculptor Bryan Kneale and others 'in a rather decrepit workshop belonging to a builders merchant in the Fulham Road' ('Henry Inlander', 1976). Between 1957 and 1979 he taught painting at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts. Students respected Inlander for having moved beyond the tired neo-romanticism prevalent when he began to teach and found him a kindly tutor who helped them to find their own direction. He had many friends, and was admired as 'a passionate painter' of great integrity (private information). His temperament was volatile, shifting rapidly from gloom and self-doubt to high spirits, and he seems always to have questioned his own identity. 
Ambitious and focused, Inlander exhibited with the London Group as a non-member between 1947 and 1953. His first solo exhibition was at the Galleria La Tartaruga, Rome, in 1954 and the second at London's Leicester Galleries a year later. Subsequently he showed regularly with Roland, Browse, and Delbanco and the New Art Centre in London and at the Peridot Gallery, New York (1961-3). His paintings were selected for exhibitions organized by the Tate Gallery, the Contemporary Arts Society, and the Arts Council and are in numerous private and public collections in Britain and abroad. In the mid-1970s he held two exhibitions in Vienna. He spent 1960-61 in the United States on a Harkness Commonwealth scholarship and was visiting artist at the University of Calgary in Canada in 1969, though he remained untouched by American abstract expressionism. While he was described by colleagues as a romantic artist, his work, rooted in post-impressionism, was modern but not avant-garde. As a result it has been neglected by critics and historians since his death. His approach is exemplified by 'Moving Surface' (oil on canvas, 1961; Tate collection). He wrote that it represented 'the study of movement in water' where the forms were based on accumulated leaves and branches which constantly shifted in the slow-moving river ('Tate Gallery: Report', 1962). Even when his work looked abstract, it was grounded in the visible world, though Inlander seldom painted direct from a subject, preferring to work from drawings and memory. Predominantly a landscape painter, he also painted interiors, portraits, many self-portraits, and a variety of animals, for which he evidently had great sympathy. Inlander died at King's College Hospital, London, on 15 December 1983, as the result of a heart attack suffered during a party at Camberwell School of Art, and was buried in a Jewish cemetery in north-west London. 


@@@@@


doc= 64261


Badmin, Stanley Roy (1906-1989), illustrator, painter, and printmaker, was born at 8A Niederwald Road, Sydenham, London, on 18 April 1906, the second child of Charles James Badmin, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Margaret (Madge) Raine, both of whom had come from Somerset. Important in his development into the essential illustrator of the English countryside were family holidays to Holcombe, in the Mendips, staying with his paternal grandfather, the village carpenter; these trips continued long after his grandfather's death, into adulthood and married life. Badmin was educated at Sydenham School, and continued to receive general private tuition on becoming an art student, for in 1922 he won a scholarship to Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts, and studied under Cosmo Clarke and Thomas Derrick. Then, in 1924, he won a studentship to the Royal College of Art, London (RCA), switching in his second year from painting to design; following the change he encountered such important teachers as Professor Tristram and Randolph Schwabe, the latter remaining a close friend. A precocious and conscientious student with a specialism in book illustration, he received his diploma in 1927. 
In the following year Badmin prepared for an art teacher's diploma, taking a range of courses at the RCA and at Camberwell. Thus he could supplement his income early in his career by teaching at Richmond School of Art (1934) and St John's Wood School of Art (1936), experiences that sealed his friendship with colleague P. F. Millard. Nevertheless he quickly established himself, first as an illustrator and then as an etcher. He made his initial periodical contributions to 'The Graphic' (1927) and 'The Tatler' (1928), and had his inaugural solo show at the Twenty-One Gallery, London, in 1930. He married Margaret Georgina (Peggy) Colborne in the same year. Badmin had been introduced to the gallery in 1928 by Robert Sargent Austin, his etching tutor at the RCA. It published many of his masterly etchings during the few years until 1931, when the market in the medium slumped. He then transferred to the Fine Art Society and concentrated increasingly on watercolour while continuing to etch and maintaining an emphasis on rich, evocative topography. Election to the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers (associate, 1931; member, 1935) was soon followed -- and superseded -- by election to the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours (associate, 1932; member, 1939). A wider reputation was ensured in 1935, when Badmin received a major commission from 'Fortune', an American magazine, which asked him to depict various towns in the United States; the results were exhibited at MacDonald's Gallery, New York (1936). A growing international perspective also led to greater political awareness, the events of the Spanish Civil War encouraging him to join James Holland and others of the liberal left in the Artists' International Association. Maintaining his ideals beyond the Second World War, he became an active member of the Sydenham and Forest Hill Peace Group. 
An important development in Badmin's illustrative style was marked by 'Highways and Byways of Essex' (1938). Begun by F. L. M. Griggs, an artist revered for his prints and illustrations, it was completed by Badmin following Griggs's death. His meticulous use of pen and ink capitalized on his earlier etchings and offered lively anecdote in contrast to Griggs's sombre majesty. A unique eye for detail soon enabled him to make a mark as an important educational illustrator; his first Puffin picture book, 'Village and Town' (1939), lithographed in colour, was followed by 'Trees in Britain' (1942), through which Badmin's name became a byword for the accurate depiction of trees. He made a similarly distinctive contribution to a project aimed at adults, 'Recording Britain' (1940), in which artists were paid by the Pilgrim Trust to record threatened buildings and landscapes; fifteen of his drawings were included in the resulting three-volume publication, 'Recording Britain' (1946-7). The Second World War emphasized the urgency of such an occupation, while also employing Badmin in other ways. He contributed drawings to exhibitions organized by the Ministry of Information and, following his call-up in 1942, worked on operational model-making at RAF Medmenham, near Henley-on-Thames. In its vision of a peaceful, profitable Britain, Badmin's art seemed to offer a perfect antidote to war and an ideal for the post-war generation. It received unparalleled popular exposure from 1948, when he joined the agency of Saxon Artists and took on frequent commercial commissions. He designed series of advertisements for Fisons and Bowater Paper, and produced posters for transport and travel companies. He was also patronized by Royle, one of the largest manufacturers of greetings cards and calendars. Equally in demand as an illustrator of books and periodicals, he published 'Trees for Town and Country' (1947) and 'British Countryside in Colour' (1951), and contributed to 'Radio Times'. His constant professionalism and stamina became particularly useful from 24 March 1950, when, his first marriage having ended in divorce, he married Rosaline Elizabeth Wates Flew, 'nee' Downey, and took on the upbringing of her daughter, Elizabeth, along with that of his own two children, Patrick and Joanna; a fourth child, Galea, was born in 1951. 
Only from the mid-1950s was Badmin able to paint two or three major pieces for each Royal Watercolour Society exhibition and hold a show at the Leicester Galleries (1955). He also found time to embark on projects for Shell, perhaps the most important commercial patron of British art; his contribution to Geoffrey Grigson's 'Shell Guide to Trees and Shrubs' (1958) and four volumes of 'Shell Guides' to the counties greatly influenced and enhanced the house style. 
In 1959 Badmin and his family moved to Bignor, near Pulborough, Sussex, from where he continued to paint and exhibit. He held a further show, at Worthing Art Gallery in 1967. In 1984 the Royal Watercolour Society honoured his achievement by devoting a part of its autumn exhibition to his work. This was followed in 1985 by a major retrospective at Chris Beetles Gallery and an accompanying monograph. The overwhelming success of that show proved the artist's enduring appeal and value as an interpreter and chronicler of the native landscape. He died in his beloved Sussex, at St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, on 28 April 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 64262


Berlin, Sven Paul (1911-1999), artist and writer, was born on 14 September 1911 at 6 South Terrace, Fairlawn Park, Sydenham, in south-east London, the second of the three children of Karl Gustave Hermann Berlin (1885-1972), a Swedish paper merchant (and nephew of the explorer Sven Hedin) who brought his business to London in the early 1900s, and his wife, Mary Louisa (1882-1955), daughter of Joseph Hughes, the central figure of a literary coterie in late nineteenth-century London. In a family falling on hard times, education was piecemeal, but for young Sven it included a boarding-school at Kenley, Surrey, and the Crystal Palace School of Practical Engineering. 
Berlin had no formal art education; he enrolled at the Beckenham school of art, but stayed for only six weeks. He then met Phyllis Groom (1910-1960), a trained ballet dancer in need of a partner to form an adagio dance team to tour the British music-hall circuit. She and the Zelia Raye School of Dancing taught Berlin the necessary skills and techniques required for this part ballet, part burlesque dance, and together as Sven and Helga they appeared on stage throughout the 1930s with such stars as the Crazy Gang, George Formby, and Max Miller. Berlin's first published work, 'The adagio dancer', appeared in the 'Dancing Times' in 1929. 
On 4 December 1937 Sven and Helga were married, in Bromley, Kent, and that same year they visited the Cornish artists' colony at St Ives. They gave up the stage so that he could become an artist, his lifelong ambition. He worked as a labourer to make ends meet and in his spare time endeavoured to make up for lapses in his education by studying philosophy with Dr Frank Turk of Exeter University and art with Arthur C. Hambley, then in charge of the Redruth and Camborne schools of art. He met the resident artists of St Ives and soon became one of their number. His son Paul was born in 1940, his daughter Greta (also an artist) in 1942. 
Berlin lost his job in a tin mine when he registered as a conscientious objector on the outbreak of war, but he later joined the Royal Artillery, serving as a forward observer at the time of the Normandy landings in 1944. A series of letters sent back from the battle zones of northern France to the art critic Adrian Stokes was later reformulated into 'I am Lazarus' (1961), a much praised account of the front-line soldier's life under fire. Meanwhile, still in the services, he wrote the first biography of Alfred Wallis (1855-1942), the St Ives rag-and-bone man whose naive paintings of ships and harbours so strongly influenced the more sophisticated artists of the colony. It was published in 1949. When he returned to Cornwall after the war, he found his marriage in disarray and moved to a studio which he called 'The Tower'. He became one of the most active and colourful figures of the St Ives art community, painting, writing prolifically, and carving the severe granite of the region. His work appeared in nationwide exhibitions, including that celebrating the Festival of Britain in 1950, in which he was awarded second prize for sculpture. 
But St Ives was undergoing an artistic sea change as a younger generation of artists supplanted the old school. Berlin became embroiled in a controversy which divided traditional and modern artists into rival factions. He formed the Crypt Group with like-minded fellow artists John Wells, Bryan Wynter, Peter Lanyon, and others. He also helped to create the Penwith Society in 1949, but soon resigned when he clashed with the major figures of St Ives, Ben Nicholson and Barbara Hepworth, who wanted a much more modernist exhibition policy than that which the liberal Berlin had in mind. In 1953 he and Helga were divorced, and on 21 May he married the artist Joy Fisher, 'nee' Barlow ('b'. 1925), who adopted the name Juanita. (She was Ishtar in his books, and was later known as Juanita Casey, the novelist.) With Juanita and their son Jasper, born in 1953, Berlin left Cornwall in a horse-drawn wagon and travelled to the New Forest, where he lived for nearly ten years among the gypsies near Lyndhurst. An important film of his work as a sculptor during this period was made by the director John Boorman, and Berlin collaborated with the Swedish actor and director Mai Zetterling on a film of the Spanish gypsies. Among those who visited him at this time were Robert Graves and Ralph Vaughan Williams. 
In 1963 Berlin divorced Juanita and on 6 September married Julia Pamela Lenthall ('b'. 1944), a distant relative of Alfred Wallis. They moved first to the Isle of Wight and then, in 1975, to Wimborne in Dorset, where Berlin spent the rest of his life. After an important exhibition celebrating the St Ives artistic traditions at the Tate Gallery, London, in 1985 and, in 1993, the opening of the Tate St Ives gallery, Berlin's work, both visual and literary, enjoyed a revival of public interest, and the two extensive volumes of his autobiography, 'Coat of many Colours' (1994) and 'Virgo in Exile' (1996), together with the reissue of 'Alfred Wallis, Primitive' in 1992, were among the last of his published works. 
In an artists' community which included Barbara Hepworth, Ben Nicholson, Naum Gabo, Patrick Heron, and the potter Bernard Leach, it is a measure of Sven Berlin's stature that he remains one of the best known and remembered figures from those post-war days. The others may have been better artists and more formative innovators in a colony which was shedding the influence of the old school of representational or 'academy' art in favour of modernism and the abstract interpretation of the landscape in which they lived, but Berlin's art remained firmly anchored in the vigorous bohemianism of the old romantics, such as that of his friend Augustus John. 
Berlin's best visual art was his sculpture, and he was able to carve delicate images from that most inhospitable stone, Cornish granite. His line drawings, too, showed an empathy with natural things, especially insects and small animals, and he illustrated a number of books on natural history. He published several semi-autobiographical books of a philosophical nature, but the poetry he wrote profusely was not collected or published in his lifetime. On 7 September 1962 he published 'The Dark Monarch', ostensibly a fiction set in an imaginary artists' colony. Eight days later it was withdrawn and pulped, after four successful writs for libel were served by those of his fellow artists who recognized themselves as the inhabitants of the 'fantasy' town of Cuckoo, a place that was transparently St Ives. In art circles 'The Dark Monarch' remained one of the best-known unread books until, in 2009, a new edition was published, which contained a 'key' written by Berlin identifying the characters in the book with their real-life counterparts. It chronicles, in strong partisan language, the rift between the colony's artists and the causes of Berlin's self-imposed exile from St Ives. 
Berlin believed himself to have been ostracized, not only by the art community of St Ives, but by the wider art establishment, but when he returned to St Ives forty years later to sign copies of his autobiography 'Coat of many Colours', he found old sins forgiven, his 'enfant terrible' reputation more cherished than deplored, and his art enjoying something of a renaissance. In 1991 he declined an invitation to republish 'The Dark Monarch' in its original form, saying (in 'Virgo in Exile') he 'did not want to be responsible for the forces it would release'. He was, by then, one of the last survivors of the post-war days. 
Berlin spent his last years in Wimborne, stone-cutting, painting, and writing with undiminished energy, his last letters being written only a few days before he died of septicaemia in Poole Hospital on 14 December 1999, at the age of eighty-eight. He was buried in Holt cemetery, near Wimborne. 


@@@@@


doc= 64263


Carline family (per. c.1870-c.1975), painters, came to prominence with George Francis Carline (1855-1920), born on 11 July 1855 in Lincoln, the son of Richard Carline (1806-1863) and Jane Frances Snow (1814-1861). His father was a solicitor and three times elected mayor of Lincoln, but he numbered several painters, sculptors, and architects among his forebears. His own training as a painter began in Lincoln School of Art in the early 1870s and was pursued at Heatherley's Art School in London (1882), then in Antwerp, and finally at the Academie Julian in Paris. On his return to London in 1885 he established a studio in Fulham and exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy after scoring a critical and popular success in 1886 with 'Spelling out the List' (1885; priv. coll.). In 1885, while executing a portrait commission in Essex, he met and married Annie Smith ['see below']. The couple and their growing family (they were to have five children, of whom the three youngest also trained as painters) remained in London until 1892, when they moved to Oxford. Except for several years in Switzerland (1898-9) and Derbyshire (1899-1903), they remained there until 1916, when they settled definitively in Hampstead. 
From 1903 onwards George Carline was an active member of the Royal Society of British Artists. He specialized in landscapes and in charming, somewhat sentimental genre scenes featuring women and children, but he made his living mainly through portraiture and sporadic work as an illustrator and designer of advertisements (among others, for Pears soap). Although his most characteristic work in both oils and watercolours is meticulously executed and stamped with the Victorian taste of his generation, he was no die-hard conservative: there is evidence of his appreciation of impressionism and the peasant paintings of Jules Bastien-Lepage, who exerted a considerable influence on progressive British artists towards the end of the nineteenth century, and towards the end of his life he even experimented occasionally with novel materials and an abstracted style. This inquisitive attitude to vanguard developments was inherited by his children although they, like him, ultimately rejected stylistic innovation in favour of a traditional, naturalistic approach. 
George Carline's marriage is further evidence of the unconventional streak in his character. Born in Buckhurst Hill, Essex, on 15 October 1862, Annie Carline (1862-1945) never knew her father, John Smith, or her mother. She was adopted by a relative and was employed as a housemaid when George Carline met her. She was a forceful personality, and her matriarchal role became more pronounced after his sudden death on 28 November 1920 in Assisi, during a prolonged family painting expedition to Italy. (His ashes were buried in Sunningwell, near Abingdon, on 14 December 1920.) Thus Annie Carline is the hub of the composition of Richard Carline's ambitious group portrait of family members and artist-friends, 'Gathering on the Terrace' (1925; Ferens Art Gallery, Kingston upon Hull), and the subject of some compelling individual portraits by her children, notably Hilda Carline's brooding 'Portrait of the Artist's Mother' (1930; priv. coll.). In 1927 she took up painting in watercolour herself and proved to have an innate talent. Her sharply observed landscapes and figure scenes delighted the artists who foregathered in the Carlines' home, and she was persuaded to exhibit them publicly, mainly with the London Group and the Artists' International Association. The cult of naive painting was at a height in the 1930s and in 1939, on the initiative of the cubist painter and theorist Andre Lhote, she held an exhibition at the Galerie Pittoresque in Paris. Until her death on 20 October 1945 she was still active as a painter. She was buried in Sunningwell cemetery. 
The Carlines were indefatigable, knowledgeable, and adventurous sightseers: annual painting holidays both in the English countryside and abroad were a fixed family tradition, which Richard and Nancy Carline kept up into the 1970s. Sometimes they were joined by painter-friends, as when Stanley Spencer accompanied them to Bosnia in 1922. In this manner bonds were reinforced, and so was the family commitment to painting and drawing on the spot. The family houses in Hampstead (first at 47 Downshire Hill, and from 1936 onwards at 17 Pond Street) reflected these practices: every available wall, kitchen included, was densely hung with paintings of all periods by all the members of the family and their friends, as well as with numerous artefacts from different cultures collected on their travels abroad. A 'museum' of curiosities was installed in the basement. In this stimulating (but never luxurious or chic) setting, the Carlines and their friends met to discuss art, religion, and politics, for discussion was another fixture of their daily lives. In the 1920s and 1930s the Carline family home in Hampstead became a noted meeting place for artists, writers, and intellectuals of independent and radical tendencies, to the extent that the Carlines themselves tend to be remembered for their relationships with more prominent artists, such as Stanley Spencer, William Roberts, and Charles Ginner, rather than for their own achievements. 
In 1898 George Carline had suffered severe financial losses through a disastrous speculation, and he at first tried to dissuade his son Sydney William Carline (1888-1929), born in London on 14 August 1888, from taking up the precarious career of painting. (Later, by contrast, he did everything to foster the precocious talent of his youngest child, Richard Cotton Carline (1896-1980), born on 9 February 1896 at 72 Woodstock Road, Oxford.) Not to be deflected, in 1908 Sydney began his training at the Slade School of Fine Art under Henry Tonks, financing himself through commissions for portrait medallions and illustrations. (In the First World War he received several official commissions for commemorative medals.) At the Slade he met Christopher Nevinson, Edward Wadsworth, Mark Gertler, and Stanley Spencer, among others, and in 1912 he joined Nevinson in Paris. This was to be a crucial awakening as, in the wake of Roger Fry's pioneering exhibitions of 1910 and 1912, he discovered the work of the post-impressionists, fauves, and cubists. Tonks was notorious for implacably opposing modernism, and Sydney reacted against the strict training in draughtsmanship for which the Slade was renowned. He enrolled at the private academy in Paris run by the eccentric symbolist painter Percyval Tudor-Hart, who advocated reliance on memory and an abstract, harmonic system for using colour and tone which had some affinity with the theories of Wassily Kandinsky. On Sydney's urging, Richard Carline abandoned plans to study at the Slade and joined him in Paris at the start of 1913. When Tudor-Hart transferred his school to Hampstead that October, they followed him there, and were joined by their sister, Hilda Anne Carline (1889-1950). Born in London on 20 November 1889, Hilda Carline had hitherto painted under her father's guidance in Oxford and seems to have been more responsive than her brothers to Tudor-Hart's mystical tendencies. But all three, working and living together, strove to make their painting more expressive, bold, abstract, and 'primitive' in appearance, and more like the avant-garde continental art to which their mentor had introduced them. Richard Carline recalled that 'We were a very united family and discussed our artistic problems endlessly' ('Richard Carline: Early Drawings and Watercolours', exhibition catalogue, Anthony d'Offay Gallery, London, 1975, no pagination). A typical product of this period is Sydney Carline's primitivist memory painting 'Bank Holiday on Hampstead Heath' (1915; Tate collection), but the sense of shared goals also emerges in the searching and candid portraits they painted of themselves and each other after the war (for example, Richard Carline's 'Hilda with a Red Nose', 1918, and Hilda Carline's 'Self-Portrait', 1923; both Tate collection). 
Following the outbreak of war, Sydney Carline joined the Royal Flying Corps and received his commission as a pilot in 1916. Through Nevinson, he had come into contact with Futurist theory and was thrilled by the novel experience of flying and the transformation of the landscape when viewed from the cockpit. Richard Carline also joined the corps towards the end of the war, and in 1919 they were posted to the Middle East as official war artists. They made sketches from the air of the battlefields in Palestine, Mesopotamia, Syria, and Persia in preparation for a series of oil paintings for the newly founded Imperial War Museum in London (where the paintings and the majority of studies remain). They returned to England with numerous topographical watercolours of ancient temples, palaces, and ruins, and scenes of native life, which in their restraint, objectivity, and simplification of form reflect the muted style of modernism favoured in England after the war which is detectable in the contemporary work of the Bloomsbury painters. In March 1920 they held a joint exhibition of these works at the Goupil Gallery, London, and they exhibited again together in 1926 at the Bankfield Museum, Halifax. By that stage both were teaching in Oxford at the Ruskin School of Drawing, where Sydney had been appointed drawing master in 1922. Sydney Carline's sudden death from pneumonia in Drayton St Leonard, near Dorchester, Oxfordshire, on 15 February 1929, less than a year after his marriage on 12 April 1928 to Gwendolen Harter (1904-1980), occurred only weeks after his first one-man exhibition at the Goupil Gallery. He was buried in Drayton St Leonard on 18 February 1929. On 13 June 1950 Richard Carline married, in Hampstead, Nancy Mona Carline, formerly Higgins (1909-2004), also a painter. He died in Hampstead on 18 November 1980, and was buried in Sunningwell cemetery, Oxfordshire. 
During the war Hilda Carline was in the Women's Land Army and from 1916 to 1918 worked on a farm in Suffolk. This experience nourished her romantic identification with landscape and was commemorated in the nostalgic and Gauguinesque composition 'Return from the Farm' (1919; priv. coll.). Determined to develop her technical skills, she embarked on five years of part-time study at the Slade, where constant work from the figure resulted in a more draughtsmanlike and realistic style. Stanley Spencer (1891-1959), to whom she was introduced in December 1919, was impressed by her talent and intrigued by her striking looks and moody, imaginative, deeply religious personality -- like her mother she was an ardent Christian Scientist -- and on 23 February 1925 they were married. The years preceding her marriage were particularly productive: she benefited from the intellectual stimulus and challenge provided by the ''cercle pan-artistique' of Downshire Hill', as the gatherings at the Carlines' home were dubbed by Henry Lamb (letter to Richard Carline, 1923, 'The Spencers and the Carlines', no pagination), and like her brothers she exhibited regularly with the London Group. Although influenced by Spencer's fascination with material textures and sympathetic to his visionary interpretation of outwardly banal subjects, she never imitated his stylistic mannerisms and remained a more objective observer, as in her meticulous and candid portrait of their housekeeper, 'Elsie' (1929; Brighton and Hove Museum). 
Like many women of her generation, Hilda Carline experienced a draining conflict between her desire to paint and her domestic obligations (her daughters, Shirin and Unity, were born in 1925 and 1930 respectively), and painting became a relatively rare activity in the late 1920s. Proximity to an artist of such idiosyncratic vision, unassailable conviction, egocentricity, and brilliance as Spencer appears to have crushed her self-confidence, and some of her best later work was done after they began to lead largely separate lives in 1932. The marriage never ran smoothly, for both were uncompromising and argumentative; it ended in divorce in May 1937. Prone throughout her life to depression, she suffered a nervous breakdown in 1942, and in 1947 the breast cancer which ultimately killed her was diagnosed. She died in Hampstead on 1 November 1950, and was buried in Cookham, Berkshire. Spencer's obsession with her seems, if anything, to have increased after their divorce, and especially after her breakdown, and she inspired an unending flow of paintings and letters which ceased only with his death in 1959. Her achievement as a painter, rather than as his muse, is being re-evaluated, and in 1999 she was the subject of an important study and touring exhibition. Works by the Carlines are held in various public collections in Great Britain, including the Tate collection and Imperial War Museum, London, and the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and in many private collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 64264


Carline family (per. c.1870-c.1975), painters, came to prominence with George Francis Carline (1855-1920), born on 11 July 1855 in Lincoln, the son of Richard Carline (1806-1863) and Jane Frances Snow (1814-1861). His father was a solicitor and three times elected mayor of Lincoln, but he numbered several painters, sculptors, and architects among his forebears. His own training as a painter began in Lincoln School of Art in the early 1870s and was pursued at Heatherley's Art School in London (1882), then in Antwerp, and finally at the Academie Julian in Paris. On his return to London in 1885 he established a studio in Fulham and exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy after scoring a critical and popular success in 1886 with 'Spelling out the List' (1885; priv. coll.). In 1885, while executing a portrait commission in Essex, he met and married Annie Smith ['see below']. The couple and their growing family (they were to have five children, of whom the three youngest also trained as painters) remained in London until 1892, when they moved to Oxford. Except for several years in Switzerland (1898-9) and Derbyshire (1899-1903), they remained there until 1916, when they settled definitively in Hampstead. 
From 1903 onwards George Carline was an active member of the Royal Society of British Artists. He specialized in landscapes and in charming, somewhat sentimental genre scenes featuring women and children, but he made his living mainly through portraiture and sporadic work as an illustrator and designer of advertisements (among others, for Pears soap). Although his most characteristic work in both oils and watercolours is meticulously executed and stamped with the Victorian taste of his generation, he was no die-hard conservative: there is evidence of his appreciation of impressionism and the peasant paintings of Jules Bastien-Lepage, who exerted a considerable influence on progressive British artists towards the end of the nineteenth century, and towards the end of his life he even experimented occasionally with novel materials and an abstracted style. This inquisitive attitude to vanguard developments was inherited by his children although they, like him, ultimately rejected stylistic innovation in favour of a traditional, naturalistic approach. 
George Carline's marriage is further evidence of the unconventional streak in his character. Born in Buckhurst Hill, Essex, on 15 October 1862, Annie Carline (1862-1945) never knew her father, John Smith, or her mother. She was adopted by a relative and was employed as a housemaid when George Carline met her. She was a forceful personality, and her matriarchal role became more pronounced after his sudden death on 28 November 1920 in Assisi, during a prolonged family painting expedition to Italy. (His ashes were buried in Sunningwell, near Abingdon, on 14 December 1920.) Thus Annie Carline is the hub of the composition of Richard Carline's ambitious group portrait of family members and artist-friends, 'Gathering on the Terrace' (1925; Ferens Art Gallery, Kingston upon Hull), and the subject of some compelling individual portraits by her children, notably Hilda Carline's brooding 'Portrait of the Artist's Mother' (1930; priv. coll.). In 1927 she took up painting in watercolour herself and proved to have an innate talent. Her sharply observed landscapes and figure scenes delighted the artists who foregathered in the Carlines' home, and she was persuaded to exhibit them publicly, mainly with the London Group and the Artists' International Association. The cult of naive painting was at a height in the 1930s and in 1939, on the initiative of the cubist painter and theorist Andre Lhote, she held an exhibition at the Galerie Pittoresque in Paris. Until her death on 20 October 1945 she was still active as a painter. She was buried in Sunningwell cemetery. 
The Carlines were indefatigable, knowledgeable, and adventurous sightseers: annual painting holidays both in the English countryside and abroad were a fixed family tradition, which Richard and Nancy Carline kept up into the 1970s. Sometimes they were joined by painter-friends, as when Stanley Spencer accompanied them to Bosnia in 1922. In this manner bonds were reinforced, and so was the family commitment to painting and drawing on the spot. The family houses in Hampstead (first at 47 Downshire Hill, and from 1936 onwards at 17 Pond Street) reflected these practices: every available wall, kitchen included, was densely hung with paintings of all periods by all the members of the family and their friends, as well as with numerous artefacts from different cultures collected on their travels abroad. A 'museum' of curiosities was installed in the basement. In this stimulating (but never luxurious or chic) setting, the Carlines and their friends met to discuss art, religion, and politics, for discussion was another fixture of their daily lives. In the 1920s and 1930s the Carline family home in Hampstead became a noted meeting place for artists, writers, and intellectuals of independent and radical tendencies, to the extent that the Carlines themselves tend to be remembered for their relationships with more prominent artists, such as Stanley Spencer, William Roberts, and Charles Ginner, rather than for their own achievements. 
In 1898 George Carline had suffered severe financial losses through a disastrous speculation, and he at first tried to dissuade his son Sydney William Carline (1888-1929), born in London on 14 August 1888, from taking up the precarious career of painting. (Later, by contrast, he did everything to foster the precocious talent of his youngest child, Richard Cotton Carline (1896-1980), born on 9 February 1896 at 72 Woodstock Road, Oxford.) Not to be deflected, in 1908 Sydney began his training at the Slade School of Fine Art under Henry Tonks, financing himself through commissions for portrait medallions and illustrations. (In the First World War he received several official commissions for commemorative medals.) At the Slade he met Christopher Nevinson, Edward Wadsworth, Mark Gertler, and Stanley Spencer, among others, and in 1912 he joined Nevinson in Paris. This was to be a crucial awakening as, in the wake of Roger Fry's pioneering exhibitions of 1910 and 1912, he discovered the work of the post-impressionists, fauves, and cubists. Tonks was notorious for implacably opposing modernism, and Sydney reacted against the strict training in draughtsmanship for which the Slade was renowned. He enrolled at the private academy in Paris run by the eccentric symbolist painter Percyval Tudor-Hart, who advocated reliance on memory and an abstract, harmonic system for using colour and tone which had some affinity with the theories of Wassily Kandinsky. On Sydney's urging, Richard Carline abandoned plans to study at the Slade and joined him in Paris at the start of 1913. When Tudor-Hart transferred his school to Hampstead that October, they followed him there, and were joined by their sister, Hilda Anne Carline (1889-1950). Born in London on 20 November 1889, Hilda Carline had hitherto painted under her father's guidance in Oxford and seems to have been more responsive than her brothers to Tudor-Hart's mystical tendencies. But all three, working and living together, strove to make their painting more expressive, bold, abstract, and 'primitive' in appearance, and more like the avant-garde continental art to which their mentor had introduced them. Richard Carline recalled that 'We were a very united family and discussed our artistic problems endlessly' ('Richard Carline: Early Drawings and Watercolours', exhibition catalogue, Anthony d'Offay Gallery, London, 1975, no pagination). A typical product of this period is Sydney Carline's primitivist memory painting 'Bank Holiday on Hampstead Heath' (1915; Tate collection), but the sense of shared goals also emerges in the searching and candid portraits they painted of themselves and each other after the war (for example, Richard Carline's 'Hilda with a Red Nose', 1918, and Hilda Carline's 'Self-Portrait', 1923; both Tate collection). 
Following the outbreak of war, Sydney Carline joined the Royal Flying Corps and received his commission as a pilot in 1916. Through Nevinson, he had come into contact with Futurist theory and was thrilled by the novel experience of flying and the transformation of the landscape when viewed from the cockpit. Richard Carline also joined the corps towards the end of the war, and in 1919 they were posted to the Middle East as official war artists. They made sketches from the air of the battlefields in Palestine, Mesopotamia, Syria, and Persia in preparation for a series of oil paintings for the newly founded Imperial War Museum in London (where the paintings and the majority of studies remain). They returned to England with numerous topographical watercolours of ancient temples, palaces, and ruins, and scenes of native life, which in their restraint, objectivity, and simplification of form reflect the muted style of modernism favoured in England after the war which is detectable in the contemporary work of the Bloomsbury painters. In March 1920 they held a joint exhibition of these works at the Goupil Gallery, London, and they exhibited again together in 1926 at the Bankfield Museum, Halifax. By that stage both were teaching in Oxford at the Ruskin School of Drawing, where Sydney had been appointed drawing master in 1922. Sydney Carline's sudden death from pneumonia in Drayton St Leonard, near Dorchester, Oxfordshire, on 15 February 1929, less than a year after his marriage on 12 April 1928 to Gwendolen Harter (1904-1980), occurred only weeks after his first one-man exhibition at the Goupil Gallery. He was buried in Drayton St Leonard on 18 February 1929. On 13 June 1950 Richard Carline married, in Hampstead, Nancy Mona Carline, formerly Higgins (1909-2004), also a painter. He died in Hampstead on 18 November 1980, and was buried in Sunningwell cemetery, Oxfordshire. 
During the war Hilda Carline was in the Women's Land Army and from 1916 to 1918 worked on a farm in Suffolk. This experience nourished her romantic identification with landscape and was commemorated in the nostalgic and Gauguinesque composition 'Return from the Farm' (1919; priv. coll.). Determined to develop her technical skills, she embarked on five years of part-time study at the Slade, where constant work from the figure resulted in a more draughtsmanlike and realistic style. Stanley Spencer (1891-1959), to whom she was introduced in December 1919, was impressed by her talent and intrigued by her striking looks and moody, imaginative, deeply religious personality -- like her mother she was an ardent Christian Scientist -- and on 23 February 1925 they were married. The years preceding her marriage were particularly productive: she benefited from the intellectual stimulus and challenge provided by the ''cercle pan-artistique' of Downshire Hill', as the gatherings at the Carlines' home were dubbed by Henry Lamb (letter to Richard Carline, 1923, 'The Spencers and the Carlines', no pagination), and like her brothers she exhibited regularly with the London Group. Although influenced by Spencer's fascination with material textures and sympathetic to his visionary interpretation of outwardly banal subjects, she never imitated his stylistic mannerisms and remained a more objective observer, as in her meticulous and candid portrait of their housekeeper, 'Elsie' (1929; Brighton and Hove Museum). 
Like many women of her generation, Hilda Carline experienced a draining conflict between her desire to paint and her domestic obligations (her daughters, Shirin and Unity, were born in 1925 and 1930 respectively), and painting became a relatively rare activity in the late 1920s. Proximity to an artist of such idiosyncratic vision, unassailable conviction, egocentricity, and brilliance as Spencer appears to have crushed her self-confidence, and some of her best later work was done after they began to lead largely separate lives in 1932. The marriage never ran smoothly, for both were uncompromising and argumentative; it ended in divorce in May 1937. Prone throughout her life to depression, she suffered a nervous breakdown in 1942, and in 1947 the breast cancer which ultimately killed her was diagnosed. She died in Hampstead on 1 November 1950, and was buried in Cookham, Berkshire. Spencer's obsession with her seems, if anything, to have increased after their divorce, and especially after her breakdown, and she inspired an unending flow of paintings and letters which ceased only with his death in 1959. Her achievement as a painter, rather than as his muse, is being re-evaluated, and in 1999 she was the subject of an important study and touring exhibition. Works by the Carlines are held in various public collections in Great Britain, including the Tate collection and Imperial War Museum, London, and the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and in many private collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 64265


Brock, Alan Francis Clutton- (1904-1976), art critic, was born in Weybridge, Surrey, on 8 October 1904, the son of Arthur Clutton-Brock (1868-1924) and his wife, Evelyn Alice Vernon-Harcourt. His father was a barrister who forsook law to write on art and literature, regularly contributing articles to 'The Times', a path his son was to follow; his mother was an artist. His parents moved to Farncombe Lodge, Godalming, Surrey, and later they resided at the Red House, Godalming, a fine early Edwin Lutyens house. Clutton-Brock entered Eton College as a king's scholar in April 1919, and left in summer 1923 after winning a Fielder exhibition to King's College, Cambridge. At Eton he won several prizes for art and English verse, becoming a protege of the classicist Andrew Gow, who encouraged his interest in painting; they met again at Cambridge, when Gow became a fellow and tutor at Trinity College in 1925. Clutton-Brock abandoned classics for the English tripos, in which he achieved a first in 1926. He proceeded MA in 1956. He painted pastiches of the Italian masters from the trecento to Titian on the large panels in the set occupied by a fellow (Richard Braithwaite) in the Gibbs building (later obliterated), and affected bohemian habits such as that of drinking brandy for 'elevenses'. 
In 1927 Clutton-Brock married Shelagh Archer, whom he had met as a Newnham College undergraduate, and they settled in London, where they lived 'among beautiful objects and chaos overlaid with dust and cobwebs' (King's College annual report). Shelagh died in a road accident in 1936, leaving him with a daughter and a son; the son died of polio in South Africa during the Second World War. 
Although Clutton-Brock studied for a while at Westminster School of Art ('c'.1926/7) and exhibited at the London Group, also holding some one-man shows, his charming oil landscapes, much influenced by Constable and French impressionism, did not establish his reputation; but he soon made his mark as a writer on joining 'The Times' in 1930 and contributing to the 'Times Literary Supplement'. Widely read and gifted, he produced prose that was always elegant and finely turned. He published a few popular books: 'Italian Painting' (1930), 'Introduction to French Painting' (1932), and a short life of William Blake (1933); a detective novel, 'Murder at Liberty Hall' (1941); and for R. H. Wilenski's 'Faber Library', jointly with Adrian Stokes, 'Cezanne' (2 vols.) in 1947-55. 
During the Second World War Clutton-Brock served in intelligence with the Royal Air Force volunteer reserve Bomber Command. He had married again in 1936; his second wife was Barbara Foy Mitchell, with whom he had another daughter, and they lived for a while at Hadleigh, Suffolk. He became art critic of 'The Times' in winter 1945, remaining there until 1955, the year he was elected for three years as Slade professor of fine art at Cambridge. He also served as a trustee of the National Gallery. On the death of a cousin, Mrs Whitmore-Jones, in 1955, he inherited Chastleton House, Oxfordshire, a fine but plain early seventeenth-century manor house, where the Clutton-Brocks were hospitable and lived well but in some domestic disorder. 
As befitted a Cambridge man, Clutton-Brock was greatly influenced by Roger Fry, a family friend, and his lucid introduction to the exhibition catalogue for the Duncan Grant retrospective, held at the Tate Gallery in 1959, reflects both his allegiances and his critical objectivity. Witty and charming, Clutton-Brock could be trenchant: 'The story of its [the 'Post-Impressionist Exhibition' of 1910] reception has often been told, but it is still impossible to read any account of the indignation it provoked without being startled, more especially by the ferocity of cultivated and experienced critics who might have been expected to view these pictures with the indulgence they had been trained to give to the crudities of Cimabue. (Introduction, 'Duncan Grant', 1959)' In 1975 he suffered the first of two strokes which led to his death on 18 December 1976 at Chastleton House. He was buried on 22 December, probably at St Mary's, Chastleton. 


@@@@@


doc= 64266


Smith, Sir Matthew Arnold Bracy (1879-1959), painter, was born at 30 Elmfield Terrace, Halifax, Yorkshire, on 22 October 1879, the second of the four sons of Frederic Smith (1849-1914), wire manufacturer, and his wife, Frances (Fanny) Holroyd (died 1912). He was educated at Heath grammar school, Halifax ('c'.1890-1895), and Giggleswick School, Settle, Yorkshire (1895-7). His childhood and youth were dominated by the commanding figure of his father, a strict nonconformist who went to chapel twice every Sunday, ran his business with notable success, and in his spare time passed for a lover of the arts. Frederic Smith's collection of violins was well known to visiting virtuosi; he had published a book of Browningesque verses; and he had commissioned a painting, 'Stradivarius in his Studio', from Seymour Lucas. 
Attempts to place his son in the business world were a failure and in the face of his father's intense disapproval Matthew Smith won permission to study applied design at the Municipal School of Technology, Manchester, in 1901. His range of activity was severely restricted -- 'I was twenty-one', he later said, 'before I saw a good picture' ('Matthew Smith: Fifty-Two Colour Plates'). But an iron determination lay concealed within his frail body and apparently timorous nature and at the late age of twenty-six he was allowed to go to the Slade School of Fine Art in London. He was unhappy there, often being handled roughly by Henry Tonks in front of the entire class, and on his doctor's advice he went to Pont-Aven in Brittany in the late summer of 1908 -- a decision, he would often say, which marked the true beginning of his life. 
Pont-Aven's heyday as an artistic centre had passed, but Smith fell in love with France and with French life, and thereafter never felt really at home anywhere else. Enough of the tradition of Paul Gauguin lingered in Pont-Aven for him to learn the uses of pure colour, as distinct from the tyranny of 'pure drawing' maintained at the Slade. When he moved to Paris he was able to show, in 1911 and 1912, at the Salon des Independants in company with Matisse, Kandinsky, Fernand Leger, and Georges Rouault. He was lucky enough, also, to glimpse Matisse and his methods at first hand through attendance at the school, soon to be disbanded, which Matisse had run since 1908; and if his personal contacts with Matisse were slight, the experience was revelatory in the highest degree. 
Towards 1914 Smith's personal circumstances were radically altered by the death of his mother and father and by his marriage, on 10 January 1912, to (Mary) Gwendolen (Gwen) Salmond (1877-1958), who had studied successfully at the Slade in the 1890s and was a close friend of both Gwen John and Ida Nettleship (Augustus John's first wife). Her two brothers were Sir Geoffrey Salmond and Sir John Salmond. 
Smith had yet to show a painting in England, but when the First World War forced him and his wife to interrupt their sojourns in France he took a studio in Fitzroy Street, London, where Walter Sickert and Jacob Epstein were among his neighbours. There he painted the first of the pictures in which the lessons of France were truly digested, and in 1916 Epstein persuaded him to show a painting in the London Group exhibition. In 1917 Smith was commissioned as an officer in the labour corps and that year was wounded by shrapnel during the battle of Passchendaele. Shortly before he was demobilized he met the Irish artist Roderic O'Conor (1860-1940) in Paris. Of all his contemporaries O'Conor provided Smith with the greatest inspiration and support. In 1920 Smith went with his wife and their two sons to Cornwall. At St Columb Major he produced a series of landscapes in which the dark, saturated colour of Gauguin was happily combined with reminiscences of the spatial organization in certain Florentine predella panels. With the two 'Fitzroy Street nudes' of 1916 these constitute his first original contribution to English painting. 
Smith had always been delicate, and there was throughout his life an apparent discrepancy between his aghast and tentative approach to the practical aspects of living and the imperious energy which went into his work. Early in the 1920s the normal shortcomings of his health allied with the sense of something unfulfilled in his personal life combined to produce a serious breakdown; and it was not until he found in Vera Cuningham ['see below'] the ideal model for his art that he recovered and, indeed, redoubled his ability to work. He took a studio at 6bis Villa Brune in Montparnasse, Paris, and was soon producing one after another of the long series of female nudes which established him as one of the few English painters ever to master this most exacting of subjects. Of 'Femme de cirque' (Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh) Roger Fry wrote: 'It is a picture planned in the great tradition of pictorial design, and carried through without any failure of the impulse' ('The Mayor and Claridge Galleries', 'The Nation and the Athenaeum', 1 May 1926, 126-7). 

Vera Irene Walpole Martin Cuningham (1897-1955), herself a powerful artist with a compelling interest in the female nude, was born at Goff's Oak House, Goff's Oak, Hertfordshire, on 6 November 1897, the daughter of William Martin Cuningham (1847-1924), a mechanical engineer, and his wife, Caroline Emily (Lina) Walpole (1860-1949). She studied at the Central School of Arts and Crafts, London, and in 1922 began exhibiting with the London Group, becoming a member in 1927. In 1929 she held her first solo exhibition at the Bloomsbury Gallery. It was through her teacher, Bernard Meninsky, that she was introduced to Smith. After their relationship ended in the mid-1930s, she went on to develop within the English neo-romantic tradition an original interior vision carried out in intense colour, mixing a wide variety of media and techniques. During the Second World War she produced her most assured painting, in between her duties as an air raid warden. It has been suggested that 'in these paintings, gargantuan figures and grotesque nudes seem to caricature the nudes of Matthew Smith, suggesting an alarming tension between her role as artist and as model' (F. Spalding, '20th Century Painters and Sculptors', 1990, 137). She died of lung cancer at University College Hospital, London, on 3 May 1955 and was cremated on the 10th at Golders Green crematorium. 
From 1923 until 1940 Smith enjoyed a period of unbroken creativity. If Paris and the nude were predominant in the twenties, in the thirties his interest shifted to Provence, in geographical terms, and to landscape as his preferred theme. Throughout these years his first responsibility was owed to his work; and although he was a devoted father he was inflexible in his will to cut free from any entanglement which might impair the freedom to work which he had sought for so long and had found only in his middle forties. 
In June 1940 Smith had to be evacuated from France by the RAF and he left behind many canvases in Aix-en-Provence. There followed a period of great private unhappiness on more than one count; above all, the loss of his two sons on active service was a blow from which he took a long time to recover. The petty vicissitudes of London life during and after the war found in Smith a most consistent victim; he was troubled, also, by an affliction of the eyes which later caused him to undergo a cataract operation. He found renewed energy painting portraits. Augustus John and the novelist Henry Green sat for him, as did many women, among them the actresses Valerie Hobson and Patricia Neal. The largest and most varied series of works was inspired by Mary Keene, 'nee' Hunt (1921-1981), who remained close to him until his death. She wrote a novel, 'Mrs Donald' (1983), in which the love affair was partly drawn from her relationship with Smith. 
Smith's natural toughness empowered him to go on working, and the still lifes and large decorative subjects of the mid-fifties have a grandeur of spirit and an unforced amplitude which put them very high in the canon of his work. In 1955 he developed pancreatic cancer, the illness from which he eventually died; but even when it was clear that life was withdrawing its benefits one by one he went on working as best he could. In his last years there was a general realization that as a master of paint he had had few rivals among twentieth-century English artists. He was appointed CBE in 1949 and knighted in 1954. In 1953 a large retrospective exhibition of his work was held at the Tate Gallery, London, and in 1956 the University of London awarded him the honorary degree of DLitt. Equally precious was the affection and respect in which he was held, not only by such lifelong friends and colleagues as Augustus John and Jacob Epstein but also by younger artists -- Francis Bacon above all. 
Smith was most often talked of as a colourist, but he did not altogether care for the appellation. 'They all praise the colour', he would say, 'but if the pictures hold together there must be something else, you know. There must be something else' ('Matthew Smith: Fifty-Two Colour Plates'). Tenaciously, though with characteristic discretion, he had studied Ingres, Courbet, Rembrandt, and Tintoretto. His landscape practice was based to a surprising degree on the study of Rubens's landscape sketches. He read enormously in an unstudied way, and although he was the last man to 'keep up with' his friends in a conventional sense, few people have had a securer hold on the affections of others. He spoke, someone once said, 'like a highly intelligent moth' (personal knowledge); but, once his confidence had been won, the high seriousness implicit in two of his given names (Matthew Arnold) was allied in his talk with an idiosyncratic and unforgettable sense of fun. 
Matthew Smith died at 23 Acacia Road, St John's Wood, London, on 29 September 1959 and was buried at Gunnersbury, Middlesex. The Royal Academy mounted a memorial exhibition of 255 works in 1960. In 1974 Mary Keene, whom Smith had made his heir, presented over 1000 works to the corporation of London. A section of the Barbican Art Gallery, London, is permanently devoted to the display of part of this collection. The first full biography, Alice Keene's 'The Two Mr Smiths' (1995), establishes the facts of Smith's life and work, while the second, Malcolm Yorke's 'Matthew Smith: his Life and Reputation' (1997), discusses his unique place within early and mid-twentieth-century British art. 


@@@@@


doc= 64268


Dubsky, Mario Peter (1939-1985), painter and poet, was conceived in Vienna and born in London on 14 May 1939. He was one of two sons, non-identical twins, whose parents were refugees from Austria. His parents, who later had a daughter, were Christians of Jewish origin who spoke German at home when he was young; they made belts and decorative flowers from leather. He failed the 11-plus examination twice, and was educated at a progressive school, Burgess Hill. Passionately interested in art from childhood, in 1955 he hitch-hiked to Vallauris, where he waited for two weeks in the hope of seeing Picasso. He travelled during the summer of 1956 to Greece, Rome, and Venice, before attending the Slade School of Fine Art, 1956-60. At the Slade he was influenced by Dorothy Mead, a founder member of the Borough Group with David Bomberg, who was at that time a mature student along with Dennis Creffield, another member of the same group. Dubsky made vigorous charcoal drawings and used paint thickly at this period. He was a postgraduate student at the Slade in 1960-61, and in 1963 won an Abbey major scholarship for two years in Rome. He travelled there via Amsterdam and Berlin, where he encountered the homosexual scene, and also visited Prague and Vienna, where he met relations who had survived the Nazi period. In 1964 he travelled through Serbia, Macedonia, and Turkey to Jerusalem and during that time came to terms with his homosexuality, although he had had relationships with women. He was later to be awarded a Harkness fellowship in painting to work in New York, 1969-71. 
He had already, as a student, participated in the British Art Exhibition in Moscow (1959) and, when in Rome, in 'Ospiti di Roma' at the Galleria Feltrinelli (1969). His work was also included in the contemporary British art exhibition at the Palazzo Strozzi in Florence in 1968. In 1969 he had his first solo exhibition at the Grosvenor Gallery, showing brightly coloured highly abstracted paintings, and in 1971 exhibited 'Works on Paper' at the Penthouse Gallery of the Museum of Modern Art, New York. Friendship with Keith Vaughan contributed to his use of flatter areas of paint and brighter colours, as in 'Allegro negro' (1967/8). The relatively brief period of brilliant colour in his work, exemplified by 'Shades' of 1970 (nearly abstract, with hard edges to flat passages of paint), gave way to a darker palette and to denser textures in the mid-1970s. Dark-toned and jewelled passages appeared to be trapped in fields or curtains of black: 'Firebrand' and 'City Nights' were large (7 foot) paintings of 1973. 
During the 1970s it seemed to critics that he was faltering as he introduced a wide range of imagery into some of his pictures, which became dedicated to social and political causes. Through his friendship with John Button, he had been commissioned in 1971 to create a 40 by 8 foot mural for The Firehouse, the New York SoHo headquarters of the Gay Activists Alliance; here he employed photomontage, stencilled words, and slogans. 'The Trial' of 1974 represented three archetypal heads and threatening axes, while 'Handshake over Europe' (1975) introduced floating, almost surrealist figures and bone-like forms. The 18 foot triptych on the theme of time and human development (he had been making many drawing studies in the Natural History Museum), when shown in the 'British Painting, 1957-77' exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1977, received a hostile press. He was artist in residence at the British School in Rome in 1982. 
A fiery and ebullient man, Dubsky lived at a very intense pitch, and engaged in many conflicts in his personal life; he read widely in philosophy and anthropology, and in 1981 published a book of drawings, 'Tom Pilgrim's Progress among the Consequences of Christianity', reproducing the often tortured poses of a favourite model, Tom Dawson. His last exhibition at the South London Art Gallery in 1984 included 'Caberet Valhalla' (oil on canvas, 1983), a characteristically menacing, figurative painting, which is now in the Tate collection. He felt confident of that recent work, saying 'at last I am doing the painting I had dreamed of doing when I was 15' ('Mario Dubsky', 3). Some of his expressive poems were published in his statement entitled 'X factor', for that exhibition. He was a dark, handsome man of medium-small build who usually had a close-cropped beard, emphasizing the strong bone structure of his face. He lived alone for most of his adult life, in New York or at the Archway in London. He died of an AIDS-related illness in the Middlesex Hospital on 24 August 1985 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 64270


(Mary) Alethea Dochie Garstin (1894-1978), landscape painter, was born Mary Dochie Garstin on 1 June 1894, the third child of Norman Garstin and his wife, Louisa. She was trained as a painter by her father and accompanied him on many of his trips abroad, travelling round France with him as a child on the handlebars of his bicycle. She also painted with her friend the Cornish painter Dod Proctor. 


@@@@@


doc= 64271


Guevara, Alvaro Ladron de (1894-1951), artist and boxer, was born on 13 July 1894 at Cerro Alegre, Valparaiso, Chile, the tenth of the twelve children of Luis Ladron de Guevara (1840?-1912), a prosperous woollen exporter, and his wife, Ida Juana Maria Reimers Bode (1857-1943). Luis Guevara, though he knew only a few words of English, was passionately Anglophile and sent his children to the best English schools in Chile. His wife, whom he married when she was just sixteen, came from a wealthy Danish family, her own mother was German, and their daughters all married men of different nationalities; thus the young Alvaro Guevara grew up in cosmopolitan surroundings. His childhood was spent between two homes -- the ostentatiously decorated house embellished everywhere with gold leaf, which his father had built overlooking Valparaiso harbour, where he maintained a large staff and a menagerie of animals, and which was destroyed by an earthquake in 1906; and the farmhouse beside a volcano on their 'fundo' (country estate) at Curileo in Arauco. Guevara took an energetic part in the family routine of tennis tournaments, riding expeditions, musical entertainments, and parties; he also showed a precocious talent for both painting and boxing. 
In 1910, at the suggestion of his elder brother Lucho, who was running the family's business interests in Yorkshire, Guevara and his two youngest sisters were sent to England; their parents followed shortly afterwards and moved into the Majestic Hotel at Harrogate. Guevara entered Bradford Technical College, where he was miserable and homesick: he had no inclination to train for the wool trade and left without any qualifications. However, encouraged by his brother's friends William and Albert Rothenstein, he secretly attended evening classes at the local art school; and in 1912 he applied to, and was awarded a scholarship at, the Slade School of Fine Art in London. 
Guevara joined the Slade at one of its most brilliant periods. His fellow pupils included David Bomberg, Mark Gertler, Paul and John Nash, and Stanley and Gilbert Spencer. These, and the female students -- among whom were Dora Carrington, Iris Tree, and Lady Diana Manners (later Diana Cooper) -- were intrigued by the exuberant but conscientious South American, though they soon took to him and dubbed him Chile, the nickname by which he was afterwards always known. During his four years at the Slade (1912-16) Guevara picked up a handful of prizes. More importantly, he caught the eye of former students such as C. R. W. Nevinson and of three older and eminent figures: Augustus John, whose table at the Cafe Royal or Tour Eiffel restaurant he often joined; Walter Sickert, who introduced him to the Marylebone swimming-baths, where he painted a series of scenes in the manner of Matisse; and Roger Fry, whose two post-impressionist exhibitions he had seen and who invited him to exhibit at the Omega workshops in 1916. The interiors of theatres and cafes were often the subjects of Guevara's paintings: they were executed in the bright, simplified idiom of the modern movement and brought him quick recognition. He first exhibited at the New English Art Club in 1915 (he was elected a member in 1920), was given a one-man show at the Chenil Galleries in 1917, and was a regular contributor to exhibitions of the National Portrait Society and the International Society. 
Guevara also enjoyed a heady social success in the worlds of bohemia and the beau monde, to which the portraits he painted at this time are testament. These were perhaps his most notable achievements: he succeeded in relating his sitters closely to their environment and realizing a precise but rich harmony of colour and design, as well as a telling revelation of character. Among his best-known images are 'Mrs Lewis of the Cavendish' (1915, exh. New English Art Club 1922; priv. coll.), a portrait of the hotel owner Rosa Lewis; 'Ronald Firbank' (1919, exh. Tate Gallery, London, 1921; untraced); and 'Nancy Cunard' (1919, National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne). Guevara was bewitched by Nancy Cunard and obsessively in love with her for several years. At the same time, Edith Sitwell had fallen for him; he painted a celebrated portrait of her, 'The Editor of 'Wheels'' ('c'.1916, Tate collection), and, though her passion was unrequited, they remained close allies. The poetry he was then writing was an important bond between Guevara and both women. The Sitwells were one of several artistic groupings in London whose encouragement and patronage he enjoyed; and Edith's brother Osbert wrote the introduction to his exhibition at the Leicester Galleries in 1926, held after a period of a few years during which he lived in Chile. 
In 1927 Guevara moved to Paris, where he was prominent in the society that gathered at the atelier of Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas. He was given an exhibition at the Galerie Van Leer in November 1928 and on its last day there he met the painter Meraud Michael Guinness (1904-1993), daughter of Sir Benjamin and Lady Guinness, whose first show followed his. She had previously tried to elope with the artist Christopher Wood and had then become the pupil and mistress of another, Francis Picabia. Guevara's encounter with her ended his long search for a wife. He and Meraud were married in London in 1929 and their daughter Bridget (known as Nini) was born in Paris in 1931. Less than a year later, however, they parted, and Guevara sank into a long despondency, during which he often preferred to write rather than paint. 
As the citizen of a neutral country, Guevara remained in Paris after the German invasion in 1940. But the following year he was taken hostage by the Nazis and incarcerated in the notoriously brutal Cherche-Midi prison. After being diagnosed as paranoid, he was repatriated to Chile. At the war's end he was appointed Chilean honorary consul in London; a year later he was transferred to Bern as cultural attache. In 1948 Meraud Guinness persuaded him to move to Aix-en-Provence, and he made a studio in the grounds of La Tour de Cesar, the estate where she and her coterie of gypsies and hangers-on had settled, and where he was reunited with his daughter. 
Through his last years in Provence, when he was slowly dying, Guevara displayed the dignity which was the essential aspect of his character. He was always immaculately groomed, and dressed in a dark suit and white silk shirt even when painting; his voice was gentle, foreign, and friendly. His exotic good looks -- his height, olive skin, and glossy blue-black hair -- were immediately attractive, and he had several affairs with people of both sexes. In all his various vocations, including boxing (for which he won the gold belt as champion of all weights in South America in 1924), he maintained an air of supreme cultivation. 
Guevara died of cancer of the liver and lungs at La Tour de Cesar on 11 October 1951; the funeral took place on 15 October and his body was later interred locally in St Marc's cemetery. One of his few surviving writings, his 'Dictionnaire intuitif', unfinished at his death, was privately printed in 1954 at Meraud Guinness's instigation. In the early 1970s -- just before publication of Diana Holman-Hunt's entertaining biography -- a discovery was made of more than forty of his works, including some of his most important post-impressionist paintings, which were thought to have been destroyed in London during the blitz. Their subsequent exhibition confirmed his early distinction and secured his posthumous reputation. 


@@@@@


doc= 64272


Hall, Edna Clarke, Lady Clarke Hall (1879-1979), painter, was born on 29 June 1879 in Shipbourne, Kent, the tenth of the twelve children of the Revd Benjamin Waugh (1839-1908), philanthropist and nonconformist minister who founded the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC), and Sarah Elizabeth (Lilian) Boothroyd. When Edna was two years old the family moved to Southgate, in north London. In 1889 Benjamin Waugh resigned his ministry in order to devote himself full-time to the NSPCC, and the family settled in St Albans, Hertfordshire. 
Edna Waugh early showed a precocious talent for drawing. At fourteen she entered the Slade School of Art, London, at the instigation of William Clarke Hall, a family friend. A contemporary and friend of Gwen and Augustus John, Ida Nettleship, Ambrose McEvoy, and Albert Rutherston, she celebrated these friendships in a series of drawings and etchings (now in the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff). Her assured and spirited draughtsmanship won her many certificates, prizes, and a Slade scholarship. 
On 22 December 1898 Edna married William Clarke Hall (1866-1932), barrister and later magistrate. Beginning married life in Thames Ditton, Surrey, they moved in 1901 to Great House, Upminster Common, Essex, where Edna Clarke Hall lived for the rest of her life. From the beginning tension surfaced in the marriage, particularly between Clarke Hall's artistic ambitions and her husband's domestic expectations. One consequence was that for the next two decades her art became an intensely personal and private activity shared with only a few intimate friends and only occasionally seen in group exhibitions. During this period of personal conflict she found artistic inspiration in Emily Bronte's 'Wuthering Heights' (1847), producing a group of powerful drawings and etchings to which she added during periods of emotional crisis. These illustrate her stylistic development -- from the early detailed realism of 'Catherine and Heathcliffe' (1902, Tate collection) to the bold and summary use of line seen in 'The Young Couple' (1924, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford). 
Born in 1905 and 1910 respectively, Clarke Hall's two sons, Justin and Denis, became important subjects she painted while unconsciously absorbed in their own pursuits. The resulting portraits show great tenderness but nevertheless avoid sentimentality. Many of these studies were executed in watercolour, her chief medium and one in which she displayed a great diversity in style and content. In many of her portraits, such as that of Katie Gliddon (1912, National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff), she employed fluid atmospheric washes. In contrast, in her important series of 'Figures in Landscape' the brush was drawn almost dry across the paper in rapid strokes, as in 'Girl Leaning on a Gate' (1915, Tate collection). In 1914 she was persuaded by Henry Tonks, her former drawing master, to show her work in a one-woman show at the Chenil Galleries, London, where it was well received. In the 'Saturday Review' J. H. Collins Baker described her as a 'sensitive and expressive draughtswoman who reaches a masterly plane' with a sense of colour that was 'individual and instinctive' (14 April 1914). 
Ten years elapsed before Clarke Hall exhibited again. In 1919 she suffered a nervous breakdown, though with the help of the psychologist Henry Head she was able to resolve some of the problems of her marriage and develop a new life centred on her art. In 1922 she acquired a studio in South Square, Gray's Inn. Etching and lithography became a new and important part of her work, and in 1924 she held the first of a series of successful exhibitions at the Redfern Gallery, London. After seeing Clarke Hall's 'Painting with Poems' in her 1926 show at the Redfern Gallery, the art critic of 'The Times' hailed her as 'the most imaginative artist in England' (9 Feb 1926). In the 1920s and 1930s she published several volumes of poetry, some of the earlier poems recalling William Blake's manner of interweaving lines of verse with swirling arabesques of colour or flowing lyrical figures, such as her distinctive series of 'Poem Pictures', of which three appeared in lithograph versions in 'Facets', published by Elkin, Mathews, and Marrot in 1930. She spent the winter of 1926-7 in Egypt. While that visit formed the focus of her work in her 1930 Redfern Gallery show, the work itself forms a fascinating record of traditional life in the Nile villages. 
Edna Clarke Hall's last Redfern exhibition was in 1941, the same year that her London studio, and much of her work, was destroyed during a bombing raid. After this catastrophe her artistic energies gradually ebbed away until she ceased painting in the early 1950s. She lived another twenty-five years, sharing her life with her niece and devoted companion, Mary Fearnley Sander, until her death at the age of 100 on 16 November 1979 at Deal, Kent. Essentially an autobiographical artist, Clarke Hall painted with great sensitivity and understanding the people and places she knew and loved. 


@@@@@


doc= 64273


Morris, Jane (1839-1914), embroiderer and artist's model, was born in Oxford on 19 October 1839, the daughter of Robert Burden (died 1865), a stablehand in Oxford, and his wife, Ann Maizey (died 1871). Little is known of her childhood, but it was clearly one of poverty and deprivation. 
In October 1857 Jane Burden and her sister, Elizabeth, were seen by Dante Gabriel Rossetti (1828-1882) and Edward Burne-Jones at a performance of the Drury Lane Theatre Company in Oxford. The two men were painting murals based on Arthurian tales for the Oxford Union together with a group of artists who included William Morris (1834-1896). Struck by Jane's beauty, Rossetti and Burne-Jones sought her to model for them. Jane initially sat mainly to Rossetti, who needed a model for Queen Guinevere for the murals. After this, Jane sat to Morris, who had begun an easel painting, 'La belle Iseult' (Tate collection). During this period Morris fell in love with Jane and they were engaged. Although the details are not known, it seems clear that Jane was privately educated before her marriage. Her keen intelligence allowed her essentially to re-create herself. She read widely, became proficient in French and later Italian, and was an accomplished pianist. Her manners and speech became refined to such an extent that contemporaries referred to her manner as 'regal' or 'queenly'. Jane Burden married William Morris on 26 April 1859 at St Michael's Church, Oxford. 
The Morrises moved to Red House in Bexleyheath, Kent, in 1860. Their two children, Jenny and May Morris ['see 'Morris, Mary], were born in 1861 and 1862 respectively. Creating furnishings for Red House led to the founding of Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. Morris had begun experimenting with embroidery before he met Jane, and soon after their marriage he began working with her to refine embroidery techniques. They studied old pieces of embroidery and recovered knowledge of some stitches by unpicking these old fragments. Jane was apparently already an accomplished needlewoman, and her embroidery shows remarkable technical skill. For Red House, Jane completed panels with repeating floral designs. A number of these designs were worked on blue wool serge which she found in a London shop. This was significant, as wool became the preferred background for the firm's embroideries. Jane also contributed to a series of panels depicting great women with her sister, also an accomplished embroiderer. During the creation of these panels, Jane later recalled, 'we were making experiments in silk and gold wools afterwards to bloom into altar cloths etc.' (BL, Add. MS 45341). In 1865 the Morrises began living over the firm's premises at Queen Square, Bloomsbury, and Jane was in charge of a group of women who did needlework for the firm, producing a variety of ecclesiastical and domestic embroideries. Jane continued to embroider at least until 1910 for friends and, while her husband was still alive, important clients of the firm. Both William Morris and Philip Webb created designs for Jane's embroidery. She embroidered screens, drapery, and other items. In the late 1880s and early 1890s she exhibited her work at the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society. One of her most notable embroideries was the coverlet for William Morris's bed which she worked with her friend Mary De Morgan (now at Kelmscott Manor). The design is based on antique flower patterns and is signed 'Si je puis Jane Morris'. 
In the late 1860s Jane Morris began a romantic liaison with Rossetti which lasted until 1876. This corresponded with a period during which Jane was the model for some of Rossetti's most famous paintings, including 'Venus Astarte' (Manchester City Galleries), 'Proserpine' (Tate collection), 'La pia de Tolomei' (Spencer Art Gallery, University of Kansas), and 'The Day Dream' (V&A). Her striking appearance provided inspiration to Rossetti for over twenty years. Henry James described her after their first meeting: 'such a wife! Je n'en reviens pas -- she haunts me still... an apparition of fearful and wonderful intensity... Imagine a tall lean woman in a long dress of some dead purple stuff... with a mass of crisp black hair heaped into great wavy projections on each of her temples, a thin pale face, a pair of strange sad, deep dark Swinburnish eyes... in fine Complete. (Henry James to Alice James, 10 March 1869, 'Letters of Henry James', 1, 1974)' It is clear from Jane's correspondence with Rossetti that she was a participant in his creative work: she frequently created costumes for his paintings, often of her own design. 
In addition to her embroidery, Jane Morris produced a number of books. These are elaborately decorated and bound in vellum, velvet, or leather. They were apparently intended as gifts, and their texts are generally handwritten English and French verse, with illuminated capitals or other decoration. The bookbinder Thomas James Cobden-Sanderson first learned his craft at Jane's suggestion. 
Jane Morris was actively involved in many of her husband's endeavours. In addition to her contributions to the firm, which continued until his death, she worked for the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, the 1882 Icelandic Famine Relief Committee, and later the Kelmscott Press. She did not however share his political views. Despite her husband's commitment to socialism, Jane maintained an allegiance to the Liberal Party, although her sympathies leaned towards the party's radical wing. She also ardently supported Irish home rule, a view which she shared with her close friends Rosalind Howard, countess of Carlisle, and Jane Cobden. 
In 1883 Jane Morris met the poet and political activist Wilfrid Scawen Blunt (1840-1922) and by 1887 at the latest the couple had become lovers. Jane designed the cover for Blunt's volume of poetry 'In vinculis', published in 1889. It was also probably through Jane that Blunt came to have his poetry published by the Kelmscott Press. 
After her husband's death in 1896 Jane Morris worked with Sydney Cockerell in the winding-up of operations of the Kelmscott Press. In 1904 she modelled for the queen in Evelyn De Morgan's painting 'The Hour Glass' (Evelyn De Morgan Foundation, London). Jane made a substantial contribution to May Morris's edition 'The Collected Works of William Morris'. She assisted her daughter with dating and identifying manuscripts as well as providing her with material for use in the introductions, including reminiscences of Morris; she also reviewed drafts of all the introductions to the volumes, corrected errors, and offered suggestions for improvements. She died on 26 January 1914 at 5 Brock Street, Bath, and was buried at St George's Church, Kelmscott, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 64275


Joy, Henry (1719/20-1789), newspaper proprietor and benefactor, was born in Belfast, the first of three children of Francis Joy (1697-1790), printer and paper maker, and his wife, Margaret (1690-1745), daughter of Robert Martin of Belfast. The family was descended from Calvinist stock who moved to Ireland in the early seventeenth century. Nothing of Henry's early life is known except that he trained as a lawyer. The family's fortunes changed when in 1737 Francis Joy founded the 'Belfast News-Letter' (Ireland's second oldest provincial newspaper) after apparently receiving the printing press in lieu of a bad debt. Faced with a shortage of paper, Francis Joy developed the family business to include papermaking, first in Ballymena and then in 1745 at Randalstown, where he installed a larger mill. 
Henry Joy and his brother, 
Over the following decade the Joys emerged as one of Belfast's most notable entrepreneurial families. In 1777 Robert Joy conceived a scheme to introduce cotton manufacture into Ireland, and, together with Thomas McCabe, he installed the machinery necessary to teach poorhouse children to spin and weave cotton. Two years later the first cotton spinning mill was built in Whitehouse by Nicholas Grimshaw, followed by that of Messrs Joy, McCabe, and McCracken (the Joys' brother-in-law and father of the radical politician Henry Joy McCracken). This mill, opened in Belfast, was the first in Ireland powered by water. 
Alongside entrepreneurship the Joys combined public duty and charity. In 1745 Henry Joy was one of the volunteers who garrisoned Carrickfergus Castle when it was rumoured that the Young Pretender (Charles Edward Stuart) was attempting an invasion of the Antrim coast from Scotland. Henry was also a leading member of the Belfast Charitable Society (founded in 1752), acting as one of three 'key carriers' of the society's chest, kept at his house in High Street, Belfast; his press also printed the lottery tickets by which the society raised funds. In addition the Joys were involved in building the north Belfast poorhouse, for which Henry signed the lease and Robert drew the architectural plans in 1771; both brothers provided money and materials for the building. Between 1759 and 1772 Henry Joy served as Belfast's deputy town clerk. In 1778 he and Robert were among the first members of the 1st Belfast volunteer company, a local defence force established after the declaration of war with France; both brothers remained members after the volunteers became a political force campaigning for the legislative independence of Ireland. In 1781 Henry was elected a burgess of the town and two years later a founding member of the Belfast chamber of commerce. Heavily involved in providing facilities for marketing white linens in Belfast, he contributed in the same year (1783) to the building of the town's White Linen Hall. 
Henry Joy was married to Barbara Dunbar (died 1777?), daughter of George Dunbar of Belfast; they had ten children, six daughters and four sons, including Henry Joy (1766-1838), who, after a period as attorney-general for Ireland, became chief baron of the Irish exchequer in 1831 ('GM', 2nd ser., 10, 1838, 210). Joy died, aged sixty-nine, on 20 January 1789, in Belfast, where he was buried. Just before his death the citizens of Belfast honoured him with a cup, expressing to him their 'gratitude for the innumerable services rendered by him in a long series of years to his fellow citizens'. His obituary in the January edition of 'Walker's Hibernian Magazine' likewise emphasized his philanthropy, describing him as a man of 'correct, amiable, and engaging' manners, 'an invaluable friend of all... [who] died without the enmity of any'. On his death the proprietorship of the 'Belfast News-Letter' passed to Henry, the son of Robert Joy, who had died in 1785. 


@@@@@


doc= 64276


Esdall, James (c.1720-1755), printer and bookseller, was born in Dublin, the third of six sons of James Esdall (died 1728), a hatter, and his wife, Margaret. Esdall's family was middle-class Irish of the trade culture; and, at a time when social class, religion, and politics were closely linked, the Esdalls were probably protestant, as the principal influences on Esdall's career -- his master and mentor, George Faulkner, that prince of Dublin printers, and Esdall's principal compatriot, Charles Lucas, a zealous Irish whig nationalist and polemical writer -- were both attached to mostly protestant circles. In a vigorous career of no more than eleven years, Esdall produced a broad range of material for the rapidly expanding Irish markets. Contributing to Dublin's developing status as an international print centre, he and his small family-operated firm launched as many as four Irish newspapers; issued reprints of London editions of popular English novels, plays, and poetry anthologies; printed and sold works by Irish writers; and incurred serious legal penalties by printing and selling inflammatory political material on Anglo-Irish relations and municipal reform in Dublin. 
Recorded data on Esdall's early beginnings are thin (Pollard, 'Dictionary', 182-3), but as a true son of the trade culture he was reared and educated accordingly. His apprenticeship at George Faulkner's printing house on Essex Street, Dublin, probably began shortly after his father's death in 1728. Like Faulkner, who learned his trade from the learned London printer and scholar William Bowyer the younger, Esdall received prestigious formal training and invaluable exposure. At Faulkner's busy book hub, with its lively book chat and daily round of commercial dealings, Esdall witnessed at first hand the mechanics and politics of the eighteenth-century Irish print culture. Moreover, in Faulkner himself, Esdall had an imposing career model of the Irish patriot printer, willing to incur both rancour and litigation for his beliefs; and in a city rife with piratical printers, Faulkner also served as a model of correct business practice, notwithstanding his copyright and distribution imbroglios with the English novelist Samuel Richardson. In 1735 Faulkner engaged his promising apprentice in the issue of a slight, but sensitive, anonymous publication, 'Observations upon... Holding Ecclesiastical Benefices... together with Fellowships in the University of Dublin' -- the first of many career intersections between master and pupil. 
On 14 August 1744 Esdall was sworn and admitted free by service of the printers' guild of St Luke the Evangelist; he was paid quarterage from 1744 until 1755, the year of his death. In 1744 he set up as a printer and bookseller on Fishamble Street, Smock Alley, Dublin, the first of his two family-operated establishments. Dublin printers and bookmen doubtless counted Esdall among Faulkner's most enterprising proteges, for during the first half of his career -- the years preceding his hazardous association with Lucas in 1749 -- he achieved an impressive list of imprints; and many of these books and pamphlets were printed on paper manufactured by the Irish home market ('Buy Irish!' the cry of many Dublin tradesmen). 
On Fishamble Street, Esdall printed and sold a range of material attractive to Dublin readers with interests political, literary, and feminist. Though the four newspapers he issued reflected largely political material, Esdall's book stock consisted mostly of inexpensive reprints of London imprints. His record of imprints began on 20 March 1744 with an important political text, the 'Proceedings of the Sheriffs and Commons of... Dublin... Relating to Controverted Matters in the City'. A shrewd self-promoter, Esdall printed a full-page advertisement on the last page of the book for a recent issue of his, 'A Vindication of... Captain Middleton, F.R.S., in a Late Voyage Aboard H.M.S., the 'Furace,' for the Discovery of the North-West Passage'. On 31 March the firm launched its first of four newspapers, the 'Flying Post', of short duration, followed in October by his 'General News-Letter' (ten numbers), an unremarkable digest of domestic and foreign intelligence. Clearly Esdall had not as yet found his voice. 
With the relative success of his first year in business, Esdall moved his premises on 16 November 1745 to the Blind Quay, at the corner of Copper Alley on Cork Hill, his base of operations for the next ten years. To his new premises, he brought the capable woman who became his helpmate and unofficial business partner, 
Concurrently with his work on the 'News-Letter', Esdall regularly reprinted, or sold reprints of, English imprints (both new and old) which capitalized on the heated political climate of the mid-1740s -- among these 'The question of whether Great Britain and Ireland can be otherwise than miserable under a popish king?'; and 'The Free Briton's Answer to the Pretender's Declaration... by the Archbishop of Yorke', followed two years later by a reprint of a popular anonymous London ballad, 'Lovat's Ghost', occasioned by the recent public beheading of a notorious Jacobite intriguer Simon Fraser, Lord Lovat. Other works from this period include new material by Irish writers such as James Eyre Weekes whose poem 'The Amazon', together with 'To the Ladies of Dublin' (both 1745), indicates the firm's awareness of Dublin's growing number of women readers. Its output notwithstanding, this first half of Esdall's career was blandly uneventful as compared with the tumult soon to follow. 
Esdall's first professional association with Charles Lucas had led to the publication in March 1744 of Lucas's uncharacteristically temperate work, 'Divelina libera: an Apology of the Civil Rights and Liberties of the Citizens of Dublin'. Beginning in 1749, however, Esdall's association with Lucas developed into a dangerous partnership, with fatal results for his career. First, Esdall printed in pamphlet format some twenty political addresses by Lucas on Irish constitutional freedom and the corruption of the House of Commons. Second, he furthered his partnership with Lucas by printing Lucas's political newspaper (the fourth newspaper from the Esdall firm), 'The Censor, or, The Citizen's Journal'. And, third, he printed in June 1749 Lucas's chief work, the bold 'Magna charta libertatum civitatis Dublini', which he actively promoted in his newspaper (1 June 1749). 
The authorities did not share Esdall's enthusiasm. Lucas had manifestly succeeded in focusing strong attention on himself and his polemical writings -- and the authorities were keen to stop him and his brisk printer. Finding Lucas's 'Charter' thoroughly subversive, the chief justice examined Esdall on 16 June 1749; Esdall admitted to his (and Lucas's) role in Lucas's political writings ('Censor', 17). On 11-16 October 1749 the House of Commons resolved that Lucas's newspaper and pamphlets -- all printed by Esdall -- promoted sedition and insurrection ('The Tryal of Mr Charles Lucas', 1749; 'Collins' Pamphlets', 54, no. 16). Facing prosecution, Esdall refused to co-operate when summoned to be taken into custody. His subsequent actions remain unclear, though it appears that he went into hiding, was incarcerated, or fled Ireland for London, the continent, or even the new (hospitable) book centres of New York, Boston, and Philadelphia. On 5 December 1749 Anne Esdall, in lieu of her absent husband, was examined by the Commons about 'scandalous' and 'factious libels' emanating from the Esdall firm ('Journals of the House of Commons of... Ireland', 5.27-8). In May 1750 the grand jury presented Lucas's writings as 'seditious libels' to be publicly burnt, with severe penalties for the author and publisher (Gilbert Library, Dublin, Robinson MS 31, nos. 6 and 7; 'Dublin Journal', 15). 
These troubles seriously disrupted the operations and profits of Esdall's firm, resulting in a significant, and evidently irrecoverable, loss of income. In summer 1750 Esdall returned to public life and attempted to recover his recent shortfall with a flurry of new issues and stock; among these were 'The Case and Tryal of John Peter Zenger, Printer, for a Libel Against the Government' (a famous case of its kind, with particular applications to Esdall's troubles); Colley Cibber's classical imitations from Horace and Pindar, 'A Rhapsody upon the Marvellous' (London, 1751; Esdall reprint, Dublin, 1751); Henry Fielding's essay on urban reform, 'Examples of the Interposition of Providence' (London, 1752; Esdall reprint, Dublin, 1752); and Lord Bolingbroke's 'Letters on the Study and Use of History' (London, 1752; Dublin reprint, 1752). 
James Esdall died in Dublin, aged about thirty-five years, on 24 March 1755. He was survived by his wife and their four children. Esdall's death was mentioned solemnly by his former master and mentor, George Faulkner, whose poignant homage mentioned his former apprentice's short and sad life: 'He suffered very much in Health and Fortune by some certain People whom he espoused', suggesting, perhaps, Lucas's betrayal of Esdall when Esdall most needed him. Faulkner appealed to the public to assist the widow Esdall and her 'four helpless children' ('Dublin Journal', 25 [1755]; Pollard, 'Dictionary', 183). 
The Esdall firm continued after Esdall's death under the direction of Anne Esdall, with the firm's former journeyman, Henry Saunders, who had been taken on in 1749. She had announced these plans in the 'Dublin Journal' (1 April 1755). In 1755 she issued 'A Vindication of the Conduct of Mr John McCannon' and an edition of Edmund Gibson's 'Experimental Philosophy', sold by Oliver Nelson, an active Dublin bookseller-printer and former business associate of her late husband's. But operations soon foundered, and Mrs Esdall had to liquidate the firm's stock, its equipment, and even the household furniture ('Dublin Journal', 7 [1755]). Saunders then took over the firm, promptly restyling 'Esdall's News-Letter' as 'Saunders' News-Letter' (1755-74; Munter, 243). One of Saunders's apprentices was his former employer's son, William Esdall (died 1795), husband of Elizabeth Levinge, who was apprenticed to Saunders in 1763 and admitted free of the guild in 1777. After William's death in 1795, Anne Esdall, aged seventy-seven, petitioned the printers' guild for relief. Three guineas were granted (Pollard, 'Dictionary', 182). Anne herself died about 1795. 
James Esdall is an important figure in the history of Irish political journalism and Ireland's print culture during the mid-eighteenth century. The necessary man, beneath the blast and counter blast of reputation, lies in the factual record of his life and work. At great personal and professional jeopardy, he was an ardent promoter of Irish talent, Irish writings, and a free Irish press. An ethical businessman in a kingdom rife with surreptitious and unauthorized imprints -- not to mention rogue printers -- Esdall worked congenially and ethically with stationers and writers in London and in Dublin. In the lineage of protean Irish patriots of his day -- Molesworth, Molyneux, Swift, Lucas, Faulkner -- James Esdall merits inclusion. 


@@@@@


doc= 64277


Lloyd, Edward (fl. 1703-1736), printer and bookseller, is earliest referred to in 1703, when he moved from London and settled at the Oxmantown Coffee House, Church Street, Dublin; details of his parentage and upbringing are unknown. Soon afterwards he and his business partner, Richard Pue, published their first newspaper, 'Impartial Occurrences', with issue 1 dated 25 December 1703. The title was published regularly, priced at 8's'. including postage, and was regarded as 'excellent value'. Lloyd was described as the author in the paper for 6 January 1705, but by February 1712 the title had changed to 'Pue's Occurrences', marking the transition to Richard Pue's sole ownership. 
In May 1705 Lloyd opened a second coffee house, the Golden Ball at Cole's Alley, off Castle Street. Through his friendship with Jonathan Swift he was able to sell at both his premises Swift's controversial satire on abuses in religion and learning, 'A Tale of a Tub' (4th edn, 1704). Gaining in confidence as a publisher, Lloyd in the same year offered readers a series of 'ingenious and entertaining pamphlets upon everything of moment', which gave rise to his 'Dublin Courant, or, Diverting Post'. Alongside this venture Lloyd began a range of trading initiatives, including the import of 'one hundred curious statues, cut in allabaster, many of which are fit for placing in gardens' ('Impartial Occurrences', quoted in Pollard, 367-8). 
By 1707 Lloyd had established his own publishing company, the New Post Office Printing House, in Essex Street at the corner of Sycamore Alley. However, on 29 July the Irish House of Lords ordered his arrest for printing a 'Postscript to Mr Higgins's Sermon', a seditious and libellous tract (attributed to the nonjuror Charles Leslie) which defended Francis Higgins's earlier anti-whig polemic. Lloyd promptly disappeared and left his trading interest in the hands of his wife, of whom further details are unknown. However, he was back in business in 1709, and on 12 March, with help from his friend the printer and publisher Francis Dickson, he was able to rent the Union (hereafter Lloyd's) Coffee House, Cork Hill, and subsequently relinquished his ownership of another premises on Bridge Street. 
In 1711 Lloyd visited Cork to dispose of copies of his single-sheet 'Memorial of the Church of England', which had appeared earlier that year and remained largely unsold. He was soon in trouble, and on 12 September Cork magistrates published a 'Presentment of the grand jury of the city of Cork against Edward Lloyd, for publishing several libels' (1711), which argued that the bookseller intended to 'make the way easier for a popish pretender to possess the throne'. A year later he was in dire trouble for publishing the 'Memoirs of Chevalier de St George' and for issuing proposals for printing an abridgement of William Dicconson's life of James II. The magistrates at once ordered the seizure of Lloyd's book and identified him at his prosecution for treasonable libel, recorded in the Armagh diocesan papers, as the architect of a plan to promote the Pretender (James Stuart). Lloyd fled to England, and his petition to the duke of Ormond was referred to the tory lord chancellor of Ireland, Sir Constantine Phipps. Ormond ordered a stop to the legal proceedings on 18 June 1713 and Phipps interposed with a warrant for a 'nolle prosequi', to the anger of Dublin whigs. Unbowed by recent events, Lloyd began a new title, 'Lloyd's Newsletter', a vehemently anti-whig periodical. The whigs, victorious in the general election of autumn 1713, immediately threatened Phipps with impeachment for his defence of Lloyd, who had now returned to Dublin, if only for a brief period. In May 1714 he and his family gave up the Cork Hill coffee house and left Ireland for London. 
The situation faced by Lloyd and Phipps was temporarily eased with the dissolution of parliament following the death of Queen Anne in August 1714. However, on 30 September Phipps was relieved of his responsibilities in Ireland and also returned to London, which he entered in October attended by a train of thirty horses, with Lloyd at the head of the procession. Thereafter Lloyd disappeared into obscurity until he published his 'Description of the City of Dublin' (1732), in which he identified himself as a 'citizen and silk-thrower of London' who had 'lived nearly twenty years in Ireland', suggesting that he had lived some ten years in Ireland between 1714 and 1732. In the same year as his account of Dublin he published a 'Description of Cork' and a work on the Irish mercantile economy, 'Thoughts on Trade', in 1736. He then disappeared once more; details of his date and place of death remain unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 64278


Donaldson, Alexander (bap. 1727, d. 1794), bookseller and printer, was baptized in Edinburgh on 24 November 1727, the second son of James Donaldson (1694-1754), a wealthy linen manufacturer who served as the town's treasurer in 1726-7, and Elizabeth Weir (died 1768). His grandfather Captain James Donaldson (d. 1719) had published the 'Edinburgh Gazette' from 1699 to 1707. Alexander later stated that he 'embarked in the trade and business of a bookseller in the year 1750 at Edinburgh' (Skinner, 4), although he is identified as the publisher of a three-volume Edinburgh reprint of Joseph Hall's 'Contemplations', dated 1749. He became a burgess and guild brother of the city by right of his father on 29 August 1750. On 10 January 1751 he married Anna Marshall or Merchall ('bap'. 1726, died 1792), a merchant's daughter, with whom he had three sons, but only the eldest, James Donaldson (1751-1830), printer and founder of Donaldson's Hospital, survived childhood. On 4 December 1751 Donaldson became a one-third seat-holder at the prestigious New Kirk in St Giles Church, and on 23 June 1752 he joined masonic lodge Canongate Kilwinning no. 2. 
The period from the early 1750s to the mid-1760s was marked by a series of bookselling and printing partnerships in Edinburgh. From 1751 until May 1758 Donaldson was the junior partner of one of Edinburgh's most prominent booksellers, Alexander Kincaid (1710-1777). On their own and in collaboration with Andrew Millar of London, Kincaid and Donaldson published several new books of philosophy and medicine by Scottish authors, including Francis Home, Henry Home (later Lord Kames), James Lind, and David Hume, and from 1753 until 1784 Donaldson's name was included in the imprint of every edition of Hume's most important collection of philosophical writings, 'Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects'. They also began reprinting English literature, such as the two-volume duodecimo edition of John Milton's 'Poetical Works' that appeared in 1755. Donaldson subsequently became the fourth partner in the firm which printed that work, and from 1756 to 1760 items 'printed by Sands, Donaldson, Murray, and Cochran' were common. In August 1760 he entered into a printing partnership with John Reid that was dissolved on 11 November 1765, after which Donaldson retained the large printing house he had acquired on the south side of Castlehill and sued Reid for embezzling his books. 
After leaving Kincaid, Donaldson expanded his literary reprinting business, taking Alexander Pope's head as the sign of his bookshop. By the early 1760s it was the meeting place for young Scots with literary ambitions, such as James Boswell and Andrew Erskine, who lionized 'that seat of learning and genius, Mr Alexander Donaldson's shop' ('Boswell's General Correspondence', 3 Dec 1761), and its owner, 'the great Donaldson' (ibid., 8 Dec 1761), in correspondence published in 1763 as 'Letters between the Hon. Andrew Erskine and James Boswell, esq.' Boswell describes Donaldson in his harvest jaunt journal as 'a man of uncommon activity and enterprise in Business, who has a smattering of humour and a tollerable Address' and 'entertains like a Prince' ('Boswell's London Journal', 27 Oct 1762), which he could well afford to do as a result of a $10,000 inheritance from his father. The entertaining was done in Donaldson's spacious house in the West Bow. The second volume of Donaldson's 'Collection of Original Poems' by 'Scotch Gentlemen' (1760-62) provided Boswell and Erskine with a much appreciated outlet for their juvenile poetry, and accounts for Boswell's dubbing him 'the imperial sovereign of Pope's Head, Caledonian Dodsley, Scottish Baskerville, and captain-general of collective bards' ('Boswell's General Correspondence', 2 Dec 1761). Although Donaldson published other new books in various fields, he had little to do with publishing new works by Scottish Enlightenment authors after the dissolution of his partnership with Kincaid. 
Donaldson moved to London by early April 1763. He initially joined with his brother John ('b'. 1729) at 195 Strand, at the corner of Arundel Street (sometimes identified as 'near Norfolk-street'), but imprints continued to advertise both London and Edinburgh branches of the business. Although John claimed in an advertisement of 1774 to have been selling books at the same address since 1 October 1756, it was the arrival of Alexander, armed with his cheap Edinburgh reprints, that transformed 195 Strand into the notorious 'shop for cheap books' ('Boswell's London Journal', 13 May 1763). On 24 June 1773 the partnership was dissolved 'by mutual consent' ('Edinburgh Evening Courant', 9 Aug 1773), with John staying at 195 Strand and Alexander moving to larger quarters at 48 St Paul's Churchyard, where he remained until the late 1780s. The reasons for the dissolution of the brothers' partnership remain a mystery, but from the mid-1770s onwards imprints stating 'printed for John Donaldson' became increasingly common, at times outpacing Alexander's own. Both men issued catalogues to promote their books. In Edinburgh, with Kincaid and on his own, Alexander had used catalogues in a conventional manner to announce the sale or auction of a special collection of books, usually for a limited time, but in London he adopted a more brazen approach, as in his 1774 circular 'Books Sold Cheap', which announces prices 'thirty to fifty 'per cent' cheaper than the usual London prices' on his basic stock, and editorializes about his philosophy of bookselling. 
Donaldson's invasion of the London market brought to a head an ongoing struggle between the leading London booksellers, who claimed their copyrights in perpetuity, and the majority of the Scottish book trade, who believed that copyrights were limited to the maximum term of twenty-eight years set down in the statute of Queen Anne, dating from 1710. After April 1763 the copyright debate often centred on the motives and character of Donaldson himself. In a confrontation on 20 July 1763 with the Scottish MP George Dempster, who asserted that Donaldson's aim was to make books affordable to the poor, Samuel Johnson was 'loud and violent against Mr Donaldson' and said he was, at best, 'no better than Robin Hood' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.438-9). Donaldson was criticized in the press for sacrificing quality for the sake of price, as in the attack on his edition of Pope's Homer for its 'incorrectness and mutilations' ('London Chronicle', 8-10 March 1774). He was also taken to court: eleven suits in chancery court and one in the Scottish court of session since 1763, according to a petition that Donaldson submitted to both houses of parliament in spring 1774. There, as well as in the anonymous pamphlet that he published, and allegedly wrote, in 1764 under the title 'Some Thoughts on the State of Literary Property', he consistently presented himself as the enemy of monopoly and its harmful effects on 'the advancement of learning' (p. 7), who had been obliged 'to struggle with the united force of almost all the eminent booksellers of London and Westminster', to incur 'heavy expense', and to suffer 'much trouble and anxiety' in the name of 'the general right to supply the community at large with books at a moderate price' (Donaldson, 'Petition'). 
At first the legal skirmishing went badly, especially when the Donaldson brothers were slapped with a perpetual injunction in 'Becket v. Donaldson' in November 1772 for printing a cheap edition of James Thomson's 'The Seasons' in Edinburgh ('printed by A. Donaldson'). But then Alexander and two others won an important challenge before the Scottish court of session in July 1773, and that case paved the way for the Donaldsons' decisive victory in 'Donaldson v. Becket' on 22 February 1774, when the House of Lords overturned the injunction against 'The Seasons' on appeal, putting an end to the legal fiction of perpetual copyright and confirming the modern concept of limited, statutory copyright. When word of this decision reached Edinburgh there was public rejoicing, and the book trade drank a toast to the Donaldson brothers 'for having the courage to stand forth in the cause of liberty, against a most powerful combination' ('Caledonian Mercury', 2 March 1774). Alexander's petition was submitted to the House of Commons on 3 May in an unsuccessful effort to turn that body against the so-called 'Booksellers' Bill', which sought to provide relief to the owners of literary property by adding another fourteen years to the term of existing copyrights. The petition was also read a month later in the House of Lords, where it may have helped to quash the bill. 
Despite his emigration to London, Donaldson remained closely connected to the Edinburgh book trade. In January 1764 he founded a bi-weekly newspaper, the 'Edinburgh Advertiser', which was taken over by his son James ten years later and survived until 1859. A series of Edinburgh lawsuits during the 1760s demonstrates Donaldson's continuing business interests there, and an incident in May 1769, when he had a chest containing 'eight or ten thousand guineas' (Somerville, 162) transported from London to the Bank of Scotland in Edinburgh, shows the scale of his London profits as well as where the money was going. From 1773 onwards he seems to have surrendered most of his printing work to James, and from the middle of the next decade the number of imprints stating 'printed for' or 'sold by' A. Donaldson diminished to a trickle. The last one appeared in 1789, the year in which he retired to Broughton Hall on the outskirts of Edinburgh, which he had purchased in June 1786. Donaldson died there on 11 March 1794 and was buried three days later in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh, having bequeathed to his son an estate worth about $100,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 64281


Rayner, William (bap. 1699, d. 1761), printer and bookseller, the son of Christopher Rayner, mariner, and his wife, Anne, was baptized at the church of St Giles Cripplegate on 4 October 1699. In 1714 he was apprenticed to the City printer Anne Motte and in 1719 he was turned over to John Millet, a printer whose output consisted mainly of ballads, broadsides, and chapbooks. Rayner was later said to have married before completing the final two years of his term and he certainly did not become free of the Stationers' Company until 1737. However, unless he married outside London, the registers do not seem to corroborate the suggested timing. In 1724 a William Rayner married an Elizabeth Bray at St Martin-in-the-Fields and the elusive E. Rayner, the wife of William who worked in his shops and appeared on an increasing number of imprints identified only by an initial, was perhaps this Elizabeth. The careers of William Rayner and a fellow printer/publisher, Robert Walker, followed a very similar trajectory and there were probably some ill-defined commercial links between them during the 1720s and 1730s as they came to dominate areas of the trade in cheap print. Both Rayner and Walker set up as pamphlet sellers and in 1728 they appeared jointly on the imprint of a virulent anti-Walpole pamphlet. 'The Dunghill and the Oak' was printed for Walker and 'W. R.' and the publication of this form of occasional political material became characteristic of the initial phase of Rayner's and Walker's careers in publishing. At the end of 1729 both were independently implicated in the publication of pamphlets which hinted at Jacobite sympathies, although neither was prosecuted. By the early 1730s Rayner was running the New Pamphlet Shop next door to the George Tavern at Charing Cross, with the help of his wife and a female servant. The publications issued from this address were numerous and varied, but while E. Rayner appeared mainly on the imprint of light, non-controversial material, William Rayner himself moved into areas of commercial and political conflict. He was soon identified in print as a 'notorious Paper Pyrate', freely publishing versions of other people's work, including Henry Fielding, while he continued to cash in on the popularity of attacks on the government. Like Walker, Rayner contracted out at least part of his printing to other members of the trade, but by 1733 he had his own office in Marigold Court near the Exeter Exchange in the Strand. The link between the two publishers was given a concrete form in 1731 when Rayner's name appeared on an affidavit, printed in the 'Daily Journal', supporting Walker in his disclaimer of responsibility for the content of a libellous pamphlet. 
The next phase in Rayner's erratic career was precipitated by a political prosecution. In 1731 a collection of leading essays published in 'The Craftsman', the main vehicle for opposition attacks on Walpole's government, was published in seven volumes. Each volume had an allegorical frontispiece and the popularity of the material provided Rayner with an opportunity to combine his piratical and political interests by reprinting the frontispieces on a single sheet under the title 'Robin's Reign, or, Seven's the Main'. The official response to this was slow but it may have been the reprinting of the broadside under a modified title, combined with the presentment of this and related material by the Middlesex grand jury, that triggered the legal action. Robert Walker was among those arrested but the weight of the proceedings fell on Rayner. After a period on the run he was arrested, imprisoned, and brought to trial in 1733. His defence hinged on some implausible technicalities and was accompanied by a plea of poverty. If his debts were taken into account, it was claimed, and his wearing apparel excluded, he would not to be worth $5. The sentence took some account of this. He was fined $50 rather than the usual $100, sentenced to two years in prison, and ordered to find security for his good behaviour for seven years. 
By September 1733 Rayner was in the king's bench prison in Southwark. Like the Fleet prison on the north bank of the Thames, the king's bench was surrounded by a network of streets and alleys in which the prisoners, mainly debtors, could obtain the right to work at their respective trades. On obtaining the 'Rules', Rayner's activities as a publisher continued unabated and he moved rapidly into new areas of cheap print centred on newspapers and the serial publication of works in parts. Among the first of his hybrid serials was 'The Compleat Historian, or, The Oxford Penny-Post', advertised in September 1733. It was sold 'for the Benefit of William Rayner, Prisoner in the King's Bench' and was printed at his office in Marygold Court. The characteristically mixed content printed on three folio sheets and selling at 2died included a combination of news, state trials, and a history of Scotland. It was to be published every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. By September 1734 Rayner had opened a printing office in Bird Cage Alley in Southwark, next door to the Horse and Groom alehouse, where he employed, among others, the politically compromised compositor Doctor Gaylard. 
Rayner's output, like that of Walker with which it overlaps, has a variety of confusing features compounded by deliberate attempts to conceal or mislead. The volume of material he produced was considerable and his premises seem to have become the focus for a network of book-trade outsiders, printers, engravers, and authors who provided the workforce on which his activities were based. Walker moved progressively away from the London market; Rayner, partly by force of circumstances, focused on the metropolis. In 1734 he was distantly involved in the Shakespeare piracies which preoccupied Robert Walker but while the volume of his cheap, serial output was increasing and his conflicts with members of the respectable London trade continued unabated, the scale of his business and the state of his personal circumstances remain hard to identify. In 1735 he was negotiating with Robert Bloomfield in Norfolk over the sale of a second-hand press, while the following year the bizarre plot to explode a parcel of leaflets in parliament was hatched in his immediate neighbourhood by the nonjuror Robert Nixon. This was more Gaylard's business but at the time he was still working for Rayner. 
The stages by which William Rayner moved out of the king's bench and the causes of his long-term residence within the rules are equally obscure. In 1737 he became free of the Stationers' Company but remained within the prison. It may have provided a convenient base for his aggressive excursions into the market for print. In 1738, taking advantage of the split in the management of 'The Craftsman', which remained in print, Rayner began to orchestrate the publication of the 'Original Craftsman' in head-on competition. Production was organized in association with the printer John Standen, who moved to the Old Bailey to facilitate publication. Rayner hired two of the floating population of hackney writers, Dennis de Coetlogan and Norton Defoe, to provide regular copy and seems to have monitored the printing though his name was entirely absent from the paper itself. His real position only emerged when official action was taken against the paper and Standen, Gaylard, and both authors were arrested and subjected to close examination. Whatever the outcome, Rayner, in the security of the king's bench, seems to have remained untouched. In May 1739 he set about disposing of a large quantity of stock consisting mainly of part works and copperplate-engravings. His position outside the charmed circles of the respectable trade probably forced him to deal directly with the public through the unusual device of a subscription sale, for which he issued 8000 tickets at 2's'. 6died each. In July he obtained his freedom of the City of London and the following year moved from Southwark to a new printing office in Wine Office Court in the ward of Farringdon Without. As usual, his personal circumstances are obscure. In a petition for release at the beginning of 1740 he claimed to be utterly unable to pay the money required from his original sentence. 
This marked the beginning of the third phase in Rayner's career in the print trade. His output was still based on newspapers and part works although the controversial elements of his business were apparently in decline. His successful tri-weekly paper which had first appeared in 1736 as 'Rayner's Morning Advertiser' continued in print under a variety of modified titles into 1743, while the annotated versions of the 'Bible' which had provided one of his staples during the 1730s also remained an element in his output during the next decade. The indications are that Rayner was becoming respectable. In 1744 he took over two apprentices from John Standen and so became directly associated with the Stationers' Company whose members' interests he had been attempting to undermine for years. Walker remained combative and unassimilated by the respectable trade. Rayner may have joined it. The reason seems to lie partly in the change to his personal circumstances caused by a fortunate second marriage. In 1741 Sir John Dineley-Goodere was murdered by crewmen who had been hired by his brother. Meanwhile, in the mid-1730s, Sir John's wife, Mary, had been imprisoned in the king's bench where she may have met Rayner. In 1743, according to John Nichols, they married and Rayner acquired the murdered husband's property, including the manor of Charlton in Worcestershire. Support for this account appeared in Rayner's will of 1761, where he described himself as formerly of Charlton in the county of Worcester. In May 1744 he was granted a licence under letters patent to the sole right to print and publish 'A Family Bible, or, The Old and New Testament Explained by Way of Question and Answer' by William Friend, but already his direct engagement with the book trade was fading. For the rest of his life he held shares in various copies but there are no indications that he was subsequently involved in either the production or distribution of print. There is also some suggestion that he may have had a continuing interest in medicines. During the late 1730s, in tandem with Walker in Fleet Lane, he sold Daffy's Elixir and other medical specifics from his warehouse in Southwark. Under the terms of his will, George West, apothecary of Derby Street, Westminster, was appointed executor to oversee the sale of his property, while in the single year 1760 an entry in the land tax assessment for Fleet Lane identified a William Rayner. It seems possible that even at this late stage a link existed with Dr Walker as he now called himself. Some time in the mid-1740s Rayner may have moved to Charlton, though Nichols claimed that he alienated the property soon after he had acquired it. By the time he came to make his will in 1761 he was living on a copyhold estate in the prosperous London suburb of Hammersmith. 
In his brief published comments, John Nichols implicated Rayner in a piece of sharp practice that may have occurred shortly before his death. The City printer Elizabeth Nunneley was said to have bequeathed a substantial property to her nephew and niece 'of which they were deprived by the chicanery of... their guardian' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 8.447) identified by Nichols as the printer William Rayner. The date of Mrs Nunneley's death cannot have occurred much before 1760 and it was only in a correction to an earlier statement that Rayner's name was substituted for Baynes. However, Nichols identified Mrs Nunneley as publisher of the 'St. James's Evening Post' and in 1761 Rayner held a 1/20 share in this paper as well as in its partner publication, 'Read's Weekly Journal and London Spy'. Direct evidence is lacking, but it was the sort of action that a self-interested businessman of Rayner's type might have been ready to undertake. 
Under Rayner's will, drawn up on 21 May 1761, he bequeathed his property to his third wife, Anne, of whom further details are unknown. There was no mention of children by this or any other marriage. His financial position appears to have been stable and the valuation of his stock made at the beginning of 1761 indicated his ownership of some useful properties. 'Smith's Bible', which Rayner had first issued in parts during the 1730s, was valued at $350. This, in combination with his interest in the Hammersmith estate and other accumulated assets, may have justified the use of the respectable title of esquire in the probate record. Rayner died not long after making his will, which was proved on 6 November 1761. 


@@@@@


doc= 64282


Walker, Robert (c.1709-1761), printer and distributor of patent medicines, details of whose parentage and upbringing remain the subject of speculation, was a prolific entrepreneur in print based in London, who was probably apprenticed through the Stationers' Company. Two entries under this name appear in the registers. The first, a Scot, was apprenticed to a writing master in 1699 and freed in 1706. The second, and more likely candidate, was the son of Thomas Walker, gentleman, deceased, of St Bride's parish in London. This Robert Walker was apprenticed in 1724, presumably at an age close to fourteen, to the City printer James Read, but did not formally complete his term of seven years. Read's interests centred on the publication of his pro-Walpole weekly journal and the sale of patent medicines, while his son Thomas was active in the publication of part-works and cheap newspapers. All these elements figured prominently in the career of Robert Walker. The first imprints to carry his name were published during 1728 and they included a virulent anti-Walpole pamphlet, 'The Dunghill and the Oak', printed for Walker and 'W. R.'. The initials were undoubtedly those of William Rayner, whose career interlocked with Walker's and who may have had some direct commercial links with him. Between them, Walker and Rayner dominated the trade in the cheaper forms of print into the early 1740s. Walker's appearance on this contentious publication fits with the image of a young man, free of parental control, whose rash and active nature, combined perhaps with financial necessity, were likely to push him into confrontations with authority. His willingness to engage with this material led to his arrest in December 1729, at which time he was described as a pamphlet seller and printer. With his wife he was running a shop at the sign of the White Hart in the Strand adjacent to Devereux Court. The proprietor and distributor of the famous Anodyne Necklace lived on the first floor, while E. Lynn, a whip maker with some interest in publishing, and an unidentified pamphleteer were also on the premises. Walker was taken into custody but made fulsome offers of discovery and was not proceeded against. His unnamed wife figured prominently but, although the details of Walker's family circumstances are obscure, the timing of what is known, checked against the content of his will (1761), may suggest a second marriage in the 1730s. Circumstantial evidence seems to point to a first wife, Elizabeth Hoseley (died 1731), and a second, Judith (second name unknown), who survived him. Their daughter Judith was baptized at St Sepulchre Church (1738) as were four other children -- Anne (1740), Robert (1743), Mary (1745), and Franklin (1749). Samuel Walker was baptized at St Botolph without Bishopsgate in 1750. 
Meanwhile Walker's erratic and dynamic career was moving in several directions. He continued to publish potentially libellous pamphlets, and an equivocal disclaimer of responsibility for one of them which he inserted in the 'Daily Journal' in 1731 was supported by an affidavit signed by William Rayner. Party-political material hostile to the administration continued to form an identifiable element within his mixed output as printer and publisher. In 1732 he was again arrested, this time in a sweep of the trade centred on a cluster of anti-Walpole material for which Rayner was arrested and finally imprisoned (1733). It may have been because of the force of this process that Walker moved into another, more directly commercial, area of attack. In 1734 he became embroiled in a flat-out battle over material claimed by Jacob Tonson and associates, high-status members of the respectable London trade, under the shaky notion of perpetual copyright. Walker had apparently moved his main centre of operations to Turnagain Lane, one of the streets embedded in the dense networks of courts and alleys abutting the Fleet market and prison and adjacent to the complex formed by Newgate prison, the Sessions House, and the College of Physicians in the Old Bailey. He remained in this neighbourhood for the rest of his life. From his printing office he began to issue cut-price editions of the plays of Shakespeare and others which were being simultaneously published by the booksellers whom in his advertisements he described as 'the monopolists'. Legal proceedings followed but Walker remained in business and may have reached a financial accommodation with his competitors. He continued to confront the claims of the respectable trade and in 1739 and 1752 faced injunctions over his serial publication of 'Paradise Lost'. He remained undaunted. During the skirmishes with Tonson in 1734 Walker worked out of a number of shops under his truculent sign of Shakespeare's Head and his premises at the Royal Exchange and in Fleet Street, among other central locations, figured on his fluctuating imprints. In the mid-1730s he moved his printing office to Fleet Lane, where he consolidated his business and began to develop what were to become his main lines of publication -- cheap newspapers and part works. The bibliography of Walker's increasingly voluminous output is bewildering. Non-survival, disguised imprints, multiple and overlapping series in a variety of forms help to obscure the networks of material that flowed through Walker's office and across the nation. 
Initially, Walker's publications are hard to distinguish from those of William Rayner and others. However, by 1737 he had begun to publish sequences of cheap newspapers specifically directed at the local market. With their geographical target identified in their titles by county, these publications represented the first attempt to provide cheap serial print specifically for readers outside London. The newspapers formed one part of Walker's marketing strategy. It was combined with the issue of works in parts, some of which used material already in print and often claimed under copyright; others were composed of original material written by authors for whom Walker acted as sole publisher. These serials were sometimes supplementary to the newspapers with which they were issued, sometimes the newspaper simply formed the wrapper for each part. The third element of Walker's output was provided by medical specifics. 
From 1739 Walker consolidated his newspaper interest in the 'London and Country Journal'. Until 1741 this was published in conjunction with the 'History of the Bible' in parts which was incorporated into the title of the paper. The 'Journal' appeared in different series published from Fleet Lane on different days of the week and directed at readers in counties extending through the midlands and into the north-west. Walker's interventions in places outside London brought him into a series of conflicts with established local printers such as Thomas Aris in Birmingham. To ensure a foothold in the local market he began from the late 1730s to work directly with printers who moved into several of the main urban centres as his representative. John Berry in Manchester (1738) and Joseph Collett in Bristol (1739) centred their activities on the distribution of Walker's print and medicines, while Walker himself played an occasional part in the conduct of the local business. 
By the mid-1740s Walker's business may have needed a new impetus. He had resolved the problems arising out of his attempt to evade the taxes on newspapers, pamphlets, and advertisements and in most local centres agreement seems to have been reached with his main competitors. In 1744 Walker left London with the printers Rene Le Butte and Thomas James to set up a new printing office in Cambridge, from which the first newspaper to appear locally was to be produced. The 'Cambridge Journal and Weekly Flying Post' proved successful and two years later Walker moved on. In another joint venture, this time with the printer William Jackson, Walker targeted Oxford. In 1746 they opened a printing office and began to publish the 'Oxford Flying Weekly Journal'. In spite of entrenched university interests, the corporation of the city of Oxford granted Walker the right to hang out his sign at the office and Jackson to do the same at their medical warehouse (1746/7). In 1749 the newspaper ceased publication and Walker, who had also published a number of part works in association with Jackson, probably returned to London. Four years later Jackson set up a new journal under his own name and in 1761 was named as an executor in Walker's will. 
Walker continued to run his London printing and publishing business, probably with the help of his wife, who must have taken over during his absences, and to distribute those medicines in which he had a special interest. The Fleet Lane printing office itself or adjacent premises appeared in advertisements as Walker's Daffy's Elixir Warehouse (1738) or the British Oil Warehouse (1748). Walker, like his competitors, made extensive promotional use of royal grants under letters patent. These sometimes applied to original printed material particularly vulnerable to low-level piracy and increasingly to such medicines as the British Oil, which was granted to Walker during the 1740s. His business, like that of most printer-publishers in London and elsewhere, was essentially miscellaneous. His 'Journal' carried advertisements for prints, songs, shrub (a lemon mixer), as well as his usual cheap print and medicine. Print was always part of a broad spectrum of commercial interests and at the end of the 1740s, although he was still living at his house in the Little Old Bailey, near Fleet Street, his move away from publication may already have begun. In 1752 he issued the serial edition of 'Paradise Lost', to which Tonson took exception, and announced the trials of Mary Blandy and others. In a notice published in the papers he expressed outrage at those who were already pirating these trials 'in the most scandalous and mangled Manner'. 
Such remarks suggest a build-up in pressure. Shortly after this Walker fled abroad to avoid his creditors, although by 1755 he had returned and surrendered himself to the keeper of the Fleet prison. In July he claimed benefit of the latest 'Act for Insolvent Debtors', describing himself as 'formerly of Fleet Lane, late of the Little Old Bailey... and last of Dunkirk in French Flanders' ('London Gazette', 9492, Saturday 12 July 1755). His release was followed in 1756 by a brief flourish of material issued from the Fleet Lane office under the imprint of Judith Walker. He must have found the return to an increasingly active market in print discouraging and from 1755 Walker himself reappears in the exclusive guise of a specialist supplier of a patent medicine called the Jesuit Drops or Elixir of Health and Long Life. 
This was one of many specifics for venereal disease and was available under a plain wrapper from Walker's warehouse at the Bible and Crown in Fleet Lane. Walker described himself as the inventor and patentee of the drops and in his advertisements rehearsed his accumulation of grants for its exclusive production and sale -- for England and for the Plantations (1755), for Scotland (1756), and for Ireland (1759). He may have kept up the printing office to produce books of direction, handbills, labels, and other necessary items, but his interest in other forms of print was over. His medical business was managed by Joseph Wessells, who was praised in Walker's will for his 'capacity in the practice of Physick and Surgery' as well as for his knowledge of Walker's medicines. In 1761 Wessells was earning a salary of 2 guineas a week and was probably responsible for a number of 'Common and Necessary Servants' employed in 'Bottling, Corking, Tying, Papering &c.'. Walker's established distribution networks extending overseas must have been fully employed. At his death he owned a $150 share in the brig 'Happy Success', presumably for use in the export trade. 
Suddenly, in 1759, his advertisements without comment began to refer to Dr Robert Walker (MD), a title which he insisted on using in all areas of his personal life. Working almost opposite the College of Physicians, his self-identification as doctor of physick may have been a last contemptuous gesture towards the claims of authority. In 1761 Walker was running a 'chariot' (hired for health reasons, he claimed) drawn by his own horses and the assumption of the title may also have reflected a rise in his financial status. Much of his long will was taken up with an attempt to ensure the continuation of the medical business, with Joseph Wessells holding the major share. His property and personal effects were to be shared between his wife, Judith, and his three daughters, Judith Burling, Elizabeth Croft, and Anne Walker. He died shortly after making his will, which was proved on 15 September 1761. No notice of his death was placed in the newspapers and advertisements for the Jesuit Drops continued to carry the name and address of 'the well-known Robert Walker' long after his demise. 


@@@@@


doc= 64283


Adams, Roger (1681?-1741), printer and publisher, is thought to have been born at Chester, and may have served an apprenticeship to a member of the Chester Company of Painters, Glaziers, Embroiderers and Stationers, although there is no entry of his name in the minute books of that company. He did, however, become a freeman of the city of Chester, by purchase, on 20 February 1714. It is possible that he may have worked for Edward Ince, who was the first commercial printer in Chester from 1710 until 1718, but this has not been verified. Adams married Elizabeth Buckley (died 1771/2), daughter of John Buckley, apothecary of Chester, at St Oswald's Church, Chester, on 28 May 1713. They had at least eight children of whom four are known to have reached adulthood: John ('bap'. 1714, died 1757), William ('bap'. 1719, died after 1741), Orion Adams (1717?-1797), and Dorothy (1717?-1757?), his twin sister. 
Adams had his first printing office in Manchester, 'At the lower end of Smithy Door' (near the collegiate church). Two books are known to have come from his Manchester press in 1716 and 1719. It was from this address that he also printed and published the 'Manchester News-Letter', later renamed the 'Manchester Weekly Journal', from December 1718 or January 1719. 
The paper sold at 1died; only thirty-five copies are known to survive, and these cover only twenty-nine issues. The largest number of these, twenty-three copies, are in the library of All Souls College, Oxford, and are for the five-month period from 6 August 1724 to 31 December 1724. The date of its demise was probably 1728, the year in which Roger Adams may have set up presses in Shrewsbury and Eastgate Street, Chester. One work (undated but assigned to 1728), 'Tair o Gerddi Newyddion' ('Three new ballads'), has the imprint 'Argraphwyd gan Roger Adams... Mwythig' ('Printed by Roger Adams, Shrewsbury'), while Thomas Badeslade's 'Some Short and Plain Considerations' (also 'c'.1728) bears the imprint 'Chester: Printed by Roger Adams in Eastgate Street'. 
Adams also published a newspaper, the 'Weekly Courant', in Chester, although this was not the town's first paper. William Cooke, Chester's second commercial printer, had issued his 'Chester Weekly Journal' from 1721 until 1733. This was briefly replaced by the 'Industrious Bee' in 1733 and then by the 'Chester Weekly Tatler' in the following year. If Roger Adams did move from Manchester to Chester in 1728, then he did so in competition with the established printer, William Cooke. However, Cooke may have been in financial difficulties about this time, as he was made to pay $25 by the Stationers' Company in 1727 (for his admittance) and in 1734 he was fined $10 for having sold an unstamped newspaper. From the numbering on surviving copies of Adams's 'Courant', it would appear to have been started in November 1732, although it has been claimed to date from 1730. The earliest known copy, number 51, is for Wednesday 7 to Wednesday 14 November 1733, and bears the imprint: 'CHERTER ['sic']: Printed by Roger Adams, Where Advertisements are taken In. Where any Person may have any small Parcels carried by the News-Men, thro' the Nine Counties they Travel, with great Care and Diligence'. Adams's first dated book was Peter Nourse's 'Athrawiaeth yr eglwys' ('Doctrine of the church') (Chester, 1731), although several undated, but datable, books survive from about 1724. One of these, 'A Sermon Preach'd at St. Hilary's Chapel Denbigh, in 1728' (1730), carries the address in the imprint as 'Roger Adams in Fleshmonger Lane'. Another work, 'A Catalogue of the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen who Compounded for their Estates' (1733), uses the same typefaces as were employed by William Cooke, thus suggesting that, about 1732-3, Adams had taken over the printing office which had been used for the 'Chester Weekly Journal'. 
The last known book to come from Roger Adams's press was 'The Raree Show, or, The Foxtrapt' (1740). The precise date of his death is unknown; according to the parish register of St John's, Chester, he was buried on 14 November 1741. Following his death the 'Courant' and the general printing business were taken over by his widow, Elizabeth, and his son John. Roger's will was proved at Chester in 1748. His son Orion had his own printing business and in July 1750 returned to Manchester where, in 1752, he resumed publication of 'Adams' Weekly Journal' from the same address as that at which his father had printed the original 'Weekly Journal'. Orion's twin sister, Dorothy, married William Monk, who had been her father's apprentice, and their son, John Monk, took over the running of the printing and publishing business in January 1772 following the death of Elizabeth Adams. The newspaper, under the title of 'Chester Courant', continued to be published weekly until its final issue dated 7 September 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 64284


Slack, Thomas (bap. 1723, d. 1784), printer and newspaper proprietor, was the eldest son of Joseph Slack (1701-1752?), of Wreay, near Carlisle, and his wife Mary ('nee' Stephenson); he was baptized on 18 December 1723 at Hesket in the Forest, Cumberland. Nothing is known of Slack's education and early years. On 15 December 1751 he married Ann (or Anne) Fisher (1719-1778), daughter of Henry Fisher, a yeoman of Oldscale, in the parish of Lorton, Cumberland. On 18 October 1752 Thomas Slack, as the heir of his father, was admitted tenant of lands at Wreay which, on 16 September 1784, his eldest daughter and heir-at-law, Mrs Mary Blaylock, inherited. 
By 1751 Slack was working for the Quaker printer Isaac Thompson, of Newcastle, to whom William Bulmer was later apprenticed. Thompson was proprietor of the 'Newcastle Journal', and Slack was said to have been his manager. Their working relationship is unclear, however, for in 1755 was issued 'Lucius and Celadon, or, A Dialogue of the Existence and Immortality of the Soul', with the imprint 'Printed by I. Thompson and C degree, for Tho. Slack'; in the following year 'The Newcastle Memorandum-Book' was published with the imprint 'Printed for Tho. Slack, and sold by all Persons who distribute the 'Newcastle Journal''. The 'Memorandum Book' survived as an annual publication until 1893, and was widely sold by booksellers in England and Scotland; Charles Elliot, the Edinburgh publisher and bookseller, for example, took 100 copies in 1774. In association with the London publishers, George Robinson & Co., he also published 'The Ladies' Own Memorandum-Book', prepared by his wife; Slack printed the letterpress matter, and the Robinsons dealt with the calendar and ruled matter. This publication continued under his successors until 1805, when the Robinsons failed. 
In 1763 Slack started his own printing business, following a disagreement with Isaac Thompson, reflected in correspondence in the local news-sheets. His shop which he named the Printing Press, was at the head of Middle Street, Newcastle upon Tyne. Slack, ably assisted by his wife, sold prints, lottery tickets, and spectacles, in addition to books and stationery. The printing of books formed a large part of their flourishing business. Between 1755 and 1784 his name appeared, as printer, publisher, or bookseller in the imprints of some 150 books, including two editions of 'The Pleasing Instructor' (1756) by his wife, writing under her maiden name. Among other books by his wife, of which Thomas Slack printed and published several editions, were 'A Practical New Grammar' (1762), 'A New English Exercise Book' (1770), 'An Accurate New Spelling Dictionary' (3rd edn, 1777), and 'The New English Tutor' (1778). An advertisement in the 'Newcastle Chronicle' for 16 March 1782 shows that he also published the pastoral poems of John Cunningham, poet and player. 
In competition with Thompson's 'Newcastle Journal' he established the weekly 'Newcastle Chronicle', the first issue appearing on 24 March 1764. The newspaper remained in the control of his daughter and son-in-law and their sons until 1850. When Joseph Cowen, industrialist and MP, took it over from Mark William Lambert in 1859 it became a radical campaigning journal; it ceased publication in 1953. 
Thomas Slack was also an author, writing under the pseudonym S. Thomas, complementing his wife's work with a series of books on business practice: 'The British Negociator' (1759), 'The Banker's Sure Guide' (1762), 'Britannicus estimator' (1764), which became 'The Ready Calculator' (1771), and 'The Commercial Palladium' (1775). He also edited W. Webster's 'Essays on Book-Keeping (1779)'. 
Among Slack's competitors in the Newcastle book trade were John White ('fl'. 1711-1769), William Charnley ('fl'. 1755-1803), and Thomas Saint ('fl'. 1761-1788), who worked with and succeeded White. White was the first 'permanent' printer in Newcastle and, in 1711, established the 'Newcastle Courant', which Saint continued. Saint pursued White's policy of concentrating on popular literature, including children's books, often illustrated by Thomas Bewick. Charnley was a considerable bookseller and publisher, helping to establish Fourstones papermill in 1763. Each of these four had, therefore, his own field of specialization, Slack concentrating on more substantial, frequently didactic, works, and all had connections with the London and provincial book trade. Ann Fisher's schoolbooks were frequently reprinted in association with Slack and 'pirated' by Hoey of Dublin, Henry Mozley of Gainsborough, Christopher Etherington of York, and Anthony Soulby of Penrith, among others. 
Slack was unusual in the eighteenth-century English provincial book trade in combining authorship (his and his wife's), printing and publishing a wide range of books, newspaper proprietorship, and jobbing printing. In this he was most successful, his will showing that in addition to the property at Wreay and his house and printing workshop in Middle Street, he had other houses and a shop in Newcastle and a one-sixteenth share in the ship 'Mary'. 
Slack and Fisher had nine children, all girls, three of whom died in infancy; one other, Jane, predeceased her father, dying in 1776, aged twenty-one. Thomas Slack died at Newcastle on 13 January 1784, and was buried at St John's Church there. The printing business was left to his fourth daughter, Sarah, then aged just under twenty-four. Solomon Hodgson (1760-1800), who had probably been working for Slack, married Sarah on 15 February 1785. On 21 February the executors of Thomas Slack's estate transferred to Hodgson the 'Newcastle Chronicle', together with the printing, bookselling, and stationery business. 


@@@@@


doc= 64286


Woolmer, Alfred Joseph (1805-1892), literary and historical genre painter, was born on 20 December 1805. Nothing is known of his parents or about his education. Although his place of birth is usually identified as Exeter (a historic seat of the Woolmer family), census records list his birthplace as Chelsea, Middlesex. At the age of twenty-two he began contributing to exhibitions of the Royal Academy, the British Institution, and the recently formed Society of British Artists, to which he was elected a member in 1841. For the next decade this exceptionally prolific artist exhibited ten to sixteen pictures with the society each year, in addition to contributions elsewhere. These numbers halved from 1853 and declined to two or three a year from 1875. Nevertheless, his sixty-year career yielded a total of 355 works exhibited with the society, forty-five with the British Institution, and twelve at the Royal Academy. 
Woolmer's paintings embody the concept of 'ut pictura poesis'. Although he often illustrated specific incidents from favourite writers -- chiefly Shakespeare, Byron, Milton, and Tennyson -- he concentrated on evoking the mood of his literary and historical subjects. Suffused with a nebulous atmosphere suggestive of nostalgia and romance, his pictures rely on exotic costumes, quaint manners, and sumptuous settings to conjure the enchantments of imagined worlds. In formulating his rich, painterly style, he culled lessons from an eclectic array of past artists, some studied on the continent, others at old master exhibitions held annually in London. One such exhibition in the summer of 1832 provided the subject of an uncharacteristically realistic painting, 'Interior of the British Institution' (Yale U. CBA). Woolmer offered self-conscious tributes to influential precursors in more fanciful paintings such as 'Rembrandt's Studio' (ex Christies, London, 16 May 1962) and 'Titian Contemplating Colour' (ex Lowndes Lodge Gallery, London, May 1968). He was best-known for sensuous, mildly erotic images of ladies at their 'toilette' and for elegant courtship scenes set in light-dappled gardens and shady bowers. Although inspired by Antoine Watteau, such imagery also links him with the English vogue for romantic historical costume pieces initiated in the 1820s and 1830s. Woolmer scouted out striking scenic effects during sketching trips to Scotland, northern Wales, the Sussex coast, the Alps, Italy, and France. His predilections for rich impasto, the dissolution of form by light, and pyrotechnical meteorological phenomena generated a visionary style reminiscent of Turner or Samuel Palmer. 
Conspicuous in both number and appearance, Woolmer's exhibition contributions were singled out for prominent critical notice during the 1850s and 1860s. Writers praised the splendour of his imaginative vision and technical facility but complained that he squandered his exceptional gifts by relying on splashy atmospheric effects to disguise cursory drawing and negligent finish. Many were perplexed by the lack of obvious meaning in his more enigmatic subjects. His copious output supports the charge of hasty work, but critical demands for clarity of subject and execution were inappropriate in view of his intentions. His rejection of narrative in favour of the evocation of mood, and his painterly concern with expressive brushwork and daring effects of light and colour, placed him at odds with contemporary art trends and help to explain his exclusion from official honours and monographic critical notice. 
Woolmer changed residences frequently before moving in 1849 to Fortis Green, Finchley, Middlesex, where he remained until 1864. He then resided briefly in Holloway, finally settling at 9 Chester Road, New Highgate, from 1868 to 1875. Woolmer was married, though the identity of his wife is unknown, and the Miss Marion Woolmer who exhibited five pictures at the Society of British Artists was presumably his daughter. In 1875 Woolmer moved to 34 Dartmouth Park Avenue, Kentish Town, where he died on 19 April 1892, six years after exhibiting his last picture. In light of his productivity, he left a surprisingly meagre estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 64287


Winterhalter, Franz Xaver (1805-1873), painter, was born on 20 April 1805 in the village of Menzenschwand in the Black Forest in Baden-Wurttemberg, the sixth of eight children of Fidel Winterhalter (1773-1863) and his wife, Eva Mayer ('b'. 1764/5). His father had various occupations, including selling watches, seasonal resin producing, and farming. Known in his youth as Xaver, Winterhalter, brought up a Roman Catholic, attended the local parish school, where Father Joseph Lieber taught him, encouraging an interest in the arts. Both he and his younger brother Hermann (1808-1891) showed early artistic talent, and through Lieber Winterhalter obtained patronage from Baron Eichtal, a well-to-do factory owner from a banking family. This sponsorship prompted speculation that Eichtal was Winterhalter's natural father. 
In 1818, aged thirteen and funded by his patron, Winterhalter left his village to study in Freiburg im Breisgau near the French border. With a view to working as an illustrator and engraver, he served an apprenticeship in drawing and engraving in the studio of Karl Ludwig von Schuler (1785-1852), who was soon appointed director of the Herdersche Kunstinstitut. Winterhalter attended this art school (somewhat unhappily, as he suffered bullying), remaining until 1823. His brother also enrolled in 1819. Some of Winterhalter's earliest known works, dating from 1818-19, include careful copies after antique plaster casts, studies of animals, and copperplate engravings. 
In Munich by 1823, Winterhalter worked at printmaking, contributing lithographs to periodical publications. In 1824 he received a grant to study at the Munich Academy of Art, where Robert von Langer (1783-1846) provided some teaching; however, it seems that Winterhalter found academic methods less than congenial. He also joined the studio of Josef Karl Stieler, a miniaturist and portrait painter in oils who had studied with Gerard in Paris, and who was court painter to Ludwig I of Bavaria. Stieler's life and work influenced Winterhalter's career, for the older artist's glamorous, French-based neo-classical style enabled Winterhalter to portray society figures in a flattering fashion, evident in his famous series of beauties at the court of Ludwig painted from 1827 onward for the Schonheitsgalerie (now at Schloss Nymphenburg, Munich). 
In 1825 Winterhalter received a pension of 200 florins from the grand duke of Baden with the stipulation that he submit one drawing each year. With this necessary patronage, in 1827 he travelled, from his base in Munich, around Germany to study. In 1829, again through the court at Baden, he was appointed drawing-master to Sophie Guillemette, grand duchess of Baden. In 1830 Winterhalter moved to Karlsruhe, where the court was located, executing portraits there, including an early self-portrait drawing. He found favour with Grand Duke Leopold, who partly funded a bursary so that he could travel to Italy in late 1832. Winterhalter spent over a year in Rome, sketching local scenes and producing some oil paintings of Italian genre subjects then fashionable. He mixed in the circle centred on the well-known Caffe Greco. It included the painter Horace Vernet, who as director of the French Academy in Rome may well have provided an entree into Parisian society. The trip indicated that Winterhalter had higher ambitions than solely producing portraits for his homeland. 
Winterhalter returned to Karlsruhe in 1834, after being appointed court painter to Grand Duke Leopold, but by the end of the year he had moved to Paris, almost immediately sending a painting of a woman's head to the Salon of 1835. His next exhibits were large-scale subject paintings: 'Il dolce far niente' (1835; ex Christies, London, 17 June 1994) was awarded a second-class medal and sold from the Salon to the dealer Auguste Asse; 'The Decameron' (1836) followed in 1837, selling for 10,000 francs and gaining a first-class medal. These effortlessly composed group scenes, based on literary subjects, reveal the artist's ease in the stage management of his figures. The success of the works assured Winterhalter a prolonged stay in France, with patronage for portraits immediately following from the king, Louis Philippe. He received the further accolade of the Legion d'honneur in May 1839 and was raised to chevalier in 1857. The portrait of Louis Philippe (1839; Versailles, Musee National du Chateau de Versailles et du Trianon); is without the flattery Winterhalter accorded to his female sitters. 
To deal with the influx of new commissions Winterhalter apparently took on pupils such as the Swede Olaf Johan Sodermark in the late 1830s, along with later assistants such as Albert Graeffle and Louis Coblitz. Winterhalter's brother Hermann worked with him, handling the business side of this increasing portrait practice and later assisting in the production of copies. A sensitive double portrait by Winterhalter of himself and Hermann in 1840 testifies to the closeness of their relationship. 
Winterhalter met with great success with the Belgian royal family, with portraits of Leopold I, king of the Belgians, and Queen Louise-Marie (Royal Collections, Belgium). Through a recommendation from the queen of the Belgians Winterhalter came to the attention of Queen Victoria as early as 1838. The young Queen Victoria greatly valued the opinion of her uncle Leopold and his wife on artistic matters, so she was favourably predisposed to Winterhalter even before meeting him, acquiring several of his works during the late 1830s. However, it would seem that her marriage in 1840 to Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, who heard of the debacle surrounding the state portrait of the queen by David Wilkie and who grew dissatisfied with the queen's official portrait painter, George Hayter, led to a search for an unofficial replacement. Prince Albert seems to have approved of an invitation to Winterhalter to visit England and the artist went on to produce approximately 120 oil paintings for the royal couple over the next twenty-five years. 
In early summer 1842 Winterhalter arrived in Britain to paint commissioned portraits of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. The appeal of these early three-quarter length portraits (Royal Collection) secured further work for the artist, not least the many repetitions and variations of the queen's portrait. He produced a new, full-length, state portrait in mid-1843. In the queen's opinion, he invariably secured a good likeness yet also managed to animate his portraits, never producing images that were too formal or stiff. This recipe also recommended the artist wherever imposing yet lifelike and pleasing portraits were required, as in court circles in Europe. He worked to deadlines, reliably completing work on time. John Gilbert's view of Winterhalter painting in the throne room shows him at work surrounded by royal children and with court ladies in attendance, an indication, perhaps, of his relaxed manner and easy-going personality. 
Winterhalter's role as court painter to Louis Philippe and his unofficial role at the British court meant that he painted many ceremonial scenes in both large and small scale, in both oils and watercolours. He was just as likely to be found on board the British royal yacht quickly painting a watercolour of the French royal family departing in September 1843 as he was to be included in royal tours to record family gatherings. The group portrait of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert with the family of King Louis Philippe at the Chateau d'Eu (1845; Royal Collection) demonstrates his skill in composing a group which, owing to the variety in poses employed and the interest of the setting, avoids monotony. 
Winterhalter spent part of each year in Britain, usually about two months, working for Queen Victoria. By 1846 he had been commissioned to produce a group portrait of the royal family on a large scale for the substantial price of 1000 guineas (Royal Collection). This painting conveys the unity of the royal family in a harmoniously composed group with the five children each characterized in lively fashion. The queen called it a ''chef d'oeuvre' -- like a Paul Veronese, such beautiful, brilliant, fresh colouring -- and we were enchanted' (Lloyd, 70). As a new addition to royal iconography the work enjoyed great public success as well as a special exhibition at St James's Palace accorded to the artist in May and June 1847. This rare event was attended by 98,000 visitors but it did not endear Winterhalter to the British art community. 
To Queen Victoria Winterhalter was a 'personal, attached' friend (Millar, 'Victorian Pictures', xxvii) and he visited the royal family at their private retreat, Osborne House, Isle of Wight, and spent much time teaching the queen oil painting techniques. She commented in June 1851 that Winterhalter was 'so kind, and shews me everything so patiently, though at the same time, he is strict' (Roberts, 110). When Winterhalter was asked to portray the shared birthday of the duke of Wellington and the one-year-old baby, Prince Arthur, in 'The First of May 1851' (Royal Collection), Prince Albert suggested that the painting be based on the theme of the adoration of the magi, and the work shows the duke making an offering to the infant. The date also refers to the opening of the Great Exhibition -- shown in the background -- towards which Prince Albert is looking over his shoulder. As the title suggests, Winterhalter adopted a historical treatment of these concurrent events. More often, however, he portrayed the royal children in a variety of unusual settings (such as the landscape around Balmoral) and in costume. Apart from portraits, Winterhalter was much in demand for surprise paintings intended as presents between the royal couple. The so-called secret portrait of the queen in 1842, showing her informally with her hair undressed, was Albert's favourite image of his wife; she also gave to him Winterhalter's massive nude group, 'Florinda' (Royal Collection), for which she paid $1000 in 1852 and which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in the same year. 
Winterhalter avoided the upheaval of the revolution in France in 1848 by decamping to Brussels, Geneva, and then England: as a cautious and conservative individual, he was deeply affected by the horrors of these turbulent times. He returned to France at the end of 1849, and by 1853 he was painting for the new French royal family, Napoleon III and Empress Eugenie. The years about 1850 were dominated by work in Britain and then by travel to Spain in 1852 and Poland in 1856. In 1854 he became 'peintre attitre' to the court of Napoleon III. Winterhalter had a particular insight into Empress Eugenie: her devotion to the spirit of Marie Antoinette and her aspiration to be a leader in matters of style and taste, best exemplified by Winterhalter's group portrait 'The Empress Surrounded by her Ladies in Waiting' (1855; Musee National du Chateau, Compiegne). 
Winterhalter's personality is elusive: Eugene Delacroix considered him 'not a bad fellow, but a terrible bore' (Ormond and Blackett-Ord, 49). His capacity for understanding women, conveyed in his best portraiture, did not apparently extend to his personal life. An engagement arranged for him by his friend the architect Karl Josef Berckmuller in June 1852 with Marie Scheffel in Karlsruhe was broken by July. He travelled constantly throughout the 1850s, but wishing to settle in Baden, where he had early success, he had a residence built by 1861, the Villa Trianon, Friedrichsgasse. By 1862, however, he had sold it. He continued to base himself in Paris with a studio on the rue de La Rochefoucauld and a residence on the rue de la Chaussee d'Antin; he amassed a modest collection of old master and modern paintings. 
Winterhalter continued to visit Britain. He produced new state portraits in 1858-9 showing the mature Queen Victoria and Prince Albert (Royal Collection). After Prince Albert's death Queen Victoria was less active as a patron of the arts; as Winterhalter was himself ageing, she turned to other younger talents, always retaining affection for him even with 'all his peculiarities' (Ormond and Blackett-Ord, 64). Even after his death she still claimed that 'All these great artists Angeli, Richter etc. cannot throw that life and lightness and animation into a portrait that dear old Winterhalter could' ('Victoria', 238, 6 Jan 1875). However, the English critics still rejected his art outright: Ruskin called him 'a dim blockhead' (Millar, 'Victorian Pictures', xxvii) and J. B. Atkinson dismissed him as a purveyor of 'confectionary art' in 1862 ('Blackwood', 357). His technique in particular was alien to English taste, and a reviewer of the Royal Academy exhibition of 1856 found that his 'low tints are extremely impure; they are deficient in natural transparency' ('Art Journal', 1856, 165). 
In his later years Winterhalter painted some of his most sumptuous portraits of European society women, such as 'Mme. Rimsky Korsakov' (1863; Musee d'Orsay, Paris). His international stature was recognized with a request for a self-portrait from the Uffizi in Florence (1867). With the onset of the Franco-Prussian War Winterhalter retired in poor health to Karlsruhe in 1871. After contracting typhus he died on 8 July 1873, at the Diakonissen Krankenhaus, Frankfurt am Main, and was buried in Frankfurt am Main cemetery. Retrospective exhibitions followed in Frankfurt and Baden. His will, made only a few days before his death, included the bizarre request that twelve preselected, unexhibited paintings be locked away for fifty years and then submitted to the artistic judgement of a future generation. No one acceded to this request. 
Winterhalter served his royal and aristocratic patrons well by accommodating himself to their whims, with the result that his own painting style served to flatter them in beautifully stage-managed and carefully lit portrayals, with little evidence of delving beneath the surfaces. His lifetime of compliance to patrons provided a comfortable livelihood, but he clearly felt posterity would judge him as a more rounded and accomplished artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 64289


Watts, Frederick Waters (1800-1870), landscape painter, has often been mistakenly called (Frederick) William Watts. According to his second wife, Julia Watts, he was born in Bath, Somerset, on 7 October 1800, his father had been in the navy, and his mother was Mary Eyre, daughter of Ambrose Eyre, rector of Leverington, Isle of Ely, Cambridgeshire; he may also be the Frederic Waters Watts, son of William and Mary Watts, who was baptized on 9 July 1801 at St Albans Abbey, St Albans, Hertfordshire. Watts was probably the William Watts who entered the Royal Academy Schools in London in 1817, aged seventeen, and won its silver medals in 1819, 1820, and 1821. He was certainly the Frederick W. Watts who exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1821 to 1860, the British Institution from 1823 to 1862, and elsewhere. 
Watts lived all his working life in the Hampstead area of London but painted landscapes throughout much of Britain; he appears also to have visited France in 1826. (Two pictures with Rouen as subject matter were shown at the British Institution in 1827.) His exhibited pictures of the 1820s and 1830s usually bore specific topographic titles and were closely handled; later canvases were more broadly painted and often imitated the mature work of John Constable. Many carried generalized titles such as 'River Scene with Barges', enabling others subsequently to identify them as scenes in 'Constable country' and to misattribute them to Constable himself. Watts was regarded as a follower of Constable even in his earlier work: in 1833 one critic saw him as 'trying to outrun the Constable' but concluded that: 'He never will,... daub away as he may' (Ivy, 180). That same year, however, Constable suffered the indignity of being mistaken for his follower: one of his paintings of Helmingham Dell in Suffolk was put up for sale at Christies but arrived too late for inclusion in the catalogue. It was bought in at 50's'. because, Constable told a friend, 'it was considered Watt's, and at least not certain, if mine' (Beckett, 164). Like Constable, Watts was a prolific outdoor oil sketcher. (Two examples are in the Tate collection.) Although possessing their own distinctive character, such sketches have also been misattributed to Constable in the past. 
No details of Watts's first marriage are known except that two sons and three daughters were born of it, and that one, Alice J. Watts, became a painter. Most details of his second marriage also remain to be discovered. According to the second Mrs Watts, Julia Joanna Louisa, her husband 'had an humble opinion of his works & talents' and 'ceased to paint for 10 years before his death' (J. Watts to E. E. Leggatt, 13 Feb 1911). Watts died at his home, 11 Lawn Road, Hampstead, London, on 4 July 1870 of lung disease compounded by diabetes. 


@@@@@


doc= 64290


Selous, Henry Courtney (1803-1890), artist and illustrator, was born at 2 Panton Street, Haymarket, London, on 25 April 1803, the son of Gideon Slous (1779/80-1856) and his wife, Sophia Ann Lokes (died 1847). His father, a painter specializing in miniatures, trained him in music, literature, and art, and prepared him successfully for entry to the Royal Academy Schools in 1818. That year he exhibited his first work at the Royal Academy, 'Portrait of a Favourite Cat'. Despite his young age he won four separate medals for figure drawing, two gold and two silver. Commissioned in 1825 by Charles Knight to produce twelve illustrations to short passages from Shakespeare's 'The Tempest', he responded with a series of updated Flaxmanesque works in which the few key figures are large and clear, arranged on a plane, like a frieze. His academic training was evident in the dominant central characters, using clear gestures to signal their emotions in the manner of the heroic classicism of the seicento schools of north Italy, especially the work of Guido Reni and the Caracci. His commercial success was founded on this heroic style, which was almost the official version of classicism, sponsored by Reynolds and popular with aristocratic collectors. 
During the early 1830s Slous developed his career as an illustrator, taking such work as Elliott's 'Portraits of Painters' (3 vols., 1832), and providing twelve illustrations for 'Tales of a Rambler' (1836), a collection of historical short stories by his younger brother Angiolo Robson Selous 
(or Slous; 1812-1883)
. By 1835 he felt financially secure enough to move into Keats's former home in Wentworth Place, Hampstead, and about that time adopted Selous as the spelling of his surname. He married, at St Pancras parish church on 4 March 1837, Emily Elizabeth (died 1879), daughter of the successful miniature painter Henry Pierce Bone. They had four daughters. 
Selous's wealth and reputation always rested on commercial grounds. He was the principal assistant painter of the enormous canvas panoramas produced by Robert Burford at the Leicester Square Rotunda in London. Such vast and hurried work was clearly a collaborative project. Each canvas was covered with varnished oil paint, not distemper, as Burford insisted that this was art, not mere stage work. It has been estimated that Selous worked on about thirty of these vast works, but the evidence is incomplete. The first known contribution by Selous, in 1829, was 'Milton's Pandemonium'. In 1833 he recorded his work on 'The View of the Continent of Boothia' (1833), from the polar expedition of Sir John Ross. The subject matter of the panoramas was usually 'sublime' in the style of John Martin and David Roberts, and covered historical events from early biblical and classical history, but also included the most contemporary subject matter, based on sketches made by observers, for instance 'The Battle of Sobraon, with the Defeat of the Sikh Army at Punjab' (1846), several works during the Crimean War (Alma, 1854, and Sevastopol, 1855) and the destruction of Canton (1859). Another perennial topic was exotic travel, usually prompted by contemporary events, with Naples and Nanking (Nanjing) (1845), Rouen and Constantinople (1846), the Himalayas and Cairo (1847), Paris and Pompeii (1848), Lucerne (1850), Niagara Falls (1851), Salzburg and the Alps at Berne (1852), Mexico and Granada (1853), St Petersburg (1856), and Messina (1861). 
Practised in large-scale work, Selous entered the fresco competition for the houses of parliament in 1843 with his 'Boadicea Haranguing the Iceni'. This received a $100 prize, but was not executed. Nevertheless he was commissioned to produce a fresco for the Law Society on Chancery Lane, 'King Alfred Submitting his Code of Law' (1844). His plates for 'Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress' and 'Sintram and his Companions', each undertaken in 1844, show his progress, and both were published by the Art Union. The works are busier and more dynamic than before, but the central action is always clear. He also added the kind of exuberant border work (foliation, arches, and framing motifs) characteristic of medieval manuscripts and, in particular, the fashionable work of contemporary German illustrations (contemporaries noted August Moritz Retzsch as a key influence, particularly in the Bunyan works). 
In the 1850s Selous earned a more respectable reputation for his illustrations ('Life of Moses' in twenty plates and 'Seven Events in the Life of Robert the Bruce', both 1850) and for a series of large oil canvases. His 'The Opening of the Great Exhibition' (1852; V&A) was painted in the same year as his design for 'Surrender of Calais: Queen Philippa Pleading with the Burgesses', which won a prize of $500 from the Art Union. Still with an eye for a popular subject, he painted 'The Glorious Charge of the Heavy Brigade at Balaclava' (exh. RA, 1855), linking his professional work with his more commercial work for Burford. 
In the 1860s Selous continued to market his popular heroic style. In 1863 he produced a large-scale fresco imitation of Leonardo da Vinci's 'Last Supper', with an accompanying chromolithograph print and, later, a pamphlet study of Leonardo in 1870. He also undertook the work on which his reputation now rests, the illustrations for 'Cassell's Illustrated Shakespeare' (1864-8). In 1869 he produced a series of widely admired engravings for Kingsley's 'Hereward the Wake' (once again issued by the Art Union). 
By the 1870s Selous's fortunes were at their peak. He was living in 28 Gloucester Road, and in 1871 his daughter Maria married George Webb Medley, a wealthy stockbroker and economist living on Park Lane. Selous celebrated with a proud self-portrait (1871; NPG). He produced a series of topographical works of the Holy Land, after a visit there in the early 1870s: 'Jerusalem: in Her Grandeur (AD' 33) and 'In Her Fall'. Here he returned to the style of David Roberts, and each was typically accompanied by a short explanatory pamphlet. He also wrote stories for children, 'The Young Governess' (1872), 'Granny's Story-Box' (1874), and 'Our White Violet' (1880). He died at the country house that his daughter and son-in-law had recently built, Winsford Tower, Beaworthy, Devon, on 24 September 1890, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 64291


Sant, James (1820-1916), portrait and genre painter, was born on 23 April 1820 in Croydon, Surrey, the son of William Sant (1787-1850), and his wife, Sarah Maria Baker (1793-1868). During the 1830s Sant studied with John Varley and Augustus Wall Callcott, and from 1842 to 1846 at the Royal Academy Schools. He exhibited his first painting at the academy in 1840. On 15 July 1851 he married Eliza (1833-1907), daughter of Dr R. M. M. Thomson, staff surgeon in Bengal; they had two sons and five daughters. He gained popular acclaim for his idealized depictions of childhood (occasionally modelled on his own children), which were widely disseminated through engravings. His most successful paintings include 'The Children in the Wood' (1854) and 'Little Red Riding-Hood' (1860). 
Later in his career Sant became a fashionable painter of social and political luminaries. The extensive series of portraits that he produced for Frances, Countess Waldegrave, was exhibited at the French Gallery in 1861. In that same year Sant was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, becoming a full academician in 1869. In 1877 he was elected a corresponding member of La Regia Accademia Raffaello in Urbino. On 19 January 1871 Queen Victoria appointed Sant her principal painter, but his inability to capture an acceptable likeness made her refuse to sit to him. State portraits for Japan and the embassies of Turkey and Madrid were among the few he completed. He had far greater success with sweetly sentimental paintings of the queen's children and grandchildren. 
Although Sant's best-known works are executed in a carefully polished style, he experimented with the loose brushwork and outdoor lighting effects of impressionism in works such as 'Miss Martineau's Garden' of 1873 (Tate collection). In a lecture of 1871 Sir Coutts Lindsay named Sant among the contemporary painters who were influencing the direction of English art. He later invited Sant to exhibit at the progressive Grosvenor Gallery. Although Sant described himself as shy, he was not without daring. When a new client arrived at his studio heavily made up with rouge and powder he reportedly remarked, 'I see we both paint' (Ward, 283). A prolific artist with an exceptionally long career, he exhibited over 300 paintings at the Royal Academy from 1840 to 1916. He was appointed CVO in 1914 and resigned from the academy that year, 'wishing to afford an opportunity of full membership to an Associate' ('The Times', 13 July 1916, 11). Sant died at his home, 43 Lancaster Gate, Hyde Park, London, on 12 July 1916 and was buried three days later at Kensal Green cemetery, leaving a large estate valued at $35,981. His surviving son, Mowbray Lees Sant, was chief constable of Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 64292


Ward, Caesar (bap. 1710, d. 1759), bookseller and historian, was baptized on 2 June 1710 in the parish of St Sepulchre, Holborn, London, the son of Caesar Ward (1675-1712), apothecary, and his wife, Ann. He married first Mary Kilsha ('b'. 'c'.1715) of Clothall, Hertfordshire, on 29 February 1736, but she evidently died within the year. His second marriage, in or before 1738, was to Ann Ward (1715/16-1789), about whose early life little is known. 
Ward was apprenticed in 1725 to Robert Gosling, bookseller and father of the bookseller-banker Sir Francis Gosling. About the time of his freedom of the Stationers' Company in September 1732, Ward set up business at the sign of the Ship between the Temple Gates, Fleet Street, in a shop formerly occupied by the bookseller James Lacy. His brother-in-law and partner Richard Chandler joined him soon after this, and by 1734 the partnership had a second shop in Scarborough, at the corner of Long Room Street. 
Ward was admitted to the freedom of the city of York by purchase in 1736, and by 1737 he and Chandler had added a third shop to their business, one formerly occupied by Mr Mancklin in Coney Street, York. At about the same time they moved their London shop to the Strand, at the Ship without Temple Bar. Parish accounts suggest that Richard Chandler was the main tenant at this address until 1742, when he was replaced by the bookseller William Sandby, probably elder brother to Edward Sandby, apprenticed to Ward in York in 1744. William Sandby acted as Ward's London agent until Ward's death. 
The partnership seemed to prosper in this unusually enterprising arrangement. Ward and Chandler maintained valuable connections with the London trade, regularly buying and selling books and copies (that is, shares) in books at numerous London trade sales in the 1730s and early 1740s. They published a wide range of books, including 'Popery Confuted by Papists' (1736), Thomas Cox's 'Magna Britannica' (1738), Defoe's 'Colonel Jack' (1739), and Cervantes' 'Persiles and Sigismunda' (1741). The proximity of their London shops to the inns of court and Chancery Lane probably lay behind the preponderance of law books in their list, including the 'Attorney's Compleat Pocket-Book' and the 'Law for and Against Bankrupts' (both 1743). The wording of the imprint of one of their books -- James Anderson's 'New Book of Constitutions of the Antient and Honourable Fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons', 'printed for Brothers Caesar Ward and Richard Chandler' (1738) -- suggests that both were freemasons. In January 1739 the partners took over the proprietorship of the 'York Courant' (established in 1725) from Alexander Staples, as well as his printing house in the former Bagnio, Coney Street. 
The downfall of the partnership lay in Richard Chandler's over-investment in the multi-volume 'History and Proceedings of the House of Commons from the Restoration to the Present Time' (1742-4). While the venture initially seemed successful -- Frederick, prince of Wales, gave the 'History' some encouragement -- the financial burden evidently became too much for Chandler and he killed himself in 1744. As Thomas Gent describes it, this was 'an action that for awhile seemed to obumbrate the glory of Caesar, who found such a deficiency in his partner's accounts, so great a want of money, and such a woful sight of flowing creditors, that made him succumb under the obligation to a statute of bankruptcy. ('Life', 192)' To make matters worse, Ward was called before the bar of the House of Commons on 5 April 1745, accused of illegally publishing the proceedings of the house in the 'York Courant'. The accusations were undeniably true, and Ward was reprimanded by the speaker and fined. Printing parliamentary proceedings was a common offence among the newspaper trade of the day, but the timing of this case was particularly damaging for Ward. His bankruptcy notice appeared in the 'London Gazette' in June 1745. 
Although Ward had the help of friends, including the York historian Francis Drake, his recovery had much to do with his own determination: he announced in the 'York Courant' of 25 June 1745 that he had been obliged to sell his printing house to meet his debts; Richard Bucktrout, a former employee, made a further announcement in the same paper that the newspaper and printing business would continue as usual. That was followed early the next year (27 February 1746) by a London sale where Ward's remaining book stock -- bound and in quires -- as well as his shares were auctioned to his book-trade colleagues for the benefit of his creditors. Somewhat unusually for one of these events, a selection of Ward's silver plate was also offered. Ward was still concerned to repay the partnership's outstanding debts when he wrote his will in October 1756: he directed that his executor should, within three years of his decease, divide $200 among the remaining creditors. 
Although Ward took up business again, his book-trade career had changed. Before the bankruptcy he had bookshops in three locations, he was running a successful newspaper, and most of the books in which his name appeared were ones in which he had a financial share. The London shop was in William Sandby's possession before the bankruptcy and Ward spent most of his time in York. The proprietorship of the 'York Courant' now passed out of his hands, at least for some years. He was listed as the paper's printer again in mid-1747, and he continued to print books for others, even though he no longer held many shares. He printed minor verse, such as Thomas Comber's 'Ode to Frugality' (1758), and documents for local institutions, but most of his surviving works are sermons. In 1750 he printed Laurence Sterne's 'Abuses of Conscience, Set Forth in a Sermon'. (Sterne was to turn to Caesar Ward's widow, Ann, when he needed a printer for 'Tristram Shandy' in 1759.) A further typical example was a two-volume collection of sermons preached by another local, Richard Warneford, vicar of St Martin's, Coney Street, which Ward printed for Warneford's subscribers in 1757. 
But one printing job led to the major achievement of Ward's career, the secret co-editorship with Francis Drake of the 'Parliamentary or Constitutional History of England' in twenty-four volumes (1751-61). As Ward describes the evolution of the 'History' to Charles Lyttleton, then dean of Exeter, 'The first 8 Vols. I did little more than soften some Expressions; but the last ten was such a Skeleton of a History, that I can say, with great Truth, I have bestow'd as many Hours, at least, upon it as Mr. D. himself. I do not mean hereby to claim any Share of Honor as an Author -- Profit is more suitable to the Circumstance of a Man who has a Wife & 6 Children; and You will please to observe that, 'by Agreement', I am to disburse the whole Charge of Paper & Print &c. And (this paid) we are to divide the Profits. (Ward to Lyttleton, 13 Jan 1755, BL, Stowe MSS)' These claims to motivation notwithstanding, Ward writes with the pleasure of a gifted historian about the work that took up much of his last ten years, tracking down and borrowing manuscript material from collectors such as Horace Walpole, collating originals with printed sources, and including a profitable 'three Days Confinement in a Garret of Old Pamphlets' (Ward to Lyttleton, 18 Sept 1754, BL, Stowe MSS). Drake readily acknowledged Ward as his 'Fellow-Labourer' (Drake to Lyttleton, 25 Aug 1755, BL, Stowe MSS), whose work on the project continued until its near completion at Ward's death on 24 April 1759 of 'a violent fever which carried him off in a few Days; to which his over-great Attachment to Business did not a little contribute' (Drake to Lyttleton, 28 April 1759, BL, Stowe MSS). He was buried at St Martin's, Coney Street, York, on 27 April 1759. The 'History' was successful enough to go into a second edition in 1762, but, by design, neither editor's name ever appeared on the title-page. 
When Ann Ward took over the business after her husband's death, she reassured readers of the 'York Courant' that the paper would 'be carried on with the same Diligence and Impartiality as before; under the Conduct of the same Person, who, for some Years last past, has had the principal Management of it; Mr. Ward's own Time being mostly taken up in carrying on a large Work of another Nature. ('York Courant', 1 May 1759)' Of the seven children who survived their father, the younger Caesar ('b'. 1741) also followed the printing trade in London, but the relationship between father and son seems to have been uneasy. In his will Caesar Ward notes that his son should receive 'Five Pounds and no more he having already by his Extravagance cost me his proportion'. His daughter Mary married George Peacock, who was to carry on the York printing and bookselling business after the death of Ann Ward on 10 April 1789. 


@@@@@


doc= 64294


John Frederick Herring junior (1815/1821-1907), sporting painter, is generally thought to have been born in the parish of St George's, Doncaster, on 21 June 1815, the eldest son of John Frederick Herring senior and Ann Harris, and to have been baptized on 22 October 1815. However, another baptism is recorded: of John Frederick Herring junior and his sister Sarah Herring on 22 May 1821; the date of birth of the former is undecipherable. It seems probable that the first child baptized John Frederick Herring junior died and that the second was born between 1816 and 1821. Herring junior was still with his parents when they left Doncaster for Newmarket; he lived in Cambridgeshire for the rest of his life. He married Catherine Augusta (Kate) Rolfe (1828-1928), herself an artist and sister of A. F. Rolfe, who collaborated with Herring senior. She exhibited one picture at the Royal Academy and a second at the British Institution. He was not on good terms with his father; of all his surviving children, J. F. Herring junior was the only one not to be mentioned in his father's will. 


@@@@@


doc= 64296


Strachey, Sir Edward, third baronet (1812-1901), religious and philosophical writer, was born on 12 August 1812 at Sutton Court, Pensford, near Bristol, Somerset, the son of Edward Strachey ['see below'] and his wife, Julia Woodburn (1789/90-1846), daughter of Colonel William Kirkpatrick. Sutton Court was the seat of his old Somerset family, which was closely involved with India for three generations. 
The senior Edward Strachey (1774-1832), East India Company servant, was born on 18 December 1774, the second son of Sir Henry Strachey, first baronet (1736-1810), Lord Clive's private secretary in India, and his wife, Jane (died 1824), daughter of John Kelsall and widow of Captain Thomas Latham RN. He was educated at Westminster School from 1783 and St Andrews University from 1791, and in 1793 went to Bengal in the East India Company's service. He held a succession of diplomatic and judicial posts, and became a close friend of Mountstuart Elphinstone, who said that in his early days he owed much to Strachey's advice and example (Colebrooke, 2.309). In 1801 the two were appointed to the staff of Colonel William Kirkpatrick, the British resident at the Maratha court, and they journeyed overland from Calcutta to Poona for nearly a year (ibid., 1.22-36). Strachey eventually became a judge of the provincial court of appeal at Dacca (1810). At Calcutta on 13 October 1808 he married Kirkpatrick's youngest daughter, Julia Woodburn. They returned to England in 1811 and lived at Sutton Court. 
In 1815 Strachey resigned from the Bengal service, and in 1820 he was appointed an examiner at East India House, London, where his colleagues included James Mill and his son John Stuart Mill -- whose utilitarian philosophy Strachey shared -- and Thomas Love Peacock. The Stracheys moved to Fitzroy Square, London, with a summer residence at Goodenough House, Shooter's Hill, Kent. They became well acquainted with Edward Irving and Thomas Carlyle, who acted as tutor to Julia Strachey's nephew. Carlyle left amusing descriptions of them in his 'Reminiscences' (especially pp. 246 ff., 267 ff.), according to which Strachey was 'rather tacit than discursive', and devoted to Chaucer. He had also been greatly impressed by ancient Indian achievements in algebra, the subject of his only publications, a translation of a Persian version of a Sanskrit algebraic treatise by Bhaskara Acharya ('Bija Ganita, or, The Algebra of the Hindus' [1813]), and an article, 'On the early history of algebra' ('Asiatic Researches', 12, 1818, 160-85). Edward Strachey died at Shooter's Hill on 3 January 1832. He and his wife, who died on 20 November 1847, had one daughter and six sons. Of the younger sons, Sir Richard Strachey and Sir John Strachey were civil servants in India. William Strachey also pursued an Indian career, and the youngest son, George, became a diplomat. 
The eldest son, Edward, had also been destined for India and attended the East India College, Haileybury (1829-30), but his career hopes were destroyed by arthritis of the knee, which forced him to use crutches for more than twenty years. He was said to have been eventually cured by the waters of Ischia when he was on one of several visits to Italy, but by then he was over forty and his knee always remained stiff. In the hope of entering a university (which in the end his disability prevented) he spent most of 1836 reading philosophy and related subjects with F. D. Maurice at Guy's Hospital, where Maurice was chaplain. Strachey had been attracted by Maurice's 'Subscription No Bondage' (1835), and obtained an introduction through John Sterling, a friend of Julia Strachey. Maurice became his spiritual adviser for many years and under his influence he became firmly attached to the Church of England, but opposed to most high-church doctrines and practices, and sympathetic to nonconformists; his opinions in his early days were in advance of contemporary orthodoxy. He began writing on religious subjects in 1843, with a commentary on the Church of England marriage service, and -- also under Maurice's influence -- developed a liking for biblical criticism, for which he learned Hebrew. One result of this was 'Hebrew Politics in the Time of Sargon and Sennacherib' (1853; revised as 'Jewish History and Politics', 1874), on the background to the prophecies of Isaiah. He also published 'Miracles and Science' (1854), and later collaborated with Maurice on 'Politics Ancient and Modern' (1861) for the 'Tracts for Priests and People'. With his mother's fascination for religion he combined his father's literary, philosophical, and oriental interests, as seen in his 'Shakespeare's 'Hamlet': an Attempt to Find a Key to a Great Moral Problem' (1848) and occasional translations from Persian poems. 
On 27 August 1844 Strachey married Elisabeth, eldest daughter of the Revd W. Wilkieson, of Woodbury Hall, Bedfordshire; when she died childless on 11 April 1855 he collected and edited her 'Translations from the French of Emile Souvestre' (1856). His second wife, whom he married on 3 November 1857, was Mary Isabella (died 1883), second daughter of the physician John Addington Symonds (1807-1871), and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' Sykes. Mary Isabella was sister to the novelist John Addington Symonds (1840-1893) and to Charlotte Byron Symonds, later Charlotte Byron Green, a promoter of higher education for women who married the philosopher T. H. Green. On 11 April 1858 Strachey succeeded his father's unmarried elder brother, Sir Henry Strachey, second baronet, who had also followed a judicial career in Bengal. The rest of Sir Edward's life was divided between his literary activities and his responsibilities in Somerset, where he was an active magistrate and deputy lieutenant, and in 1864 served as high sheriff. He was also a poor-law guardian and a member of the first Somerset county council. A Liberal of a somewhat idealistic type, he took a warm interest in the welfare of his tenants, especially the working class; he was an admirer of Gladstone, and in 1870 wrote a series of articles in the 'Daily News' on the proposed Irish land bill, using material supplied by his friend and neighbour Chichester Fortescue, afterwards Lord Carlingford. Other later works included the Globe edition of Malory's 'Morte d'Arthur' (1868), a memoir of his father's colleague Thomas Love Peacock for the last volume of Richard Garnett's edition of Peacock's prose works (1891), and an introduction to Lear's 'Nonsense Songs' (1895); he also wrote 'Talk at a Country House' (1895), in which, according to him, the imaginary 'Squire' represents his mature thought, and 'Forster' the ideas of his younger days. He contributed articles to 'The Spectator', 'Blackwood's Magazine', and other periodicals. 
Strachey's second wife died on 5 October 1883, leaving a daughter and three sons: Edward Strachey, first Baron Strachie, politician; John St Loe Strachey, editor of 'The Spectator'; and Henry, an artist, who painted two portraits of his father. Strachey himself died at Sutton Court on 24 September 1901 and was buried in Chew Magna churchyard, Somerset. 


@@@@@


doc= 64299


Ballantyne, John (1815-1897), portrait painter, was born on 25 April 1815 in Kelso, Roxburghshire, one of ten children of Alexander (Sandy) Thomson Ballantyne (1776-1847), newspaper editor and manager, and his wife, (Anne) Randall Scott Grant (died 1855). His parents were both Scottish; his father is primarily remembered for having copied for press some of Sir Walter Scott's early 'Waverley' novels. John Ballantyne was educated at the Edinburgh Academy and received his artistic training at the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh under William Allan and Thomas Duncan. He then travelled to Paris, Rome, and London to complete his student education. After returning to Edinburgh in 1839, he established himself as a portraitist, though he also painted historical genre subjects and still lifes. He regularly exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy (1831-83) and the Royal Academy (1835-83) and was elected an associate member of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1841. He became a full member in 1860. 
From the 1840s until the early 1860s Ballantyne played a significant role in Edinburgh's art world. He was a founder member and president of the Smashers, a sketching club established in 1848 by the city's younger artists. By 1845 Robert Scott Lauder, new head of the Trustees' Academy, had appointed Ballantyne as preceptor of life classes, where he taught draughtsmanship until he moved to London in 1863. As Lauder's chief assistant he assisted with the successful restoration of the falling reputation of the academy, teaching some of the most significant artists of the next generation, including William McTaggart, William Quiller Orchardson, and John Pettie. Some of his theories about art were expressed in his published 1856 pamphlet, 'What is Pre-Raphaelitism?', in which he linked the artistic principles and working practices of the movement to his own techniques. 
Despite Ballantyne's active participation in Edinburgh's art world, he was by the 1860s in serious financial difficulty. While he had been in some demand in the 1850s as a portraitist, he had fallen out of vogue by the next decade. His career was not aided by his personality, for the frail, thin, bearded man was very ill at ease promoting himself. His financial pressures mounted, for he had a family to support -- he had married his second cousin, Christina (Teenie) Hogarth, about 1845 and they had had three children, Randal, Dot, and Edith. From this point until his death his brother Robert Michael Ballantyne (1825-1894), the highly successful writer of books for boys, contributed considerable sums in support of John and his family. 
Attempting to seek more sympathetic patronage, Ballantyne and his family moved to London in 1863. Here he took in pupils to generate income and revived friendships with the many former Edinburgh colleagues who had already moved there. These artists re-established their sketching group, renaming it the Auld Lang Syne Club. Most importantly, Ballantyne and his brother Robert formulated a plan to enable him to establish his reputation and make money by painting portraits of famous London artists at work in their respective studios. At least seventeen of this series were completed, including those of William Powell Frith, Sir Francis Grant, William Holman Hunt, Sir Edwin Landseer, John Millais, and David Roberts. Landseer proved an especially troublesome subject, as he belatedly decided that he would not give permission for the painting of him completing the Trafalgar Square lions for the Nelson memorial to be exhibited in 1865 or to be reproduced and sold as chromolithographs because he was not yet ready to unveil these sculptures to the public. Although Ballantyne's paintings received a good press when exhibited, they apparently made little money. They are nevertheless his most important and most frequently exhibited works today. Highly significant as the first visual records of Victorian artists portrayed at work in their studios, they provide the only or finest records of what these large and often impressive rooms actually looked like, and they eloquently capture a sense of how each artist worked. While his other rather mediocre works are virtually unknown today, the artist series is very widely reproduced and admired. Some of the finest examples are in the collections of the National Portrait Gallery, London, and the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh. 
This project proved to be Ballantyne's final major effort. By the late 1860s his eyesight began to fail, and his productivity dropped to a handful of works annually. In 1869 he took the position of curator at the Royal Academy of Arts but was forced to resign due to further ill health. He then retired to Seend, near Melksham in Wiltshire, where by the mid-1880s he had ceased painting altogether. The impoverished artist lived on a small pension and aid from his brother until his death at Seend on 12 May 1897. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 64300


Leslie, Alexander (fl. 1796-1798), radical bookseller and publisher, was born in Jedburgh, moving to Edinburgh some time before 1796. Before becoming Bookseller to the Rabble, as he liked to describe himself, he was apprenticed in Edinburgh, possibly to one Andrew Leslie, shoemaker. Leslie was to claim in 1796 that he had 'uniformly adhered to... the glorious cause' and that it was 'persecution' which had forced him to give up his apprenticeship (BL, Add. MS 27815, Francis Place MSS, fols. 74-5), a story which, given the prevalence of such acts of persecution of radicals in the 1790s, has a strong air of credibility about it. On 29 December 1797, having set up as a 'patriotic bookseller' in Nicolson Street, Edinburgh, he married Janet Young, daughter of Patrick Gow, a Glasgow weaver. 
An extant catalogue of Leslie's, taken from his shop in early 1798, shows that he stocked and distributed a wide range of radical pamphlets, songbooks, and poems. These included Jacobin classics such as Joel Barlow's 'Advice to the Privileged Orders in the Several States of Europe'; Thomas Paine's major political works of the 1790s, including both parts of 'The Rights of Man'; and several translations of major works of the European Enlightenment, such as Voltaire's 'Dictionnaire philosophique' and Beccaria's 'Dei delitti e delle pene' ('On Crimes and Punishments'). He also stocked a broad array of more populist radical works, many of which were published by the London radical bookseller Daniel Isaac Eaton. These included, for example, Eaton's famous serial publication 'Politics for the People' and James Parkinson's 'Pearls Cast before Swine, by Edmund Burke, Scraped together by Old Hubert' (1793) and 'Revolutions without Bloodshed, or, Reformation Preferable to Revolt' (1794). 
Leslie played a crucial role in the dissemination of radical propaganda and tracts in Scotland between 1796 and 1798, and outside Scotland. He dealt closely with a number of important radical printers and booksellers from London, notably Eaton, but also John Smith, J. S. Jordan, John Bone, and Thomas Evans, all members of the London Corresponding Society (LCS). He also appears to have had links with Thomas Spence, the bookseller and radical land reformer. At several times during this period, he dispatched large orders of pamphlets to Eaton, Smith, Jordan, Bone, and Evans, as well as to John Ashley, at this stage secretary of the LCS. In 1796 he had written to the society offering his services as a confidential correspondent, claiming to have contacts in the west, north-east of Scotland, and in the borders. He also spoke of the eagerness for radical publications in Scotland at that time. Extracts from his daybook for 1796-7 indicate that he did business with a network of radical booksellers and printers which included Edinburgh, Leith, Glasgow, Paisley, Kelso, Hamilton, Hawick, Jedburgh, Dunbar, and Newcastle, south of the border. His customers also included leading radicals from several parts of Scotland, for example, James Craigendallie and Robert Sands from Perth. 
As well as selling and distributing radical works printed and published in London, Leslie was joint publisher of several pamphlets with London's radical printing fraternity, further emphasizing the closeness of the connections between them. For example, John Martin's 'A letter to the Hon Thomas Erskine, with a postscript to the Right Hon Lord Kenyon, upon their conduct at the trial of Thomas Williams' (1797) was published with John Smith, John Bone and Thomas Evans, and T. G. Ballard. He also published several pamphlets on his own account, including Edinburgh editions of Paine's 'Agrarian Justice' and 'A Letter to George Washington', a translation of Helvetius's 'Catechism', as well as a number of radical poems. 
The exact nature of Leslie's politics is hidden from full view. Radicals in these years were acutely conscious of the prudence of secrecy, given official and judicial hostility; the language they used in correspondence was deliberately elliptical. Nevertheless, as a republican and deist, Leslie was on the extremist fringe of Scottish radical opinion in this period. In one letter to a fellow radical, a weaver from Kilsyth, he referred to 'these cursed Brigands or Ruffians, for they are a race of Monsters that ought to be exterminate the Earth, Kings & Priests have in all ages been a Curse to Mankind in Making Ruinous & Bloody War' (NA Scot., JC 26/293). It seems highly likely that Leslie was also a member of the United Scotsmen, a shadowy body linked to a wider insurrectionary conspiracy embracing Ireland and England. In August 1797 a fellow radical wrote to him from Linlithgow: 'I think the Soceity ['sic'] in London is doing well. I hope they will give Arastockrats a Sweet very Soone' (ibid.). He was a frequent visitor to Glasgow -- on one trip he had got married -- visiting radical groups in various places 'en route'. Among the pamphlets seized from his shop were two in the name of the British Union Society, a breakaway group of impatient extremists from the LCS, formed in August 1797. In 1796 he sent an order of books to Colonel Despard, who was to lead an abortive and failed insurrectionary conspiracy in 1801-2. 
Given Leslie's prominence in Scottish radical circles, and the nature of the literature he was circulating, it is unsurprising, therefore, that he was apprehended in November 1797 as part of a wider executive crackdown against radicals in the aftermath of the militia riots and against a background of deteriorating political and military conditions in Ireland. He was charged with distributing seditious and blasphemous writings, namely Paine's 'Rights of Man' and the 'Age of Reason'. Admitted to bail of 600 merks ($33 6's'. 8died) on 2 April 1798, he was called to appear at the high court on three occasions. On the final call, on 28 May, when Leslie failed again to appear, Lord Eskgrove handed down a sentence of fugitation and outlawry against him. He forfeited his bond of caution, and all his moveable goods were escheated to the crown. 
Leslie's importance to the history of Scottish radicalism in the 1790s is considerable. His brief career as a bookseller illuminates not only networks of radical communication in Britain in the years that followed the first major wave of government repression, but also some of the ideological influences shaping Scottish radical opinion in a period when, following the suppression of the British convention, it fades from clear view. 


@@@@@


doc= 64301


Ruddiman, Walter (1719-1781), printer and newspaper proprietor, was born in the parish of Alvah, by Banff on the Moray Firth, the youngest of the four sons of James Ruddiman ('c'.1680- 'c'.1739), farmer, and his wife, Isabel, 'nee' Ruddiman. The will of his brother John (died 1744), proved in Aberdeen on 11 March 1745, reveals Walter to have been then employed as a 'merchant in Banff' (cited in Johnston, 'Ruddimans in Scotland'). It was shortly after this date that he moved to Edinburgh to work as a printer. That move meant that there were then two firms named Ruddiman working as printers in Edinburgh: that of Walter and the established firm of his uncles Thomas Ruddiman (1674-1757) and Walter (1687-1770). Until the death of the elder Walter, he appears as 'Walter Ruddiman Junior' on the title-pages of his publications. On 11 September 1754 he was admitted a burgess of Edinburgh, and about that time he married Janet Bradfute (died 1776), with whom he had four children: Thomas (1755-1825), with whom he entered partnership and who inherited his printing firm; John (died 1816); Walter (1762-1823), a lieutenant in the Scots brigade in the Netherlands; and Janet (1761-1849). 
In July 1757 Ruddiman began publishing the 'Edinburgh Magazine', a periodical in octavo bearing the imprint 'Edinburgh:/Printed by Walter Ruddiman Junior and Company,/Morocco's Close, Lawn - Market'. Ruddiman abandoned the project in 1762, after publishing the sixth volume. His most significant undertaking was to publish the 'Weekly Magazine, or, Edinburgh Amusement'. The first issue was published on 7 July 1768, and the periodical claimed to offer 'The Essence of all the Magazines, Reviews, Newspapers, &c. published in Great Britain: Also Extracts from every new Work of Merit, whether political, literary, serious, or comical, being a Register of the Writings and Transactions of the Times'. It was a tremendous success, quickly establishing itself as the most popular weekly publication in Edinburgh, selling as many as 3000 copies per week. By 1770 Ruddiman had moved his business to Forrester's Wynd in Edinburgh's Lawnmarket, and from that location came the edition of the 'Weekly Magazine' (7 February 1771) that carried the first published poem of Robert Fergusson (1750-1774). Ruddiman's son Thomas became a partner in the following April, and it is with the imprint 'Printed by Walter and Thomas Ruddiman' that the first edition of 'Poems by Robert Fergusson' appeared in January 1773, the only edition to appear in the poet's lifetime. In his versified will Fergusson bequeathed his portrait to Ruddiman, concluding with the request that his will be printed: '
patent may it be, and seen, 

in Walter's 'Weekly Magazine'. 

' By the mid-1770s the 'Weekly Magazine' was a runaway success, not least because of its appealing mix of reviews, literature, and news. Newspapers carried stamp duty at the time; 'literary' periodicals did not. The presence of news in the 'Weekly Magazine' was brought to the attention of the exchequer, which found it liable to stamp duty on this account. In response Ruddiman in 1777 divided the magazine into two separate publications: a new octavo newspaper entitled 'Ruddiman's Weekly Mercury', costing 3died and attracting tax at a halfpenny per copy, and the 'Weekly Magazine', now a weekly miscellany free of news and tax, which from the forty-seventh volume (30 December 1779) became the 'Edinburgh Magazine, or, Literary Amusement'. Ruddiman's restructuring of his publications effectively divided his market: in 1780 the 'Edinburgh Magazine' had a circulation of some 1400 copies, the 'Weekly Mercury' between 1800 and 2000. The action brought against Ruddiman, together with his response, had an important influence in clarifying the distinction between newspapers and other periodical forms that is common today. Predeceased by his wife, who had died on 21 May 1776, Walter Ruddiman died in Edinburgh on 16 June 1781, and was buried on 19 June at the city's Greyfriars churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 64302


Mennons, John (1747-1818), printer and journal editor, was born on 22 February 1747 in the Canongate parish of Edinburgh, son of John Mennons (1718-1793), baker, and Rebecca Galloway. John junior was apprenticed as a printer, probably with the 'Edinburgh Courant'. He set up on his own in 1778 when he published the 'Scots and County Magazine', with the imprint 'J. Mennons & Co., Brodie's Close, Lawnmarket'. Over the next four years he produced a variety of periodicals offering information and entertainment, such as the 'Gentleman and Lady's Pocket Register' and the 'Weekly Mirror' (assisted in the latter by the balloonist James Tytler). About 1772 he married Janet Moir. A daughter, Janet, was born on 19 January 1773 but died in infancy; she was followed by a son, Thomas (1774-1804), who became his father's business partner. 
In 1782 Mennons moved to Glasgow and bought a secondhand press; on 27 January 1783 he published the first issue of a newspaper, the 'Glasgow Advertiser', from Duncan's Land, Gibson's Wynd, in the Saltmarket, claiming, as editors do, to 'preserve his mind as free as possible from any prejudice, which... might lead him to partial representation of the facts'. In fact, Mennons's statement was more than the standard declaration of impartiality, for the 'Advertiser' was noteworthy for its independence from political faction. 
After the death of his first wife, Mennons married in 1785 Jean Steedman (died 1814), daughter of James Steedman, cutler in Glasgow, and Jean McNair. They had three sons and five daughters; the first son, James, and a daughter, Jean, died young. The surviving daughters -- Jane, Mary, Marion, and Agnes -- never married. The second son, John ('c'.1786-1843), worked with his father for a while and later was editor of the 'Greenock Advertiser'. The third son, another James, died in 1817. By virtue of his second marriage Mennons was admitted burgess and guild brother of Glasgow in 1786. He joined the Stationers' Company in 1786. By 1789 he was established in the Tontine Close, near the Cross, the hub of the busy merchant city. There he accepted 'advertisements, commissions and articles of intelligence'. 
In appearance Mennons was stolid and genial. There is no clear evidence of his religion or politics. The 'Advertiser' soon proved itself of special service to commerce, while politically generally steering a middle course. However, in 1793 Mennons was indicted for treason, for publishing, on 23 November 1792, a report of a meeting of the Partick Sons of Liberty which declared that if nations adopted Thomas Paine's principles, 'tyrants and their satellites would vanish' ('Glasgow Advertiser', 23 Nov 1792). The author of the article failed to appear for trial and the matter was dropped, ending this 'disagreeable situation' ('Glasgow Advertiser', 1 Feb 1793). 
Mennons continued to print the kinds of useful publication he had in Edinburgh, including 'Jones's Directory' (1787 and 1789), the 'Glasgow Almanack' (1784-1802), and the 'Glasgow Magazine' (1783-4), as well as selling lottery tickets and patent medicines. In 1797 he bought Jeanfield House, near Camlachie, from his wife's cousin Robert McNair, for $2435, but sold it a year later to John Finlayson, McNair's brother-in-law. 
In 1802 Mennons sold the 'Advertiser' and leased Eastmuir coalfield, near Shettleston, owned by Finlayson. This venture failed, and in 1809 he was declared bankrupt. Attempts to return to publishing -- the 'Western Star' (1807) and 'The Scotchman' (1812-13) -- also failed. After his wife's death in 1814 he moved to Irvine on the Ayrshire coast and in a small house at 15 High Street, with the help of his children, doggedly started afresh. The 'Irvine and County of Ayr Miscellany' (1814-15) proved his swansong. He died at home of old age on 2 February 1818, and was buried in Irvine parish churchyard two days later. 
Mennons was no innovator, just one of many entrepreneurs of fluctuating fortune in a city recovering from the American War of Independence. His legacy is the 'Glasgow Advertiser', which became Glasgow's longest-running newspaper under the successive titles the 'Herald and Advertiser', then the 'Glasgow Herald', and then 'The Herald'. 


@@@@@


doc= 64303


Chalmers family (per. 1736-1876), newspaper proprietors and printers, established in Aberdeen what became the largest printing and publishing business in the north of Scotland in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The family's prominence was founded on the 'Aberdeen Journal', among other newspapers and magazines, and on their succeeding as printers to the town and university of Aberdeen, in which capacity they were responsible for at least 40 per cent of works printed in Aberdeen from the 1730s to the end of the eighteenth century. The company remained the major regional printer and newspaper publisher during much of the nineteenth century, during which it faced markedly increased competition. 



@@@@@


doc= 64304


James [ii] Chalmers (bap. 1713, d. 1764), printer and newspaper proprietor, was born in Aberdeen and baptized on 8 January 1713 at Dyke, Moray, the eldest surviving son of James [i] Chalmers ('bap'. 1686, died 1744), professor of divinity at Marischal College, Aberdeen (1728-44), and his cousin Jean Chalmers. He was apprenticed to James Nicol, printer to the town and university of Aberdeen, and thereafter, it is frequently stated, he continued his training in the office of John Watts, the respected London printer (Keith, 73). On Nicol's retirement in May 1736 Chalmers immediately made successful application to the town council to become its official printer, and shortly afterwards he was confirmed as printer to Marischal College. He also became official printer to the commissioners of supply for the county of Aberdeen; until 1752 his was the only printing house in the city. On 13 March 1739 he married Susan or Susanna Trail (1720-1791), daughter of James Trail, Church of Scotland minister at Montrose; they had seven children, including James [iii] ['see below'] and Alexander Chalmers (1759-1834), literary critic and biographer. In November 1740 Chalmers's petition to the town council to become precenter of the East Church of St Nicholas was accepted. Contemporary sources state that in autumn 1745 Chalmers, a committed Hanoverian, produced some news sheets and that his printing shop and equipment were damaged by Jacobite sympathizers. In July 1746 he was appointed commissioner for the forfeited estates of Hallhead and Esslemont. 
In January 1748, from his Castlegate premises, Chalmers launched the (then) weekly 'Aberdeen Journal', the first newspaper published north of Edinburgh and still extant in the late twentieth century as the 'Press and Journal'. In 1797 the extension of the title to the 'Aberdeen Journal and General Advertiser for the North of Scotland' reflected its success and commercial utility. Its avowed aim was respectability, and impartiality in reporting events. It had no enduring eighteenth-century rival, though Douglas and Murray's 'Aberdeen Intelligencer' (1752-7) offered some competition. Pressure from the 'Journal', however, and protests upheld by the commissioners of supply over costs incurred in having to place advertisements in two newspapers, forced the cessation of the 'Intelligencer'. In addition to his role as a newspaper publisher Chalmers produced works such as the 1762 edition of George Buchanan's 'Rerum Scoticarum historia' (ed. James Man) for local booksellers; in his official capacity as university printer he also printed Alexander Gerard's influential 'Plan of Education in Marischal College' (1755). Otherwise, his presses were given over to pamphlets on religious or civic subjects. He died in Aberdeen on 25 August 1764 and was buried at St Nicholas's Church. 
Shortly after James [ii] Chalmers's death his widow announced that the business would be continued by her son 


@@@@@


doc= 64305


James [iii] Chalmers (1742-1810), printer and publisher. He was born in Aberdeen on 31 March 1742 and was educated (but did not graduate) at Marischal College between 1755 and 1757, with the aid of a Liddel bursary. He then entered the family business, for which he had been trained in London and Aberdeen. On 22 March 1769 he married Margaret Douglas (died 1818); they had seven daughters and five sons, including James [iv] (1775-1831), later printer of the 'Dundee Advertiser' (1801) and David ['see below']. James [iii] faced greater business competition than his father and witnessed a marked increase in printing and publishing activity in a city that more than doubled in size from the 1750s to a population of 35,000 in 1811. Like his father he was not overly given to risky speculation; while more ambitious local printers attempted editions of the poets and Enlightenment texts James Chalmers & Co. (imprint adopted 1770) largely continued in its preferred, secure role as printers for the town council. Occasionally it adopted the conservative approach of publishing by subscription, and it remained the dominant local and regional printing business. As the owner of what was regarded as the most lucrative newspaper in Scotland James [iii] was a member of the Narrow Wynd and other respectable friendly societies. In 1787 he met Robert Burns, who described him as 'a facetious fellow' (Burns). 
In the same year Chalmers began one of several unsuccessful new publishing ventures when he launched the 'Northern Gazette', which soon failed because of the burden of the stamp duty, and later reappeared as the 'Aberdeen Magazine' (1788-91). Even the political preoccupations of the 1790s failed to provide sufficient stimulus to carry into print the 'Aberdeen Courier', due to have been published by Chalmers in partnership with two local booksellers. More successful was the 'Aberdeen Almanack', which first appeared in 1771 and sold throughout the north of Scotland. This annual finally ceased, with the 1955-6 edition, as the 'Northern Year Book'. Chalmers's printing shop also provided stock for the chapbook trade, and several such works were produced by the company itself. Chalmers also acted as a local agent for newspapers published elsewhere. In 1803 he began a papermaking business with Alexander Brown, Aberdeen's principal bookseller, owner of the stamp office, and future tory provost, who in 1795 had married Chalmers's daughter Catherine. Contacts between Brown and Chalmers were undoubtedly of mutual benefit: the Chalmers family undertook most of the printing for Brown's many local publishing ventures. Notwithstanding the investment in steam-driven machinery the paper mill failed and in 1807 it closed. The first sustained challenge to the newspaper dynasty appeared in 1806 in the form of the 'Aberdeen Chronicle', though even its radical politics failed to draw any reaction at the time from the then stolidly neutral 'Journal'. 
James [iii] died in Aberdeen on 17 June 1810 and was buried at St Nicholas's Church; he was survived by his wife, who died on 14 August 1818, 'in her seventieth year'. The business was continued by their second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 64306


David Chalmers (1778-1859), printer and publisher, who was born in Aberdeen on 19 October 1778. He was educated at Marischal College, and then began to work with his father on the 'Aberdeen Journal'. On 27 February 1812 he married Ann Lamb Campbell (died 1870), with whom he had seven sons and seven daughters. Under David Chalmers's control the business underwent significant changes, including a move to new premises at Adelphi Court, Aberdeen, in 1813 and the introduction of steam-powered presses for newspaper work about 1830. In other respects little changed and a considerable amount of civic printing was still undertaken. The political persuasion of the 'Journal' became clearer with its support for tory interests in the 1832 election. That same year the 'Journal' claimed the highest circulation of any newspaper in Scotland, a fact unhesitatingly drawn to the attention of advertisers. The appearance of a number of rival local newspapers (particularly the 'Aberdeen Herald', 1832, and the 'Aberdeen Free Press', 1853) helped consolidate the 'Journal''s own political stance. On Chalmers's retirement in 1854 the management passed to his two eldest sons, James [v] (died 1896) and John Gray (died 1890). 
David Chalmers died on 24 April 1859 at his estate at Westburn, near Aberdeen (purchased in 1823), and was buried at St Nicholas's Church; his wife died, aged seventy-seven, on 20 March 1870. Six years later the family business was sold to form the North of Scotland Newspaper and Printing Co. Ltd, by which date the 'Aberdeen Journal' had become a daily with conservative political principles. Late nineteenth-century competition for readers was intense, though the position of the 'Journal' was made secure by John Gray Chalmers's bequest of $10,000, to be invested for the benefit of the paper. He also left a similar amount to endow the Chalmers chair of English literature at Aberdeen University. 


@@@@@


doc= 64308


Farley family (per. 1698-1775), printers and publishers, played an important role in the introduction and development of printing and newspaper publication in Exeter, Bristol, Salisbury, and Bath. A family prone to enter into personal and political confrontation, the latter largely in the tory if not the Jacobite cause, they were influential in developing a newspaper press that became highly politicized in the south-west compared with local newspapers published in most other regions of eighteenth-century England. There has been much dispute over the precise relationships of the members of this complex family, particularly in the first decades of the eighteenth century. 



@@@@@


doc= 64309


Samuel [ii] Farley (1699-1753), printer. He was born probably in Exeter and moved with his father to Bristol. In 1718 he was involved, with his father, in a chancery grant infringement lawsuit brought by the Stationers' Company. In 1723 he appears to have returned to Exeter to establish 'Farley's Exeter Journal' but this was handed over to his brother Edward [ii] by May 1726, probably because he himself had returned to Bristol to assist his father in publishing 'Farley's Bristol Newspaper'. After his father's death he continued the newspaper, starting a new sequence of numbering that was maintained when the title was changed in March 1734 to 'Sam. Farley's Bristol Newspaper', probably because a second brother, Felix Farley, had now started business at a different address in Bristol. In 1731 Samuel [ii] caused controversy when he reprinted a letter taken from the 'Craftsman' that revealed England's foreign policy to her continental rivals. By August 1741 the title had become 'Farley's Bristol Journal', probably to reflect the partnership between Samuel and Felix, now at the same premises, between 1737 and 1741. Between 1740 and 1742 the brothers ran a printing office in Pontypool that produced Welsh-language publications. In 1741 Samuel [ii] moved to Bath, returning to Bristol in 1746 to form an independent printing office. In January 1748 he rejoined Felix and for a short period they each published the newspaper on alternate weeks, with differing titles, until, from 30 January of that year, they settled on the simple title of the 'Bristol Journal'. In March 1752 a quarrel led Felix to set up a rival newspaper. Samuel [ii] died in Bristol on 15 December 1753, after a long illness. His will was proved in the prerogative court of Canterbury on 9 February 1754. His printing business he left to his niece Sarah Farley (died 1774), daughter of Edward [ii], who had run the newspaper during her uncle's long illness, provided that she carried on the paper and joined the Quakers. To his sister-in-law Elizabeth Farley, widow of Felix, and to her son Samuel [iii] he left only 1's'. each, reflecting the animosity within the family. Samuel [ii] had printed Quaker publications since 1742 and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Redcliffe, Bristol. 



@@@@@


doc= 64310


Edward [ii] Farley (c.1705-1729), printer, brother of Samuel [ii], is recorded in Bath and Bristol as a defendant in a chancery grant infringement lawsuit brought by the Stationers' Company in 1718. He took over the publication of 'Farley's Exeter Journal' from his father, Samuel [i], or from his elder brother, Samuel [ii], in or before May 1726 from premises at the sign of Shakespeare's Head, opposite the Guildhall, Exeter. His career proved to be short and disastrous. He soon incurred the hatred of Andrew Brice, the printer of 'Brice's Weekly Journal', and an acrimonious quarrel was conducted in their two newspapers. In August 1728 Brice challenged Farley to reprint the libel on George II, known as the 'Persian letter', which had appeared in the London newspaper 'Mist's Weekly Journal' on 24 August. The hapless Farley took up this challenge all too promptly in the issue of his 'Exeter Journal' dated 30 August. He was immediately arrested, put in irons, and cast into Exeter gaol. Brice triumphantly printed the presentments at the October quarter sessions in 18 October. For a time Farley was held in Newgate but was returned to Exeter in time for his trial, which opened on 31 March 1729. As only two witnesses for the crown were forthcoming, one a man of bad character and the other Farley's son-in-law, who would speak only on compulsion, the attorney-general recommended that the prosecution should not proceed, and an order was made for Farley's release. This came too late for Edward [ii], who had died in Exeter gaol in May 1729, thus earning a place as one of the first victims of a libel prosecution in the English provincial press. 
Other members of the Farley family had continued the newspaper while Edward [ii] was in prison and an unnamed newspaper, printed by his son Edward [iii] throughout the 1730s, is recorded in the Courtenay family account books, although no copies appear to survive. Edward [iii] was imprisoned in 1742 on a charge of evading stamp duty. A notable publication of his, Ezra Cleaveland's 'A Genealogical History of the Noble and Illustrious Family of Courtenay', appeared in 1735. His address then was Shakespeare's Head, near Eastgate, Exeter. Sarah, daughter of Edward [ii], took over the Bristol newspaper of her uncle Samuel [ii] after his death in 1753 with the aid of Samuel's foreman, Samuel Bonner, and Richard Middleton, and ran it until her death in 1774, having been joined by Mark Farley, who was probably her brother, by 1762. She never married but was prominent in local literary circles, Hannah More being among her friends. She left the paper to her cousin Hester, daughter of Felix and Elizabeth Farley. 



@@@@@


doc= 64311


Felix Farley (bap. 1708, d. 1753), printer, son of Samuel [i], was baptized in St Lawrence's Church, Exeter, on 3 October 1708. He was printing in Bath at Shakespeare's Head, without Westgate, in 1732 and started business in Bristol at the same shop sign in 1734, in separate premises from his brother Samuel [ii]. Among the items printed in these years was an edition of 'Bristol: the City Charters', an anti-corporation publication issued in 1736. From 1737 to 1741 the two brothers were in partnership, publishing 'Farley's Bristol Journal' from the same address. Felix revisited Exeter in 1741 to revive 'Farley's Exeter Weekly Journal', of which only issue 33, for 11 December 1741, survives, while in the same year Samuel left Bristol for Bath. In 1743, at premises in Castle Green, Bristol, Felix began to produce two separate newspapers with different numberings on alternate weeks, 'Felix Farley's Bristol Journal' and 'Farley's Bristol Advertiser', the latter described as being printed by Farley and Company; this was a device to avoid stamp duty and was dropped by Farley in August 1746. From January 1748 Samuel [ii] was again in partnership with Felix; together they published the 'Bristol Journal' until in April 1752, after their quarrel, Felix set up the rival 'Felix Farley's Bristol Journal' in premises in Small Street, still at the sign of Shakespeare's Head. Felix died of consumption in April 1753, a few months before his brother Samuel [ii], to whom he left only 1 guinea, praying to God 'that his eyes may be opened that he may see the injury he has done me and my poor family'. He had been a Wesleyan Methodist and left 1 guinea also to both John and Charles Wesley. In 1744 he had printed 'Hymns and Sacred Poems', collected by John Wesley, as well as many other Wesleyan publications; part of the family conflict may therefore have been religious, since Samuel [ii] had Quaker sympathies. 
Felix's widow, Elizabeth (died 1779), continued the newspaper from premises in Small Street, Bristol, in partnership with her son Samuel [iii] (died 1786?). Samuel [iii] left for Bath in 1756 to found the short-lived 'Farley's Bath Journal' but was again in partnership with his mother from 1758 to 1760. He then left for America, where imprints are recorded in New York in 1772, and probably died in the Bahamas in 1786. Elizabeth was an active printer and was several times in dispute with the corporation. In 1767 she took as a partner Thomas Cocking, who began printing on his own account in 1771, and took over the newspaper completely in 1773. She died on 28 May 1779, aged sixty-five, and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground, Bristol. Hester, the daughter of Elizabeth and Felix, was born on 7 September 1750 and was left the 'Bristol Journal' by her cousin Sarah, daughter of Edward [ii] Farley, on her death in 1774. After problems with the printers Bonner and Middleton, Hester sold the paper in 1775 to George and William Routh and Charles Nelson, who had earlier married her sister Elizabeth. Hester married Thomas Rutter, a Quaker, in 1780. When Nelson left the partnership the Rouths renamed the paper 'Sarah Farley's Bristol Journal' and continued to publish it into the nineteenth century, although by that time there appears no longer to have been any connection with the Farley family. 


@@@@@


doc= 64312


Mark Farley (d. 1766), printer, was probably the son of Edward [ii]. In partnership with other members of the family he printed in 1745 the first edition of the frequently reprinted work 'The Life and Adventures of Bampfylde Moore Carew'. In 1754 he was sentenced to one year's imprisonment for printing a seditious song on the anniversary of the Pretender's birthday. By 1758 he was in Bristol, where he assisted Sarah Farley in the 'Bristol Journal'. He died in Bristol in June 1766; his burial was recorded in the Society of Friends' register on 21 June. 
Mark's uncle 


@@@@@


doc= 64315


Pitt, James (fl. 1714-1755), writer on politics, was born in Norfolk; no details are known of his parentage or his upbringing. In early adulthood he was a freeholder in Heigham, Norfolk, and served as a schoolmaster, first in Norwich and later in Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. In the late 1720s Pitt emerged as a leading political writer, defending Sir Robert Walpole and his government from attacks published in 'The Craftsman', a weekly journal supported, and sometimes written, by Lord Bolingbroke and William Pulteney. Pitt wrote for two papers, the 'London Journal' and, from 1735, the 'Daily Gazetteer', under the pseudonyms Francis Osborne esq., Socrates, and Publicola. His earliest attributable essay appeared on 18 February 1728, and he quickly gained a reputation, alongside William Arnall and Ralph Courteville, as one of Walpole's favoured writers. As Francis Osborne esq. his 'London Journal' essays reached a wide audience in a paper which sold up to 5000 copies a week and which may have been read (or heard) by as many as 100,000. Throughout the late 1720s and the 1730s Pitt's contributions made him an influential figure among London's chattering classes, serving, according to one contemporary account, as 'the oracle of a political circle in George's Coffee House, temple-bar' (Nichols, 3.649). Alexander Pope conferred upon him the ultimate accolade for any pro-government writer: a reference in the 'Dunciad' (1729), where he appeared as Mother Osborne, because of the 'Heaviness of his style', and was compared to Ovid's petrified and pathetic Niobe. 
Pitt's essays covered a wide range of political, religious, and even philosophical subjects. However, his principal aim was to dismantle 'The Craftsman''s case against what its authors identified as the Walpolean 'robinocracy'. It was largely as a result of Pitt's influence that the 'London Journal' moved away from its earlier focus on literary as well as political issues to become a key platform for attacks on opposition journalism. Pitt held 'The Craftsman' directly responsible for much of the anti-government feeling in the country. Selling sometimes as many as 13,000 copies a week, it 'scatter'd more dissatisfaction thro' the kingdom, than all other causes put together' ('London Journal', 551, 21 Feb 1730). Pitt saw the motive for these attacks less in terms of policy difference than of the political jealousy of its principal sponsor, Bolingbroke: 'the 'Craftsman' would never have seen the light, had not some gentlemen, whom he's acquainted with, been thrown out of power' (ibid., 581, 19 Sept 1730). 
Yet Pitt's contribution was always more substantive than these personal attacks suggest. His weekly essays in both the 'London Journal' and the 'Daily Gazetteer' reveal a clear set of political ideas and an attachment to Walpolean whig principles which have been seen as a precursor to the political writings of David Hume. Pitt's thought was rooted in the experiences of the real world and he mocked opponents who based their criticism of Walpole in discussions of classical and contemporary political philosophy. By contrast, Pitt remained aware of humankind's imperfections, though he eschewed a Hobbesian view, believing people 'more happy living in society than by living singly' ('London Journal', 653, 1 Jan 1732). Politicians had therefore to work within the limits of human ability though his optimistic view of human sociability made government a convenience rather than a necessity. A supporter of the post-1688 constitutional settlement, Pitt challenged Bolingbroke's view that Britons' liberty dated to the 'Magna Carta', which he claimed had brought 'only some concessions to the churchmen and barons' (ibid., 769, 23 March 1734). Pitt's opponents accused him of apostasy, having departed from an earlier whig tradition of John Locke and Algernon Sidney in order to defend a corrupt government. Pitt, who boasted that he was 'as thorough a whig as any man now living, or that ever liv'd' ('Daily Gazetteer', 132, 29 Nov 1735), maintained that members of the modern court whig party 'fully enjoy what the old whigs so gloriously contended for'; as a result of these changing fortunes Pitt claimed that modern whigs were fully justified in moving away from late seventeenth-century theories of resistance since 'we have the end to which their opposition was the means' ('London Journal', 733, 14 July 1733). Additional literary attacks against Pitt appeared in Henry Fielding's play 'Pasquin' (1736); this followed on from reports of his having been beaten up by critics of Walpole's policy during the 1733 excise crisis ('GM', 141). Pitt was nevertheless amply rewarded for his pains by Walpole. In March 1729 he was appointed to his first sinecure: tide surveyor at Portsmouth, which carried a salary of $200 per annum. In June 1731 he earned promotion, becoming surveyor of tobacco in London, a post he was later rumoured to have sold for $1100. 
Pitt's final essay appeared in the 'Daily Gazetteer' for 25 November 1738. A well-read journalist, he retired to his house in Essex Street, London, and to his books; a glimpse of his life in the 1740s and 1750s emerges from a handful of extant letters to Thomas Cook, the classical translator. A keen advocate for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', Pitt also published a pro-dissenting essay, 'On superstition', in the 'London Journal' (1733), later mistakenly reprinted as a work by William Pitt, earl of Chatham. Pitt's death date remains unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 64316


Johnston, William (fl. 1792-1817), newspaper proprietor and radical, was a half-pay officer in the armed forces. Some time before the 1790s he married a Miss Home, niece of Francis Home, physician. By at least 1811 he owned property in North Charlotte Street in Edinburgh's expanding New Town. Between 1792 and 1794 he was resident at 20 North Frederick Street, also in the New Town, another indication of his gentle status. Henry Cockburn later noted that Johnston had been 'a respectable man, and a gentleman in his manners' (Cockburn, 118). 
Although Johnston chaired the meeting which saw the birth of the Scottish Friends of the People, held in Edinburgh on 26 July 1792, his importance in Scottish and Edinburgh radical circles was principally owing to his establishment of the 'Edinburgh Gazetteer' in September 1792 -- one of only two radical papers founded in Scotland in the 1790s. (The other was the 'Caledonian Chronicle'.) Two months later he was voted the thanks of the Friends of the People at a meeting in Edinburgh of delegates from constituent radical societies throughout Scotland. In the proposals for the paper Johnston promised early and impartial news of international events; to convey early and prompt intelligence of public abuses; full coverage of important developments in the worlds of commerce, the arts, sciences, politics, and amusements of the nation; and to devote special attention to events in France. This last promise was given added importance because of the hostile comment on, and coverage of, the French Revolution and French military fortunes in the rest of the contemporary Scottish press. In July of the following year delegates of all the radical societies of the county of Renfrew voted thanks to both the radical papers for 'the impartial manner in which they disseminated truth and political knowledge' (Meikle, 129 n. 1). 'Look before ye Loup', a loyalist pamphlet of 1793, also alluded to the eagerness with which French news carried by the 'Gazetteer' was digested by weaver radicals. The proposals also made clear the reformist intent of the paper. It was, they declared, attached to the 'British constitution for which our fathers shed their blood' and 'not to those defects produced by time and by the efforts of bad men' (NA Scot., RH 2/4/64, fol. 320). 
The 'Gazetteer' quickly became the mouthpiece of the Scottish Friends of the People, being used as the vehicle for the circulation of radical addresses and motions and the advertisement of radical pamphlets and handbills, as well as the dissemination of information about radical activities throughout the British Isles, not least Ireland. As early as November 1792 one informant from Montrose told Lord Advocate Robert Dundas that they believed the paper 'has done more hurt than anything else' (NA Scot., RH 2/4/65, fols. 156-7). Copies of both the 'Gazetteer' and the 'Caledonian Chronicle' were also regularly forwarded to the home secretary, Henry Dundas, in London. From November Johnston's mail was being intercepted and he was being 'closely watched' by the authorities (NA Scot., RH 2/4/65, fols. 48-53; RH 2/4/68, fols. 11-12). 
Although he was, by late 1793 certainly, a supporter of universal suffrage and annual parliaments, Johnston's temperament and disposition were those of a moderate. In a series of letters to the leading Scottish radical William Skirving, written some time before the third general convention of the Scottish Friends of the People, held in the Scottish capital in the autumn of 1793, he urged a posture of 'candour, firmness and constitutional integrity'. He also counselled the need for unanimity and a conciliatory attitude towards those who supported more moderate measures of reform. In the same correspondence he characterized his position as that of 'intrepid moderation' ('State trials', 23.65-70). 
Johnston displayed essentially the same attitude at both the first and the third conventions of the Scottish Friends of the People. At the former, held in Edinburgh in December 1792, he proposed two resolutions, the first of which recommended that all radical societies expunge from the roll of membership any individual who acted 'illegally, tumultuously, or in any way to the disturbance of the public peace'. The subject of the second was the defence of those who, despite having behaved 'legally and orderly', found themselves 'prosecuted by the arm of power for adhering to the cause of the people'. The previous month had seen a series of riots in Dundee, Perth, and other places in Scotland, which appeared to ministers and their supporters to be linked to, if not promoted by, the Friends of the People. As chairman of the convention -- this was a rotating office -- Johnston also led a number of delegates to Goldsmiths' Hall to sign a loyal address being promoted by a newly established loyal association in the capital, the Goldsmiths' Hall Association. In 1793 Johnston was no longer a delegate but a visitor to the convention. He participated in a debate on 29 October opposing a proposal to petition the king on the subject of reform as unconstitutional and likely to lead to 'ruin' (NA Scot., JC 26/276). He later claimed that he did not attend from 19 November, when the convention was reconvened following the arrival in Edinburgh of several English radicals. He was, however, present on 30 November. By this stage the convention, under the influence in part of the bolder English delegates, had taken on a more strident radical edge, symbolized by the change of title, on 23 November, to the British Convention of the Delegates of the People, Associated to Obtain Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments. 
Johnston's caution was reflected in the contents of the 'Gazetteer'. Against a background of official anxiety about radical activity and a marked disposition to use the courts to suppress it, it is striking that the paper escaped hostile attention, at least from ministers, until the end of 1793, by which time Johnston had severed his links with it. On 22 January 1793 the editor declared that he had refused to publish a letter from a 'constant Reader' in Montrose on the ground that it 'seems to espouse Republican sentiments, with which we can never coalesce'. Johnston's enthusiasm for the venture, moreover, dampened in February after he was called, along with the paper's printer, Simon Drummond -- also a member of the Friends of the People -- to attend the high court of justiciary to answer a charge of contempt of court for a report in the paper of the trial of three journeymen printers for sedition in the previous month. Although Johnston claimed that he had been ill at the time of publication (15 January 1793) -- a story lent weight by an inflammation of the eye which prevented his initially attending court -- both he and Drummond were found guilty and sentenced to three months' imprisonment. Johnston also had to find sureties for $500 for three years for good behaviour on his release. Bonds for that purpose were entered into by fellow radical James Campbell, a writer to the signet, and Francis Home, his wife's uncle. That Johnston was chastened by this experience was evident when he refused in March 1793 to publish resolutions in the paper opposing the war against France drawn up by Thomas Fyshe Palmer, who was himself to become a victim of judicial repression later in the same year. Johnston had taken the precaution of submitting the resolutions to his lawyer, 'who rejected them in 'toto'' (NA Scot., RH 2/4/70, fol. 82). 
By March 1793 Johnston was exploring ways of divesting himself of the paper. On 27 March one of Lord Advocate Robert Dundas's regular informants wrote that he had 'certain information' that the 'Gazetteer' and 'Caledonian Chronicle' were to be given up, unless a plan was settled on for their rescue (NA Scot., RH 2/4/70, fols. 139-40). A meeting of radicals, including Skirving, was held for this purpose on the following day. Johnston was willing to give up the paper for $400 in ready cash; he claimed to have invested around $700 in its establishment. There appears to have been considerable support for some sort of rescue package, from Skirving and from radical societies outside of Edinburgh, reflecting the value of the paper to the movement. There was, however, no quick solution. On 2 April Johnston was succeeded as publisher by 
In 1794 Johnston, together with Campbell and Home, was forced to answer a petition in the High Court that his sureties for good behaviour should be forfeit because of his attendance at the British convention of radicals. In the counter-petition, Johnston claimed to have lost a considerable sum through his involvement with the 'Gazetteer'. He also claimed that his health and family had suffered considerably through his imprisonment. He also declared that the paper had already been proving profitable when he gave it up, and showed every sign of becoming more so. This may have been special pleading to gain favour from the court. What is certain is that under Scott's management -- and facing harassment of potential advertisers and readers -- the paper lurched from one financial difficulty to the next. In July the price of the paper was raised to 4died from the original 31/2died At some time in October or November Scott wrote to Maurice Margarot explaining that only a loan would enable him to continue publication of the paper. Scott also claimed to be publishing between 1000 and 2000 copies per edition, a relatively modest total for the period. There is also a hint in another letter from Scott to Margarot from around the same time that Johnston had continued to provide the paper with financial support (NA Scot., JC 26/270). The only help the British convention provided was to recommend that radical societies do all in their power to raise money and send it to the editor, or at least to remit payment for the paper in advance. 
The action to have Johnston's sureties for good behaviour declared forfeit was dropped. Scott and the 'Gazetteer' were not so lucky. Scott was charged with seditious libel for reports on the British convention carried in the 'Gazetteer' for 26 November and 3 and 10 December 1793, and for a paragraph entitled 'An extraordinary instance of public spirit in the cobler of Messina', which could be read as encouraging the assassination of the 'oppressors' of the country (NA Scot., JC 26/281). Scott was outlawed for non-appearance. He fled to London where he was arrested but subsequently released on agreeing to act as a government spy. Johnston nursed a strong sense of injury about his prosecution for contempt of court in 1793 over many years. In 1817 he presented a memorial to the first division of the court of session in which he declared again his innocence. Details of the date or place of his death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 64317


Alexander Scott (fl. 1793), printer and radical. By June it was being reported that Johnston was about to leave for America. His terms were by now considerably easier; he was willing to make over to Scott the types and printing apparatus upon payment of simple interest on the sum he had invested. The principal was not to be paid back for at least three years. On 20 June Johnston's terms were agreed to by the Edinburgh general committee of Friends of the People; $500 was to be raised through subscriptions to fund running expenses, and this money was to be managed by committee. 


@@@@@


doc= 64318


Mocatta, David Alfred (1806-1882), architect, was born on 17 February 1806, the son of Moses Mocatta (1768-1857), bullion dealer, and Abigail Lindo (1775-1824). A pioneer of Jewish entry into the artistic professions, he was from February 1821 a pupil of Sir John Soane for a period of six years. He was awarded the medal of the Society of Arts in 1825, and afterwards travelled in Italy, exhibiting paintings of Rome at the Royal Academy in 1831-2. His training, influences, and artistic inclinations were classical. He worked on the drawings for the Bank of England (1826-7) and submitted designs in the competition in 1839 for the Royal Exchange, London. He designed several London synagogues: the Reform in Bruton Street (1841), the West London Synagogue in Great St Helen's Street (1851), which congregation he and his father helped to found, and the Montefiore in Ramsgate (1833). One of the first fellows of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), he was elected in 1837 and eventually became a vice-president of the institute. In 1835 he married Knendal (Ann) Susskind (1814-1896) at the Spanish and Portuguese Jews' synagogue in Bevis Marks, London. 
It was perhaps in his designs for the railway that Mocatta made his most important contribution to British architecture. He designed Brighton Station and several others for the London and Brighton Railway. His drawings in 1840 and 1841 for stations at Croydon, Redhill and Reigate Road, Horley, Crawley, Haywards Heath, Hassocks, and Brighton survive in the drawings collection of the RIBA. The intermediate stations were all built with white Suffolk brick and Yorkshire stone cornices. The internal layout was practical and well designed, and the exterior style was usually single-storeyed, with an Italianate or Doric appearance, but Horley was a two-storey design with a Tudor feel. The Brighton station was designed in 1839-40 and housed the railway company's headquarters, offices, and board-room. The buildings were in a dignified Italianate style, three storeys high, with an arcaded entrance. The platforms were covered by a saw-toothed roof 250 feet long. This is the only one of his stations still in use at the end of the twentieth century, but extensions have since obscured the original building. 
Mocatta worked with the engineer of the London and Brighton Railway, John Urpeth Rastrick (1780-1856), on his greatest work, the Ouse Valley Viaduct, north of Haywards Heath. This otherwise monotonous brick structure, 491 yards long and 96 feet high, and consisting of thirty-seven semicircular arches each spanning 30 feet, was ennobled by Mocatta's embellishments. He designed eight stone and brick pavilions, placing four at each end, two on each side of the line, and a stone balustrade which runs from end to end, punctuated every 30 feet with a safety refuge projecting beyond the balustrade. The design is simple yet exuberant and triumphant. Mocatta ceased to work for the railway in 1843, though in 1845 he made detailed drawings for a central London terminus in Farringdon Street (RIBA). He won the competition for the design of the London Fever Hospital, although his design was set aside in favour of a lesser one. He designed offices for Whiteknights Park, Reading (1844), Stowlangtoft Hall, Suffolk (1845), and the Imperial Insurance Company (1846). 
On inheriting a fortune from his father in 1857 Mocatta retired from architectural practice and busied himself with philanthropic work, particularly for hospitals. He was a leader in the struggle for Jewish emancipation, a most active promoter of the Architects' Benevolent Society, a senior trustee of Sir John Soane's Museum, and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He died on 1 May 1882 at his home, 32 Prince's Gate, South Kensington, London, and was buried at the Kingsbury Road Jewish cemetery on 5 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 64319


Clifton, Francis (fl. 1716-1724), printer, of unknown parentage, seems to have been educated at Oxford University despite being of the Roman Catholic faith. Between 1716 and 1724 he was notorious in London as a printer of cheap, seditious broadsheets espousing the Jacobite cause. He was involved in the production of three newspapers, the 'Oxford Post' (December 1717 to 1719), the 'Weekly Medley, or, The Gentleman's Recreation' (1718-19), and briefly the 'Orphan Revived' (1720) for Elizabeth Powell, another printer. Clifton's wife, Catherine, was also active in his printing business. Little is known of their married life, although Clifton described his wife as being pregnant in April 1720 (TNA: PRO, SP 35/23/37(3)), and later in that year, 'lame', while he portrayed himself as 'weak and consumptive' (TNA: PRO, SP 35/24/75(5)). His evidence, however, is not wholly reliable as he was at that time pleading for sympathy from government officials investigating him for his treasonable printing activities. 
Francis Clifton was variously described as printing in Black House Alley, Fleet Street (1718), 'near the Ditchside' (1718), at the Old Bailey (1719 and 1720), in 'the Libertys of the Fleet [prison]' (1719 and 1720), in Waterman's Lane (1723), and in Little Wild Street. His frequent changes of premises reflect the precarious nature of his business, being often pursued for debt as well as for political reasons. 
Clifton was probably the most active and persistent of a number of printers making a living by producing cheap broadsheets and pamphlets of an anti-Hanoverian and often Jacobite content at a time when, in the aftermath of the Jacobite rising of 1715, George I's ministers were desperately concerned to stamp out any signs of support for the Pretender. Clifton had the ability to exploit the market for scurrilous popular ballads and verses which were reputedly cried about the capital in large numbers. One magistrate, Sir John Fryer, warned that Clifton's works, 'tho' they are silly ridiculous things, yett they do much hurt among the common people' (TNA: PRO, SP 35/18/35). A more sympathetic account is given by Clifton's journeyman, Thomas Gent, later himself a prominent printer in York, who noted his employer's 'poor circumstances' and difficulties over debts, but presented a graphic picture of Clifton's busy enterprise carried on within the Fleet: 'Some time in extreme weather, have I worked under a mean shed, adjoining to the prison wall, when snow and rain have fallen alternately on the cases; yet the number of wide-mouthed stentorian hawkers, brisk trade, and very often a glass of good ale, revived the drooping spirits of the workmen. I have often admired at the success of this person in his station; for... advantageous jobs so often flowed upon him, as gave him cause to be merry under his heavy misfortune. ('Life', 85, 86-7)' At least fourteen Jacobite broadsheets can be positively identified as having been produced by the Cliftons between 1716 and 1724, although this list is certainly incomplete. Thomas Gent records that on one occasion Clifton was secretly employed by the Jacobite Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester. Clifton's works included two broadsides on the death of the nineteen-year-old Jacobite John Matthews in 1719, the last printer to be executed in Britain. It is hard to assess how many copies of each of his pieces Clifton printed, perhaps between several dozen and several hundred, but these works were usually intended to be sung or declaimed to a wider audience in alehouses and gin shops, or on street corners. 
Much of the evidence for the importance of the Cliftons in this period comes from the careful attention paid to them by authorities keen to clamp down on a dissident press: they were a prime target for informers, and raids on their establishments and several arrests followed. In 1719 Clifton was taken up for an edition of the 'Oxford Post', and in 1720 was gaoled as a result of a series of vehement accusations of treasonable work made by Richard Burridge, a hack writer and business rival. From prison Clifton wrote pleading letters to Charles Delafaye, the under-secretary of state responsible for his case, and even to a disdainful archbishop of Canterbury. He remained in custody until late March 1721 when he was finally allowed bail, the Treasury solicitor concluding that there was insufficient evidence against him to warrant prosecution. Another informer, Richard Shaw, continued to complain of Clifton's work, which was sustained despite the dangers of government action -- including the breaking up of his print by government messengers -- and Clifton's supposed ill health. In 1722 Clifton was again gaoled, this time on suspicion of printing 'lines' on the arrest of the bishop of Rochester. 
Clifton's Jacobitism was certainly persistent despite adversity. However he showed little solidarity with other Jacobite printers, offering to give information against those he clearly saw as business rivals if it would get him off the government hook, and denying that he ever received funding from Jacobite sources. He claimed that he was unfairly treated because of his Catholicism. Thomas Gent, growing disillusioned with his employer, portrayed Clifton as having an 'obstinate', violent, and 'ungovernable' temper, and as 'ill-respected'. The last work which can be attributed to him with any certainty was in 1724, after which, according to Gent, he 'proved himself a villain, in moving off to France with the money of a brewer to whom he was a steward, & left his bondsmen to answer for what damage he had done thereby' ('Life', 112). Clifton is thought to have died in France, although the date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 64320


Anne Esdall (1717/18-c.1795), printer and bookseller, whom he had married on 31 August 1745 ('Dublin Courant', 3 Sept 1745). Esdall now restyled his 'General News-Letter' and reissued it under a more assertive and proprietary title: 'Esdall's News-Letter'. The paper, which ran (sometimes irregularly) thrice weekly for nearly ten years, spoke to tradesmen and men of business; and it gave a special focus to timely political, urban, and guild news in Dublin and London, as well as in the new American colonies, in Africa, and on the continent. 'Esdall's News-Letter' was the economic mainstay of the firm and of Esdall's career; and its income from advertising sales must have been steady, if not robust ('Advertisements are inserted in this paper at a British Half-Crown for the first, and a British sixpence for each time after': no. 400, Wednesday, 13 June 1750). Esdall regularly ran illustrated advertisements for such local establishments as Hibby's Optical Shop, Rourke's Parrot (a clothes shop), and Newman's, where Dubliners could buy 'leather breeches of a black kind, for customers who fancy them' (no. 397, 6 June 1750). 


@@@@@


doc= 64322


Brunton, John (1741-1822), actor and theatre manager, was born in Norwich on 10 November 1741, the son of John Brunton, a soap maker, said to have come from a Scottish family tracing its descent from James II of Scotland. Young John Brunton went to Norwich grammar school before serving his apprenticeship to a wholesale grocer in the city. He then married Elizabeth Friend (1744-1826), daughter of a Norwich merchant, and with her settled and started a family in London, where he engaged in business as a grocer and tea dealer in Drury Lane. 
However, according to 'The Secret History of the Green Rooms' 'the Drama had long floated in his imagination' (2.176) and he conceived the idea of converting his propensity for 'what he had hitherto considered an amusement' (ibid.) into a livelihood. His chance came in 1774, when, at the suggestion of his friend Joseph Younger, actor and prompter at Covent Garden, he appeared first at Younger's own benefit on 11 April, in the title role of John Hoole's tragedy 'Cyrus', then at the benefit of Mr and Mrs Kniveton on 3 May, in the role of Hamlet. A year later -- at the age of thirty-three and neither tall nor very handsome, but with an intelligent eye and resonant voice -- he was playing leading parts at the Theatre Royal, Norwich. 
He opened in late March 1775 with three consecutive performances as Hamlet, and in the following weeks he proceeded to build up a repertory of parts as diverse as Romeo and Richard III, Achmet in John Brown's 'Barbarossa', and Belville in Hugh Kelly's 'The School for Wives'. The public, no doubt predisposed to applaud a fellow citizen, gave him a great reception, esteeming him, according to 'The Thespian Dictionary' (1805), 'the best actor that had ever appeared on that stage'. John Bernard, who had been in the company with Brunton, described him as 'our leading tragedian and one of the best Shylocks... I ever saw' (Bernard, 121). In accomplishing so much so quickly, in spite of his inexperience, Brunton quite possibly had help from the manager, Richard Griffiths, who had a gift for coaching young actors, as Bernard recalled in acknowledging his own debt to him. 'Mr Griffiths', he wrote, 'exerted himself in that peculiar element in which he had ability, the opening to me a knowledge of the mechanism of my performance, as the means of my attaining a good style' (ibid.). That the actors themselves do not seem to have resented the sudden incursion of Brunton into their midst may have been at least partly a tribute to his genial temperament and generosity of disposition. 
After five years on the Norwich circuit (which varied, but typically included Colchester, Ipswich, Bury St Edmunds, Yarmouth, and King's Lynn) Brunton tried his fortune again in London, in a single performance of 'Richard III' on 1 July 1780. The audience was cordial enough but the press was grudging, conceding his natural attributes but finding him lacking in technique. He spent the rest of the summer at Bristol before joining the Bath company in September, at the beginning of their 1780-81 season. Characteristically he took his family with him and during the next five years, while himself acting both at Bath and in Bristol, chiefly in supporting roles, he also began to introduce his older offspring to the stage. Elizabeth, John, and Harriet, now ten, seven, and five years old, all took their first bow in 1782 but it was on his eldest daughter, Anne, born in London in 1769, that Brunton's hopes were centred. With his instruction and encouragement she made a brilliant debut in April 1785 as Euphrasia in Arthur Murphy's 'The Grecian Daughter', Brunton playing her father, Evander. In October they were offered a brief engagement together at Covent Garden, where Anne had a promising reception, her father a cool one. They returned to Norwich, where Anne played for a while before spreading her wings in the theatrical firmament. 
Brunton resumed his place as leading actor in what had become one of the most important theatres in the provinces. Things had changed in his absence. Griffiths had retired because of ill health in 1780 and the new manager, Giles Linnett Barrett, was also lessee. On 24 May 1788 the 'Norwich Mercury' announced: 'Mr Barrett, with the consent of the Proprietors, has disposed of the remaining five years of his lease, as Manager of our Theatre, to Mr Brunton, father of the celebrated actress of that name... From the well-known abilities of Mr Brunton, the public may naturally expect to be highly gratified in their theatrical amusements, under his direction.' Brunton was an excellent manager, shrewd and reliable in business, popular with the public, considerate to his actors, and liberal in support of the Norwich Theatrical Fund for Retired Actors; generous, in fact, to anyone in need, from a rival manager in dire straits to a small school threatened with closure. He was also good company and at home in Norwich society. Under him the theatre had the most distinguished and prosperous decade in its history. However, towards the end of his third term as lessee it became clear that maintenance of the theatre buildings was not a high priority with him, and in January 1799 the proprietors decided, by sixteen votes to eleven, to grant the patent, not to him but to William Wilkins, architect, who had submitted detailed proposals for a complete structural overhaul of the Norwich house. Still immensely popular, Brunton retired gracefully from the scene at the end of May 1800. 
Meanwhile two more of Brunton's children had sought the limelight. Elizabeth (1771-1799) had had an affecting debut in 1790 at her now famous sister Anne's benefit at Covent Garden. Later she acted at Norwich but she died in 1799, a year after her marriage there to Peter Columbine. John (though intended for the law) had made the theatre his career and in 1792 he had married an actress, Anna Ross ('b'. 1773); both acted at Norwich under Brunton. Harriet (1778-1859) had not taken to the stage but had married Francis Noverre (1773-1840), son of Augustin Noverre and nephew of the famous Chevalier Jean Georges Noverre. It was now the turn of Louisa Brunton (1782x5-1860) to follow her sisters to Covent Garden, as she did on 5 October 1803, charming the audience with her beauty. 
In 1804 Brunton became manager of the Brighton (Duke Street) Theatre, the fortunes of which he improved, securing for it the active patronage of the prince of Wales (later George IV) and the title of Theatre Royal. When, in 1805 and 1806, Louisa came from Covent Garden to play for her father, the prince of Wales attended her benefits in both seasons. Among other noble patrons was William, first earl of Craven (1770-1825), and on 12 December 1807 at his house in Charles Street, Berkeley Square, he took Louisa from her father's hand in marriage. By April of that year the Duke Street theatre had been demolished and replaced by a new one in New Road, with Brunton as first lessee, this time with his son John, who also played Laertes to Charles Kemble's Hamlet at the opening on 6 June. Two more young Bruntons acted at Brighton, Kitty and Thomas, but the youngest of the family, Richard (1787x9-1846), was to take a different path, serving in the army through the Peninsular War, at Waterloo, and in India, and becoming lieutenant-colonel of the 13th light dragoons. 
Brunton continued at Brighton until 1811, at some time after which he and his wife moved to Hamstead Marshall, in Berkshire, close to the Craven family seat at Hamstead Park. There he died, after an illness of only three days, on 18 December 1822. In its report the 'Norwich Mercury' (28 Dec 1822) described him as 'alike distinguished by his own talents and those of his family'. As manager he had had 'a degree of success no former patentee had obtained'. As actor, it said: '[he] was of the school of Garrick. He was natural, easy and graceful; and his manner in certain parts was powerful and affecting. His 'Iago', 'Shylock' and 'Old Dornton' are still remembered by many in the district, as perhaps the most perfect representations they have ever seen of these difficult characters. In the walks of private life few men were so amiable. His conversation was particularly animated, and informed by sense, vivacity and anecdote.' His wife, Elizabeth, lived on until 14 May 1826. She had been married to Brunton for over fifty years and borne fourteen children but had not followed his example in taking to the stage. 


@@@@@


doc= 64323


Cadman, Robert (1711/12-1740), ropeslider, was born between 3 February 1711 and 2 February 1712, perhaps at or near Shrewsbury, Shropshire. A Robertus Cadman, son of Thomas Cadman, was baptized at Cannock, Staffordshire, on 9 September 1711. Nothing is known of his life until the 1730s, when Cadman emerged as 'the famed Icarus of the rope' (S. Ireland, 110), a celebrated flying man who slid down head first from some of the highest steeples and precipices in England. Balanced on a wooden breastplate grooved for the rope, blowing a trumpet and firing off pistols, the diminutive, bare-chested Cadman 'flew' spectacularly down to earth. Behind him streamed a jet of smoke from friction of wood and hemp. This, the rapid crescendo of his act, was preceded by a variety of acrobatic stunts and mimetic antics, during which he might take an hour to climb up the rope, hanging by his toes, resting nonchalantly with arms behind his head, playing the tailor and shoemaker -- in view of audiences sometimes numbered in the thousands. To encourage audience participation, he called for brave volunteers. 
Cadman appears to have travelled in company with at least one companion -- who circulated among the crowd, passing the hat as a collection plate -- and a wagon freighted with the coiled rope. A handbill circulated before one performance stated that gentlemen might, should they wish to attend, send their servants in advance with a subscription; otherwise Cadman might call upon them in person to secure the same. To supplement his 'take', or perhaps barter with church officials for leave to 'fly' from their steeples, he repaired damaged weathercocks and restored fallen ones. A prelate once denied the 'daring adventurer' permission to fly from one cathedral, replying that 'the man might fly 'to' the church whenever he pleased, but he should never give his consent to any one's flying 'from' it' (Nichols, 185). 
Ropesliding was no new phenomenon. A Spaniard flew from St Paul's Cathedral at Edward VI's coronation, and a man (who received only the promise of a patent for his 'invention') flew during the procession of James I through Grantham. More conventional funambulists entertained crowds at fairs throughout the country and in London, where Cadman was a 'constant exhibiter' (Rimbault, 161) and apparently once flew from St Martin-in-the-Fields, but the 1730s witnessed a flying craze: 'No amusement was seen but the rope; walls, posts, trees, and houses, were mounted for the pleasure of flying down: if a straggling scaffold pole could be found, it was reared for the convenience of flying' (Hutton, 205). 
The charismatic Cadman triumphed at Derby in October 1732, in what may be his first identifiable performance, climbing the rope once and flying down twice on each of three consecutive days from the top of All Saints' steeple. He was probably the 'flying man' who on 9 September 1732 at Cambridge 'flew down from the Top of St Mary's Steeple upon the Shambles' and, one week later, the disappointed showman who 'fix'd his Rope to the Top of Chesterton Steeple, and had like to have pulled Part of it down; so they would not let him proceed' ('Daily Journal', 22 Sept 1732). Presumably, however, he was not the 'sailor' who in London flew from Lambeth Tower to the Feathers alehouse; from the Monument to the Three Tuns tavern in Gracechurch Street; and from Greenwich church, suffering injuries that encouraged false reports of his death. 
It is not certain whether William Hogarth, in his painting and engraving 'Southwark Fair' (1733), intended to depict Cadman -- rather than his predecessor, the Italian flyer Signor Violante -- in the figure flying headlong from the tower of St George the Martyr, but Cadman's posthumous reputation encouraged the association. In 1735 at Bromham, Wiltshire, Cadman earned notoriety when he brought down the steeple, suffering only minor injuries when he crashed into a tree. By 1736 Cadman had eclipsed Violante. The 'Daily Gazetteer' (15 April 1736) noted that 'Robert Kidman, the famous Flyer, who has flown from several of the highest Precipices in England', flew on 12 April from the highest point of St Vincent's Rocks near Bristol, over the River Severn 'with Fireworks and Pistols', a feat executed eight years earlier by Signor Violante. In 1739 he descended to the Black Boy public house from a spire of Lincoln Cathedral. 
During the great frost of the winter of 1740 Cadman and a woman called his wife appeared at Shrewsbury to restore the church's damaged weathercock. A handbill dated 24 January heralded his flight on 2 February from St Mary's steeple over the Severn to the meadow opposite. It was later said that 'just before he set out on his mad career, he found the rope a little too tight, and gave the signal to slacken it: but that the persons employed, misconceiving his meaning, drew it tighter. It snapped in two as he was passing over St Mary's Friars, and he fell amid thousands of spectators... the body, after reaching the earth, rebounded upwards several feet', the severed rope smoking in its serpentine descent. His wife, who had been passing round the hat, 'threw away her money in an agony of grief' (Owen and Blakeway, 410) and ran to him, but '
Nothing could ought avail but limbs of brass, 

When ground was iron, and the 'Severn' glass. 
(J. A., ll. 38-9)' The 'London Evening-Post' (7 Feb 1740) reported that Cadman was killed 'by the cutting off of the Rope where it came through the Steeple, it being fasten'd to the Frames of the Bells'. 
Cadman was buried beneath the steeple at St Mary's, Shrewsbury, on 4 February 1740, commemorated by a ten-line epitaph. His cold, dramatic death cemented his reputation and ended the golden age of flying. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' rushed to press a mock-heroic yet sympathetic poem by 'J. A.', presumably an eyewitness, who likened Cadman to Icarus, Arachne, and Ovid's Phaeton -- 'Magnis tamen excidit ausis' ('yet he fell in a great undertaking') -- in verses that record vivid details of his final flight. 
Recklessness played its part in Cadman's catastrophe. 'He was a very extraordinary Fellow in his Way, but was grown too daring; for notwithstanding he was frequently caution'd by People here, he would not be prevail'd on so much as to set any thing between the Rope and the Stone to prevent it cutting off' ('London Evening-Post', 7 Feb 1740). Once, having drunk too much in company after restoring the weathercock at Hanslope church, Buckinghamshire, Cadman discovered he had left atop the spire the drum he beat before terrified onlookers while at his task, and, claiming it might be stolen in the night, could scarcely be restrained from climbing up again to fetch it down. Such antics of a man 'seemingly composed of spirit and gristle' (Hutton, 203) heightened the fascination, awe, and incredulity that Cadman sparked and suggest why beneath his epitaph someone once appended the couplet: '
Good-night, good-night, poor [ROBERT] CADMAN, 

You lived and died just like a madman. 
(Loaring, 185)' 



@@@@@


doc= 64325


Careless, Elizabeth (d. 1752), actress and prostitute, was known as Mrs or Miss Betty Careless. It is probable that she was acting before her name first appeared in the extant bills for the role of Polly in John Gray's 'The Beggar's Opera' at the Haymarket Theatre on 30 December 1728. During the years 1730-32 she was an active member of a range of lesser known companies, performing such parts as Cherry in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem' at the Haymarket on 18 September 1730. She acted at the Lee-Harper booth at Southwark fair on 24 September 1730, at Goodman's Fields on 26 March 1731, and at the Haymarket on 1 April 1732. It is likely that she undertook various engagements during the 1730s, such as acting the roles of Mariana in Fielding's 'The Miser', a Lady of Pleasure in 'The Ridotto al' fresco', and Miss Witless in 'The Comical Humours of Sir John Falstaff' (the latter two both theatrical compilations, or 'catchpenny entertainments') in a booth operated by Hallam, Griffin, Bullock, and Cibber in August and September 1733 at Bartholomew fair. 
The next notice of Betty Careless does not appear until 27 October 1741, when she was known to have danced a minuet and performed the part of Polly for her own benefit at the small theatre in James Street. Tickets could be procured from Mrs Careless's Coffee House, which was probably located in Covent Garden, where she advertised: 'Mrs Careless hopes her friends will favour her according to their promise, to relieve her from terrible fits of the vapours, proceeding from bad dreams, tho' the comfort is they generally go by contraries' ('BDA'). Following this she acted the role of Cherry at James Street on 31 March 1743 and an unspecified part in Thomas Baker's 'Tunbridge Walks' for her own benefit on 15 April 1743. 
The last theatrical notices known for Betty Careless were at Hallam's booth at May fair in 1744, when she was billed as the celebrated Mrs Careless. She acted various parts in a range of plays, which included Colombine in the theatrical compilation 'Harlequin Sclavonian' on 1 May, Cherry in 'The Beaux' Stratagem' on 7 June, and Rose in Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer' on 8 June. 
Betty Careless had a 'celebrated' reputation as a strumpet in the area of Covent Garden Theatre. She is depicted in a print (set in the Covent Garden piazza) by the French engraver Louis Pierre Boitard (1747): 'which showed her asleep in a [sedan] chair, attended by the rakes Captain Marcellus Laroon and Captain Montague and their link-boy, Little Cazey -- persons regarded by Fielding, when Bow Street magistrate, as 'the three most troublesome and difficult to manage of all my Bow Street visitors'. ('BDA')' Her name was also used by Hogarth in one of the plates of 'The Rake's Progress'. 
The 'Scots Magazine' recorded her funeral on 22 April 1752: 'The famed Betty Careless was buried from the poor's house of St. Paul's Covent-garden. She had helped the gay gentlemen of this nation to squander above 50,000 $ though at last reduced to live on alms; -- almost the certain consequence attending women of her unhappy cast of life. ('Scots Magazine', 213)' The burial was registered as being on 22 April 1752, where she is defined as a widow. It would appear that she spent the last years of her life in the poorhouse of St Paul's Church in Covent Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 64326


Cautherley, Samuel (c.1747-1805), actor, was rumoured to be a love child of the great actor David Garrick. Malicious gossip claimed Peg Woffington as his mother. A more plausible candidate is Jane Hippisley (1719-1791) ['see under 'Hippisley, John (1696-1748)], who had played Ophelia to Garrick's Hamlet at Goodman's Fields and who, in 1747-8, adopted the married name of Mrs Green without known recourse to a husband. The 1775 edition of 'Theatrical Biography', which published the rumour of this productive liaison between Garrick and Hippisley, is not, however, reliable, and Cautherley's parentage remains a mystery. What is clear is that, after his marriage in 1749, Garrick assumed the responsibilities of a guardian towards the boy. 
Cautherley made his first appearance at Drury Lane on 28 April 1755, when Garrick's farce 'Miss in her Teens' was given a novelty airing with a cast of children, but his serious debut came on 23 October 1755, when he played the boy Duke of York to Garrick's Richard III. The fact that he made a handful of appearances in 1756 and 1757 suggests that Garrick considered him less than outstanding. We know from surviving letters that Cautherley was sent to board at a school in Bromley in 1759, and that Garrick had cause for concern about his charge's slow academic progress. The educational experiment was short-lived, and on 9 October 1760 Cautherley was billed as Prince Edward to Thomas Sheridan's Richard III at Drury Lane, where he made sporadic appearances during the next three seasons. From June 1763 to November 1764, at Garrick's expense, he was in Paris, probably with a tutor in attendance, but on 26 September 1765 he made his adult debut at Drury Lane as George Barnwell in George Lillo's 'The London Merchant'. The small theatrical success that Cautherley had over the next ten years at Drury Lane was owed to Garrick's indulgence. He was given his chance as Hamlet on 23 September 1766 and as Romeo seven days later, and failed to seize it. He was handsome, unintelligent, and vain enough to resent Garrick's wise decision to cast him in no more leading tragic roles. 
On 4 July 1771, from Garrick's home in Hampton, Cautherley married Susanna Blanchard, the daughter of George III's wealthy cardmaker. Buoyed up by the new independence his wife had brought him, he began to pester Garrick for better parts. Eventually the exasperated actor-manager wrote a stinging letter, dated 7 October 1773, attacking Cautherley for his unjustified self-importance and desiring him to 'do your business or to leave it' ('Letters', 2.902). Frightened into apology, Cautherley contained his bitterness for two years, but on 27 September 1775, the day after what proved to be his last appearance at Drury Lane, he sent Garrick a letter of resignation. Garrick's third-person response, dated 2 October 1775, ends chillingly: 'Mr Garrick said in a former letter, that Mr Cautherly ['sic'] could confer no favour upon him, which he now retracts; for he confesses, Mr Cautherly has found a Way to confer a very great one' (ibid., 3.1037). 
The remaining ten years of Cautherley's undistinguished theatrical career were spent in provincial playhouses; he is known to have acted in Bristol, Hull, Dublin, Edinburgh, and York. There is no record of his response to Garrick's death in 1779, but in 1800 he wrote to Garrick's widow: 'The Gratitude I shall ever feel for the many kindnesses confer'd on me, while under your Hospitable Roof (for almost Twenty years) can never be effaced' ('Letters', 1.305). Cautherley died at his home in Richmond, Surrey, on 15 November 1805. The affluence he owed to his wife now reverted to her as his widow. When she died, on 22 March 1820, her will listed South Sea annuities, Bank of England stock, various securities, and several properties. She was survived by three of their children. Two others had died in infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 64327


Coan, John (1727/8-1764), sideshow performer, was born at Tivetshall, Norfolk. Although he has been known as the Norfolk Dwarf, both accounts of his development and pictorial representations of him reveal that he was not a dwarf but a midget. Coan appeared to grow normally in his early years but by the time he was exhibited at the Lower Half Moon, Market Place, Norwich, in July 1744, aged sixteen, was 'not three foot high' ('Norwich Mercury') and weighed 271/2 lb. By the time he was exhibited in Norfolk in April 1750 he had reached his full height and weight of 3 ft 2 ins. and (with clothes) 34 lbs. 
The first evidence of Coan's move to London is his presentation before Frederick, prince of Wales, at a party in Leicester House in January 1751, where he proved a highly popular guest. During this period dwarfs and midgets were very much in vogue with royalty in general and often lived in their patrons' homes. Much of Coan's appeal lay in the combined attraction of his very small but well-proportioned limbs (he was frequently referred to as the Man in Miniature) and his precocious personality. He was not simply a biological curiosity, therefore, but was distinguished from similar performers of the period by a sharp wit, intelligence, and capacity for entertainment through recitation, imitation, and singing. 
Coan appeared at a number of London fairs and tavern venues. Thomas Frost describes an early appearance he made, aged twenty-three, at the Swan in Smithfield during the three days of Bartholomew fair in 1751. Although Frost reports that the 'principal show seems to have been one containing two dwarfs, a remarkable negro, a female one-horned rhinoceros, and a crocodile' (Frost, 167), a giant of 7 ft 4 in. named Henry Blacker ('b'. 1724) from Cuckfield in Sussex was also included in the show. Coan is featured in an engraving by J. Roberts standing next to another giant named Edward Bamfield. Following this he featured much more as an individual performer. Although he was exhibited (for a payment of 2's'. 6died) as a curiosity to the public at a watchmaker's opposite the Cannon tavern, Charing Cross, Westminster, and for members of the Royal Society, it is clear that his twelve-hour-long daily exhibitions also included much active and interactive participation on his part. He appeared in taverns such as the Ship, the Anchor, and the Windmill near Temple Bar, and played an extravagant host in John Pinchbeck's Dwarf's tavern in Spring Gardens and at the Star and Garter tavern, both in Chelsea Fields, where Coan's humorous entertainments over dinner would be followed by Carlo Genovini's firework displays. 
According to Highfill, not only does 'Owens' Weekly Chronicle or Universal Museum' of 5-12 June 1762 print a prologue which explicitly invokes Coan and which is reported to have been spoken by the actor William Gibson (1713-1771) at a performance of Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan' at the Haymarket Theatre on 31 May 1762 but, following Coan's death in London on either 24 or 28 March 1764, an effigy of him was displayed at Rackstraw's Museum of Anatomy and Curiosities in Chancery Lane (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 


@@@@@


doc= 64328


Cross, Letitia (bap. 1682?, d. 1737), singer and actress, was, according to a statement in 1712, the daughter of Ann Cross; she may have been the daughter of Leonard and Ann Cross baptized on 6 March 1682 at St Martin's, Dorking, Surrey. A prologue which she spoke in spring 1696 included the words 'Look to't, ye Beaus, my Fifteen is a coming' (Danchin, 'Restoration', 3.289), which would place her birth in 1681 or 1682. She described herself as 'having from her Childhood been educated in the theatre' (Milhous and Hume, 'Theatrical politics', 428), and by 1694 she was a member of London's only theatre company. In spring 1695, when Thomas Betterton and other star players seceded, she remained with the Drury Lane / Dorset Garden company and was a leading performer of the music which Henry Purcell wrote in the last few months of his life. She sang new songs by him in 'The Indian Queen', by Robert Howard and John Dryden, 'The Mock Marriage', by Thomas Scott, 'The Rival Sisters' by Robert Gould, and John Dryden's version of 'The Tempest', where she played Dorinda and sang 'Dear pretty youth'. As the doomed young Bonvica in an anonymous adaptation of Fletcher's 'Bonduca' she sang 'O lead me to some peaceful gloom', as Altisidora in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Don Quixote Part 3' she performed Purcell's great mad song 'From rosy bowers', and in Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko' she sang a 'faux-naif' dialogue with the boy Jemmy Bowen. The theatre exploited her youth and charm in teasing prologues and epilogues, and she became an accomplished comic actress. In 'The Female Wits', an anonymous theatrical satire performed in 1696, Mrs Cross appeared as herself. She was called 'pretty Miss' and 'a little inconsiderable Creature', sang, danced, and threatened (aside) to kick an admiring fop 'i'th' Chops'. In November 1696 she created Miss Hoyden in John Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse'. When Peter the Great visited England early in 1698 he went to the theatre and she became his mistress; on his departure he sent her 500 guineas, which she thought insufficient. She gave a concert at York Buildings on 1 June 1698, but by the end of the year had left the stage for 'an Excursion into 'France', with a certain Baronet' (Egerton, 2). 
On 2 January 1705 Mrs Cross, 'Famous for Singing and Acting in the last Reign' ('Diverting Post'), returned to Drury Lane to perform 'several Entertainments of Singing and Danceing' ('Daily Courant', 2 Jan 1705). On 16 January she sang in the first all-sung English opera in the Italian style, Thomas Clayton's 'Arsinoe'. On 8 February she appeared as Florimel, the role written for Nell Gwyn in Dryden's 'Secret Love', and in April she created Mrs Clerimont, a lady returned from the continent with French affectations, in Richard Steele's 'The Tender Husband'. In 'The Tempest' she sang 'her Original Song of Dear Pretty Youth' ('Daily Courant', 1 Jan 1707), and later new roles included Miranda in the premiere of Susanna Centlivre's 'The Busybody', on 12 May 1709. On 31 March 1706, at St Benet Paul's Wharf, she married Martin Weir, who died fighting in Flanders soon after. She signed a five-year contract with Owen Swiny in 1709, but a year later Swiny was joined in management by Colley Cibber, Robert Wilks, and Thomas Doggett, and the new managers refused to employ her. The following March they received a letter from seventy-three gentlemen, threatening to wreck Doggett's benefit if she was not reinstated. In a letter to the lord chamberlain she denied instigating this and claimed that she had dissuaded them. 'The Spectator' of 6 April 1711 reported that Mrs Cross had visited Holland, where she was not computed as handsome as a Dutch soprano 'by near half a Tun'. In 1712 she took out a lawsuit against Swiny, making a strong case, but he was in debt and fled abroad. Her return to the London stage came only in the 1714-15 season, when a new theatre managed by John Rich opened at Lincoln's Inn Fields. She acted, spoke saucy prologues and epilogues, danced, and sang. Mrs Cross was away from the stage for three seasons (1717-20) and after October 1725 made only a single appearance, as Monimia in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan', for her benefit on 8 May 1732. She died at her lodgings in Leicester Fields on 4 April 1737, and was buried on 8 April at St James's, Piccadilly. She left mourning rings to a number of friends and the share in the Lincoln's Inn Fields theatre which she had inherited from her mother to her friend and residuary legatee Elizabeth Barker. 


@@@@@


doc= 64329


Cuyler, Margaret (1758-1814), actress and courtesan, was allegedly the daughter of an army officer who rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in an Irish regiment and died in 1790, leaving his fortune to his mistress. For this information, and for details about her early life which may have owed more to John Cleland's 'Fanny Hill' than to any respect for the truth, the only sources are the 1790 and 1792 editions of 'The Secret History of the Green Rooms'. According to the narrative provided there, Margaret Cuyler was abandoned by her father (who, like the child's mother, goes unnamed), brought up as a playmate of George III's daughters by their deputy governess, procured by the notorious Mother Kelly, and rescued by Captain Cuyler of the 46th foot, whose common-law wife she became and whose child she bore and nursed during its few weeks of life. She was again abandoned when Captain Cuyler was dispatched to America, lived for three years with a Major Metcalf and then briefly with an unnamed young lord until the earl, his father, broke the match, and was then kept successively by an auctioneer and, in turn, the managers of London's two patent theatres, Richard Brinsley Sheridan of Drury Lane and Thomas Harris of Covent Garden. 
It seems a circuitous way of explaining how a courtesan came to work in the theatre, but it was certainly at Drury Lane that Cuyler made her debut on 4 January 1777, as Miranda in 'The Tempest', and it is possible that Sheridan was her partisan patron. Then, and throughout an undistinguished career on the stage, it was her appearance rather than her acting that attracted the admiration of reviewers. George Colman the younger, who was her manager for most of her summer seasons at the Haymarket, thought her 'a fine woman: a full-grown Irish Venus, without the Graces; and, though an indifferent actress, good enough for the indifferent part of Miss Mortimer' in Harriet Lee's 'The Chapter of Accidents' (Peake, 2.51). It is a sober footnote in R. B. Peake's 'Memoirs of the Colman Family' that shows that Margaret Cuyler married Dominic Rice of Gray's Inn on 21 February 1778. Nothing more is known of the marriage, and contemporary gossip continued to regard Cuyler as more consistently a courtesan ('Cyprian' was the term in currency) than a wife. Acting was, perhaps, her way of keeping up appearances. Although she continued to perform intermittently at Drury Lane and regularly at the Haymarket during the summer closure of the patent theatres until the spring of 1809, she was limited to supporting roles in comedy and farce. Her starring roles were reserved for routs and masquerades. On 24 May 1783, for example, the 'Morning Herald' described the impression she made at a masquerade staged to give a French aristocrat a taste of English fashion: 'The lovely Mrs C---r appeared in the circle with peculiar eclat... the beautiful simplicity of her dress proved the delicacy of her taste in that important article, and exhibited her gracefully elegant form to the utmost advantage'. 
Like many Cyprians, Cuyler lived richly so long as her protectors kept faith by her. She is known to have been living in elegance in St Albans Street in 1784 during a period of four years' absence from the Drury Lane company, but by 1808 she was needy enough to call on help from the Drury Lane Actors' Fund. She was living seedily in Lambeth by then, and in Walworth when she died there on 14 March 1814. It was presumably her old theatrical companions who rallied round to arrange for her burial on 22 March in the actors' church of St Paul's, Covent Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 64330


Devoto, John (fl. 1708-1752), painter and scene designer, was referred to as being French during his lifetime, but his parents were probably Italian and the name has Genoese connections. It is circumstantially probable that he was related to the John Devoto who made properties for the court masque 'Callisto' (1675), and possibly also to Antonio Devoto, an Italian puppet showman, who performed at a booth in Charing Cross between 1662 and 1675. 
In 1708 Devoto worked as an assistant to the Flemish painter Gerard Lanscroon (died 1737), painting the 'great room' at Burley on the Hill in Rutland for Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham. Devoto seems to have established himself as a decorative painter by 1718, and drawings of 1719 show similarities to the work of James Thornhill (1675-1734). There are clear links between the techniques and subject matter of the decorative and architectural painter and the scenic artist: 'ingenious foreshortening, play of perspective, and painting of false architecture and sculpture... the same classical themes did duty both for ceilings and walls, and for the arguments of 'opera seria' and heroic drama' (Croft-Murray, 7). Early scenic commissions of 1719-20 suggest that Devoto may have additionally established his reputation by producing work in the style of, or indeed copies of, the Italian designers: the Bibiena family, Filippo Juvarra (1676-1736), and Pietro Righini (1683-1743). His first recorded theatre work was to produce designs for 'Julius Caesar' at the Drury Lane theatre, 'With an entire Sett of Scenes representing Ancient Rome, painted by Mons. Devoto' ('Daily Courant', 24 Sept 1723). The following year, for John Thurmond's 'Harlequin Sheppard' at Drury Lane, the playbill (28 November 1724) records, 'A New Night Scene. The Scenes being all painted from the real Place of Action'. His work must have been sufficiently well recognized by audiences for Hogarth to include the reference, in his 'A Just View of the British Stage' (1725), to 'Scene Newgate, by M D-V-to'. 
Devoto prepared scenes for Thurmond's 'The Miser, or, Wagner and Abericock -- a Grotesque Entertainment' (30 December 1726); for 'Perseus and Andromeda' (15 November 1728); for 'Othello' (15 November 1731) at Drury Lane, whose playbill offered 'a new set of Scenes being a prospect of the Ponte Rialto at Venice painted by Mr Devoto'; and for Theophilus Cibber's 'The Harlot's Progress, or, The Ridotto al' Fresco: a Grotesque Pantomime Entertainment' (31 March 1733). There is, however, insufficient recorded work to indicate that Devoto was a resident painter at Drury Lane. Henry Angelo, in his 'Reminiscences' (1823), indicates that he may have worked for John Rich at Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre after 1732, although Rich moved into his newly built Covent Garden theatre in 1732 and the playbills make no mention of Devoto. 
At Henry Giffard's new theatre in Ayliffe Street, Goodman's Fields, Devoto designed scenes for Vanbrugh's 'The Mistake' and 'a New Dramatick Entertainment, call'd Jupiter and Io... in which will be Introduc'd, a new Pantomime Interlude, call'd Mother Shipton's Wish; or Harlequin's Origin' (24 January 1735). Referring to Dryden's 'King Arthur', the 'Daily Post and General Advertiser' said: 'We hear the Designs of Merlin's Cave, that were presented last week to Her Majesty by Mr Giffard, have been so well approv'd of, by many Persons of Quality, that Mr Devoto, who made the Draughts, has had several Copies bespoke by the Nobility. ('Daily Post and General Advertiser', 27 Jan 1736)' In a theatre world where scenes were taken from stock and their precise relationship with the play may only have been circumstantial, artists would frequently provide generic scenes, or rework earlier scenes, for new theatrical circumstances. In this way Devoto, for example, provided scenes for the White Swan Theatre in Norwich, where it was reported 'the fine Sett of Scenes painted by the famous French Painter Devoto are arriv'd' ('Norwich Gazette', 20-27 Jan 1739). But there is also evidence to suggest that Devoto was providing for the growing taste for topographical scenes that could be recognized by their audiences. For the New Wells Theatre, London Spa, Clerkenwell, in June 1740 he was responsible for scenes for 'A Hint to the Theatres, or, Merlin in Labour'. This included a view of Merlin's Cave, one of Queen Caroline's features in the royal gardens at Richmond. Given the reference to the queen's satisfaction with this topic, it is likely that this was either a reworking of the scene from 'King Arthur' or simply the original set of scenes hired from Ayliffe Street. 
Spectacle and pantomime provided an opportunity for theatres such as Ayliffe Street and the New Wells to evade the 1737 'Stage Licensing Act', which permitted only Drury Lane and Covent Garden to present 'legitimate' drama. At Goodman's Fields, Devoto prepared the scenes and their associated machinery for 'Harlequin Student, or, The Fall of Pantomime' (3 March 1741). These included a magician's cave which broke open to reveal Pierrot, views of Covent Garden, the Tower of London, the Hermitage in Richmond (another of the queen's garden follies), and a court of Cupid which disappeared while a stage descended representing a heathen heaven. As Harlequin is banished with Mercury's song '
Sink Sink, Dishonour of the Age 

Disgrace and Scandal of the Stage 

Ye Worthless Crew, away, 

' the stage direction reads, 'The Scene draws, and discovers the Monument of Shakespear, exactly represented, as lately erected in Westminster Abbey.' The following year the 'Daily Post' (3 July 1742) advertised 'A Grand Representation of Water Works, as in the Doge's Gardens at Venice' with scenes by Devoto at the New Wells Theatre. 
In 1744 David Garrick, whose London debut had taken place at Ayliffe Street in 1741, engaged Devoto to provide 'one Flat Scene and 4 Wings' for the private theatricals of John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, at Woburn, for which the painter received $10 10's'. On 29 January 1746 a benefit was planned for Devoto at the New Wells Theatre in Lemon Street, Goodman's Fields. The occasion was additionally intended to mark the debut of his daughter in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan', but the play was changed and there are no further references to his daughter's acting career. 
The few references to Devoto's career after this date make no mention of continued scenic work. However, for the Covent Garden Lenten oratorio season in 1752 he designed theatrically inspired admission tickets for performances of Handel's 'Samson' and 'The Choice of Hercules'. Also in 1752 he provided a satirical frontispiece for an edition of 'Twelve English Songs, Serious and Humorous' by Barnabas Gunn. 
There are no later references to the life or work of the artist and there is no evidence of a will being made, or of the date of Devoto's death. However, a John Devoto, possibly his son, living in Bedford Street, Covent Garden, established a drawing school at 139 Longacre in 1775 and exhibited at the Society of Artists of Great Britain in 1776. 
John Devoto was painted by the Venetian Vincenzo Damini some time before 1730 (when Damini left the country), and a mezzotint, after Damini, was made by John Faber the younger and published in 1738, inscribed, 'Johannes Devoto: historicus scenicusque pictor'. Ninety-one designs, which represent Devoto's principal theatrical and decorative work, are to be found in the print room of the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 64331


Dimond, William Wyatt (c.1750-1812), actor and theatre manager, was, according to James Winston, apprenticed as a chaser (an engraver of precious metals) (Winston, section 1). Since Dimond was still alive when Winston's book was published, and likely to be interested in the author's record of his tour of provincial theatres, and did not contradict the claim, it can be accepted. Dimond's gentlemanliness and easy civility were widely acknowledged, fulsomely by Tate Wilkinson (Wilkinson, 3.111, 197), and this is consistent with apprenticeship in so specialized a craft. Hogarth had served a similar apprenticeship some fifty years earlier, but Dimond, unlike Hogarth, was not content to observe actors. He was ambitious to be one. He made his first known appearance, anonymously as a 'Young Gentleman', at Drury Lane on 1 October 1772, in the part of Romeo. The prompter William Hopkins noted in his diary, 'He is very younge a Smart Figure good Voice and made a very tolerable first appearance he met with great applause' (Stone, 1660). In attendance at Drury Lane throughout that season, though, he acted on only five further nights. In Canterbury for the summer season, he took a share in managerial responsibilities, but he returned to a subsidiary role in Garrick's Drury Lane company for the 1773-4 season. His best opportunities came as Rovewell in Shadwell's 'The Fair Quaker' and the Dauphin in 'King John'. For his benefit on 7 May 1774 he shrewdly chose to play Florizel in Garrick's reduction of 'The Winter's Tale' to 'Florizel and Perdita'. 
It may have been at Garrick's prompting that Dimond included the Theatre Royal, Bath, in his theatrical perambulations during the summer of 1774. He made his first appearance in the city with which he would be associated for over thirty years on 20 October 1774, inconspicuous in a minor role against John Henderson's towering Richard III. Bath's fashionable reputation was at its height, and the Orchard Street theatre was too small to profit from the crowds of visitors. By the time Dimond returned for the 1775-6 season the managers had contrived to double its capacity. In Bath, moreover, he was able to play the leading roles he hankered for, particularly after Henderson's departure for London in 1777. For three important seasons, from 1779 to 1782, he played opposite Sarah Siddons: Jaffier to her Belvidera in Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd', Posthumus to her Imogen in 'Cymbeline', Bassanio to her Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', and Lord Townly to her Lady Townly in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband'. Dimond excelled in society comedies such as 'The Provoked Husband'. They allowed him to indulge his extravagant taste in costume and to parade his graceful body before his indulgent patrons. Sheridan thought his Joseph Surface 'more consonant to his own ideas when he wrote the part, than anybody else' (Genest, 8.527). But Dimond was unwilling to abandon his tragic roles. He was still playing Romeo in 1790, when Wilkinson featured him during the week of the York races on 23 August, and his Hamlet was admired in both Bath and Bristol. In a measured review of his career, at a time when his retirement from acting was imminent, the 'Bristol Journal' commended his good ear, sound judgement, and unmatched skill in genteel comedy, but feared that his performances in tragedy were too smooth, orderly, and correct: 'nothing is irregular, nothing is left to chance.... Hence it is, that if you have little to excite astonishment, you have a great deal to admire' ('Bristol Journal', 28 June 1800). 
By that time Dimond had long been settled in Bath, initially in Devonshire Buildings and later in Norfolk Crescent. He married Matilda Martha Baker (died 1823), a Norfolk woman of independent wealth, on 2 December 1779, and their three known children were brought up and educated in Bath. The elder son, William Dimond, became a prolific playwright of little quality and a theatrical manager of little more. Dimond's own opportunity to manage the Bath theatre arrived in 1786. John Palmer's interest in the postal service had caused him to relinquish the management to William Keasberry in 1785, and Dimond was sufficiently prosperous, perhaps with his wife's help, to purchase a share when, in the following year, he was invited to do so by Keasberry. Since 1779 the theatres royal in Bristol and Bath had been run jointly as a compact and self-sufficient 'circuit', already established as the most prolific producer of future London stars. As a manager Dimond proved uncommonly popular, not only with the directors, but also with the public and the company of players. Keasberry retired in 1795, and Charles Charlton was appointed assistant manager, with specific responsibilities to Bristol. 
It was in Bristol that Dimond made his farewell performance, on 1 July 1801, as Edgar in Nahum Tate's version of 'King Lear', but continued in management until his death, having been granted a seventeen-year lease in 1799. His most visible achievement was the building of Bath's new Theatre Royal in Beaufort Square, the exterior of which remained largely unaltered two centuries later. It opened on 12 October 1805 with an undistinguished production of 'Richard III', but Dimond found no difficulty in attracting the stars of the London stage to appear in the magnificent playhouse. Mrs Siddons performed there on her final tour in 1811, following such luminaries as Mrs Jordan, G. F. Cooke, R. W. Elliston, Joseph Munden, Charles Kemble, and John Bannister. In the full promise of prosperity, Dimond suffered a stroke on 24 December 1811, and died at his home in Norfolk Crescent on 2 January 1812. He was buried in Bath Abbey on 10 January. His will bequeathed his property and theatrical interests to his widow, and it was through her that their son inherited the management of the Bath Theatre Royal. According to Belville Penley, the younger Dimond relinquished the management on his mother's death in June 1823 (Penley, 122). 


@@@@@


doc= 64332


Elliot, Ann (1743-1769), courtesan and actress, was born on 16 November 1743 in Tonbridge, Kent, the daughter of Richard Elliot (1706?-1771), the sexton of Tonbridge parish church, and his wife, Mary (1716-1748). She moved to London as a lady's servant, but was soon a high-class prostitute, using the name Miss Hooper. She became the protegee of the playwright Arthur Murphy (1727-1805), who trained her as an actress and wrote the part of Maria for her in his comedy 'The Citizen'. She made her debut in this role on 2 July 1761, during the summer season at Drury Lane Theatre managed jointly by Murphy and Samuel Foote. Murphy later dedicated the play to her, ascribing its success to her 'uncommon talents' and 'genuine comic genius'. 
In a letter to Murphy dated 22 June 1761, David Garrick had criticized Elliot's pronunciation and claimed that her face was 'more form'd to create Passion, than to Express it'; he offered to give her a trial without salary in the coming season. However, she preferred to go to the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, where Richard Cumberland remembered her playing Maria 'with admirable spirit and effect' (Cumberland, 1.232). After another summer season with Foote, she spent the rest of her career at Covent Garden under John Beard's management. For three seasons she played lively roles in comedies, such as Cherry in George Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', Bizarre in his 'The Inconstant', and Berinthia in Sir John Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse'. She was particularly successful in comic afterpieces, playing Polly in George Colman's 'Polly Honeycombe', Termagant in Murphy's 'The Upholsterer', and, above all, Maria in 'The Citizen'. Her appearances were reduced by illness, particularly in the 1764-5 season. George Ann Bellamy, whose roles she had taken over, remembered that she regained her parts, 'Miss Elliot's ill health obliging her often to decline playing' (Bellamy, 4.103). In 1765-6 she performed only once, for the benefit of the actor Charles Holland at Drury Lane, and the next season at Covent Garden was to be her last. In November 1766 she took her only tragic role, Calista in Nicolas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent'; the 'Court Miscellany' (November 1766, 618) thought she had 'very great merit as a tragic actress' but 'Thespis' found her too 'circumscrib'd in voice' (Kelly, 43). Murphy's final gift to her was the role of Mary Ann in 'The School for Guardians', his reworking of Wycherley's 'The Country Wife'. He quarrelled with Garrick ('a little sneaking rascal'; Taylor, 1.194), accusing him of forestalling the play with his own 'Country Girl'. Murphy's play was acted six times in January and February 1767, and he gave Elliot the proceeds of the two author's nights. 
In his 'Life of Arthur Murphy', Jesse Foot gives a description of the 'sylphic and enchanting' Ann Elliot as she was in January 1763, when he first saw her: 'she was a good figure, somewhat above the middle stature... her complexion was very clear; her eyes were dark hazel, and her hair a beautiful brown' (Foot, 188). Her charms attracted lovers, including Augustus Hervey, later third earl of Bristol (1724-1779), who is said in the 'Genuine Memoirs of the Life and Adventures of the Celebrated Miss Ann Elliot' (1769) to have removed her from the stage (possibly in 1765-6), and the king's brother, Henry Frederick, duke of Cumberland (1745-1790). Cumberland set her up in a house in Greek Street, and it was there that she died, on 30 May 1769, after a long and painful illness. She had remained in touch with Murphy and wished to bequeath him her estate, but he insisted that it should go to her poor relations and acted as one of her executors. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' reported that she left $8000; her will mentions plate, jewellery, a considerable quantity of furniture, and $5000 promised her by the duke of Cumberland, of which part had been paid, $1000 being invested in the funds. Her relationship with Cumberland probably ended some months before her death, but he is said to have fulfilled her dying request and ensured that her body was buried with her mother's remains, erecting a monument in Tonbridge churchyard with memorial verses almost certainly written by Murphy. 


@@@@@


doc= 64333


Elmy, Mary (1712-1792), actress, perhaps began her career in a provincial company and may have acted at the Haymarket in 1732 and in early 1733. On 18 October 1733 a Miss Morse is listed as playing Charlotte in Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko' at Drury Lane. She made two more appearances at Drury Lane as Miss Morse -- as Chloe in 'Timon of Athens' on 23 November and as Lucy in Edward Phillips's 'The Livery Rake' on 8 January 1734 -- then some time between 14 and 31 January she became Mrs Elmy: probably Mrs William, perhaps Mrs James Elmy. Nothing more is known of her husband. The remainder of the 1730s suggests occasional appearances in London at Drury Lane, the Haymarket, and Covent Garden, where she made her debut as Florinda in Aphra Behn's 'The Rover' on 11 April 1737. She may well have had regular employment in small and unadvertised parts at these and other houses. Whatever the case, in 1738 she left London for Dublin, and made her first appearance there as Mrs Sullen in George Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem' at the Aungier Street Theatre in October, when she was advertised as from Drury Lane. She made her debut at the Smock Alley Theatre on 11 December 1739 and stayed in that company through to the season of 1743-4. 
In autumn 1744 Mrs Elmy returned to London and the roles of Phyllis in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers' at the Haymarket with Theophilus Cibber's 'Academy' and Lady Dainty in Colley Cibber's 'The Double Gallant' at Drury Lane. In 1745-6 she appeared again in Dublin and remained for the season at the Aungier Street Theatre and at Smock Alley, where she was part of the supporting company for Garrick's engagement. She then appeared as Lady Grace in Sir John Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband' at Drury Lane (3 January 1747) and stayed in Garrick's company until the end of the 1740s, appearing in a range of increasingly high-profile roles. 
On 16 October 1750 Mrs Elmy was Belinda in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Wife' at Covent Garden, and she remained with that company until her retirement in 1762. Her roles included Lady Touchwood in William Congreve's 'The Double Dealer', Lady Brute in 'The Provoked Wife', Regan in 'King Lear', and, throughout the 1750s, Gertrude in 'Hamlet': she was greatly praised for her portrayal of Gertrude to Spranger Barry's Hamlet. The 'European Magazine' lists her death on 1 April 1792 at the age of eighty at Knightsbridge, London. 
Mary Elmy made a will on 12 October 1780 and added a codicil on 28 April 1789; it was proved on 19 April 1792. In the will she noted herself to be a widow. She left $100 each to four cousins in Norwich and $20 to another cousin in London. In addition four children of a cousin were each to receive $10. One Anne Williams received a diamond ring, and the rest of her estate -- including $1000 in stock -- was left to her cousin Sarah Smith, also of Norwich. The codicil left $50 to Anne Crawford, Spranger Barry's widow. 
Mary Elmy was never of the first rank of performer but became a solid and reliable company member, though she occasionally excelled in the right part. For example, in the 1753 season her Desdemona was greatly praised. Her fellow actress George Anne Bellamy considered her a 'good humorist and possessed of a great good sense, but by her want of powers was prevented from making a conspicuous figure upon the stage'. 'The Thespian Dictionary' (1802) adds that Elmy was 'respectable both in tragedy and comedy... [and] had a tolerable share of wit and good sense'. Chetwood's 'A General History of the Stage' (1749) was surprised that 'She seems to have more Spirits 'off' the Stage, in a Chamber, than she has 'in' the public Theatre', and in 'The Actor' (1750) Hill saw her as 'an actress of great judgement, endowed with a sweet voice and a pleasing deportment' ('BDA'). 


@@@@@


doc= 64334


Giffard, John (1745-1819), politician and newspaper editor, was born on 14 February 1745 in Dublin, the son of John Giffard (died 1746) of Wotton and Great Torrington, Devon, and his wife, Dorcas, 'nee' Murphy, of Oulartleigh, co. Wexford, widow of Francis Robinson of Dublin. Though descended on his mother's side from the ancient Irish family the McMorroughs, and connected on his father's to the Giffards of Devon, Giffard's upbringing was decidedly modest. Educated, it was alleged, as a charity pupil at the famous Blue Coat Hospital in Dublin, he qualified as an apothecary in London, and he was made a freeman of the Apothecaries' Guild in Dublin in 1768. A year later, in June 1769, he married Sarah Morton (1750-1827), an heir of Ballynaclash, co. Wexford, and the first of their six children, Ambrose Hardinge Giffard, was born in 1771. 
Giffard was elected, as a representative of the Apothecaries' Guild, to the common council of Dublin corporation in 1774. His political orientation in the 1770s was towards opposition; in 1778 the first company of Dublin Volunteers was formed at his house, and in 1779 he joined with Napper Tandy and John Binns in advocating 'free trade'. However, political instinct and self-interest pulled him in the opposite direction, and the early 1780s were to witness his transformation into a conservative activist. His role in reporting the proceedings of the Irish parliament that resulted in the publication of the first volume of the 'Parliamentary Register' (1782) attracted the notice of the Irish administration, and he was already a 'Castle scribbler' (Inglis, 58) when he publicly challenged the legality of an aggregate meeting convened in Dublin on 21 June 1784 to launch a campaign for parliamentary reform. His presence together with the attorney-general, John Fitzgibbon, when he embarked on a similar action three months later, emphasized his usefulness to the Dublin Castle authorities, and he confirmed his value during the mid-1780s by, among other services, reporting debates in the House of Commons in 1787. Already the beneficiary of a position in the customs service and a secret service pension of $300, Giffard's star rose further when Dublin Castle helped him secure the lease on the city's oldest newspaper, 'Faulkner's Dublin Journal', in 1788. 
Dublin Castle's expectation was that Giffard would turn the 'Dublin Journal' into a propaganda mouthpiece, and he did not disappoint. He used the paper and his membership of the growing 'castle party' on the common council to promote the administration's position during the late 1780s and early 1790s on such issues as the regency, the lord mayoralty dispute, the French Revolution, and Catholic relief. His egregious manner and assertive conservatism precipitated an unseemly altercation in 1790 with John Philpot Curran, but Giffard was unrepentant. Intolerant of those of opposite views and devoted to the maintenance of the political 'status quo', he was a member of the corporation committee that drafted the famous clarion call to protestants to rally to maintain 'protestant ascendancy' in January 1792. He further demonstrated his ardent conservatism by passing information from Thomas Collins, the United Irish spy, to Dublin Castle and by becoming a captain in the Dublin militia. As sheriff of Dublin in 1793-4 he zealously prosecuted radicals and, among other actions, conducted the raid upon Tailors' Hall in May 1794 that brought the open phase of the United Irishmen to a close. His partiality and arrogant righteousness made him a hate figure in liberal circles and earned him the nickname the Dog in Office. Giffard resorted to the courts to protect his name, but despite his successful prosecution of the editor of the 'Dublin Morning Post' in 1794 the sobriquet stuck. Indeed, its use by a rival newspaper in 1795 resulted in an assault by Giffard for which he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment, though high-level intervention secured his early release. 
Just prior to this Giffard's career as a newspaper editor appeared finished when the lord lieutenant, Earl Fitzwilliam, 'dismissed' him and the 'Dublin Journal' (Inglis, 61). The experience did nothing to temper his ultra-protestant activities, for following his restoration to favour on Fitzwilliam's recall he co-ordinated Dublin corporation's petition against Catholic emancipation and he was among the first members of the Orange order in the capital when a lodge was established there in 1797. Widely perceived in radical circles as a rabid bigot, he featured on several assassination lists in the run-up to the 1798 rising. He survived the rising unscathed but the death of his son William and his nephew Daniel Frederick Ryan left a deep mark. Convinced that protestant ascendancy and the British connection could be maintained only if Britain and Ireland were bound in a legislative union, he defied his colleagues in the Orange order and on Dublin corporation to support the measure. His political life thereafter was devoted to the twin causes of protestant ascendancy and the Union. To this end he sought at every opportunity to promote loyalty to the Hanoverian monarchy in Ireland, to popularize the Union, and, as befitted a deputy grand master of the Orange order, to oppose the enhancement of the position of Catholics. His procrustean commitment to the maintenance of protestant ascendancy meant relations with the Irish executive were often difficult. The earl of Hardwicke dismissed him from his place as accountant-general of the customs in 1805, but he was restored by the duke of Richmond, and successive tory administrations kept him on board until 1816 when he severed his connection with the 'Dublin Journal'. Unable to accept that his brand of ultra-conservatism was no longer respectable, Giffard remained politically active in the cause he had done so much to promote until his death on 5 May 1819. 


@@@@@


doc= 64335


Falkner, Anna Maria (d. 1796/7), singer, was said to have been the niece and adopted daughter of the Dublin publisher George Faulkner (1703?-1775). On 23 November 1745 she sang Eurydice in the pantomime afterpiece 'Orpheus and Eurydice' (music by J. F. Lampe) at Covent Garden, billed as a young gentlewoman who 'never appear'd on any Stage before' ('General Advertiser', 23 Nov 1745). She sang the role more than thirty times before the middle of May but was not advertised at Covent Garden again for nearly two years. Aided by her striking appearance -- she was above average height with large dark eyes and black hair -- she established her reputation as a singer at Marylebone Gardens, being an attraction there every summer from 1747 to 1752. Many songs by Thomas Augustine Arne, Willem De Fesch, Joseph Baildon, and others were published as sung by her at the gardens. De Fesch was in charge of the music at Marylebone, and she is holding his 'I sing not of battles' in her portrait by Andreas Van der Mijn. 
Miss Falkner returned to Covent Garden on 13 February 1748 with two songs in Italian and Handel's 'O sleep' and ''Tis liberty'. She sang between the acts of plays, took leading roles in musical afterpieces, and played Polly in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera'. Her name is in Handel's manuscript for incidental music for 'Alceste', never performed but recast as 'The Choice of Hercules' and sung with 'Alexander's Feast' in March 1751. She may have sung the music then; certainly she sang two arias from 'Alexander's Feast' for her benefit that April. 'Amid a croud of exalted admirers and profuse offers, she kept her character unimpeached' (Trusler, 63). On 19 May 1748 she married William George Donaldson (died 1780). Their son John was baptized in January 1752, and she did not play Polly that season although she still appeared frequently in two pantomime afterpieces. 
In autumn 1752 Anna Maria went to Dublin for a season at the Smock Alley Theatre, where she appeared first as Miss Falkner but then as Mrs Donaldson. She opened as Polly and among other parts in a busy season performed Ophelia, Jessica, and Ariel (Shakespearian characters then viewed as essentially singing roles), Sabrina in Arne's 'Comus', and Philidel in the Dryden-Purcell 'King Arthur'. She was frequently advertised as singing between the acts and appeared in concerts in March and April. She was not re-engaged by Smock Alley, and in September 1753 advertised a subscription series of concerts in Dublin for the winter, but these do not seem to have been very successful. Her husband, a 'handsome and sprightly man' (Taylor, 1.56), appears to have begun an affair with the actress Mary Ann Graham while in Ireland and to have lived with her in London for two years before her marriage to the actor Richard Yates in 1756. After a season in the theatre at Bath, Mrs Donaldson made a final London appearance on 2 April 1755, singing a cantata by the young Michael Arne and the Irish song 'Ellen a Roon'. 
All accounts agree that it was her musical powers that attracted George Montagu Dunk, second earl of Halifax (1716-1771). Their relationship lasted until his death. He obtained a lucrative government post in Jamaica for Donaldson, and built a house for Anna Maria adjoining Bushy Park, Middlesex, where he was ranger. This was Hampton Court House, with a charming rococo garden and elaborate shell grotto. In 1760 Halifax was in serious financial difficulties and arranged a marriage to an heiress to restore his fortunes; in desperation Anna Maria took their daughter, who was born on 24 July 1759 (in one account also their son, who died young), to plead with him, and he called the marriage off. She was in Ireland while Halifax was lord lieutenant there and behaved discreetly, although she was accused of selling places later. On his death in 1771 he provided fully and carefully for 'my Dearest Friend Anna Maria Donaldson' and for their daughter, Anna Maria Montagu. 
William Donaldson, who had been living with a mistress and children at Turnham Green, died in 1780, and on 17 July 1784 his widow married Major Charles Lumm, recently returned from service in North America. Anna Maria Lumm of Gloucester Street, Portman Square, London, made her will on 28 December 1796, dividing her wealth and mementoes of Halifax among her five grandchildren and asking to be buried 'in the Chapel at Horton in Northamptonshire as near the Family vault of the Earl of Halifax as possible'. She was interred at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 16 January 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 64336


Farren, William (1754-1795), actor, was, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', the son of a London tallow chandler. He was bound apprentice to a tinman, but possibly ran away and joined a party of players. Alternatively, a manuscript in the Folger Shakespeare Library suggests he was well brought up and placed in a banking office in Lombard Street. A conspicuous member of a spouting club, he was noticed by Richard Yates, who engaged him at Birmingham, where his presence can be authenticated from 1774. In the mid-1770s he began living with Mary Mansell, known as Mrs Mary Orton (1745/1748-1820), an actress, with whom he had eight children, four of whom survived. 
On 20 March 1775 Farren made his debut at Drury Lane as Jason in Richard Glover's 'Medea' for Mrs Yates's benefit, where his 'appearance and voice impressed the Audience with favourable ideas of his talents. The spirit he evinced, though rather uncouth, it was hoped experience would polish' (Haslewood, 124). He later commenced an engagement at Drury Lane, first appearing on the bills on 4 November 1775 as Stratocles in Nicholas Rowe's 'Tamerlane'. 'His cast of parts', said the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 'were in the second walk of acting, though he supported with applause all the first, and ever acted with sense and judgement' ('GM', 65, 1795, 528). His Horatio was highly regarded: 'He does not endeavour to make more of his situations in the scene than he ought; he observes a proper subordination' (Davies, 2.90). The 'Theatrical Review' commented: 'His manner is particularly adapted to rigid, strong, and masculine parts in Tragedy' ('Theatrical Review', 7 Oct 1783), but was less impressed by him in genteel comedy (he was the original Careless in 'The School for Scandal', 8 May 1777). Possibly dissatisfied with secondary roles, Farren left Drury Lane for Covent Garden, where he made his debut on 21 May 1784 as Othello. He now took on more major parts, including Altamont (Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent') and Jaffeir (Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd'). He played Lear for the first time on 6 May 1786, prompting Leigh to write:''he ne'er will rise beyond' a decent 'Lear'' (Leigh, 19). He also continued to play secondary roles. His visits to the provinces were rare, although he played leading parts at Bristol (1778), Birmingham (1779), Manchester (1781, 1783), and Liverpool (1786). His only engagement at the Haymarket Theatre was in 1791. His last performance at Covent Garden was as Penius, in Colman's 'Bonduca', on 24 April 1795. 
Genest called Farren a 'respectable actor' (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 7.220), who latterly grew too fat for younger characters. According to 'The Secret History of the Green Rooms', Farren was: 'if not a first-rate actor, at least a respectable second-rate actor... He formerly pleased the eye both in countenance and person, but is now grown rather clumsy -- His voice is very powerful and capable of variation; and although he seems to have laboured to express his Author with great animation and beauty, yet his efforts have not extended beyond passive propriety... his passion too often makes him descend from the dignity of his character, by staring, and rolling his eyes, and suffering his face to redden with the heat of a testy welchman. (Haslewood, 128)' Pasquin is particularly scathing: '
By much the most ardent among the assuming 

By much most presumptuous amid the presuming; 

Hear FARREN affright every muse from her station, 

By unqualified rant, and extreme intonation. 
(Pasquin, 67)' A failing memory was noted as another of Farren's shortcomings in 1790. 
Latterly Farren spent his summers at his house near Kingston, Surrey, indulging in his favourite sport of fishing. On one of these occasions he caught a chill, from which he died, at his London home, 85 Gower Street, on 9 May 1795, at the age of forty-one. He was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 15 May. His principal mourner was Percival Pott, a gentleman who had reputedly been rescued by the actor when attacked by thieves. An intimacy developed between them, and Farren persuaded Pott to move into his house. Partly through Pott's resources, the family lived in great splendour, and Pott continued to support them after Farren's death; one of the beneficiaries of his generosity was Farren's second son, William Farren (1786-1861), who became a highly successful actor. 


@@@@@


doc= 64337


Fawkes, Isaac (d. 1731), magician, is first recorded in newspaper puffs promoting his booth at Bartholomew fair in 1722. It is clear from their references to his patronage by the prince of Wales and the extent of his public renown that his reputation had been set for some time before this. Until 1726 Fawkes's show consisted of sleight-of-hand tricks involving 'Cards, Eggs, Corn, Mice, curious India Birds, and Money' ('Saturday's Post', 9 March 1722) followed by his young son, the 'posture-master', who performed various bodily transformations as well as the 'Italian Scaramouche Dance, with two Heads, four Legs and but one Body' (quoted in Houdini, 60). These he performed in a variety of other London fair booths including ones at Southwark fair, Tower Hill, Hyde Park, and Upper Moorfields as well as in the Long Room in Queen Ann's Tavern in Southwark, the French Theatre in Haymarket, and the Cock and Half-Moon tavern in Chancery Lane. Occasionally he worked in association with Powell junior, son of the famous puppeteer Martin Powell. 
During 1726 Fawkes both moved to what became known as Fawkes's Theatre, James Street, Haymarket, and began a highly profitable partnership with the clock and automata maker Christopher Pinchbeck (1669/70-1732) of Fleet Street, inventor of the copper/zinc alloy which still carries his name. Although Pinchbeck received no billing and did not tour with the shows, his craftsmanship was behind all Fawkes's apparatus during this period. While the 'Venetian machine' showed different mechanically operated pictorial representations of landscapes from around the world (thus anticipating items displayed in the nineteenth century in London's Egyptian Hall), from 1730 onwards it was the 'Apple tree' which 'bore ripe apples in less than a Minute's Time' ('British Journal', 20 Feb 1731), which received top billing. Fawkes still toured the fair booths of London with this show under titles such as the 'Grand Theatre of the Muses' or 'Multum in Parvo' and it was in one such booth that his fortunes took a turn for the worse when, early in 1731, a fire in an adjacent booth frightened his wife into a 'premature confinement'; his own death, the precise cause of which is not known, followed on 25 May 1731; he was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. He left his considerable financial legacy of $10,000 (though some historians have questioned this sum) to his wife, Alice (died 1745); she went on to marry Pinchbeck's son Edward Pinchbeck (1713?-1766?) ['see under 'Pinchbeck family] the following year, and he, together with Fawkes's son, continued the business partnership forged by their fathers. 
Several significant pictorial representations of Fawkes and his work exist. Two of these are contained within engravings by William Hogarth -- 'Masquerades and Operas' (or 'The Taste of the Town'; 1724) which shows a London crowd clambering into the Long Room under a sign 'Faux Dex-terity of Hand', and 'Southwark Fair' (1733), a section of which shows Fawkes alongside contortionists with a bird in one hand and dice in the other. Although to Hogarth Fawkes epitomized an 'English Stage / Debauch'd by fool'ries' ('Masquerades and Operas'), thereby confirming the bankruptcy of aristocratic patronage and taste, for Harry Houdini he was the 'cleverest sleight-of-hand performer that magic has ever known' (Houdini, 56). Both his success and his importance in the history of magical performers lie in the fact that he pioneered the harnessing of the ancient and anti-Enlightenment tradition of magic with complex forms of mechanization; this clearly anticipated more modern preoccupations with the apparatus of vision. 


@@@@@


doc= 64338


Fisher, David (I) (1760-1832), theatre manager and actor, was born on 26 December 1760 in Norwich, the eldest son and third of the eleven children of David Fisher (1729-1782), a craftsman, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' West (1730-1819). The family were farmers, earlier worsted weavers, in Hethersett, near Norwich, where they had owned land since the mid-seventeenth century. Fisher, however, grew up in Norwich, where, after schooling, he was trained as a carpenter and worked in the building trade. His fine tenor voice, his striking appearance, with blue eyes and red-gold hair, and his reputation as an amateur performer led the manager of the Norwich Theatre Royal, Giles Barrett, to give him a trial appearance, on the strength of which he offered him an engagement, primarily as a singer. He is also known to have worked, in the early 1780s, with a travelling company run by William Scraggs. The precise order of events is uncertain, but from 1786 onwards his name appears regularly as singer and actor on the Theatre Royal's playbills, both in Norwich and in the principal towns of Norfolk and Suffolk, which the company visited on its annual tour of what was known as the outer circuit. His exceptional singing, particularly in the patriotic sea songs then in vogue, brought him a considerable personal following. 
On 16 March 1788 Fisher married Elizabeth Burrell (died 1814), aged about twenty-five, who then also became a performer with the company. They remained in its ranks for another four years, by which time they had a three-year-old son, David (II) Fisher, and a small daughter, a second Elizabeth. However, on 7 April 1792 the following announcement appeared in the 'Norfolk Chronicle': 'Mr SCRAGGS having resigned to Mr FISHER, of the Theatre Royal, Norwich, the MANAGEMENT of the Company of Comedians, to be by him conducted upon the plan of the first provincial Theatres in the kingdom -- for which purpose a compleat set of scenes, wardrobe, etc., have been purchased and a respectable Company of performers engaged -- they jointly beg leave to solicit the patronage of the Nobility, Gentry, and other friends of Mr Scraggs in and near the principal towns in the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk who have hitherto honoured Mr Scraggs, and to assure them that every exertion in their power will be employed to obviate those objections which have in some towns been made to the admission of a Company of Comedians.' By this shrewd step Fisher entered on management in a formidable partnership, adding his own talents and personal prestige to the long experience and local contacts of Scraggs. On 28 April, after a joint farewell benefit, he and his wife left the Theatre Royal, and within days Fisher & Co.'s Company of Comedians (more formally known as the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of Comedians) opened in Bungay, Suffolk. They were an instant success. On 5 July the two-month season ended 'with the greatest eclat', crowned by a rousing address written by a local celebrity. Before this was in print in the 'Norfolk Chronicle', the new company had opened more than 40 miles away in Sudbury, launched on a non-stop round of the smaller towns of the region (the 'inner circuit') which lasted without a break for the remaining forty years of Fisher's life and for a decade afterwards. 
At the beginning there were half a dozen other companies travelling the two counties, but these steadily lost ground to the new management, not because it did anything radically different from the others, but because, as a matter of declared policy, it did things noticeably better. The evidence is in the playbills. Here can be seen that 'respectable company of performers', never fewer than twenty in number, led by the two families, with a complement of other professional players. Occasional appearances of the children augured well for the future, though not to the neglect of their education: local schools were found on the circuit for the boys, after which they went to a boarding-school in Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire, and received separate tuition in music, French, and dancing. The company were indeed 'respectable', as claimed, and it was this that enabled them to come unscathed through a puritan attack in Halesworth in 1808 -- indeed to laugh it off in a comic song on the affair, sung by Fisher from the stage. 
Among more tangible assets, the company's 'compleat set of scenes', already more than most travelling actors could boast, was constantly augmented by the work of successive London-trained scene-painters, engaged both to paint and to instruct the young Fishers in the art. Construction of scenery and trick effects was no problem to the manager, a qualified carpenter, and 'Machinery by Mr Fisher' was a feature of their pantomimes. Costume too was a speciality. Writing in 1880, Fisher's grandson David Nunn Fisher recollected: 'Amongst the things remarkable in the company was the accurate dressing -- a complete wardrobe for everything and everybody; but the feature of the Fisher wardrobe was the dressing of old comedies. 'Old David' had costly presents of dresses of the last century, and bought largely of gentlemen's servants old swords, wigs in heaps, and some very costly dresses indeed. ('The Theatre', 1 April 1880, 199)' The dramatic repertory was immense: thirty or forty different pieces in each two-month season, from Shakespeare to the latest opera, farce, pantomime, or melodrama, interspersed with all kinds of music and dancing. The audience for this fare came from all classes, but most lucrative was 'the patronage of the Nobility and Gentry' in each neighbourhood, and the number of gentlemen's seats in the vicinity was an important factor in working out a good itinerary. Moreover, Fisher was noted for being at ease with all ranks in society and was a welcome guest in the homes of the gentry. It was found well worth while for the property-man to deliver playbills to every big house within a 6-mile radius of the theatre. 
The business was run on a sound family basis. David's two younger brothers, in addition to acting, were printer and box-book keeper respectively. His eldest son, David, became the scene-painter and his second son, Charles, assistant manager. The wider family lent its farm horses to pull the huge waggon-loads of paraphernalia from town to town. Finances were well managed and the actors could count on getting their weekly salaries and regular benefit nights. 
By the early 1800s the company had established a profitable two-year circuit. The only things not up to standard were the buildings they played in; although they were called theatres on the playbills, most of them were in fact fitted-up barns. By 1812 Scraggs and his wife were dead and their son had set up on his own. Fisher, now sole manager, began to build. Already, two years before, he had bought land in Lowestoft, Suffolk, and it was here and in Wells next the Sea, on the north coast of Norfolk, that in 1812 he completed his first two theatres. This set the pattern for the next sixteen years, during which he also opened his own theatres in Halesworth (1812), Woodbridge (1814), Eye (1815), East Dereham (1816), Sudbury (1817), Thetford (1818), Beccles (1819), Swaffham (1822), Newmarket (1825), Bungay (1828), and North Walsham (1828). In Halesworth and Sudbury he bought existing theatres as they stood; elsewhere he rebuilt, or built anew on a fresh site, usually financing his projects by raising share capital from local patrons. They were small, simple structures, built to his own design, each with an adjacent family house. From the start they were hailed in the press for their comfort and practicality, neatness and elegance. Two contemporary watercolour sketches of the last of them (now in the Fisher collection), show the interior at North Walsham, decorated by David (II) Fisher. The stage is set with wings and backdrop for a rural scene. The small pit and gallery and the two curving rows of boxes are all in delicate beige, picked out in white, blue, and gold. Decorative gilded lamps adorn the boxes, and over all is a painted sky of summer blue with white clouds. As the papers said, it is 'neat and elegant'. 
In an indenture of 31 January 1827, with the end of his building programme in sight, Fisher professed himself desirous of retiring from management and made over to his three sons, David, Charles, and George, the running of the theatres, with their entire contents. The theatres themselves he left, by a will made the following day, to his brother-in-law Thomas Sadler, a grocer in Norwich, to hold in trust for his three nephews. 
However, though he appears to have relinquished some of his managerial responsibilities, Fisher was undoubtedly still the head of the company, and as a performer he never retired at all. His name was on the playbills, acting in two plays and singing a comic song, for his own benefit night on 3 August 1832, just three days before he died suddenly at his theatre in Dereham, on 6 August. He had lost his wife, Elizabeth, in 1814 and an only daughter and youngest son had died young, but David (II) (1788-1858), Charles (1792-1869), and George (1793-1864) were left to continue his life's work on the circuit. Through their own careers and those of their children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren they handed on a family acting tradition which lasted for over 150 years. 
The 'Norfolk Chronicle' wrote of David Fisher when he died that he had been an indefatigable builder of theatres, a highly esteemed manager, a talented actor, a fond parent, a warm friend, and 'in the strictest sense an honest, just and upright man'. At his funeral on 11 August 1832 carriages of distinguished patrons followed the cortege to East Dereham churchyard, Norfolk, in a procession a quarter of a mile long. This was the personal impact that he made. His wider achievement was to raise, decisively, the professional standards and moral reputation of the travelling theatre companies of his day. And the driving force behind it was something more passionate -- a great and incurable love of the stage. Fisher's hero was David Garrick, whose glories he could describe and manner of acting demonstrate even in old age. All his life he kept an impression of Nathaniel Marchant's small intaglio of Garrick with Shakespeare, a talisman, handed down as an heirloom in the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 64339


Fleetwood, Charles (d. 1747), theatre manager, was the only son of Thomas Fleetwood of Gerard's Bromley in Staffordshire and Frances Gerard, the sister of Charles, sixth Baron Gerard. At the age of twenty-one he inherited (from Lord Gerard, through his mother) a landed estate valued at $6000 per annum. Described by Benjamin Victor as 'agreeable in his person' and 'affable and engaging in his address' (Victor, 1.33-4), the young Fleetwood enjoyed a highly extravagant lifestyle. His reputation for improvidence soon attracted the attention of a circle of gamblers, however, who quickly relieved him of his fortune. With his inheritance all but gone, he hit upon the idea of venturing into the theatre, and in the spring of 1734 he purchased John Highmore's share of the Drury Lane theatre patent. Knowing nothing of the mechanics of the stage, he appointed the actor Charles Macklin to take charge of his fellow players and supervise the artistic business of the theatre. 
With Fleetwood overseeing the financial management of Drury Lane, the theatre thrived for several years. However, by the 1737-8 season Fleetwood appears to have grown tired of his day-to-day involvement. Leaving his treasurer, Pierson, in charge of financial affairs, he devoted his time to less salubrious amusements. In 1739 he began to referee boxing matches at Tottenham Court. He simultaneously renewed his passion for gambling, to which he devoted large sums of money taken from the profits at Drury Lane. Without the necessary funds for fresh scenes and costumes, the theatre suffered. Fleetwood responded by introducing a series of novelty acts, including physical freaks and rope-dancers, but their appearance served only to diminish box-office receipts still further. 
Following the great success of Garrick's debut season at Goodman's Fields in 1741-2, Fleetwood brought the young star to Drury Lane with an offer of $500 per year. However, his continuing abuse of the minor company actors, to whom he refused to grant a benefit night, soon prompted a rebellion among the players. In 1743 the leading actors formed a union and vowed that not one of them would agree individual terms with Fleetwood unless the other members of the company were satisfied with their own salaries. The manager responded by gathering together an alternative company of players, drawn principally from Giffard's disbanded troupe at Lincoln's Inn Fields. After several months of financial hardship, the majority of the rebels chose to make their peace with Fleetwood. However, despite a number of economies, the theatre continued to struggle. In a desperate attempt to raise money Fleetwood mortgaged the Drury Lane patent, and offered the theatre's store of costumes and props as security against a further $7000 loan. 
On 17 November 1744 Fleetwood's decision to raise ticket prices provoked a riot among the audience, which the manager sought to quell by sending a number of men into the theatre armed with wooden clubs. A repetition of this incident, witnessed by Horace Walpole, appears to have sealed Fleetwood's disenchantment with the stage. In December 1744 he sold the Drury Lane patent to Richard Green and Morton Amber, who offered him a lump sum of $3200 and an additional annuity of $600. 
In the spring of 1745 Fleetwood, suffering from 'excessive Gout' (Victor, 1.62), moved to France. He died, apparently bankrupt, at Chalon-sur-Saone in August 1747. He was survived by his wife, the actress and dancer Susanna Fleetwood, 'nee' Williams ('b'. 1714). They had two sons, Charles and John Gerard, both actors. The younger Charles Fleetwood made his London debut in 1758, and spent two seasons at Drury Lane before moving to the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin. He soon gave up the stage, however, and in 1769 emigrated to the East Indies; he died in 1784. John Gerard Fleetwood, the younger of the two brothers, made his first appearance at Covent Garden in April 1769. He then spent a season at the Haymarket before moving to Edinburgh in 1771. In 1773 he joined Tate Wilkinson's company at York, where he performed for three seasons. He died in Leeds in 1776. 


@@@@@


doc= 64340


Furnival, Elizabeth (fl. 1731-1752), actress and singer, took her first known role as Lady Grace in John Vanbrugh's and Colley Cibber's 'The Provok'd Husband' on 10 February 1731 at the Haymarket Theatre, London, where she and her husband, Thomas Furnival (died 1773), were engaged for the 1730-31 season. According to William Chetwood, while playing at York, in 1736 Mrs Furnival was noticed by a noble person who arranged for her Drury Lane debut in the title role of Beaumont's and Fletcher's 'The Scornful Lady' on 17 March 1737. Despite performing several other parts that season, including Lady Townly in 'The Provok'd Husband' for a benefit she shared with her husband and Charles Macklin, she was given little opportunity to act tragic roles and was advised to try to make a name for herself in Dublin. Following two more Drury Lane seasons, during which she performed Portia, Goneril, and Lady Fidget in William Wycherley's 'The Country Wife', she moved to the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin, where she played over thirty parts from 1739 to 1742, including Hamlet in 1741. She also toured during this time. From 1742 to 1744, when her husband left Ireland and they presumably separated, she acted at the Aungier Street theatre in Dublin. She was performing with the United Company in 1744-5; the following season the company began at Aungier Street but moved to Smock Alley in December 1745. 
It was during this season that Furnival shared a celebrated rivalry with George Anne Bellamy. The latter wanted Furnival's role as Constance in 'King John' and schemed with her influential patroness Mrs Butler to ensure poor houses until she got her way. Fanny's ill-judged revenge occurred after George Anne again took one of her parts, Cleopatra in John Dryden's 'All for Love'. Relegated to Octavia (and jealous of George Anne's notices), Furnival stole the diamond-studded costume borrowed from Mrs Butler (in some accounts the dress had been given to George Anne by the princess of Wales). When she appeared on stage Thomas Sheridan was astounded by her 'borrowed plumes' (Bellamy, 1.83) and Mrs Butler exclaimed, 'Good heaven, the woman has got on my diamonds!' (ibid.). The audience cried 'No more Furnival!' until she 'very prudently called fits to her aid, which incapacitated her from appearing again' (ibid., 1.84). The part was taken over by Mrs Elmy. 
Fanny Furnival returned to Drury Lane, replacing Mrs Macklin as Lady Macbeth opposite Spranger Barry on 10 November 1746. During the rest of the season her parts included Lady Upstart in William Taverner's 'The Artful Husband' and Gertrude in 'Hamlet', and she also replaced the ailing Mrs Cibber in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore' at Covent Garden. She is mentioned only once in the Drury Lane bills for 1747-8 but the play was not performed. Chetwood wrote that Mrs Furnival was in England in 1749 but that she would be better remembered in Dublin for her Alicia, Hermione in 'The Distrest Mother' by Ambrose Philips, Lady Macbeth, and Zara in William Congreve's 'The Mourning Bride'. 
In 1752 Furnival was the leading lady in Smith's troupe at Canterbury and began a relationship with Roger Kemble (1722-1802) with 'the promise of making an actor of him'. She was billed as Mrs Kemble (or Mrs Campbell), although it is unlikely that the couple ever married, and played a variety of parts as well as singing in 'Romeo and Juliet' and providing entr'acte songs. Charles Lee Lewes, though writing of events before his career began, considered her 'far superior to any of her predecessors, possessing an elegant figure, an uncommon share of beauty, a perfect knowledge of every part she undertook and an execution scarcely excelled by any actress of that day' (Lewes, 1.87). After the 1751-2 season the pair applied to John Ward at Birmingham but there was no room in the company for Fanny and she joined Quelch's Coventry troupe instead. After apparently rejecting Kemble for another man she disappears from theatrical records. 


@@@@@


doc= 64341


Grimaldi, Joseph (1709x16?-1788), dancer and dentist, was probably born between 1709 and 1716, perhaps in Malta, the son of the dancer John Baptist Grimaldi ('fl'. 1709-1741) and his wife, Catherine (died 1773). Many details of his life and circumstances are based on hearsay, conjecture, and fragmentary information. He was one of a family of Italian entertainers who performed throughout western Europe, 'where he spent the first forty years of his life' (Findlater, 33). His father, also known as Nicolini, was the first to use Grimaldi's byname of Gamba di Ferro, or Iron Legs. Grimaldi may have appropriated his father's stage name to bolster his status and career in England, or confusion in later accounts of his life may be responsible for an erroneous conflation of the father's achievements with those of his son. 
When Grimaldi first settled in England is uncertain. He appeared as a dancer at the King's Theatre on 10 January 1758 and may have continued to perform there during the rest of the season. He performed at Drury Lane during the 1759-60 season and in every following season (apart from 1777-8) for the next twenty-six years. As a dancer he excelled in the role of Pantaloon in numerous harlequinades; as a ballet master he both choreographed and performed in dances which were presented either as set pieces in a longer stage play or as separate items in the programme. He also acted as 'maitre de ballet' during the summer months at Sadler's Wells Theatre from 1763 onwards and at the Royal Circus in 1782. Following in the footsteps of his paternal grandfather, also John Baptist Grimaldi (who appears to have spent some time in England and whose will, dated 11 March 1760, can be found in the Public Record Office), he practised dentistry alongside his career in dance, advertising himself as a 'Surgeon-Dentist, who has had the Honour of attending her MAJESTY, the Prince of Wales, and the Prince and Princess of Brunswic' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 
On 13 April 1762, when he was in his late forties or early fifties, Grimaldi married a sixteen-year-old dancer, Mary Blagden (1745/6-1781). There were four children from this first marriage: Mary, baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 19 January 1763; Isabella Louisa, baptized at St Paul's on 14 October 1764; Margaret Charlotta, born in 1765; and Catherine, born in 1767. During the 1760s Grimaldi had a number of affairs with young dancers and entertainers. He had contracted syphilis by 1767 and infected his wife with the disease, insisting on having sexual relations with her while she was carrying their fourth daughter. Grimaldi and Mary stopped living together in 1775, and in 1779 Mary -- two years before her death -- began divorce proceedings on the grounds of severe cruelty and abuse. About 1775 Grimaldi began a relationship with Rebecca Brooker (died 1819), a young dancer at Drury Lane, by whom he had two, or possibly three, illegitimate children: Joseph Grimaldi, the future clown Joey, born on 18 December 1778, baptized at St Clement Danes on 28 December; and John Baptist, born some time in 1780. William, mentioned in Grimaldi's will, may have been a third son by Rebecca (being one of the three young Grimaldis who performed alongside her in the Drury Lane season 1789-90). However, he may have been the result of a parallel relationship, for, in the same month and year as Joseph was born, another illegitimate child, Henrietta Marguerite, was born to Ann Perry, with whom Grimaldi was having an affair. Ann later adopted the name Grimaldi and lived with Grimaldi at 125 High Holborn, while Grimaldi continued to maintain a household with Rebecca Brooker and their children at Theatre Court, Lambeth. Old Grim had a reputation as a coarse humorist and an obscene practical joker, a harsh and cruel teacher, an accomplished dancer and pantomimist, and a violent and melancholic human being whose obsession with death is recorded in numerous contemporary anecdotes, in Charles Dickens's 'Memoirs of Joseph Grimaldi', and in the bizarre details of the will he made on 25 February 1786. He requested that, on the day that he was buried, his eldest child, Mary, should sever his head from his body. Grimaldi died of dropsy two years later, on 14 March 1788, perhaps at Theatre Court, Lambeth, and Mary employed a surgeon to carry out the beheading. She touched the knife as he did so. Grimaldi also stipulated that Mary, Joseph, John Baptist, and William should share his estate equally and that Margaret and Catherine should receive nothing; no mention was made of his other children or of Rebecca Brooker or Ann Perry. He was buried at the Northampton Chapel in Exmouth Street, Clerkenwell, on 23 March 1788. 


@@@@@


doc= 64342


Hallam, Lewis (1714?-1756?), actor and theatre manager, was the son of the actor, singer, and dancer Thomas Hallam (died 1735) and his wife, whose name is unknown. Thomas, who was killed by the hot-tempered Charles Macklin when he dared to try on Macklin's wig in Macklin's dressing room at the Drury Lane Theatre, acted at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin from at least 1707 until 1724; it may be that his son Lewis was born in Dublin. One of Lewis's brothers was an admiral; the other three brothers and a sister were performers. 
Lewis Hallam, who gained experience with his family acting in the British provinces, later performed at London's fairs (and perhaps at the minor theatres, including the Haymarket) before working with William's company at the New Wells from 1745 until 1748, and again in 1750. Lewis was possibly a somewhat more accomplished performer than William, but he was clearly unable to achieve success on the London stage. 
The Hallam brothers apparently saw that their best chance for theatrical success was to lead a troupe to America, where few professional actors had ventured. They had almost surely heard of -- and were perhaps inspired by -- the success of John Moody, an Irish actor who had recruited English performers to form a spectacularly successful repertory company in the West Indies. In October 1750 the Hallams dispatched Robert Upton, an actor, to the colonies as an advance scout for the London company. Meanwhile, William's ruse to circumvent the 'Licensing Act' eventually stimulated a grievance, and in 1751, after complaints had been filed, the lord chamberlain closed the Wells in Lemon Street, causing William to seek another method of securing his livelihood in the theatre. 
William and Lewis patiently awaited word from Upton. The brothers agreed that Lewis would accompany the troupe to America and William would remain in London. The profits from their colonial company, to be known as the London Company of Comedians, would be divided equally between them. Months passed, however, with no word from Upton. As Lewis later complained, 'On his arrival Upton found... that sett of pretenders with whom he joined and, unhappily for us, quite neglected the business he was sent about from England. For we never heard of him after' (Hornblow, 1.67). The group in question was a short-lived, evidently barely competent acting company, 'composed of stage-struck tradesmen and their wives' (Rankin, 42), headed by Walter Murray and Thomas Kean; Upton later formed his own troupe, which, like the Murray-Kean company, did not last long. The performances of both companies were probably on the most amateurish level. Indeed, until the arrival of the London Company of Comedians, theatrical presentations in America were almost certainly inept, as attested by the failure of the early companies to find audiences loyal and numerous enough to ensure their theatrical survival. 
After waiting to hear from Upton for more than a year, the Hallams determined to delay no longer. The troupe, consisting of William and Lewis Hallam (who was to play comic roles and serious old men), the latter's wife, 
The Hallams' company arrived in Yorktown, Virginia, on 2 June and travelled by land to Williamsburg. On 12 June Lewis Hallam placed an advertisement in the 'Virginia Gazette', announcing that his: 'select company of Comedians, [with] Scenes, Cloaths and Decorations... all entirely new, extremely rich, and finished in the highest Taste, the Scenes being painted by the best Hands in London... the company being perfected in all the best Plays, Opera's, Farces, and Pantomimes' was ready to perform. The colonial governor initially disapproved Hallam's application to present plays, for the now disbanded Murray-Kean troupe's rowdy behaviour in Williamsburg had inflamed opposition to all theatrical endeavours. Hallam persisted, however, running his advertisement on two more occasions. One of the troupe's actors advertised that he would offer violin lessons to the inhabitants of Williamsburg and surrounding towns, perhaps helping to persuade the governor of the good character of the Hallam company. At any rate, the governor eventually agreed to grant Hallam a licence. Hallam purchased a building in Williamsburg that Murray and Kean had used to present their plays and refurbished it. The theatre opened on 15 September 1752 with Lord Lansdowne's 'The Jew of Venice', which Hallam billed as 'The Merchant of Venice', 'Written by Shakespear', adding that this was 'the first play performed in America by a regular company of [British] comedians' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Mrs Hallam appeared as Portia, Patrick Malone played Shylock, Rigby was featured as Bassanio, while Lewis Hallam performed the comparatively small role of Launcelot. Playing a servant to Portia was twelve-year-old 
The Hallam brothers' agreement to split whatever profits their company might bring held until 1754, when William, evidently in dire financial straits, sold his interest in the company to Lewis and returned to London. He played at Bartholomew fair and received a benefit at Sadler's Wells in 1756 before he died, presumably in 1758. 
From 1753 to 1755 the London Company of Comedians, led by Lewis Hallam, played in New York, where it once again had to overcome opposition based on the misbehaviour of the Murray-Kean troupe; in Philadelphia, where religious opposition to the theatre was particularly strong; and in Charles Town, South Carolina. Hallam built new theatres in New York and Charles Town and remodelled a warehouse into 'the New Theatre in Water-Street' in Philadelphia. In February 1755 the Hallams repaired to Jamaica, perhaps hoping to duplicate John Moody's success. Moody had earlier sailed to England to join David Garrick's company at Drury Lane, but the core of his organization was still intact, now led by 
Lewis Hallam died of yellow fever shortly after this time (the exact date is unknown), but the combined company remained united under Douglass's leadership. Still, the credit for having established the first fully professional theatre in colonial America belongs to Lewis Hallam the elder and to his brother William. 
In 1758 Douglass married Lewis Hallam's widow and led the troupe back to the colonies. Lewis Hallam the younger, then eighteen, became the company's leading actor, often appearing opposite his mother, on several occasions playing Romeo to her Juliet. William Dunlap, the first historian of the American theatre, described the mature Hallam as 'of middle stature or above' (another account says he was 5 feet 7 inches), 'thin, straight, and well taught as a dancer and fencer' (Dunlap, 1.155). In later years he vied with several others for the title of America's foremost actor. Rivals included John Palmer, who began performing with the London Company in 1759 and later became a leading actor in London. Another was John Henry, like Palmer an actor from England, who joined the company in 1767, and was generally recognized as more gifted than Hallam; he soon began to play many of the leading roles for the American Company, beginning a feud with the younger Hallam that was to last for nearly thirty years. 
However, Hallam had his loyal adherents. Alexander Graydon, who expressed early scepticism about Hallam's abilities, later said: 'He was... at Philadelphia, as much the soul of the Southwark Theatre, as ever Garrick was of Drury lane; and if, as Doctor Johnson allows, popularity in matters of taste is unquestionable evidence of merit, we cannot withhold a considerable portion of it from Mr. Hallam, notwithstanding his faults. (Graydon, 87-8)' Douglass and his company invariably faced hostility -- economic, religious, political, or moral -- to the theatre wherever they played in colonial America, but they shrewdly wore down the opposition by behaving irreproachably offstage, offering performances for charity, and deleting any potentially offensive scenes or lines from the plays they performed. Furthermore, Douglass continued the tradition established by Lewis Hallam the elder of building theatres (or converting existing buildings into playhouses) at many stops, for colonial America lacked theatre structures. Douglass's company offered the first professional production of an American play, Thomas Godfrey's 'The Prince of Parthia', in 1767, and produced Shakespeare's plays (albeit generally in their eighteenth-century versions) and new British plays (Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer' was given in 1773, the same year it had its first performance in London). 
Despite the rigours of offering performances where, in many cases, plays had never been seen before, the company appeared in cities and small towns in New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Virginia, South Carolina, Maryland, and elsewhere, winning influential adherents such as George Washington. Despite periodic defections from the company, Douglass persisted, succeeding more often than not. The company's once-tenuous reputation had improved so greatly by 1761 that the governor and council of Virginia gave Douglass the following letter of reference: 'The company of comedians under the direction of David Douglass has performed in this colony for near twelve-month; during which time they have made it their constant practice to behave with prudence and discretion in their private character, and to use their utmost endeavours to give general satisfaction in their public capacity. We have therefore thought proper to recommend them as a company whose behaviour merits the favour of the public and who are capable of entertaining a sensible and polite audience. ('Newport Mercury', 11 Aug 1761)' Perhaps Douglass's shrewdest stroke was to rename his troupe the American Company of Comedians in 1763, thereby attracting American audiences by aligning his company with the colonists in their struggle against Great Britain. While for the most part the company's personnel continued to come from England (Douglass made periodic trips there to recruit new actors and seek out new plays), a few American-born performers also joined the troupe. 
Mrs Douglass (the former Mrs Hallam) died in Philadelphia in 1774 of 'a hurt received in the theatre', according to a contemporary report (Rankin, 187). Later that year the Continental Congress passed a resolution condemning all theatrical performances and other 'diversions' until the conflict against the British was resolved. The American Company, preparing to begin a new season, recognized that attempting to defy the congress's direct order would be futile; it immediately closed its theatres and set sail for the British West Indies, where it remained for the next ten years, but under new leadership. Douglass soon retired from the stage, founded the 'Jamaica Mercury and Kingston Advertiser' (later called the 'New Royal Gazette'), and amassed a considerable fortune. He died in 1789. 
Lewis Hallam the younger returned to England in 1775 and gave one performance (and endured a merciless review in the 'Morning Post') as Hamlet at Covent Garden. By 1779 he was again in Jamaica, where he acted under the direction of John Henry, who had taken over the management of the American Company after Douglass's retirement. In 1785 Henry took his troupe to Maryland, then New York. Meanwhile, Hallam, in conjunction with a Mr Allen, had assembled 'a feeble company' (Seilhamer, 2.165) that played in Philadelphia and New York. 
In New York in 1785, Henry recommended to Hallam that their companies join forces, to which Hallam agreed. Their troupe, now known as the Old American Company, dominated the American theatre until 1792, when one of their actors, Thomas Wignell, formed his own company in Philadelphia. 
During the years of its dominance, the Old American Company performed principally in New York and Philadelphia. According to the nineteenth-century historian George O. Seilhamer, the company under the joint leadership of Hallam and Henry: 'was superior to any that had as yet been seen in America.... The pieces produced [by the company] would have been creditable to any of the London theatres. New productions followed each other in rapid succession, and for the first time in the history of the American stage successful plays had what might be called a run. This was notably the case with the 'School for Scandal' and 'The Poor Soldier,' the former being played seven and the latter eighteen times during the season.... The long exile of ten years in [Jamaica] had kept the organization together, strengthened it by the addition of new members, and enabled it to keep pace with dramatic progress in England. (Seilhamer, 2.177-9)' The Old American Company was plagued with managerial disputes, no doubt because Henry and Hallam were equally duplicitous. In 1794 Henry was displaced by John Hodgkinson, who, motivated by ambition and an intense dislike for Hallam, began taking all the best roles for himself and his wife, permitting Hallam and his second wife, the former Eliza Tuke, only roles of lesser importance. Mrs Hallam cannot be said to have been blameless, however, as she not infrequently arrived at the theatre in a drunken state. On one occasion, in 1795, she was unable to complete a performance. According to William Dunlap, 'Mr. Hallam attributed the very strange exhibition to opium. The audience were shocked and disgusted' (Dunlap, 1.266). 
Two years later in New York, having been deprived of all her roles by Hodgkinson and Dunlap (who had joined Hallam and Hodgkinson in the management of the Old American Company in 1796), Mrs Hallam burst onto the stage during a performance, joined by her husband. She announced that Hodgkinson had engaged in a plot to deprive her of her livelihood. Hallam supported her, and, despite Hodgkinson's appeal to the audience, a near-riot ensued. Later that year Hodgkinson published a pamphlet, 'Narrative of his Connection with the Old American Company', which consisted almost entirely of his account of his grievances against the Hallams. 
On 25 May 1797 Hallam quit as co-manager, selling his interest to Dunlap and Hodgkinson, but remained with the company as a salaried actor, as did Mrs Hallam. In 1806, however, Thomas Abthorpe Cooper, the new manager of the company, refused to renew Hallam's contract. Hallam, the last survivor in the group of actors who went to America as members of the London Company of Comedians, died in Philadelphia on 1 November 1808. 
Hallam had two children by his first wife, Sarah, a young Jamaican girl he married when he was about eighteen (in or before 1758). Sarah Hallam, who seems to have appeared on stage only once, separated from her husband at some time around 1763. Perhaps as early as 1770, but surely by 1775, she was running a dancing-school in Williamsburg. Lewis and Sarah's son Mirvan (whose date of birth is unknown) became an actor and played in his father's company in 1793. His abilities seem to have been small, for he never became anything but a minor actor. Lewis D. Hallam, the other son of Lewis and Sarah, was a medical student when he died at the age of nineteen in 1780. 


@@@@@


doc= 64343


William Hallam (1712?-1758?), Lewis's elder and most theatrically significant brother, was a strolling player in the British provinces and acted in Dublin. He also ran a booth at Bartholomew fair in London, and acted at Covent Garden, the Haymarket, and Lincoln's Inn Fields theatres before opening in 1740 his own playhouse, the New Wells (a 'drinking theatre', at which singing, tumbling, rope-dancing, and pantomimes were performed) in Lemon Street in Goodman's Fields. William Hallam, although apparently a mediocre performer, enjoyed a modest success by offering variety entertainments so that he and his company would not violate the 'Licensing Act' of 1737, which restricted 'legitimate' drama in London to the two patent houses, Drury Lane and Covent Garden. Although he did begin to present 'legitimate' plays in 1744, he remained technically within the law by advertising his entertainment as a 'concert' in two parts, the first part to be followed by a play, offered, according to the advertisement, at no charge to the audience. 


@@@@@


doc= 64344


Lewis Hallam the younger (1740-1808), who eventually became one of the leading performers in America, but on this occasion, never having acted before, burst into tears and ran off the stage. Still, the production, given by experienced professional actors -- albeit actors who had found only modest success in the competitive theatrical environment of London -- was undoubtedly the finest yet seen in America, and it inaugurated an eleven-month stay in Williamsburg, during which the company played three nights a week to large houses. Although several of the actors wound up in debtors' prison and had to be bailed out by Hallam, the first engagement of the London Company could reasonably be described as successful. From Williamsburg Hallam led the company to New York, where they opened on 17 September 1753. 


@@@@@


doc= 64345


Sarah Hallam (d. 1774) -- her maiden name is unknown but her first name is given in the baptismal record of her daughter Isabella -- who was to play female leads, William Rigby, who was assigned the male leads, and nine other adults, plus three of Hallam's four children, sailed for the colonies in early May 1752, on the 'Charming Sally'. Hallam's daughter Isabella remained behind to live with her aunt; she later became famous as Isabella Mattocks (1746-1826), a leading performer at Covent Garden. Aboard ship, the actors rehearsed on the quarterdeck when the weather permitted. 


