@@@@@


doc= 64346


David Douglass (d. 1789), an actor originally recruited from England by Moody. Douglass, who was preparing to return to England to enlist new actors, realized that the arrival of Hallam's troupe made his trip unnecessary. Instead, he and Hallam joined forces. 


@@@@@


doc= 64347


Henry, John (1746?-1794), actor and theatre manager, is usually stated to have been born in Dublin in 1746, although this claim, like William Dunlap's that he was 'liberally educated' (Dunlap), has never been substantiated. His initial stage outings were most likely in 1761 in Belfast and Dublin. He apparently joined the Charles Storer theatrical family when they departed from Ireland in 1762 for Jamaica, where Henry married one of the Storer's seven daughters, Jane. Five years later, in August 1767, while travelling to join the American Company of Comedians in the colonies, Henry and the remaining Storer family were involved in a ship accident off the coast of Rhode Island that claimed Henry's wife and two young children. 
Henry made his American debut in Philadelphia on 5 October 1767 as Publius Horatius in William Whitehead's 'The Roman Father' with the American Company, led by Lewis Hallam the younger and David Douglass. For his New York debut, on 7 December 1767, he played Aimwell in George Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem' opposite Hallam's Archer. With the American Company he appeared in Philadelphia again, from 4 October 1768 to 6 January 1769; at New York from 9 January to 19 June; at Albany, New York, in July; and at Philadelphia, from 8 November to 24 May 1770. In March 1770 Ann Storer was listed as Mrs Henry, though there is no evidence of a legal marriage. After Philadelphia the American Company appeared in Annapolis, Maryland, and Williamsburg, Virginia; it then returned to Philadelphia in 1772-3 and played in New York for the final season (April) until after the American War of Independence. They followed this with appearances in Charles Town, South Carolina, after which, in 1774, they departed for Jamaica in order to evade the prohibition of theatrical events during hostilities between the colonies and Britain. 
In Jamaica Henry assumed the management of the American Company and led them at three locations, including a new venue in Kingston, from July 1775 until 10 May 1777, after which he apparently sailed for England, where he appeared during the summer at the small China Hall theatre in Rotherhithe. Henry's activities for the next two years are unverified, although it has been suggested that he was an officer in the British army during this period. It is known that on 16 October 1779 he made his London debut at Drury Lane as Othello; on the same evening 'A Young Lady' (very likely another Storer sister, Maria) made her debut at Covent Garden. By 1788 Maria was known as Mrs Henry, her sister Ann having returned to Ireland rather than go to Jamaica with Henry in 1774. Records of this Henry-Storer marriage have not been located, yet the union proved successful. 
By June 1781 Henry, back in Jamaica, was joined by Hallam in the management of the American Company. On 25 August Henry's play 'School for Soldiers, or, The Deserters' was presented. He later wrote and staged 'The Convention, or, The Columbian Father', performed in New York on 7 April 1787. During the 1780s Henry returned to the United States, where he helped to re-establish professional theatre, following the end of hostilities; he also spent time in Jamaica and London, and on 21 November 1785 rejoined efforts with Hallam in New York in what was now known as the Old American Company. Despite a volatile relationship they dominated American theatre for the next seven years. With the threat of competition from former company member Thomas Wignell, in 1792 Henry went to London to recruit actors, including John Hodgkinson, who, with the support of Hallam, drove Henry and his wife out of the company. At the end of the 1794 season Henry sold his shares to Hallam for $10,000. 
Henry died at sea near Fisher's Island, off the New England coast, 'very suddenly of gout of the stomach' on 16 October 1794 ('Columbian Centinel', 1 Nov 1794); he was buried either at Bristol, Rhode Island, or, according to Dunlap, under the sand of an island in the sound. Maria, who reportedly had the body returned to her, died on 25 April 1795 at Philadelphia. 
Tall and handsome and effective in Irish comic roles, Henry was also a respectable musician who sang musical roles and often played with the theatre orchestra when not needed on stage. His parsimonious behaviour and arrogant manners, however, made him many enemies throughout his career. 


@@@@@


doc= 64348


Jefferson, Thomas (1732-1807), actor and theatre manager, was born in a farm near Carthorpe in the North Riding of Yorkshire on 31 January 1732. After his mother's early death, instead of following his father into farming, he was articled to a Yorkshire attorney. Shortly before his fifteenth birthday he moved to London, probably still in the employ of an attorney, but was soon in thrall to the theatre. It is possible that David Garrick, having watched or heard of his amateur debut at the Haymarket playhouse, advised him to work in the provincial theatre to prepare him for membership of the Drury Lane company, and it was probably while he was acting on the Kent circuit in 1751 that he met and married Elizabeth May, the daughter of an officer in the merchant navy. The bride's father's attempt to keep his daughter off the stage failed, and it was as a couple that the Jeffersons were engaged at Drury Lane for five seasons from October 1753. Their modest status is represented in his roles as Guildenstern in 'Hamlet', the duke of Burgundy in 'King Lear', and Count Paris in 'Romeo and Juliet', and hers as Lady Macduff in 'Macbeth', but their reliability was appreciated by Garrick and the senior actors. It earned them, in 1758, an invitation to join Spranger Barry and Henry Woodward in a new theatrical enterprise in Dublin. They were lucky to get there. The 'Dublin Trader', in which they embarked on 27 October 1758, struck a sandbar, and the Jeffersons were among the passengers who elected to abandon ship. The few who remained on board included the actor Theophilus Cibber and the equilibrist Anthony Maddox: they were among the drowned when the ill-fated packet sank in a storm. 
The Jeffersons acted in Dublin from 1758 until 1763, and may have toured in Ireland for a further year. They are next heard of in Exeter, where Jefferson entered into joint management of the theatre. He remained in management for the rest of his active life, and was particularly associated with the Plymouth circuit from 1765 to 1796, but he had no intention of abandoning acting. Management gave him access to leading roles, feeding an appetite which he was happy to gratify away from home. In 1767, a year after the sudden death of his first wife, he rejoined Garrick at Drury Lane, and remained in the company until Garrick retired in 1776. He had graduated to stronger roles -- Claudius in 'Hamlet', Orsino in 'Twelfth Night', Jaques in 'As You Like It' -- but it was as the foil to Garrick's sprightly heroes in contemporary comedies that he proved most valuable. He was a stalwart member of London's finest theatre. He was also a man of uncommon entrepreneurial energy. While retaining his interest in the Plymouth circuit, he managed, jointly with the dancer Simon Slingsby, the Richmond assembly rooms and theatre in the summers of 1774-7, and from 1778 to 1779 he was one of three lessees of the Bristol Theatre Royal, though this seems to have been a less than glorious bid to raise the status of his Plymouth stock company. 
Jefferson was already suffering recurrent attacks of gout, and it may have been for reasons of health that he settled in Plymouth from 1780. He continued to manage theatrical affairs from his house next door to the playhouse in Frankfort Place, acting when health and circumstance allowed (he starred himself as King Lear at Exeter on 17 December 1784). By the time he surrendered his theatrical interests in 1796 there were complaints that he had outstayed his welcome, but Plymouth signalled its respect by awarding him an annual theatrical benefit, which continued until at least 1805. In his last years he was left disabled, and largely confined to his Plymouth home. It was probably there that he died in January 1807, in sufficient poverty to earn for his widow the award of $10 from the Drury Lane Actors' Fund. 
Jefferson had married his second wife, Rebecca Bainbridge, in Exeter Cathedral on 27 December 1766, less than six months after the death of his first wife. Of their five children, the three who survived infancy became actors, but it was through Joseph ('c'.1760-1832), the second son of Jefferson's first marriage, that the Jefferson theatrical dynasty was most famously established. Joseph emigrated to America with his Scottish wife, and their seven children all became actors. The third son, also Joseph, married an actress, and their son, Joseph Jefferson III, became an international star through his playing of Rip Van Winkle in Dion Boucicault's dramatization of Washington Irving's story. Through her marriage to B. L. Farjeon, the eldest daughter of this Joseph Jefferson restored the dynasty to England. Three of the Farjeon children, Eleanor (1881-1965), Joseph Jefferson (1883-1955), and Herbert (1887-1945), included plays among their voluminous writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 64349


Lewis, William Thomas (1746?-1811), actor and theatre manager, was born in Ormskirk, Lancashire. There is disagreement about the date, but 1746 is widely accepted. His grandfather was a clergyman in Wales, and his father, William Lewis (died 1753), was a linen draper in London until he decided instead to form a travelling theatre company, which eventually crossed to Ireland. The young William made early appearances in his father's company, but started to achieve prominence only when, after education at the grammar school in Armagh and more experience as a strolling player, he arrived in Dublin and joined the company at the Smock Alley Theatre, where he made his first appearance on 3 June 1761. In 1767-8 he performed at the Crow Street Theatre, and in 1771 he joined the company of his stepfather, William Dawson, at the Capel Street Theatre. There he made his first appearance as Belcour in Richard Cumberland's 'The West Indian' (19 February 1771), in which part he 'vanquished Mossop' (Doran, 3.303-4). Cumberland saw his performance and commended Lewis as 'the VERY 'Belcour' he had an idea of when he wrote the piece' (Haslewood, 2.5). It was on Cumberland's recommendation that Lewis made a move to Covent Garden, and he played Belcour there for the first time on 15 October 1773. Lewis's later appearances in Ireland were not restricted to Dublin: it was in Cork, playing Othello to her Desdemona, that he met a young actress, Henrietta Leeson ['see below'], whom he eventually married. Eight children (four daughters and four sons) were baptized, at St Martin-in-the-Fields and St Paul's, Covent Garden, between 1779 and 1789. 
Lewis's later career was centred on Covent Garden, where he made almost all of his London appearances ('The London Stage' credits him with 799 between 15 October 1773 and 12 June 1800). Between his debut and his retirement in 1808 he played some 194 parts and created at least 85 roles, including the original Faulkland in Sheridan's 'The Rivals'. Among his (and his public's) favourite parts was Copper Captain in 'Rule a Wife and have a Wife', by Beaumont and Fletcher, and it was in this role that he made his final appearance at Covent Garden. Haslewood wrote of him in this role (and as Mercutio): 'he is yet unrivalled; and it is doubtful whether he was ever excelled in those parts, which he represents in such perfection, that the most perfidious Critic cannot point out a single error or defect' (Haslewood, 2.6). Lewis's long career at Covent Garden was not solely as an actor: in 1782 he became deputy or acting manager of Covent Garden, and thereafter restricted most of the parts he played to comedy. Comedy seems to have been his forte. Haslewood obviously considered it so: ''Pert' or 'outre' Comedy is his 'chef d'oeuvre'... his proper sphere' (ibid.). 
Nor were Lewis's appearances and activities limited to Covent Garden. In the early years he acted outside London, at Birmingham and Liverpool and for Tate Wilkinson's company at York, Leeds, Edinburgh, and Wakefield. Indeed, Wakefield appears to have been the only place where he did not attract an audience; on one occasion in 1780, on learning of the size of the house, he declined to appear. After giving up the management of Covent Garden (he sold his share to John Philip Kemble in 1803) he devoted much of his energy, with his colleague Thomas Knight, to the Liverpool theatre; their first season opened in November 1802. He also became involved with a theatre in neighbouring Manchester. 
Lewis died at home at Westbourne Place, King's Road, Pimlico, London, on 13 January 1811, leaving his widow, two daughters, and three sons. He was buried at Christ Church, Liverpool. Two of the sons followed in their father's theatrical footsteps: Thomas became co-manager of the Liverpool theatre and Henry had a seemingly short and unsuccessful career as an actor. While Lewis was not as well known as some of his contemporaries, his unspectacular but steady career allowed him to leave a considerable fortune on his death. He was not recognized as a major figure of his age but is worthy of note, for he exemplifies not only the dominance of London through Covent Garden (and Drury Lane) but also important aspects of the theatre outside London -- especially of Dublin, where the 'Licensing Act' of 1737 did not apply -- the role of the touring companies such as those of Dawson and Wilkinson, and the growth of provincial theatres in the last half of the eighteenth and the early years of the nineteenth century. 
There is not a wealth of anecdote, as is the case with some of his contemporaries, to flesh out Lewis's life. His sobriquet Gentleman Lewis appears to have been well warranted: his farewell words to his audience at his final performance were that 'for the space of thirty years he had not once incurred their displeasure' (Russell, 209); and, of his management of Covent Garden, Haslewood commented: 'In this capacity it is, perhaps, impossible not to incur some dislike among the Performers, who regard his power with jealousy and envy; but his exertions for public entertainment have always been examined as they deserve, with approbation' (Haslewood, 2.6). 
Lewis's wife, Henrietta Amelia Leeson (1751-1826), was born in London. Haslewood credits her with an early infatuation with the theatre, indulged by her father's inattention to his family and his business as a printer, and the encouragement of her friends. She was taken on by Charles Macklin as an apprentice and in 1771 went with him to Ireland, where she made her debut at the Crow Street Theatre in Dublin. She accompanied Macklin to other towns, playing a number of roles, including Portia and Desdemona. After returning to Dublin she continued to act with Macklin until she obtained a release from her articles and joined the Dawson company at the Capel Street Theatre. She then lived with Lewis and in 1775 accompanied him to England, where they married about 1780. She also acted with the Covent Garden company, initially as Mrs Leeson, later as Mrs Lewis, and went with her husband on his visits to the provinces. Opinions differ about her abilities. Haslewood attributed her rare appearances on the stage ('The London Stage' lists 103 between 1775 and 1791) to her desire to provide for her large family rather than talent, although one critic said of her first appearance at Covent Garden that 'there was an ease and nature in her deportment and dialogue that entitles her to encouragement' ('Westminster Magazine', November 1775) and Wilkinson described her as 'an amiable handsome woman, and a pleasing actress' (Wilkinson, 2.60). She died on 6 December 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 64350


Le Texier, Anthony A. (c.1737-1814), monologuist and theatre manager, was born about 1737 in Lyons, France, of good, though not noble, family. Little is known of his early life, but by 1770 he was a cashier in the office of the ferme generale at Lyons. Having a strong inclination towards the theatre, he participated in amateur theatricals wherever he could, one particular triumph being in Jean-Jacques Rousseau's 'Pygmalion' in June 1770. Since his social status prevented him from becoming a professional actor, he began to hold play-readings in which he would perform all the parts himself. 
By 1774 Le Texier's readings had become popular and, abandoning his secure position with the ferme generale, he went to Paris. After only two recitals there he was a sensation. However, the extraordinary amount of adulation he received turned his head, and he became insufferably arrogant. When reciting in front of Louis XV, who, exhausted after a day's hunting, fell asleep during his performance, Le Texier is said to have woken the king by slamming a book in front of him. Once he had lost royal support -- the king considered his performances 'too noisy' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA') -- official questions started being asked about his having left his post at Lyons without permission, and he was accused of peculation. He fled Paris, spent a few months acting comedies before Voltaire at Ferney, and, via the Austrian Netherlands and Weimar, finally reached England in September 1775. 
In London Le Texier became acquainted with David Garrick, who thought his talents 'very extraordinary' (Hedgepath, 273). Their initial correspondence shows a relationship of mutual respect and admiration, but when Le Texier tried to exploit the friendship by urging Garrick to intercede with the French ministry Garrick refused. Not long after, possibly because of Le Texier's arrogant behaviour, he withdrew his patronage. 
Apart from liaising with Garrick, Le Texier was a frequent guest of Henry and Hester Thrale, of Horace Walpole at Strawberry Hill, and of many others. He also recited in front of George III and participated in amateur theatricals at various country houses. In 1777, for example, he took the title role in Rousseau's 'Pygmalion' and played the violin for George Mason-Villiers, Viscount Villiers, and his guests at Bolney Court, Henley-on-Thames, Buckinghamshire. In that same year he began bringing out by subscription the 'Journal Etranger de Litterature, des Spectacles et de Politique'. This magazine was especially valuable for its theatrical criticism, but for unknown reasons it was discontinued after a year. 
Le Texier was particularly associated with the house of William Craven, sixth Baron Craven, and his wife, Elizabeth (formerly Lady Elizabeth Berkeley), at Newbury in Berkshire. Lady Craven was the energizing force behind various amateur theatricals, for which she employed Le Texier's assistance. At a charity performance directed by Lady Craven at Newbury Town Hall on 11 and 12 May 1778, Le Texier played the Dutch Gardener in her translation of 'Le somnambule', by Antoine de Ferrol, comte de Ponte-de-Veyle. This was an opera comique in which Le Texier probably also sang. 
From 1778 to 1779 Le Texier was acting manager of a small but good company of singers and dancers in a King's Theatre season which included the first performances of the famous castrato Pacchierotti. He returned for the following season, but resigned or was discharged on or after 27 December 1779. 
From around 1780 Le Texier resumed giving solo readings at his house in Lisle Street. For English audiences his one-man shows had the added allure of being in French. Sylas Neville, describing an evening at Le Texier's in his diary, mentions that 'his pronunciation is extremely pure & correct, which makes it an excellent amusement for those who wish to improve themselves in the French language' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Another way in which Le Texier helped promote French culture was his publication, between 1785 and 1787, of forty plays by various French playwrights. 
Between 1792 and 1798 Le Texier was engaged as gentleman-in-ordinary to the household of the margrave and margravine of Ansbach (formerly Lady Craven) at Brandenburg House. A sort of private theatrical manager, he wrote, acted, directed, and had a decisive part in arranging visual and musical effects. His wife, the Drury Lane dancer Mary Ross, whom he had married by 1793, and his daughter also took part in the presentations he organized. 
For the season of 1795-6 Le Texier had been recalled as acting manager at the King's Theatre. On 25 May 1797 he planned and conducted a celebration of the wedding of George III's daughter Princess Charlotte, princess royal, to Prince Friedrich of Wurttemberg at Ranelagh. On that occasion he was also responsible for a magnificent display of fireworks. Together with Joseph Rossi, an opera dancer, Le Texier had been involved in organizing pyrotechnics since at least 1791. 
The 'True Briton' of 10 April 1797 named Le Texier as a bankrupt, but given his many connections this probably did not prevent him from continuing his theatrical activities. However, the remainder of his life was spent in comparative obscurity, and the circumstances of his death in 1814 are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 64351


Magrath, Cornelius (1737-1760), giant, was born on 10 January 1737, near Silvermines, co. Tipperary. This date is recorded on the only known image of Magrath, an etching made in 1756 by a German engraver named Maag. Nothing is known of Macgrath's parents except that they were both of normal stature and that it is likely he was orphaned by the age of fifteen or sixteen. He is known to have suffered from acromegaly, a disease that causes abnormal growth in the extremities as well as an enlarged jaw. The beginnings of Magrath's career as a touring giant began in July 1752, when, on a visit to the city of Cork, his extraordinary height attracted the attention of many passers-by. A report in the 'London Daily Advertiser' (4 Aug 1752), headed 'Cork, July 24th', describes the sixteen-year-old's arrival in the city, having travelled there from the coastal town of Youghal, where he had sought relief from the pains caused by his medical condition. Even at this age he was, reportedly, already slightly over 6 feet 9 inches tall. 
The attention he attracted in Cork was evidently sufficient to convince Magrath that a living might be made by exhibiting himself publicly so that, by 1753, he had made his way to London, via Bristol. Like many human oddities of the pre-circus period, Magrath appeared at public houses and fairs around London, while local advertising publicity made much of his relative youth (still only sixteen), as well as his superior height and proportion to his older contemporary Cajanus (1703-1749), a Swedish giant. An extensive tour followed, which included Paris and several other European capital cities, but Magrath's physical strength soon weakened and he returned to his native Ireland in 1760, to Dublin, where he died within two months, on 20 May 1760. 
Magrath's final height has been variously reported as being between 7 feet 3 inches and 7 feet 10 inches, but his skeleton, which is now held in the anatomy museum at Trinity College, Dublin, is 7 feet 6 inches long. It was alleged in contemporary newspapers that Magrath's body was stolen during his wake by students from Trinity College for the purpose of a public medical dissection. Successive writers have disputed these allegations. Edward J. Wood reported in 'Giants and Dwarfs' (1868) that Magrath's body reached the museum as a result of the friendship struck up between him and several students from the medical faculty, and D. J. Cunningham, in his detailed and authoritative lecture on Magrath (1903), and T. P. C. Kirkpatrick in his 'History of the Medical Teaching in Trinity College, Dublin' (1912) were also sceptical about reports of theft. 
Doubt has also been cast upon reports that accumulated following Magrath's death and which reached fruition in Thomas Campbell's 'A Philosophical Survey of the South of Ireland, in a Series of Letters to John Watkinson, M.D.' (1777), concerning the relationship between the young Magrath and the cleric and philosopher Dr George Berkeley (1685-1753), bishop of Cloyne. Campbell alleged that Berkeley came upon Magrath as a fifteen-year-old orphan and saw in him the opportunity to indulge 'a strange fancy whether it was not in the power of art to increase the human stature' (Campbell, 188). Wood regarded Berkeley's careful tending to the boy's diet and welfare, for the period of one month, as an expression of his philanthropy. Whatever its basis, this remains one of the few indications of human interest in Magrath, since those accounts of his life that exist give little indication of his family, character, the nature of his public appearances, or his responses to others. Indeed, the most detailed account that endures is Cunningham's analysis of Magrath's skeleton, still a source of spectacle long after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 64352


Macready, William (1755-1829), actor and theatre manager, was born in Dublin, where his father was highly esteemed both in his trade as an upholsterer and as a civic leader. Although he served an apprenticeship with his father, William Macready embarked on a stage career, with engagements in Kilkenny (1776) and Edinburgh (1776-7). He played at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin during 1783-4 and 1784-5, appearing as Egerton alongside Charles Macklin (as Sir Pertinax McSycophant) in that elderly actor's own play 'The Man of the World'. The two men, who shared an irascible temperament, struck up a rapport, and Macklin helped Macready to secure engagements in Liverpool and Manchester. In Manchester, Macready met Christina Ann Birch (1765-1803), from a genteel family of clergymen, surgeons, and schoolmasters; they acted together -- Bob Acres and Julia in Sheridan's 'The Rivals' was a typical pairing -- and on 17 June 1786 they were married at the collegiate church. 
On 18 September 1786 Macready began his metropolitan career at Covent Garden, where he remained for ten years. While he never progressed beyond the role of supporting player, he had some success as an adapter of old plays. Christina did not act: she gave birth to eight children, three of whom died in infancy. Following his brief management (1797) at the Royalty Theatre in the East End of London, Macready took the New Theatre, Birmingham, where he had managed a successful summer season in 1796, and finally severed his link with Covent Garden. In the next few years his activities radiated to Leicester, Stafford, Sheffield, and beyond. He was an exacting manager, setting exceptionally high standards for lighting and scenery, attaching great importance to rehearsals (backed up by an elaborate system of fines, strictly enforced), and engaging the most celebrated actors of the day (Mrs Siddons, Thomas King, and Master Betty). By March 1803 he was sufficiently prosperous to send his sons, William Charles Macready (1793-1873) and Edward, to Rugby School, where William Birch (a cousin of Christina's) was a master. Christina Macready died on 3 December 1803. 
In 1807, with economic depression setting in, Macready took the disastrous decision to abandon Birmingham, where the landlord had doubled the rent, for a newly built theatre in Manchester. His affairs were so parlous in December 1808 that his elder son, William, left Rugby to save money and help his father. Macready managed to extricate himself from Manchester, but within a year he was imprisoned -- albeit for only a few weeks -- in Lancaster Castle, and the sixteen-year-old William set off to rescue his father's companies in Leicester, Chester, and Newcastle upon Tyne. Back in Birmingham, the young William made his stage debut, as Romeo, on 7 June 1810, and for the next four years the fortunes of father and son were contiguous, until their similar temperaments and the latter's burgeoning talents hastened a separation of their ways. 
The senior Macready settled first in Carlisle, where he had a theatre built, and thereafter in Berwick, Dumfries, and Newcastle upon Tyne, before descending on Bristol, where with William's help he took the Theatre Royal in 1819. His years in Bristol -- with less successful forays to Bath -- brought him the respectability and relative prosperity which, Micawber-like, he had always expected to 'turn up'. On 26 November 1821, at Whitehaven, he married Kathleen (known as Sarah) Desmond (1789/90-1853), who was certainly his professional partner of several years' standing and, assuming, as most did, that George Macready ('b'. 8 July 1814) was not the nephew he was claimed to be but the couple's son, already his wife in all but name. A handsome woman, with a commanding stage presence, Sarah Macready was an attraction in her own right, in particular as Meg Merrilies, Lady Macbeth, and Hermione. Macready maintained a strong musical side and a creditable standard of scenery, costumes, and effects; he supplemented his regular company with visiting stars (Maria Foote, John Liston, and Madame Vestris, as well as his increasingly eminent son William, who was always a popular draw), but was not above introducing animal acts. 
Irascible, improvident, exacting, and exasperating, William Macready died in Bristol on 11 April 1829, a respected freemason, and was buried in Bristol Cathedral on 18 April. In his will he left all his property and rights in his theatres to his widow, Sarah, their daughter, Mazarina Emily (1824/5-1878), and 'the boy known by the name of George William Macready'. His son William, with Richard Brunton, actually held the lease of the Theatre Royal, Bristol, until 1833, when Sarah took it over in her own right. Following her death on 8 March 1853, it passed, in accordance with her wishes, to her son-in-law James Chute, the husband of her daughter Mazarina (Maggie), who formed a minor (at least) theatrical dynasty. 


@@@@@


doc= 64353


Maddox, Anthony (d. 1758), slack-wire acrobat, was probably the son of James Maddox, a Bristol dancing-master, and his wife, a Miss Hoyle, who both died in 1744. There is no confident knowledge of his activities before the sudden notoriety of his debut season at Sadler's Wells in 1751. Maddox was a supreme exponent of slack-wire acrobatics. He would set the wire swinging, then balance his hat on his chin while playing the violin (as a later refinement, he would simultaneously play the trumpet and the violin while swinging), he would lie on the wire or stand on his head as it swung, he would balance several pipes or full wineglasses, and conclude his act with a hornpipe. Contemporary engravings, though, suggest that it was his passing of a straw from foot to face and back again that most caught the popular imagination. It is possible that the Maddox vogue owed something to the iconographic force of a 'balance-master' a decade after the fall of Walpole and with the events of 1745 still vivid in the public memory. Whatever the explanation, Maddox was able speedily to amass sufficient wealth to announce his early retirement in December 1754. Still popular at Thomas Rosoman's 'low' theatre at Sadler's Wells, he had also appeared at John Rich's Covent Garden in a showy revival of Rich's afterpiece 'The Fair', which began a run of twenty-eight nights on 2 November 1752. The last night was commanded by the young prince of Wales, the future George III. Garrick protested when his partner, James Lacy, proposed to 'bring such defilement and abomination into the 'house of' 'Shakespeare'' ('Letters', 1.172), and Lacy had to settle for the Haymarket instead of Drury Lane. 
Maddox was as sought after in Dublin as he was in London. He was performing at the Smock Alley playhouse in 1752-3, and he and his wife, Elizabeth, shared a benefit there on 6 June 1753. He was recalled to Dublin in the autumn of 1758, in the company of Theophilus Cibber, who had been one of many to encourage him out of retirement in 1756. Cibber and Maddox set sail in the 'Dublin Trader' on 27 October 1758, and were among those drowned when the packet sank in a storm. In his will, dated 3 October 1758, Maddox bequeathed to his wife Elizabeth all his real estate in Bristol, Devon, and elsewhere, and $10 to each of three siblings. 
There is no mention of 


@@@@@


doc= 64354


Mahon, Gertrude (b. 1752, d. in or after 1808), courtesan and actress, was born in Dublin on 15 April 1752, the daughter of James Tilson ('c'.1715-1764), diplomat, and his wife, Gertrude, dowager countess of Kerry ('c'.1720-1775), daughter of Richard Lambart, fourth earl of Cavan, and widow of William Fitzmaurice, second earl of Kerry. Her older half-siblings were Francis Thomas Fitzmaurice, third earl of Kerry; Lady Anna Maria Fitzgerald, 'nee' Fitzmaurice; and, by an earlier marriage of her father, Elizabeth Anne Tilson. She was brought up in the established church. Little is known about her education but at sixteen she attended the home of Charles Burney, in Poland Street, Westminster, for music lessons. Until she was eleven Gertrude lived at Bolesworth Castle, Malpas, Cheshire, the family home; then her father became consul at Cadiz in Spain. Gertrude and her mother moved to London, where they lived at Wigmore Street. In 1764 Gertrude's father died and she received $3000 in his will. 
Gertrude's appearance was striking. 'A mass of raven hair clustered round her pink cheeks, lustrous black eyes lit up her sweet features' ('Morning Herald', 18 April 1777). She was wilful and spoiled by her ineffectual mother and became an outrageous flirt. Frances Burney described Gertrude's behaviour as 'An amorosa so forward in Cupid's cause!' ('Diary and Letters', 1.25) after Gertrude wrote love-notes to Frances's cousin Charles. At seventeen Gertrude fell in love with a disreputable Irish gambler, Gilbreath Mahon ('fl'. 1740-1795). Knowing of her inheritance, Mahon proposed but Gertrude's mother would not consent. The pair eloped to France and married in 1769. Gertrude became pregnant in 1770. Her mother then insisted they marry in England and the ceremony took place at St George's, Hanover Square, Westminster, on 14 December 1770, their son, Robert Tilson Mahon, being born on 18 January 1771. Gertrude's mother refused to support Mahon and in 1774 he deserted Gertrude, who returned to her mother's home. Gertrude's mother died on 24 October 1775 leaving Gertrude the interest on her large estate, the capital being held for Robert. 
Gertrude could have lived a quiet comfortable life but instead began to cavort with notorious courtesans including Grace Eliot, 'nee' Dalrymple, Dally the Tall, mistress of the prince of Wales (afterwards George IV) and George Cholmondeley, fourth earl of Cholmondeley, and Kitty Frederick, mistress of William Douglas, fourth duke of Queensberry. In her will Gertrude's mother had stated 'I hope that my relations will treat her with kindness and compassion' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1029, fols. 169-71), but so scandalized were her family that they refused to have anything more to do with her. From 1776 Gertrude appeared at tawdry venues throughout London. Her name was constantly in the press, which referred to her as the Bird of Paradise because of her love of bright immodest colours and large, many-plumed hats. Scandalous stories of her love affairs with wealthy men abounded. 'The Bird of Paradise has taken up residence in the South of France, with Sir J -- n L -- e, to wash in the pool of Montpelier, famous in the ailment of her trade!' ('The Rambler', 1784, 359). Gertrude's 'companions' included Queensberry, Cholmondeley, and Thomas Lyttelton, second Baron Lyttelton, who had tired of their previous mistresses, and numerous officers with private fortunes. In 1780 she met the actress Margaret Cuyler and appeared on stage on 12 December at Covent Garden in John Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar'. The play sold out but Gertrude was not a success. After two further plays critics described her acting as 'Intolerable' ('Morning Herald', 15 Feb 1781). Diminishing public interest cut short her career. Through acting she met the prince of Wales, but his attentions proved short-lived. In 1784 she was left the interest on $3000 by her half-sister Elizabeth and took a house in Great Portland Street. Her son, Robert, left England in 1785 to join the Indian army. Gertrude then appeared on stage in Dublin but was heralded only for her hats. In 1790 Robert died in Madras aged nineteen and the unhappy Gertrude's popularity waned as her beauty diminished. In 1808, aged fifty-six, Gertrude Mahon 'retired' to the Isle of Man and press and public lost interest. There is no obituary or evidence of the date or whereabouts of her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 64355


Nossiter, Maria Isabella (1735-1759), actress, was the daughter of a housekeeper of George Cholmondeley, third earl of Cholmondeley (1703-1770), and was probably Cholmondeley's illegitimate child; the comic actor West Digges later described her mother as 'a 'favourite' housekeeper!' ('Letters', 17). The George Robert Nossiter baptized at Richmond, Surrey, on 9 September 1739, son of Thomas Nossiter, was probably the brother mentioned in her will. Little is known of her early life, save that she 'was possessed of a handsome fortune and genteel education' (Wilkinson, 180), until her triumphant first theatrical appearance, at the age of eighteen, when she played Juliet to the Romeo of Spranger Barry (bap. 1717, d. 1777) at Covent Garden on 10 October 1753. According to Digges, she had been tutored by Barry and the instructor and actor L. Sparks; her debut had been made possible by Susanna Maria Cibber's departure for Drury Lane, and probably by the fact that she and Barry were already lovers: 'what added to the performance, Romeo and Juliet were really in love, and well known to be so' (Wilkinson, 180). Her initial nervousness was accentuated by the aggressive presence of Mrs Cibber, who had previously made the part of Juliet her own, 'with an intent by the superior force of her own effrontery, to stare away the little degree of courage she had left' (Morgan, 5). However, the audience responded sympathetically to 'so fine a girl, in such distress' (ibid.) and she gradually gained confidence, going on to reprise the part on a number of occasions. She was thought by many to be the equal of Mrs Cibber, and by some to have surpassed her. Her natural poise and elegance were generally praised; she was possessed of a 'pleasing figure' and 'genteel accomplishments' ('Theatrical Biography', 1.93), with a 'natural bloom' (Morgan, 6) that obviated the need for make-up, though 'The Gray's Inn Journal' (20 October 1753) spoke for many in recognizing her need for further training in 'the management of her voice' and the attainment of 'a more simple elocution'. On 14 November she played opposite Barry again, as Belvedira in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd', 'and in the mad scene did wonders from tuition, attention and strong understanding' (Wilkinson, 181). On 11 December she played the Countess of Rutland in 'The Earl of Essex' by Henry Jones, and then on 22 January 1754 she took on the lead role in 'Philoclea', 'brought forward and wrote purposely to show her to advantage by McNamara Morgan', the play's author (Wilkinson, 181), who had earlier published a glowing eulogy of her talents as Juliet. For her first benefit night, on 18 March, she reprised her role as Juliet, a part with which she was always associated. 
Nossiter now lived with Barry in Bow Street, but when her partner quarrelled over money with the Covent Garden impresario John Rich the couple decamped to act at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin, where Barry received $800 for the season and Nossiter $500. They returned to Covent Garden for the 1755-6 season; she made her first appearance as Monimia in Otway's 'The Orphan' on 12 December, 'which she performed to a crowded audience' (Wilkinson, 220), and she played many roles opposite Barry, including Cordelia in 'King Lear', Lady Pliant in William Congreve's 'The Double Dealer', and Desdemona in 'Othello'. She had a second benefit night on 29 March 1756. The initial praise for her debut was now something of a distant memory, and she was less employed in the 1756-7 season, although she added a new part when she played Statira in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens', after George Anne Bellamy, who was beginning to be preferred over her, broke her arm; she repeated the role for her benefit on 28 March 1757. She missed the next season completely, and when she returned to Covent Garden for the 1758-9 season (leaving Barry in Dublin to promote his new theatre in Crow Street, in which she was assigned an eighth share of the profits), she was replaced as Juliet by Mrs Bellamy. She reprised her Lady Pliant and again took a variety of roles, being last seen as Aurelia in 'The Prophetess' by John Fletcher, on 18 April 1759. She died aged twenty-four at her Bedford Street address on 25 April 1759, of a broken heart according to Mrs Bellamy, after Barry had formed a new liaison in Dublin with Ann Dancer, a young widow and aspirant actress whom he later married. In fact, whatever the effect of Barry's desertion, she probably died of consumption, being 'naturally of a delicate constitution, which the fatigues of her profession made more so' ('Theatrical Biography', 1.95). She had made a will on 8 August 1758 and it remained unaltered. 'By her death, however, she testified her connections with her Romeo were of the purest kind; as by her will she left him sole executor and legatee of her effects, which amounted in cash, clothes and jewels to upwards of $3,000' ('Letters', 17). The money included her eighth share in the profits of the Crow Street theatre. She also left $50 to her brother, George Robert Nossiter, and her 'wearing apparell' to her maid, Mary Collins (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 


@@@@@


doc= 64356


Novosielski, Michael (c.1747-1795), scene painter and architect, although Polish in name, was born in Rome. When he arrived in England is not known, but by 1772 he was living in Golden Square, London. On 3 September 1776 he married the singer Regina Felicia Pasquali (died 1820) at St Pancras Old Church. The Drury Lane account book in the Folger Shakespeare Library shows that he worked on at least two occasions for that theatre in 1777. But in 1781 he began his long scenic association with the King's Theatre in the Haymarket, where in 1783 he was made master painter. He worked with Gaetano Marinari, and with Cornelius Dixon, Thomas Luppino, and A. Thiselton as assistants. 
Between 1781 and 1784 Novosielski prepared scenery and machinery for many operas and ballets at the King's Theatre. Jean-Georges Noverre was ballet master and had an exacting eye for scenic standards. It should be remembered that many individual scenes would be taken from stock and that Novosielski may have only contributed by adding occasional new scenes and supervising the refurbishment of existing ones. In this way, during his first season, 1780-81, he worked on the operas 'Mitridate', 'Il barone di Torre Forte', and 'Piramo e Tisbe' and the ballets 'Les caprices de Galathee', 'Medee et Jason', and 'La frascatana'. In 1781-2 he prepared scenes for the ballets 'Les amants reunis', 'Le triomphe de l'amour conjugal', and 'Rinaldo and Armida' and the operas 'Giuno Bruto', 'Apollen et les Muses', and 'Ifigenia in Aulide'. In 1782-3 he designed scenes for the ballets 'Il ratto delle Sabine' and 'Il riposo del campo' and the operas 'Cimene', 'The amours of Alexander and Roxane', and 'La dame bienfaisante'. 
In 1782 the King's Theatre underwent considerable rebuilding, planned by Novosielski. Confined to the original walls of 1705, he increased capacity by reducing stage depth and planning the auditorium on the lines of an Italian opera house: 'The stage and pit were rebuilt, and four tiers of boxes completely encircled the auditorium' (Nalbach, 28). However, 'Being confined to the original walls, Mr Novosielski had not the opportunity of giving it greater width; the form therefore remained extremely bad, and the stage and its appendages wretchedly confined and inconvenient' (Saunders, 80). In fact, Novosielski added some width to the auditorium by placing the corridors and access to the boxes outside the walls of the original building. 
During 1783-4, when Jean Dauberval was appointed ballet master and Auguste Vestris junior the principal dancer, Novosielski contributed to the ballets 'The Pastimes of Terpsychore', 'The Slaves of Conquering Bacchus', and 'The Four Ages of Man' and the operas 'Il trionfo d'Arianna' and 'Le due gemelle'. During his final season in 1784-5 he designed scenes for the ballets 'Le jugement de Paris' and 'Il convitato di pietra' and the operas 'Il curioso indiscreto' and 'Artaserse'. 
At the close of this season Novosielski's architectural interests led him to begin what was to be a secondary career as a property developer. In 1785 he took a lease on land to the south of Brompton Road in Kensington, where he built seventy-seven houses in three developments -- Michael's Place, Michael's Grove, and Brompton Crescent. He later built speculatively in Grosvenor Square and in Piccadilly. On his death he left a half-completed development (Fortfield Terrace) at Sidmouth, Devon. 
Early in the 1783-4 season the management of William Taylor at the King's Theatre foundered, and while he was in gaol for debt Novosielski was appointed one of five trustees to whom Taylor's business interests were assigned. 'The Case of the Opera-House Disputes, Fairly Stated' (1784) criticized the work of the trustees, charging Novosielski with sacking staff and misappropriating theatre income in order to invest in the Royal Circus. He was accused of taking a holiday in Italy, accompanied by his wife, and claiming expenses of $1500 from the opera fund for it as a recruiting trip for new singers. Novosielski was also charged with increasing his salary from $300 to $750 per annum and claiming expenses for coals, candles, and dinners at the theatre. It was claimed that his wife was paid $150 per annum for superintending the candles and that her father was paid $200 as 'superintendent of something, but what that something is, heaven only can tell'. 
The theatre was destroyed by fire on 17 June 1789, and, notwithstanding these charges, Novosielski, assisted by his pupil William Capon, planned the rebuilding to permit enlargement of audience capacity by increasing the overall size by 30 feet in width and by 38 feet in length. The 'London Chronicle' on 7 October 1790 reported: 'The span of the roof is 25 feet wider than that of Westminster Hall... The formation gives the idea of a lyre. The boxes consist of four complete tiers, besides an additional tier on each side. The whole, as they rise, are thrown back, by which means every person in the boxes will be visible from any part of the house. The boxes exceed in number those in any former theatre -- sixty.' The theatre was 'hailed as an architectural marvel of a size and magnificence to rival Piermarini's La Scala in Milan' (Price, Milhous, and Hume, 562). The theatre opened on 26 March 1791 with Joseph Haydn 'presiding at the harpsichord' (Hogan, 1277). In spite of the speed and shoddiness of its construction, Novosielski's theatre lasted for over fifty years. 
During 1794-5 Novosielski returned to the theatre and prepared scenery for the opera 'L'amor contrastato'. He died on 8 April 1795 in Ramsgate, and his will was proved on 11 April. He was buried in the churchyard of St Laurence, Ramsgate. His executor was left $20 to undertake his duties and to dispose of 'sundry Household Estates... in the County of Middlesex'. From the estate, one-third was to go his 'dear wife Regina Felicia Novosielski' and the remaining two-thirds to his four children. His will does not name the children, but Regina's will, administered in 1820, names three of the four: Michael Peter, Mary Ann, and Ursula; a second son, James George, died in October 1799 with the loss of the frigate 'Lutine'. 
It is presumed that Novosielski's scene designs were destroyed in the 1789 theatre fire -- hence, perhaps unfairly, his reputation relies upon his architectural work, where some evidence survives. But his age applauded his scenic work and very early in his career he was expected 'to rival soon in scene painting, even Loutherbourg himself' ('General Advertiser', 27 Feb 1781). His portrait by Angelica Kauffman, executed in 1791, shows him holding his 1789-90 plans for the rebuilding of the King's Theatre. 


@@@@@


doc= 64399


Comgan mac Da Cherda (d. 645). While Mac Da Cherda is very much a figure of saga, he has been tentatively identified with Comgan, the abbot of Emly, mentioned in the west Munster synod. Mac Da Cherda, through his mother Rim, was supposedly the brother of both Guaire and Cummene. Although he is generally affiliated to a minor branch of the Desi, the Ui Rossa, one Irish anecdote transfers him to the main branch of the Desi and relates that, having been struck with madness by God, he found holiness through his friendship with Cummene. In another anecdote, relations between Guaire, Cummene, and Mac Da Cherda help to link Clonfert and Ardfert, the two principal churches of the 'familia' of St Brendan of Clonfert. 


@@@@@


doc= 64400


Mael Cetair mac Ronain (fl. 6th-7th cent.?). Unfortunately, there is very little extant information about this saint. He is not recorded in the annals and his floruit can only be a guess. His name literally means 'the servant of the cedar', in other words the servant of the cross, which indicates a cult of the cross at Kilmalkedar. Otherwise, the only substantial information concerning Mael Cetair is contained in the late twelfth-century martyrology of Gorman, which gives his feast day as 14 May; later notes appended to it state that Mael Cetair was descended from the royal family of the Ulaid. Kilmalkedar's significance, however, was local to Corco Duibne, for the church does not make an appearance in the annals of monastic rivalry. 


@@@@@


doc= 64401


Mac Creiche mac Pesslain (fl. late 6th cent.) of Kilmacreehy (Cell Mac Creiche) and Killoran (Cell Maele Odrain). His feast day was celebrated on 11 August according to the martyrology of Donegal. In recent times, however, it has been celebrated on the first Sunday of August, known as Garland Sunday (Domnach Chrom Dubh), particularly around the west Clare town of Liscannor. Mac Creiche's Irish life was transcribed by Micheal O Cleirigh from a copy made by Melaghlin O'Callanan, the 'coarb' of the saint, at Killoran in 1528. Contrary to the opinions of earlier scholars, it has been shown to contain valuable information and two historical strata. The earlier refers to west Munster events in the seventh century and may well have been written towards the end of that century or in the eighth. Here, Mac Creiche is affiliated through his father, Pesslan, to the Corco Mruad, and through his mother to the Ciarraige. The saint shows particular attachment to his maternal kindred, being referred to as their 'garmac' or dutiful son. Furthermore, he gains the confidence and support of two Eoganacht Locha Lein kings, Crimthainn and his son, the important Aed Bennan (died 619). Unlike other tales emanating from Iarmumu in this period, the text shows considerable hostility towards Connacht. Mac Creiche is opposed to Connacht before finally winning the submission of the early Ui Briuin king, Aed mac Echach (died 577). Throughout the life, Mac Creiche, as bishop, acknowledges the superior status of Ailbe as archbishop of Munster. This is consistent with the portrayal of Mac Creiche as Ailbe's foster child in the eighth-century life of the latter saint. The second section of Mac Creiche's life may date from the early tenth century, and makes Ailbe the father of Mac Creiche. Mac Creiche is identified as a saint of Cenel Fermaic, a more minor people who lived near Corco Mruad. Undoubtedly, this reflects a local aspect of his cult. This section of the composite life does not know of the saint's maternal genealogy. He gains the submission of Ciarraige Luachra through St Brendan, rather than through his mother's kindred. 


@@@@@


doc= 64404


Mainchin mac Setnai (fl. late 6th cent.) of Luimnech (at the head of the Shannon estuary, later Limerick) was caught up in the rivalries of Dal Cais, Ui Fhidgeinte and vikings. There are several saints of this name, but the most likely candidate is mentioned in the martyrology of Donegal on 29 December. This Mainchin is attached to the genealogical stem of the Dal Cais through his father, Setna, and seems to be identical with the Mainchin who appears as Mac Creiche's disciple in the life of that saint. The church was subsumed in the growth of the viking city of Limerick in the tenth century, Mainchin becoming the patron of the city. The saint is also associated with Bruree (Brug Rig) further south, where his feast is celebrated on 2 January, perhaps through confusion with St Manchene, commemorated on that day in 'Felire Oengusso'. Both Bruree and Luimnech were, from early times, contested by Dal Cais and Ui Fhidgeinte. Mainchin's cult as a Dal Cais saint reflects this. 


@@@@@


doc= 64406


Nessan (d. 556), the deacon and founder of Mungret (Mungairit), was one of the most important of the Ui Fhidgeinte saints. His feast day is 25 July in 'Felire Oengusso'. Mungret, situated not far from present-day Limerick, was wealthy and powerful. Several of its abbots are recorded in the annals. Cummian's seventh-century letter to Segene refers to Nessan as a father of the Irish church, and to his successor, the abbot of Mungret, as an authority of note. Furthermore, the saint is given jurisdiction over Corco Duibne in the West Munster synod. This reflects a genealogical link with Corco Duibne and, perhaps, the extent of Mungret's influence. Moreover, the saint's cult is well attested in the early tenth-century 'Vita tripartita'. Here, Nessan shows Patrick the respect he deserves, even though Patrick has been insulted by the Ui Fhidgeinte king, Lonn. Nessan is rewarded with a religious vocation and founds Mungret, where he is eventually buried. Considering the importance of Mungret, it is disappointing to find no extant life of the founder saint. Nessan does make stray appearances in the lives of other saints, notably in that of the Eoganacht patron, Ailbe, but the strength of the saint's cult is best attested by the wealth of Mungret. The monastery survived the raiding of the Norse and the close proximity of their city, Limerick. In the twelfth century it adopted the rules of the canons regular and claimed episcopal status at the Synod of Kells-Mellifont in 1152. Although its claims were derailed by the powerful see of Limerick, Mungret continued to flourish. Several buildings dating from the twelfth to the fifteenth century can still be seen on the site. 


@@@@@


doc= 64407


Gobnait (fl. 6th cent.?) lay west of the monastery of Cork on the borders of Muscraige Mittine and Eoganacht Locha Lein. Its patron, Gobnait, is commemorated on 11 February in 'Felire Oengusso' and was affiliated to the Muscraige. Her church never had more than local importance and Gobnait is not the subject of a life. She does appear in the life of Abban, where she is very much the junior partner of the male saint. Furthermore, Findbarr's life lays claim to the church by asserting that it was founded not by Gobnait, but by a disciple of Findbarr. Her cult flourished there, however, and the remains of the medieval church can still be seen. Locally, the saint's day is still celebrated. 


@@@@@


doc= 64408


Cranat ingen Buicin (fl. 6th cent.) was a fairly significant local Fir Maige saint. She may possibly be identifiable with the Craebnat commemorated on 17 July in the martyrology of Donegal. Her Irish life is more of an anecdote than a full-blown hagiographical production. The saint's refusal of marriage to the king of Munster, Cairpre Crom, and her gouging out of her own eyes -- eyes that are miraculously restored -- to avoid this fate are clearly modelled on the example of the more famous Brigit. Cairpre, however, dies as a result of his temerity towards the saint. In this anecdote she is represented as the uterine sister of the king of Fir Maige, and the daughter of Buicin. Her two churches were Kilcranatan (Cell Cranatan) and Hermitage (Disert Cranatan), both in Fir Maige Fene. 


@@@@@


doc= 64410


Mucnoe (fl. c.500). His feast day was not recorded in any of the Irish martyrologies, whereas 


@@@@@


doc= 64411


Muiredach mac Echdach (fl. early 6th cent.) of Killala had his feast day, 12 August. The latest of the major martyrologies, that of Donegal, says that Muiredach belonged to an Ui Neill dynasty, Cenel Loegairi, whose main lands lay around Trim, far to the east of Connacht's eastern boundary, the Shannon. Tirechan, however, in the late seventh century, placed Muiredach a little to the east of the Ui Amolngada, in the coastal strip along the southern coast of Sligo Bay and thus within the kingdom of Ui Fhiachrach Muaide. This raises the possibility that the replacement of Domnach Mor by Killala as the chief church of the Ui Amolngada to the west of the Moy may have owed much to the influence of the Ui Fhiachrach Muaide, since they were the most powerful dynasty of northern Connacht. Muiredach may also have been thought by Tirechan to be the eponymous saint of Inishmurray, Inis Muiredaig in Sligo Bay, although the patron saint of the island monastery was 


@@@@@


doc= 64412


Laisren mac Declain (fl. 6th cent.), whose feast day was 12 August and who was affiliated in the genealogies of the saints to the Westmeath people, Corcu Roide. Laisren also had a mainland base at Aughris (Echross), close to where Tirechan placed Muiredach. 


@@@@@


doc= 64414


Cethech (fl. 5th cent.), bishop, whose feast day was 16 June. Cethech's name suggests that he may, in reality, have been a Briton (it is probably a nickname, Welsh 'coediog', 'woody') but for Tirechan, 'c'.690, Cethech belonged to the Ui Ailella, an important but declining royal dynasty of north-eastern Connacht. Tirechan's evidence suggests that the Ui Ailella had been powerful within Mag nAi, the most fertile area of all Connacht, between Elphin and Roscommon. Cethech's main church was at Cell Garad, on the southern edge of Mag nAi (earlier Bri Garad, now Oran from the name of the holy well, Uaran Garad, marked by the remains of a round tower and a church). From Tirechan's time onwards, the Ui Ailella were confined to the area between Elphin and Collooney in co. Sligo. Their loss of power in Mag nAi may be the explanation of an anecdote in the 'Book of Armagh', which tells a story of disobedience. Cethech and another early saint, Sachellus, were said to have ordained bishops and consecrated churches without Patrick's permission. Patrick summoned them to Armagh; and, although they did penance, he declared that 'Your churches will not be great' (Bieler, 122-3). 


@@@@@


doc= 64416


Sachellus (fl. 5th cent.), like Cethech, was a bishop; as Cethech was identified with his supposed father's people, the Ui Ailella, and, in a subordinate way, with his mother's people, the Sairige, a minor group close to Duleek, far to the east, so Sachellus and his church, Baislec, were identified with the Ciarraige nAi, a major client-kingdom within Mag nAi. Sachellus, very possibly another early British missionary, was listed by Tirechan among Patrick's bishops. Baislec -- in Ireland a rare name for a church, borrowed from Latin 'basilica' -- had been, earlier in the seventh century, the recipient of a special gift from Armagh, a share of its relics of Peter, Paul, and Laurence. The implication appears to be that Armagh then had high hopes of an alliance with Baislec, and thus with its saint, Sachellus. Late in the seventh century, however, these hopes were dashed, probably by the reduction of the Ciarraige nAi to close dependence on the rising dynasty of Ui Briuin Ai. 


@@@@@


doc= 64417


Bron mac Icni (d. 512), the saint of Caisel Irrae near the town of Sligo, was claimed by Tirechan as another of Patrick's bishops. His feast day of 8 June is in the martyrologies; he is also mentioned in the Middle Irish genealogical collections among a list of bishops, but no pedigree is given. Already in Tirechan's day, Bron's church claimed to possess a tooth of St Patrick -- a rare early example of an Irish corporeal relic. It was later enshrined, received a hereditary guardian, and survived long enough to be one of the most valued relics of the entire province of Connacht as late as the seventeenth century; it is preserved in the National Museum. Bron's church and cult thus remained firmly entrenched in a limited area, the peninsula west of the town of Sligo, defended by his Patrician relic. 


@@@@@


doc= 64418


Beoaed mac Oclain (d. 520/24), bishop, is broadly similar to that of Bron, but without the Patrician connections of the latter. His feast day is 7 or 8 March. His church of Ard Carna lay within Mag Luirg, an area to the south of Lough Key and north of Elphin. The site, some 4 miles east of the town of Boyle, is marked by the modern Church of Ireland parish church. According to the saints' genealogies, where his father's name is given as Olcan, Beoaed belonged to the Corco Loigde of west Cork. His church and cult were of major but not dominant importance within the kingdom of Mag Luirg, ruled by a branch of the Ui Ailella, 'the Sons of Erc'. But, whereas the main line of the Ui Ailella were on good terms with the heirs of Patrick, the Sons of Erc were not. Not only did their early bishop, Beoaed, have no Patrician allegiance, but they later received an important Columban church at Assylin. 


@@@@@


doc= 64420


Berach mac Amargin (fl. late 6th-early 7th cent.), whose feast day was 15 February, and who, unlike Comman, was himself said to belong to the Ui Briuin, but to a not particularly powerful branch, Cenel nDobtha. 


@@@@@


doc= 64421


Athracht ingen Thalain (fl. c.500), whose feast day is 11 August, was said by Tirechan to have received the veil from St Patrick. She was the principal saint of the Gregraige Locha Techet (Lough Gara), on the borders of Roscommon and Sligo. Her church was Killaraght (Cell Athrachtae) on the east side of the lough, but another important site was her well, Toberaraght, on the west side. Her cult sites thus straddled this minor kingdom. Another local saint attached to St Patrick by Tirechan, and thus believed to be of early date, was 


@@@@@


doc= 64422


Lalloc (fl. 5th cent.) of Senles, or Ard Senlis, whose feast day was 6 February. Her church is represented by the modern townland of Kildalloge (Cell Lalloc) in the parish of Kiltrustan on the west slopes of Slieve Baune, north-east of Roscommon. To judge by Tirechan she was the major saint of a small vassal kingdom lying on the eastern edge of Mag nAi. On the other hand, the church of 


@@@@@


doc= 64424


Cairech Dergain (d. 577/9), whose feast day is 9 February, lay in a much more powerful kingdom. She was the patron saint of the church of Cloonburren, almost opposite Clonmacnoise but a little further down the Shannon. Her church thus lay within the important kingdom of the Ui Maini. In spite of the rival attractions offered them by such cults as those of Brendan of Clonfert, Ciaran of Clonmacnoise, and Brigit of Kildare, Cairech Dergain retained a particular role for the women of the Ui Maini; according to their fourteenth-century customs, the queen of the Ui Maini owed seven garments each year to Cairech Dergain and a penny was owed by every girl. In this case, therefore, a female saint was not the principal saint of a minor kingdom, but became a saint specifically for the women of a much larger kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 64425


Lomman mac Dallain (fl. 5th-early 6th cent.) of Trim, whose feast day was celebrated on 17 February, but also on 11 October, is one of the clearest cases of an early British saint being drawn into a subordinate position within the cult of St Patrick. This appears to have happened for reasons of dynastic politics within the kingdom ruled by the dynasty of Cenel Loegairi, in which Trim was the principal church. Up to the early eighth century, the church of Trim belonged to a cadet branch of the dynasty; in the early eighth century, however, their position came under threat from the ruling branch. The subjection of Lomman, the patron saint of the church, to St Patrick first appears at that date, in a text included in the 'Book of Armagh'; it seems to have been a defensive measure by the cadet branch, seeking to gain the influence of Armagh in order to defend its control. The text also asserts that Lomman was related through his mother, not just to Patrick, but to a string of minor local saints across Meath and into Connacht, all of presumed fifth-century date, including 


@@@@@


doc= 64426


Munis (fl. 5th cent.?), bishop, 'in Forgnaide among the Cuircne', that is, buried at Forgney in the modern barony of Kilkenny West, Westmeath (feast day 18 December), and 


@@@@@


doc= 64427


Mo Genoc (fl. 5th cent.?) in Cell Dumai Glinn in southern Brega (Kilglinn, Meath; feast day 26 December). Although the manoeuvre failed to defend the cadet branch of Cenel Loegairi, in that the ruling branch took control of Trim, the subordination of Lomman to Patrick is still there in the tenth-century tripartite life of Patrick. Once this hagiographical weapon had been given to Armagh, it was retained for possible use. 


@@@@@


doc= 64428


Erc mac Dega (d. 513), the patron saint of Slane (about 12 miles east and a little south of Dulane), whose feast day was 2 November, was Patrick's judge. The ninth-century collection of monastic anecdotes about Ceili De reformers known as 'The monastery of Tallaght' mentions Slane as a particularly, even discreditably, wealthy church. Erc's, and thus Slane's, connection with Patrick and Armagh goes back at least to the late seventh century, so that Dulane may have been making an attempt in the ninth century to supplant Slane as an ally of Armagh. Such a policy might have something to do with the construction, at the beginning of the ninth century, of the new Columban monastery of Kells, only 2 miles to the south of Dulane. As Kells enjoyed the favour of the kings of Mide (Meath), so Dulane might be led to look with hope at the rival power of Armagh. A possible corollary may be that Dulane was where the later prologue was composed. 


@@@@@


doc= 64429


Cianan mac Setnai (d. 489), although close to Slane, was one of the three principal churches of the Ciannacht Breg, perhaps the most powerful client kingdom within Brega. Cianan, whose feast day was 24 November, is attributed to the Ciannachta in the saints' genealogies, a connection suggested by his name (the Ciannachta were thought to be descended from Cian, while Cianan means 'little Cian'). The tripartite life of St Patrick has Patrick blessing Cianan in the northern kingdom of Ciannacht Glinne Geimin (around Dungiven, Dun Geimin, in modern co. Londonderry), although his church Duleek was in the southern kingdom of Ciannacht Breg. Although the leading saint of Ciannacht Glinne Geimin came to be Cainnech moccu Dalann ['see under 'Munster, saints of], Cianan's cult had a minor role in binding together the two Ciannacht kingdoms. His obit in the annals of Ulster is also found in the annals of Tigernach and thus goes back to the chronicle of Ireland, the hypothetical parent text compiled in or soon after 911. It connects him with St Patrick by saying that he received his gospels from the saint of Armagh. 


@@@@@


doc= 64430


Mac Cuilinn mac Cathmoga (d. 496). He himself is given a Ciannacht pedigree in the genealogies of the saints; moreover, the close identification of church and dynasty is indicated by the consequences of the loss of royal status by the local branch of the Ciannachta in the early eighth century: they reinvented themselves as the kindred controlling the church of Lusk. The amenities of Mac Cuilinn's feast day (6 September) appear to have included horse-racing, since in 800 a king of southern Brega was thrown from his horse in a race on the feast day and died immediately. The only life of Mac Cuilinn to survive was described by Charles Plummer (died 1927) as an impudent forgery, having been lifted from a life of Finnbarr. 


@@@@@


doc= 64431


Lonan mac Talmaig (fl. 5th-6th cent.) of Trevet, whose feast day was 1 November, is said to have been of British descent on his mother's side, but there is no surviving paternal pedigree and no life. Domnach Sechnaill may well have been the principal early church of the region, as suggested by the term 'domnach', borrowed from the early Latin word for a church, 'dominicum'; its saint, 


@@@@@


doc= 64432


Sechnall mac Restitiuit (fl. 5th cent.), bishop, whose feast day was celebrated on 27 November, was said by the tenth century to be the son of Restitutus and Culmana, who was identified as one of Patrick's sisters. Sechnall was of secure reputation as one of the principal episcopal assistants of St Patrick. Yet the only surviving life was copied in the seventeenth century from a humanist compilation in the possession of an Irish Jesuit exile, Henry FitzSimon. This contained some plausibly medieval material, but nothing to demonstrate an especially active cult. It is likely that Sechnall's connection with Patrick was created by the development of the Patrician legend; he may have been the principal bishop of the northern province of what, in the fifth century, was still a greater Leinster including most of Brega; and, if he was anyone's assistant, he was more likely to have been Palladius's rather than Patrick's. His cult, therefore, may have been damaged by being made dependent on that of Patrick, and yet, given his new role as Patrick's lieutenant, his cult was never likely to decline beyond that of a second-rank local saint. 


@@@@@


doc= 64433


Mochtae (d. 535) of Louth, whose feast day was 24 March. He was always considered to be both a Briton and a disciple of St Patrick, as in Adomnan's second preface to his life of St Columba. The annals of Ulster, in his obit s.a. 535, quote the beginning of a letter purporting to have been written by him, in which he describes himself as 'Mauchteus, a sinner, priest, disciple of the holy Patrick'; and there is a reasonable chance that the letter is genuine, given the relationship between Mochtae and Columba disclosed by Adomnan and the Iona provenance of the early annals. There is an apparently abbreviated life preserved in the part of 'Codex Salmanticensis' that contains a string of lives of northern saints for August and September, arranged in the order of their feast days. The church of Louth was one of the principal churches of the client kingdom of Conailli Muirthemne; it was sometimes linked to Slane, and even to Lusk, by joint abbacies; and it may have been the Irish monastery of Fursa of Peronne. 


@@@@@


doc= 64434


Dublitter (d. 796), abbot, 'scriba' (principal scholar and teacher), and probably also bishop, whose feast day was 15 May. Dublitter was one of the main leaders of the Ceili De reform movement in the late eighth century, a movement given a major impulse by the 'assembly of the synods of the Ui Neill and the Leinstermen in the 'oppidum' of Tara, where there were many anchorites and 'scribae', whose leader was Dublitter' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 780). His name, which means 'Black Letter', was evidently a religious name, following a characteristic practice of the Ceili De. He is not included, under that name at least, in the genealogies of the saints. 


@@@@@


doc= 64435


Camulacus (fl. 5th cent.?), who is attested in the late seventh-century 'Collectanea' of Tirechan and in the hymn in his honour preserved in the antiphonary of Bangor. Camulacus must, on the evidence of his name, have been a Briton, and Rahan thus offers an unusually well-attested example of the submerging of an early cult of a British saint in Ireland. Unless he is the Mo Chamal of 16 May, Camulacus was not included in the martyrologies. 


@@@@@


doc= 64436


Manchan mac Sillain (d. 665), whose feast day was 24 January, was not the subject of a life; his church, a late arrival in the kingdom of Delbnae Bethra, was apparently overshadowed by its neighbour to the west, Clonmacnoise. There are only two obits of abbots during the eighth and ninth centuries. On the other hand, there are six early gravestones and there is the twelfth-century tomb-shaped shrine containing Manchan's relics, which seems never to have left the district and is preserved in a neighbouring Catholic church at Boher. 


@@@@@


doc= 64437


Samthann ingen Diarain (d. 739) of Clonbroney (Cluain Bronaig) in the northern Tethbae kingdom of Cenel Coirpri, whose feast day was 19 December. Samthann was not the founder of Cluain Bronaig. In her Latin life that honour is reserved for 


@@@@@


doc= 64438


Funech (fl. late 7th cent.), whose feast day was 11 December. Funech, however, is made responsible for bringing Samthann to Cluain Bronaig; the suggestion, therefore, is that Cluain Bronaig was founded in the second half of the seventh century. In the tripartite life of Patrick, however, it was claimed that the founders were two sisters of 


@@@@@


doc= 64439


Guasacht maccu Buain (fl. late 5th cent.), bishop of Granard, and thus of the kingdom of Cenel Coirpri in northern Tethbae to which Cluain Bronaig belonged, whose feast day was celebrated on 24 January. This is coupled with a claim that the head of the church of Granard had the right to veil all the nuns. There may be some connection, not easy to decipher, between this claim and the pedigree given to Samthann in the genealogies of the saints, namely that she was great-granddaughter of Dichu mac Trichim, the founder of the ecclesiastical family of Saul in co. Down (Patrick's claimed burial place). Both claims are made within the language of Patrician hagiography, specifically its Ulster branch; the connection with Dichu is quite impossible chronologically, but what it probably signifies is a rejection of the story in the tripartite life, the latter being favourable to Granard. In the Patrician legend, Dichu was Patrick's friend while Miliucc maccu Boin was his owner when he was a slave and refused to be converted. The pedigree thus aligned Samthann with the church of Saul and with the Dal Fiatach of co. Down, and was opposed to the kindred of Guasacht maccu Buain of Granard. The pedigree is echoed by the life's assertion that Samthann came from the Ulaid. It neatly gets her to the right part of Ireland by going on to say that her foster father was Cridan, king of Cenel Coirpri. 


@@@@@


doc= 64440


Daig mac Cairill (d. 587), whose feast day is 18 August. The life associates Daig with the Ciannacht Breg, a kingdom which then stretched from the south of Louth to the Liffey. The saints' genealogies, however, make him a great-great-grandson of Eogan mac Neill, the eponymous ancestor of Cenel nEogain. Once this pedigree was accepted as true, Cenel nEogain would be 'the kindred of the patron-saint' ('erlam'), normally enjoying a prior right to provide the abbot to the church. In the genealogies, however, the Cenel nEogain pedigree is associated with the assertion that Daig was smith to Ciaran of Clonmacnoise ['see under 'Meath, saints of], as 


@@@@@


doc= 64441


Assicus (fl. c.480) of Racoon, co. Donegal, or Raholp, co. Down, feast day 14 April, was smith to Patrick. Both claims were designed to make the saints and their churches part of the 'familiae' of the saints concerned; Daig mac Cairill is explicitly said to have granted his church to Ciaran. In the genealogies, therefore, Inis Cain Dega was part of a network linking the great midland church of Clonmacnoise with Cenel nEogain. Yet the connection with Clonmacnoise is also in the life of Daig, in which there is no mention of any association of him with Cenel nEogain. The life's attribution of Daig to the Ciannacht Breg appears to stem from a period before Cenel nEogain gained power over Conailli Muirthemne, the kingdom within which Inis Cain Dega was situated, as a result of the battle of Faughart in 735. A parallel case is the female saint, Femme, said in the genealogies to be a sister of Daig. A note in the martyrology of Oengus the Culdee places her in the church of Ernaide in Mag nItha, namely Urney, south-west of Strabane, in the late medieval rural deanery of Moghy (Mag nItha). Mag nItha was conquered by Cenel nEogain from Cenel Conaill during the 730s. The one genealogical fiction, therefore, served to buttress Cenel nEogain claims to two churches in kingdoms conquered in the same decade. The subjection of Inis Cain Dega to Clonmacnoise, acknowledged both in the life and in the genealogies, presumably dates from no later than the first half of the eighth century and survived the establishment of Cenel nEogain power in what had been the southernmost kingdom of the Ulstermen. Presumably it survived because Cenel nEogain wished to gain influence in a major church of the midlands. Daig's mother is named in the tract 'On the mothers of the saints' as Dediu, granddaughter of Dubthach moccu Lugair, the legendary representative of the poets who embraced Christianity; she was also believed to be the mother of other saints, including Diarmait of Inis Clothrann, so that Daig's maternal descent gave Inishkeen an alliance with several other churches. 


@@@@@


doc= 64442


Olcan (fl. 5th cent.), whose feast day is 20 February. The 'familia' of Patrick had had high hopes of Olcan and Dal Riata, as shown by Tirechan's statement, late in the seventh century, that Patrick had given Olcan a portion of the relics of Peter and Paul and other saints, one of the proudest possessions of Armagh. The investment, however, was a failure: the tripartite life records that lands belonging to Armoy had been taken by force and given to Mac Nisse of Connor and Senan of Inis Cathaig (an error for Senan of Lathrach Briuin). The general pattern of these events is confirmed by a fragment of a life of Columba of Iona written by Cummene Find, abbot from 657 to 669, which laments that Dal Riata was being subjected to its enemies. 


@@@@@


doc= 64443


Mac Nisse mac Faibrig (d. 507/8) of Connor, feast day 3 September, and of Dal Fiatach 


@@@@@


doc= 64444


Dichu mac Trichim (fl. 5th cent.) of Dal Fiatach, whose feast day of 29 April appears first in the twelfth-century martyrology of Gorman. Dal mBuain (to which Miliucc maccu Buain belonged) was the ruling group of the area around Broughshane and Ballymena; in the genealogies of the saints and in origin legends about Lough Neagh it is associated with its neighbour to the south, Dal Sailni, the people of Mac Nisse of Connor, Senan of Lathrach Briuin, and Colman Elo -- of Lynally, but also described in a version of his life as the 'second patron-saint of Connor'. The descendants of Dichu, however, were the principal ecclesiastical family of Saul and then of Downpatrick up to the ninth century: the story of their gift of the land at Saul to Patrick established their claim as 'the kindred of the land' -- a claim that should have prevailed against all others since the patron saint, Patrick, had no heirs by blood. Downpatrick, originally a royal fort, became a church in the mid-eighth century. Since the strong likelihood is that Patrick was a slave in what is now co. Mayo, the role of Miliucc maccu Buain is fictional. Moreover, Patrick's failure to convert Miliucc is explicitly contrasted with his conversion of Dichu mac Trichim in Muirchu's late seventh-century life of Patrick. The fiction, therefore, served to advance one Ulster ecclesiastical kindred, the descendants of Dichu, at the expense of two kindreds that were closely related to each other. 


@@@@@


doc= 64445


Do Biu mac Comgaill (fl. 5th cent.?) of Inis Causcraid (Inch, Down), whose feast day is 22 July but whose obit is unrecorded. The parallel variations in the name forms make it probable that the patron of Inis Causcraid in the martyrologies is the saint ascribed to Dal mBuain in the genealogies. His church is the early predecessor of the Cistercian abbey founded by John de Courcy about 1180 as a refuge for the displaced monks of Carrick. Inis Causcraid was a mile to the north-west of Downpatrick, the main early 'seat of kingship' for Dal Fiatach; similarly, Saul, the home of the Ui Dichon, Dichu mac Trichim's descendants, was 2 miles to the north-east. The topography suggests, therefore, that the implicit message of the story was an attack on those associated with Dal mBuain. The two churches of Inis Causcraid and Saul were potential rivals to be the local church of the royal fort at Downpatrick. The descendants of Dichu at Saul had one handicap balanced by some major advantages. Dichu had no serious early cult: he was not included in the martyrology of Tallaght or that of Oengus, although his feast day (29 April) was included in the much later martyrology of Donegal. On the other hand, the late seventh-century life of Patrick by Muirchu had asserted Saul's claims to be the burial place of Patrick, the apostle of the Irish. The first target of the story about Miliucc maccu Buain may have been Inis Causcraid, but, given the close connection between Dal mBuain and Dal Sailni and the topography associated with Patrick's time as a slave, Connor may also have been implicated. 


@@@@@


doc= 64446


Sillan moccu Mind (d. 610), feast day 28 February, who is recorded as having a particular expertise in arithmetical computation. The obits demonstrate that abbots were not recruited exclusively from within the Dal nAraidi (Comgall's kinsmen); again Bangor was more of a pan-Irish community than was either Connor or Nendrum. To judge by the annals and martyrologies, Bangor was the greatest monastery of Ulster, followed by its close neighbour Movilla, and then by Nendrum. It may not be an accident that the two leading houses, Bangor and Movilla, were close to the boundary between the Cruithni and Dal Fiatach, as well as being close to each other: they may have been placed there deliberately to assist peace-keeping. 


@@@@@


doc= 64447


Bronach (fl. 5th-6th cent.?) of Kilbroney, whose feast day is 2 April. Her church, Cell Bronche, became the parish church of Glenn Sechis, the valley running down to Rostrevor, co. Down. The old church was sufficiently important to be marked by a high cross. A similar figure was 


@@@@@


doc= 64448


Ercnat ingen Daire (fl. 5th-6th cent.) of Dun da En, later the parish of Duneane (including the modern village of Toome, co. Antrim). Her cult seems to have declined in the viking period: she was important enough to be commemorated 'c'.800 by Oengus the Culdee in the verse he devoted to the saints of 8 January, but she was not included in the genealogies of the saints. To judge by similar churches elsewhere, Cell Bronche and Dun da En are likely to have been founded as nunneries -- or, at least, churches served by one or more nuns -- but were also pastoral centres with a priest or priests attached. 


@@@@@


doc= 64449


Mac Cairthinn mac Cainnig (d. 506) is 24 March. The 'Codex Salmanticensis' preserves the latter part of a life, from the point at which Mac Cairthinn left his teacher (unnamed in the surviving text) and went to found Clogher. Almost all the rest of the life is determined by the situation of the monastery: it was to be founded facing the royal seat. The life thus gives an elaborate story involving three main characters, the king who remained a pagan subject to the influence of druids, his queen, and his son, both of whom were presented as ready to receive the preaching of the saint. A miracle achieves two purposes, the rescuing of the saint when the king's son was sent, albeit unwilling, to expel him from the site chosen for the monastery, and the safeguarding of the sleeping boy so that he could return unharmed to his parents. The king was then only too pleased to let Mac Cairthinn remain where he was. The surviving part of the life thus justified the role of Clogher as the principal church of the kingdom, a church which was also episcopal. It was not arguing a controversial case: Clogher was known as 'Clogher of the Sons of Daimine', that is to say, it was closely identified with the dynasty and the kingdom. In the twelfth century it would become the diocesan church of the whole area, including both Clones and Devenish. 


@@@@@


doc= 64455


James Wilson (1757-1820), one of the three 'Radical Martyrs' executed for their part in the Scottish insurrection of April 1820. Baird, born in Condorrat, Stirling, was the third son of a Condorrat weaver named James Baird ('b'. 1740) and Isobel Edmond. He had two brothers and two sisters. Baird joined the 2nd battalion of 95th regiment of foot (the Rifle brigade) on 13 September 1806 in Glasgow. Promoted to bugler, he went with his battalion in the expeditionary force commanded by General Whitelock to attack Napoleon's Spanish allies in Buenos Aires. His battalion was based at Colonia, in Uruguay. He returned on the transport 'Osborne', on which he became ill. Having recovered, he went with the 95th to Spain and saw action during the Peninsular campaign under Wellington. By 1812 he was stationed at Getafe outside Madrid. On 15 March 1813 Baird returned to Glasgow on furlough. He was due to report back to his unit on 22 May but obtained a certificate from the district surgeon, Glasgow, stating that he was ill. On 22 June 1813 he was posted as a deserter. There is no record that the army was able to arrest him. Like many others at this period he simply disappeared. 


@@@@@


doc= 64489


Walter Langley (1852-1922) described himself as 'the first figure painter to depict incidents in the life of the fisherfolk' (Fox and Greenacre). He was born into a working-class family in Irving Street, Birmingham, on 8 June 1852, the eighth of the eleven children of William Langley, a tailor, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Robinson. He was educated at Hurst Street Unitarian Mission School, Birmingham, and at the age of thirteen was apprenticed to a lithographic printer. He trained in drawing and industrial design at the Birmingham School of Design and gained a scholarship to study decorative design at the South Kensington Schools, London, but he was increasingly drawn towards painting. On 26 August 1876 he married Clara Perkins (died 1895). 
With financial assistance from a Birmingham businessman Langley moved to Newlyn in 1882. Soon after his arrival he produced some of his finest work, effectively capturing moments of personal crisis experienced by the fishermen's families. At this time he painted almost entirely in watercolour and became a leading exhibitor with the Institute of Painters in Water Colours. In the 1890s he returned to the use of oil colour and produced such major works as 'Never Morning Wore to Evening but some Heart did Break' (1894; Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery); its title was taken from Tennyson's 'In Memoriam', which proved to be one of the most popular of all late Victorian scenes of tragedy. Following the death of Clara in August 1895 Langley married secondly, in 1897, Ethel Pengelly. Langley lived in Newlyn for ten years before moving to nearby Penzance, where he died on 22 March 1922 at 18 Clarence Street. 
Edwin Harris (1855-1906), another Birmingham painter, trained with Langley at Birmingham School of Art, where he taught for two years before continuing his studies at the Royal Academy in Antwerp. He spent some months in Newlyn in 1881, and by 1883 was resident there. In contrast to the sombreness of Langley his painting depicts the quiet hours of happiness in the cottagers' lives. He left Newlyn in 1895 and spent the remainder of his life in Birmingham. Fred Hall (1860-1948) went to Newlyn in late 1883 and left in 1898. He was born at Stillington, Yorkshire, where his father was a doctor. He attended Lincoln School of Art and, like Harris, the Royal Academy in Antwerp. His landscape studies are more impressionist than those of his contemporaries in Newlyn, and he also had a gift for caricature. 



@@@@@


doc= 64528


James Paterson (1854-1932) was born on 21 August 1854 in Hillhead, Glasgow, the son of Andrew Paterson, a cotton and muslin manufacturer, and Margaret Hunter. He studied at Glasgow School of Art from 1871 to 1874 and then with various masters in Paris, including Jacquesson de la Chevreuse (1877-9) and Jean Paul Laurens (1879-83). On 24 April 1884 he married Eliza Grier Ferguson ('b'. 1856/7) and settled in Moniaive, Dumfriesshire, thus removing himself from the centre of the artistic developments in Glasgow post-1885, although he was deeply involved in the launch and production of the 'Scottish Art Review' from 1888 to 1890. He became a member of most of the artistic bodies in Scotland (Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour, 1885; associate member of the Royal Scottish Academy, 1896; full member of the Royal Scottish Academy, 1910; president of the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour, 1922-32). He died on 25 January 1932 at 12 Randolph Crescent, Edinburgh, and was buried there in Dean cemetery. 
Paterson and MacGregor met at school and from 1877 to 1883 they painted together, mainly on the east coast of Scotland. MacGregor's pursuit of the tonal values found in the more consistent light of the east of Scotland, his honesty of technique, and Paterson's French training all combined to lead them towards the naturalism of Bastien-Lepage. Landscape watercolours became Paterson's forte, painted 'en plein air', for example 'Moniaive' (1885; Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow), while MacGregor concentrated on both landscape and pictures of contemporary life, such as 'Crail' (1883; Smith Art Gallery, Stirling) and his masterpiece 'The Vegetable Stall' (1883-4; National Galleries of Scotland, Edinburgh), a painting which he substantially altered after seeing the works of James Guthrie and John Lavery in 1885 and which he never exhibited publicly. MacGregor's private income enabled him to run a large studio in Glasgow, where he entertained many of his colleagues in the early 1880s and where many of the group's ideas and beliefs were honed, but any artistic leadership MacGregor offered waned after 1885. 
The second group consisted of painters who made more sustained visits to France, particularly to Grez-sur-Loing, an artists' colony where many followers of naturalism congregated. John Lavery (1856-1941) was the most important of these, but others such as Thomas Millie Dow (1848-1919) and 


@@@@@


doc= 64532


William Whitehead Ratcliffe (1870-1955) was proposed by Gilman. The son of Zachariah Johnson Ratcliffe, a mill worker, and his wife, Kezia, 'nee' Harness, a draper, Ratcliffe was born in Clenchwarton, near King's Lynn, Norfolk, on 6 October 1870 and grew up in Manchester. He went to evening classes at the Manchester School of Art, where he was influenced by the teaching of Walter Crane, an arts and crafts designer and illustrator. In 1894 he went to London to work as a wallpaper pattern designer, and in 1906 moved to the new garden city of Letchworth. When in 1908 Gilman moved to the same road in Letchworth as Ratcliffe, the two became friends. In 1910 Gilman persuaded Ratcliffe to abandon his work as a commercial designer in Letchworth to live as a full-time painter in London, where he briefly attended the Slade. 
Membership of the Camden Town Group gave Ratcliffe, a shy and diminutive man (he was under 5 feet tall), the self-confidence to produce paintings at once distinguished and original. His controlled use of broken brushwork and high-keyed colour to support a taut design structure is seen at its best in his views of London, for example, 'Clarence Gardens' (Tate collection), shown at the AAA and Camden Town Group exhibitions in 1912, and in the landscapes he painted on a visit to Sweden in 1913. Figures played but an incidental role in his paintings, even in 'The Coffee House, East Finchley' of 1914 (Southampton City Art Gallery), which brilliantly captures the dingy respectability of a suburban cafe. Ratcliffe exhibited 'The Coffee House' with the London Group in 1919, the year in which Gilman, its president, had died. The main body of Ratcliffe's work thereafter was watercolours and wood-engravings. Unencumbered by possessions, he led a peripatetic life, staying with friends and family. When he died, unmarried, at 24 Hayes Crescent, Golders Green, London, on 6 January 1955 he was barely remembered, despite the one-man show held at the Roland, Browse, and Delbanco Gallery in London in 1946 and another in Letchworth Art Gallery in 1954. After his death his brother, the journalist S. K. Ratcliffe, gave some of his better paintings to various provincial art galleries; the residue of his studio went to Letchworth. 
Gore proposed his pupil 


@@@@@


doc= 64659


Catherine Petre, Lady Petre (1697-1785)]. Born on 4 January 1697, Catherine was the youngest of the four children of Bartholomew Walmesley (died 1701), heir of the family estate created by the judge Sir Thomas Walmesley (1537-1612) at Dunkenhalgh, Lancashire, and enlarged by his descendants. Orphaned as a small child, her brother and sisters all predeceased her, leaving her (at fifteen) heiress to a fortune of $50,000 and an estate possibly worth $5000 a year. On one occasion the family account books record five suitors visiting her house simultaneously. She seems to have made her own choice of the seventh Baron Petre as a husband. Their marriage was brief: he died on 22 March 1713 in Arlington Street, London, of smallpox, and was buried on 30 March at Ingatestone. Ten weeks later the widowed Lady Petre gave birth to their son, Robert James Petre, eighth Baron Petre (1713-1742). For a brief period she lived in France before returning to Ingatestone Hall in June 1715. Thereafter she devoted herself to his upbringing, and to a wide range of charitable activities. She made large donations to convents in Europe, not only in return for prayers on behalf of her late husband but also as dowries for young ladies entering them; she paid for boys' education or apprenticeships, and also (especially after the 1715 rising) sent money to prisoners. In 1717 she was proposed as a wife for James Francis Edward Stuart, the Pretender, but the plan was rejected despite her wealth. By 1720 she had founded schools for Catholic children at Ingatestone and nearby; Defoe commented that the family's 'constant series of beneficent actions to the poor and bounty upon all occasions, have gained an affectionate esteem throughout all that part of the country, such as no prejudice of religion could wear out' (Defoe, 141). Many years later, when her first and second husbands' heirs were again admitted to the House of Lords, they searched in vain for their ancestors' parliamentary robes: they had been cut up by Catherine 'to make petticoats for old women' (Petre). 
Having resisted proposals of a second marriage until her son came of age, on 2 April 1733 Catherine married Charles Stourton, fifteenth Baron Stourton (1702-1753), one of her earlier suitors and a lawyer. They lived first at Dunkenhalgh and then in Cheam, Surrey, but he died childless in 1753 and Catherine embarked on another thirty-two years of widowhood. Her letters and accounts reveal a life that, while characterized by religious fervour (with daily mass and long evening prayers), was far from joyless. Cards, concerts, exchanging visits, and purchasing lottery tickets feature regularly; her admirer Ralph Standish wrote in 1727 'I never had so mutch innocent mirth and satisfaction as here [at Ingatestone], where they are not apt to take things amiss and never mean harme, always gay and merry without excess' (Foley, 'Catherine Walmesley', 18). She died at Ingatestone on 31 January 1785, and was buried there on 5 February. 
Her son, the eighth baron, was more interested in plants than in his role as a leading Roman Catholic peer, but his marriage on 2 May 1732 to Lady Anna Radcliffe provided him with a wife more suited to that position. 


@@@@@


doc= 64733


Ernest Procter (1886-1935), who was already there. Ernest was born on 22 May 1886 at Tynemouth, Northumberland, the second son of Henry Richardson Procter (1848-1927), who became head of the leather industries department at Leeds University and professor of applied chemistry there, and his wife, Emma Lindsay, 'nee' Watson. After attending the Quaker school, Bootham, at York he enrolled at Leeds Art School about 1905-6 and then studied at the Stanhope Forbes Art School, Newlyn, before entering the Atelier Colarossi. Doris and Ernest returned to Newlyn in 1912 and married on 9 April at Paul parish church; they travelled to Paris and Versailles for their honeymoon. On their return to Newlyn they rented Dunton House, where their only child, Bill, was born in February 1913. Also in 1913 they had their first joint exhibition of watercolours at the Fine Art Society in London. By 1923 they had moved to North Corner, Newlyn, an old fisherman's cottage. Here, in unlikely circumstances, they created a magical garden, with grottoes and brilliant patches of coloured planting, all surrounded and protected by a high granite wall. Doris lived here until her death in 1972, and the garden was the subject of many of her paintings. 


@@@@@


doc= 64767


Richard Culverwell (d. 1586), apprenticed to John Elliott, factor to Sir Thomas Gresham during Mary's reign, became free of the Mercers in 1559, also settling in St Martin Vintry. He took over Nicholas's role within the London godly community and evidently became the mainstay of the politico-religious campaigns of John Field, while himself maintaining an extremely low profile. Despite his diligence in investigating 'the precisians' Richard Bancroft discovered little in the early 1580s beyond the fact that they collected money 'for their brethren that travell for them beyond the Seas' which was 'commonlye delivered to one Field a Preacher in the Citie, and one Culverwell in Tamyse streete' (Peel, 'Tracts', 12). Richard himself probably travelled widely on behalf of the Calvinist cause, bequeathing to his daughter a gold chain given to him by the queen of Navarre 'for the furtherance and defence of the gospel and such as sincerely profess the same' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/69). In 1583 he negotiated the land transactions necessary to establish the site of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, formally founded in 1584. Counted as one of Emmanuel's original benefactors, he bestowed upon it $200 and many books, several of which survive in the college library. 
Richard Culverwell died in February 1586, his will suggesting the extent to which he had been responsible for co-ordinating and financing godly stratagems since the death of Nicholas. There were bequests of $2 or $3 to nine leading London preachers, including Field, Robert Crowley, William Charke, Walter Travers, and Thomas Crooke, and the huge sum of $350 was left in trust for distribution to the deserving godly, clerical or lay. 
For a variety of reasons Richard Culverwell's death probably ended St Martin Vintry's influence over the affairs of the London godly. He himself had no son to succeed him. He and his wife, Anne ('nee' Hopkins; died in or before January 1598), had an only daughter, Judith, who in 1585 married the future Sir Thomas Smythe ('c'.1558-1625) but died within days of her father. Laurence's only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 64810


John Conway Philip Astley (1768-1821), equestrian performer and circus proprietor, was born in Lambeth, probably in September 1768. He shared his father's hot temper but had acquired more formal manners and education. His prowess in the ring graduated into an aptitude for writing and performing popular dramas. After a philandering youth involving an alleged duel in Ireland, in 1800 he married his co-star of Astley's stage, Hannah Waldo Smith (died 1843), niece of the political economist Adam Smith. The glamorous couple took a country house at East Sheen in Surrey. John Astley became instrumental in the development of hippodrama -- a swashbuckling form of melodrama featuring spectacular battle scenes on horseback. In 1810 he wrote and produced 'The Blood-Red Knight, or, The Fatal Bridge', netting the amphitheatre $18,000 profits and triggering a controversial wave of competition from the patent theatres, including 'Blue Beard' at Covent Garden. In spite of several more successes, John Astley ran up considerable debts that were not helped by his apparent drinking. He too died in Paris, of a liver complaint, on 19 October 1821, and was interred next to his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 64812


John Singleton (1775/6-1802), jockey, was the son of a nephew of the first John Singleton, also named John, and who had also ridden successfully for Lord Rockingham. Although the life and career of the third John Singleton were much briefer than his great-uncle's he rivalled him in fame. His greatest successes came in 1797 when he won both the Derby, riding the duke of Bedford's mount, and the St Leger, on a horse belonging to Lord Fitzwilliam. He was very well regarded by both the nobles and gentlemen who employed him, and his death in an accident at Newmarket at the age of twenty-six was 'sincerely lamented by those who had the pleasure of his acquaintance' ('Sporting Magazine', 255). While the first and the third John Singletons were the most successful jockeys of the dynasty, they were followed by three other Singleton brothers, Thomas Jackson, Kirton, and Leonard Jewison. Although all three were successful, Leonard Singleton, despite having only one eye, won more Gold Cup races than the others. Also, 'in spite of heavy 'wasting', not only in the saddle but in a chancery suit as well, he lived till he was 93' (The Druid, 200). 


@@@@@


doc= 64831


(Laura) Sylvia Gosse (1881-1968), born in London on 14 February 1881, the youngest of the three children of Sir Edmund Gosse (1849-1928) and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Epps. Gosse's training began at the St John's Wood School of Art, and continued from 1903 to 1908 at the Royal Academy Schools. In 1908 Sickert -- a family friend -- took over her education. She learned her formidable skill as an etcher at his classes at the Westminster Technical Institute, at 31 Augustus Street, and perhaps at the school for etching that he ran with the practical and financial help of young Madeleine Knox (1890-1975) first at 209 and then at 140 Hampstead Road. Sickert christened the latter address Rowlandson House in homage to the comic draughtsman and expanded the curriculum to include drawing and painting. When Miss Knox resigned in March 1910, worn out by coping with Sickert, Gosse took over management of the school. A few months later she became a full partner in the enterprise. 


@@@@@


doc= 64834


Iris Pamela Bentley (1931-1997), born on 5 August 1931, also a surviving twin, with whom he was dug out of house rubble during the blitz. 


@@@@@


doc= 64893


Sarah Hodgson (bap. 1760, d. 1822)], printer and newspaper proprietor, fifth daughter of Thomas Slack (1723?-1784) and Anne Fisher (1719-1778), who after Solomon Hodgson's death in 1800 continued and expanded the printing, bookselling, and newspaper businesses, in which she was always actively concerned. 


@@@@@


doc= 64897


Francis Howgrave (fl. 1724-1726), a young Stamford apothecary who in the year before Peck's volume appeared published 'An Essay on the Ancient and Present State of Stamford'. The preface to this short history was highly critical of Peck's delays in publishing his book and of its projected expense. Peck in turn appears to have feared that Howgrave's book would steal his thunder. Either way, their argument illustrates the petty quarrels often arising between local antiquaries in this period. Peck described Howgrave (about whom little else is known other than that he wrote a short essay against smallpox inoculation published in 1724 as a letter to Dr James Jurin FRS) as 'such a Child in Antiquities' and threatened: 'I am yet only on the defensive: But if you begin the War, I thank God, I have both Money to sue, and Pen to answer him who bespatters' (Francis Peck to Francis Howgrave, 12 Aug 1726; Howgrave, preface, 'An Essay on... Stamford', iv). Nothing further is known of their argument, though Roger Gale remarked from London in 1728 that 'Mr. Peck's 'voluminous work' is not much admired here; it is no hard matter, beside the labour, to compose such a great work, by writing everybodys life that has any relation to it' (Gale to Stukeley, 6 Feb 1728; 'Family Memoirs', 1.200). In 1729 Peck published a single sheet set of queries seeking information on the natural history and antiquities of Leicestershire and Rutland, and in 1731 Thomas Hearne observed that Peck was in Cambridge collecting material for 'a fourth and fifth volume' of Sir William Dugdale's 'Monasticon Anglicanum', as well as for his history of Leicestershire. Hearne wrote that Peck's 'Collections are almost incredible for a man tyed down to a Country Cure' ('Remarks', 10.475). Browne Willis, according to Hearne, described Peck as 'a Man of Parts, & no mean Scholar, tho' very conceited' ('Remarks', 9.218). Peck met the antiquary William Stukeley in 1723, and when Stukeley moved to Stamford they became friends, establishing a couple of 'literary clubs' together. In 1744 Stukeley recalled that Peck 'had a good deal of pride, and after many attempts at London, finding he was not rewarded as he thought he ought to have been, he became recluse and angry with the world' ('Family Memoirs', 2.248). 


@@@@@


doc= 64903


Ian Theodore Nelson (1878-1958) was born in Edinburgh. 
Tommy Nelson continued the family tradition of innovation in mass publishing, becoming managing director in practice if not in title, and initiating a number of popular series. The 'New Century Library' included titles by Dickens, Thackeray, and Scott, 'handy for the pocket or knapsack, and especially suitable for railway reading'. The 'Sixpenny Classics', later 'Nelsons Classics' (from 1903), eventually consisted of over 400 volumes and included works by James, Conrad, and Wells. From 1907 the 'Nelson Library', selling at 7died, offered reprints of copyright works in still familiar, at least to denizens of secondhand bookshops, red and gold cloth bindings. The 'Shilling Library' provided copyright titles of general literature, while several foreign series catered for languages other than English. Credit must be paid to Nelsons as one of the forerunners of Allen Lane's sixpenny 'Penguins' or the British equivalent of Tauchnitz. Among a limited number of new books was the Nelson biography of Edward VII, on sale in an edition of 120,000 copies within three days of his death. 
Late in 1906 Tommy Nelson also brought John Buchan, author, politician, and later as Lord Tweedsmuir governor-general of Canada, his friend from Oxford days, into the firm, where for some years he was largely responsible for editorial policy. Buchan was inspired by the principles that were Nelsons' from its earliest days: to place good books within the means of as many people as possible. He took charge of a weekly published by Nelsons, the 'Scottish Review', attempting to slough off its dour, worthy image as a house journal of the United Free Church of Scotland. Brown and the Nelsons envisaged it as the centre of a new Edinburgh-based Enlightenment when they bought the rights. There was a consensus that a periodical covering all matters Scottish -- political, literary, and social -- was needed. However, despite contributing lengthy items each week, Buchan could not sustain the necessary sales at 1died a copy to keep it afloat, and it closed at the end of 1908. 
In these years the American branch continued to flourish. In 1901 it published the 'American Standard Version' of the 'Bible' from a dedicated factory in Brooklyn, and in 1903 the American Thomas Nelson & Sons became a New York corporation wholly owned by the parent British company. It was also innovatory in popular publishing, issuing the 'Nelson Encyclopaedia' on a loose-leaf principle to subscribers. 
In 1907 a new factory was constructed which could produce 200,000 books a week. Reprint series of foreign language works increased, and the name Thomas Nelson & Sons appeared over branches in France and Germany. Business in Canada expanded with a Toronto branch opening in 1914. In 'Memory Hold-the-Door' (1940) John Buchan wrote of that period: 'We were a progressive concern, and in our standardised Edinburgh factories we began the publication of cheap books in many tongues' (p. 146). The languages included French, German, Magyar, and Spanish, and printing in Russian was under consideration. John Buchan became a director of Nelsons in 1915 when it became a limited company, signing a contract which expired in 1929. The book which brought Buchan lasting popular success, 'The Thirty-Nine Steps' (1915), is dedicated to Tommy Nelson in memory of a long friendship, and a joint affection for 'that elementary type of tale which the Americans call the 'dime novel' and which we know as the 'shocker' -- the romance where the incidents defy the probabilities, and march just inside the borders of the possible'. The need to be doing something (that he was writing 'The Thirty-Nine Steps' at the time did not count) preoccupied Buchan in the early months of the First World War. He was also anxious that the denial of foreign markets, the loss of manpower, and general exigencies of wartime should not lead to the temporary rundown and long-term decline of Nelsons. He proposed an ongoing history of the war, published in monthly parts (it was initially issued fortnightly) and when Hilaire Belloc declined the invitation to write it, Buchan undertook the challenge himself. Each issue, of about 50,000 words, published from 1915 to 1919, was seized upon by a public eager for clear, authoritative accounts of the war and represents a staggering feat of stamina and consistency. Over the same period another Nelson author, Edward Parrott, produced 'The Children's Story of War', also in instalments and also giving a regularity to the business. Both Tommy and Ian served on the western front, while retaining their interest in the family firm. 
The take-over of the publishing house of T. C. and E. C. Jack in 1915, strong in children's titles, consolidated the company's future direction. After Tommy's death in action at the battle of Arras on 9 April 1917 (he served in the Lothian and Borders horse, and later in the tank corps), Ian became head of the firm. In 1919 Thomas Nelson junior's original rotary press, which was interred in Germany since its exhibition at a Leipzig trade fair in 1914, was returned intact. 
Between the wars Nelsons expanded its educational list. Buchan brought in Sir Henry Newbolt as editorial adviser in this field, establishing new series: 'The Teaching of English' and 'The Teaching of History', and a new range of school readers, 'Reading for Action', and 'Read and Remember'. Buchan's collaboration continued long after his departure in 1929: at that point he did not renew his contract, given increased commitments in his political career. In any case, much of the excitement disappeared from the business on the death of Tommy. When 35 Paternoster Row was destroyed in the blitz, Nelsons shared the fate of many other publishers, but in 1948 the firm celebrated its 150th anniversary as well as release from the restrictions of wartime and after. 
Ian Nelson remained head of the firm until his death on 14 April 1958 and was succeeded by his son Ronnie. Nelsons nurtured its overseas textbook markets in the newly established Commonwealth in the same way as it had forged links in the old empire. During the 1960s branches were opened in Australia, Nigeria, and Kenya, but in order to sustain its publications in a global market, Nelsons was absorbed into the Thomson Organization in 1962. Soon afterwards the production plant in Edinburgh was separated from the publishing division, which became permanently based in London. In 1968 the printing division was sold to the Edinburgh company Morrison and Gibb and the Parkside works were eventually demolished to make way for new insurance company buildings. In 1969 the American company was sold to Royal Publishers Incorporated of Nashville, Tennessee, which retained the name Thomas Nelson & Sons. The London firm continued to trade until January 2000, when it merged with Stanley Thornes to become Nelson Thornes, a combined subsidiary of the Dutch company Wolters Kluwer. 


@@@@@


doc= 64904


Thomas Arthur Nelson (1877-1917) was born in Edinburgh in 1877 and was educated at Edinburgh Academy and University College, Oxford, where he gained a rugby blue. He also played rugby for Scotland. While at Oxford his friends included John Buchan and E. R. Balfour, whose sister Margaret he later married. (They apparently had no children.) Tommy's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 64906


William Frederick de la Rue (1825-1870), Thomas's younger son, was born in London on 3 April 1825; he began working for the firm in 1837 and became a traveller in 1840. He was made a partner in 1850 and married Emma Tanner on 20 May of the following year. For some time they lived in the family house next door to the business in Bunhill Row before moving to Harley Street in 1864. Known as Colonel Billy because of his close association with a militia regiment, the 4th Tower Hamlets, William Frederick applied his administrative skills to complement Warren's scientific interests. Over the next twenty years they introduced two important new lines: postage stamps and paper money. In 1853 the firm received a four-year contract from the Inland Revenue to produce adhesive revenue stamps for drafts and receipts. The surface-printing techniques De La Rue used for playing cards enabled them to offer benefits of cost and security over their rivals, Perkins, Bacon & Co., who had hitherto had the Inland Revenue business. In the next few years this advantage was pressed further, helped by a chemist, Hugo Muller, whom Warren had brought to the firm and who worked on perfecting secure printing inks. In 1855 De La Rue produced their first postage stamp, the fourpenny carmine; two years later they received a further contract for the 1's'. and 6died stamps. Another major market opened up in 1854 with the order for stamps for the East India Company, a contract which led to further postal business for the whole of India, including the supply of government stationery. 
A second breakthrough came in 1858 when the crown agents asked De La Rue to produce stamps for the British colonies. Once again, De La Rue's gain was Perkins Bacon's loss: disapproving of their lack of consultation, the new agent general for the crown agents established a good relationship with William Frederick, who was given the courtesy title 'Engraver to the Agents General for the Crown Colonies'. The potential offered by colonial business was boosted further in 1859 when Mauritius placed an order for paper currency, a line of security printing anticipated in the patent of 1840. In 1860 banknotes for Mauritius were printed from copper plates. For the immediate future postage stamps were the greater area of growth for the firm, but these developments were the seeds of greater things to come, for in the twentieth century supplying stamps and banknotes to the British empire was a major part of De La Rue's business. 
During the 1850s Thomas de la Rue continued to work on improvements in paper and printing inks, still maintaining his determination to stay ahead of the field; thus in 1856 and 1857 he took John Dickinson & Co. to court for infringing the patent for the envelope-making machine, and won. In 1858 his wife, Jane, died; some months later he married a young Swedish woman, Alice Marie Andre. Soon afterwards he retired from the firm, having negotiated a generous settlement which included lending money to his sons at high interest. In valuing his own achievement in founding the business above that of his sons in developing it, Thomas created a bitterness that was not resolved; thus his career ended as it had begun, with a successful partnership turning sour. After a few weeks of illness, he died at 84 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 7 June 1866, and was buried at Kensal Green. 
Following Thomas's retirement the firm's business continued to expand at home and abroad. Perhaps through William Frederick's friendship with American cousins, De La Rue in 1862 was given the contract to print postage stamps for the Confederate states. William Frederick and Warren were both active in travelling to solicit new business. They won orders for stamps and railway tickets in Italy, latterly helping the Italians to set up their own printing plant. Two letters from William Frederick at Bunhill Row to Warren in Italy in 1862 are a mix of family concerns -- Emma, William Frederick's wife, was ill -- and business, including a promising new order from the raja of Mysore. Postal contracts continued for India, and were established for Portugal and in South America. At home output and sales of playing cards and railway tickets rose impressively, research continued into improving paper and watermarks, and the stationery business flourished, including the ever popular Improved Indelible Diary and Memorandum, almost a miniature almanac, and calendars and diaries embellished with Owen Jones's exquisite decoration -- also to be found on labels for Whitbread's stout and Huntley and Palmers' biscuits. To accommodate this growth, the firm opened offices in Liverpool and Paris (the effects of the Civil War led to the early closure of a New York office) and expanded their London property. 
On 24 August 1870 William Frederick de la Rue died at 122 Harley Street, London, aged forty-six, from cancer of the liver, leaving a distraught family. Warren, who had retired some months earlier, came back to run the firm with the help of his two sons, Warren William (1847-1921) and 


@@@@@


doc= 64909


Sir John Murray (1884-1967), publisher, was born on 12 June 1884, the only son of Sir John [iv] Murray and his wife, Katherine Evelyn. Known as Jack, he had two younger sisters. Like his father, he was educated at Eton College and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he gained a degree in modern history in 1905. In the following year he went on a world tour before entering the family business, becoming a partner in 1909. He was the last editor of the long-established 'Quarterly Review'. 
At the beginning of the 1914-18 war Murray, then serving as high sheriff of the county of London, joined his regiment, the Scottish horse. He rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel, serving in Egypt, at Gallipoli, and in France. His regiment was subsumed into the Black Watch, but he later transferred to the Royal Scots, and commanded their 12th battalion. In 1918 he was made DSO for personal bravery and awarded a Croix de Guerre (Belgium). On 16 August 1916 he married Lady Helen de Vere (1892-1971), the fifth and youngest daughter of the first Earl Brassey. There were no children of the marriage. 
At the end of the war Murray, despite relatively little knowledge of the trade, was confirmed in an equal partnership with his father. His abilities were first harnessed to the tasks of integrating the newly acquired Smith Elder business, editing the 'Cornhill Magazine', and publishing the third series of the 'Letters of Queen Victoria'. Upon the publication of the ninth and final volume of this correspondence in 1932 -- four years after his father's death -- Murray was created KCVO. An administrator by nature, he worked from dawn to dusk, but discovered few if any best-selling authors for the firm during the 1930s and 1940s. Moderate profits were achieved by publishing past successes in cheaper editions, the well established schoolbook list, new books from authors inherited from both his father and Smith Elder, dull memoirs of politicians, military men, and aristocrats, travel books, and works on nineteenth-century history, a field in which Murray had a detailed knowledge. 
Murray could write a review at short notice and correct an index with fastidious accuracy. He took pride in knowing the pedigree of every important British family. Like his father, he was a member of the Church of England and a staunch tory, serving for a time on the Westminster city council. He was also a long-standing member of the Roxburghe Club and a life member of the Athenaeum Club. He was a trustee of the Westminster Hospital and treasurer of the Friends of Great Ormond Street Hospital, where there was a John Murray ward. In later years he was chairman of the Deafened Ex-servicemen's Fund and suffered himself from increasing deafness, a handicap 'which was so cruelly in conflict with his natural gaity and wit' (speech of John [vi] Murray at the firm's 200th anniversary dinner in 1968, John Murray archive). Murray would tell anyone he thought verbose to 'come back when you have less time' (private information). Throughout his life he refused to own a car. 
Murray's nephew, John Grey Murray (John [vi]), known as Jock ['see below'], entered the firm in 1931. When he returned from service after the war his Uncle Jack is said to have greeted him with the reassuring words: 'It's all right, Jock, I haven't taken on any new manuscripts in your absence' (private information). For nearly thirty years the two very different men directed affairs from Albemarle Street, but it was Jock Murray who brought in the many best-selling books published after the war. There were times when the traditions of the past clashed with the need to modernize. In 1951, with great reluctance, John [v] accepted that it was necessary for the business to change from being a partnership, and it became a limited company. 
Sir John [v] Murray died at his home, Flat 5, 49 Lowndes Square, London, on 6 October 1967 after one day's illness. At this time the firm employed about eighty people and published a similar number of books annually. 



@@@@@


doc= 64916


Sir Reynald Hilton (fl. c.1380); 


@@@@@


doc= 64917


Sir John Pecche (c.1360-1386); 


@@@@@


doc= 64918


Sir Richard Stury (c.1327-1395); Sir Lewis Clifford (c.1330-1404), and Sir Thomas Latimer (1341-1401) as 'the strongest promoters and most powerful protectors' of Lollard preachers ('Chronicon Henrici Knighton', 295). The St Albans chronicler Walsingham also independently cites Stury, Clifford, and Latimer, along with Sir William Neville (c.1341-1391); Sir John Clanvow (c.1341-1391), and ('above all') Sir John Montagu (d. 1400) as Lollard partisans in 1387: the same source names Stury ('the greatest supporter of perfidy'; Walsingham, 'Annales', 174), Clifford, Latimer, and Montagu as promulgators of the radical Lollard 'twelve conclusions' allegedly presented to parliament in 1395. Walsingham later added Sir John Cheyne (d. 1414) to the list as a leading anti-clerical, and made further accusations against Montagu and Clifford. 
The careers of these men were investigated by W. T. Waugh (1913), and far more thoroughly by K. B. McFarlane (1972). Of those named only by Knighton, Hilton cannot be satisfactorily identified -- it is possible that the chronicler was mistaken in describing him as a knight, and that the Reynold Hilton whom he had in mind was a priest, a servant of Edward, the Black Prince, who was controller of the king's wardrobe (1377-81): but Pecche and Trussell (as well as Latimer) owned lands near the chronicler's Leicester, so that rumours of their activities may well have reached him. Pecche, who died young, was Sir Richard Stury's ward, while Trussell, a violent and lawless man, was associated with Lollard suspects much later, in 1418. The core of the group, however, were those accused either by both chroniclers (Stury, Clifford, and Latimer) or by Walsingham alone (Neville, Clanvow, Montagu, and Cheyne). 
Though they were associated neither by area of origin nor blood relationship, these seven came to form a remarkably compact group: their careers were extraordinarily similar, and their public and private interrelationships very close. Again and again they appear together in documents as business partners, co-feoffees, and fellow executors, for each other or for mutual associates. All except Cheyne were career soldiers under Edward III; Clifford and Montagu were fellow knights of the Garter. Clifford, Stury, and perhaps Latimer were trusted retainers of the Black Prince, and by the 1380s all seven had achieved high status at the court of his son Richard II, five becoming knights of the king's chamber. In 1400 Montagu, now earl of Salisbury, was lynched for his share in a rising intended to restore the deposed King Richard. All except Latimer, moreover, served abroad as negotiators and diplomats. They were likewise a notably cultured group. Clifford, Stury, Neville, and Clanvow were all friends of Geoffrey Chaucer; Clifford also knew the French poet Eustace Deschamps, and Stury was an honoured associate of Froissart. Montagu was renowned in his own right for his French verse (now lost), while Clanvow wrote both an English love poem ('The Boke of Cupide') and a moralizing treatise (known as 'The Two Ways'). 
Whether this highly placed group also shared a real belief in heretical doctrines has been more controversial. Waugh concluded that they were the victims of chroniclers' prejudices, or at worst short-term and superficial supporters of heresy. McFarlane, basing his statements on much more wide-ranging investigation, conversely declared that their notoriety as protectors of Lollards was well founded. Their apparent immunity from persecution, he believed, was due partly to their influence at court and partly to the ambiguous attitude to heresy that prevailed among lay and ecclesiastical authorities before the passing of 'De haeretico comburendo' under Henry IV in 1401. Subsequent research has confirmed McFarlane's view. 
Latimer's support for Lollardy (which even Waugh admitted) is the best documented from non-chronicle sources. A forceful defender of heretical preachers from at least 1388, his Leicestershire and Northamptonshire properties remained important centres of Lollard activity long after his death. Neville clearly protected the leading Lollard Nicholas Hereford, and may even have procured his escape from prison: thereafter (according to Walsingham) Hereford took refuge with the 'arch-heretic' (as Walsingham saw him) and iconoclast Montagu. Neville's close friend Clanvow wrote an English pietistic treatise (itself a most unusual activity for a layman and courtier), which admits at least to accusations of heresy having been made against him and his friends. Clanvow's Herefordshire relations and associates, moreover, most probably lent powerful support to the Lollard evangelist William Swinderby. The evidence against Stury, admittedly, comes only from the repeated accusations of the chroniclers, but his association with the group is too close for these to be disregarded. 
Clifford, Latimer, and Cheyne (as well as Latimer's widow, Cheyne's son, and Clanvow's heirs) moreover left wills remarkable for extravagant protestations of unworthiness, contempt for the body, and prohibition of funeral pomp -- all sentiments compatible with the puritan strain in Lollardy. Among Clifford's executors, indeed, was the future Lollard rebel, Sir John Oldcastle. 
By the time of Oldcastle's revolt in 1414 all the original Lollard knights (except the marginal Trussell) were dead. The support this influential group gave to Lollardy had been crucial to its growth, but it had been given in the milder climate of Richard II's reign, when such opinions in high places could be tolerated or tacitly disregarded, despite the chroniclers' fulminations. The new generation of Lollard knights, younger men who supported Oldcastle (five knights and more than twenty esquires and gentlemen, including three of Cheyne's cousins, were implicated in his rising), lived in a different world, where government attitudes to heresy had hardened. By resorting to rebellion, these later and far less influential Lollard knights inextricably entangled Lollardy with treason, and so destroyed it as anything more than a persecuted lost cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 64920


Sir John Trussell (1349-1424); 


@@@@@


doc= 64922


John Arnaud Robin Grey Murray (1909-1993), publisher, was born on 22 September 1909 at Woodside, Wargrave, Berkshire, the eldest son of Thomas Robinson Grey (1861-1945), a barrister who was later employed in the accounts department at the firm, and Dorothy Evelyn (1881-1958), the daughter of Sir John [iv] Murray. He had an elder sister, Evelyn Marion. By deed poll in 1930 he added 'Murray' to his name. In the words of his son, John [vii] Murray: 'The Grey line brought to the house flair and a new natural instinct for publishing'. 
John [vi] was also educated at Eton College and at Magdalen College, Oxford, where in 1928 he met John Betjeman and Osbert Lancaster, who became lifelong friends as well as his authors. From an early age he was groomed to enter the firm and succeed his uncle. He was fond of recalling a youthful encounter with Conan Doyle on the stairs at Albemarle Street: 'If this is an author', he said to himself, 'what fun to be a publisher' (private information). His boyhood stammer was cured by Lionel Logue, who subsequently helped George VI. 
Murray entered the firm in 1931 and became a salaried partner in 1933. It was from Leonard Huxley that he first learned the art of dealing with authors. 'A contributor to the 'Cornhill' told me that he preferred a letter of rejection from Dr. Huxley to one of acceptance from any other editor' ('A Poet and his Publisher'). Jock Murray himself later told an author: 'Like a diamond your work will sparkle if cut' (private information). In the early 1930s he assisted with the editing of the 'Quarterly Review' and the 'Cornhill Magazine'. After the war the 'Cornhill' was relaunched by Peter Quennell and continued under Murray's editorship until 1975, when it ceased publication. 
Murray married Diana Mary Ramsden James ('b'. 1911) on 29 March 1939. They had four children, including a son, John Richmond Murray (John [vii]) born in 1941. During the Second World War Murray served for five years in the Royal Artillery, attaining the rank of major. For his role in organizing air transport for Arnhem he was made MBE in 1945. During the war Noel Carrington took Murray's place as a literary adviser. 
A group of leading authors was not only published by Murray but also became his closest friends: Freya Stark, Osbert Lancaster, and John Piper were godparents to his children. To Murray a close friendship with his authors was an essential part of publishing and won him loyalty that became the envy of other publishers with the arrival of 'chequebook' publishing in the 1970s. The steady flow of popular authors to the Murray list only increased with the publication of John Betjeman's 'Continual Dew' in 1937, a group collaboration involving Piper and Lancaster, with a jacket by Edward McKnight Kauffer. Thereafter Murray published most of Betjeman's work. 
Kenneth Clark's association with the firm began in 1949 with the publication of 'Landscape into Art'. It continued with 'The Nude' in 1956, a reprint of 'The Gothic Revival' six years later, and was capped with Clark's best-selling 'Civilisation', published jointly with the BBC to complement the 1969 television series. 'Clark's gift for connecting vivid narrative with visual explanation owes much to Jock's ability to fit text and pictures together seamlessly' (Barker, preface). For Freya Stark, author of 'The Valleys of the Assassins' and 'Baghdad Sketches', Murray would go to extraordinary lengths to supply whatever she needed, wherever she was. One of the more unusual items was a hip-bath sent to Stark in Yemen. Other notable authors published by Murray included C. Northcote Parkinson, Sir Arthur Grimble, Walter Starkie, Iris Origo, Patrick Leigh Fermor, Dervla Murphy, Leslie Marchand, Doris Langley Moore, and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala. 
The typography, illustration, and production of books from the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s gave the firm's imprint a distinctive look that was largely the vision of Jock Murray. Artists such as John Piper and Reynolds Stone were important contributors and advisers. Special editions of publications were often produced, typically bound in half buckram with Cockerell marbled paper. 
Less glamorous but of increasing importance during Jock Murray's tenure was the development of the long-standing educational list, which became the financial backbone of the house. D. G. McKean's O-level 'Introduction to Biology', with its large format and clarity of illustration, was a landmark in publishing, selling 5 million copies in eight languages. The 'Success Studybooks' helped satisfy the fast-expanding need for self-teaching texts. Under the direction of Kenneth Pinnock the turnover of the Murray education department increased by over 100 per cent in the 1970s and 1980s, by which time more than half the firm's business was in educational and scientific titles. 
Murray himself made an important personal contribution to Byron scholarship. He traced this passion not only to the modernity of the poet's words but to the need to expiate the guilt he felt for his ancestor (John [ii] Murray) burning the poet's memoirs. Initially he assisted Peter Quennell with 'Byron: a Self-portrait' (1950), and for nearly ten years he collaborated with Leslie Marchand to produce the much-praised edition of Byron's 'Letters and Journals' (1973-94). He also worked closely with Doris Langley Moore, author of 'The late Lord Byron' (1961), 'Lord Byron Accounts Rendered' (1974), and 'Ada Countess of Lovelace' (1977). Such was his obsession for Byron that there was nowhere, however distant, he would not travel in search of an unpublished letter. His Byron knowledge was prodigious, he knew all the great Byron scholars, and had worked closely with many of them including, as a young man in the 1930s, T. J. Wise, the great bibliophile and forger, helping him compile his Ashley Library catalogue. 
In 1975 Murray was created CBE for services to literature. He was an engaging raconteur and humorous public speaker. Middling in height, thin, and energetic, with longish hair, he sported a characteristic bow-tie and a colourful set of braces. An expressive pair of raised eyebrows and the signature exclamation 'Extraoooordinary' endeared him to friends, authors, and employees alike. He had a genuine gift for friendship, an equable temperament which sometimes belied a darker, depressive side to his nature. For many years Murray kept a commonplace book in which he recorded humorous anecdotes, notable quotations from books, 'bons mots', proverbs, and the like. 'A Gentleman Publisher's Commonplace Book' (1996), edited by his son John R. Murray, is a posthumous tribute to a man who reinvigorated a business that could claim to be the oldest independent family-run publishing house in the world. Jock Murray died at the Royal Free Hospital, Hampstead, London, on 22 July 1993. 
During the course of his career, and particularly towards its end, at a time when the publishing industry was changing dramatically, John [vi] Murray continued to be a strong proponent of the net book agreement, which his ancestor (John [iv] Murray) had played a part in establishing. He served on the councils of the Royal Geographical Society and the Publishers' Association and was a member of the Literary Society, the Society of Dilettanti, and the Roxburghe Club. An accomplished tree surgeon, he once remarked, 'Publishers naturally take to forestry because they can cut and chop to their heart's content without authors complaining' (speech to the Society of Bookmen, 6 Dec 1979). The house of Murray remained in family hands until May 2002 when it was sold to Hodder Headline, who promised to retain the John Murray imprint. 


@@@@@


doc= 64963


Thomas Courtenay, fourteenth earl of Devon (1432-1461), remained an unflinching supporter of the queen, whose cousin Marie, daughter of Charles, count of Maine, he had married during 1456-7, and he received a number of grants. The desperate consequences of uncontained conflict are graphically illustrated in Courtenay's brief career. Present at the battle of Wakefield (where both Bonville's son and grandson were killed), and the second battle of St Albans (following which Bonville himself was executed), he was injured at Towton and, unable 'to voyde a waye... was take and beheddyed' at York on 3 April 1461 ('The Historical Collections of a Citizen of London', 216). 


@@@@@


doc= 64978


Thomas [i] Bowles (d. 1721) who was possibly the son of John Bowles, a joiner of St Lawrence Poultry, whose will was proved in 1652. A Thomas Bowles published a broadside dated 1683 and in that year Harrhman, son of Thomas Bowles and his wife, Anne, was baptized on 1 March at St Gregory by Paul's. The first certain record of the printseller was the publication in 1691 of a print of a triumphal arch, from his house on the corner of Paul's Alley next to the chapter house in St Paul's Churchyard. A plan of the house, which was leased from the bishop of London, is attached to the deeds in the Guildhall Library. It remained the principal family shop for over a century and for most of that time the Bowles were one of two dynasties dominating the flourishing London print trade. Thomas Bowles died on 5 April 1721, 'haveing left off trade and being out of business for some time before his death' (inventory, CLRO, common serjeant's book 6, box 47, fol. 57b). At that time he was described as a citizen and joiner of St Gregory by Paul's; he also owned four tenements in London House Yard and a half-share in two houses in Bloomsbury. Among his most notable publications were views of the new St Paul's Cathedral (1708), and the set of large prints of the duke of Marlborough's victories (1717) after Louis Laguerre, for which Claude Du Bosc was paid the handsome sum of $80 per plate. 
This latter undertaking may, in fact, have been the initiative of 


@@@@@


doc= 64979


Henry Carington Bowles (1763-c.1830). Henry Bowles, born on 31 August 1763, was made free of the Joiners' Company on 7 December 1784 and was in livery by 1792. He traded in partnership as Bowles and Carver until shortly before his death in 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 64995


Amon Henry Wilds (bap. 1790, d. 1857), not, as was long thought, with his father, Amon Wilds (1762-1833), carpenter and then builder. He was baptized at All Saints', Lewes, Sussex, on 4 November 1790, the son of Amon Wilds and his wife, Sarah Dunn (1764-1822); the date of 1784 universally given for Wilds's birth is presumably incorrect. In Brighton the Wildses had built for Kemp a chapel (Holy Trinity, Ship Street, 1817) and possibly a residence, The Temple (1819), while for the Unitarians they created a majestic Doric temple in New Road (1820). In 1823 Kemp commissioned the younger Wilds and Busby to create a homonymous speculative development. From Kemp Town they continued sometimes together, often individually, to establish such an ascendancy that Regency Brighton, judged in the 1830s 'alone to be equalled at St Petersburg' (Dale, 10), was essentially their creation. While lack of surviving documentary evidence has made it difficult to distinguish the works of Busby in Brighton from those of Wilds (almost invariably, their drawings are signed 'Wilds & Busby'), the inclusion of Egyptian details, ammonite Ionic capitals, and bold scallop shells recessed over windows, and later, Italianate designs, characterize the work of Wilds. Individual works by Busby include the chapels of St Margaret (1824; dem. 1959) and St George (1824-5), and Portland Place (1824-8; plans exh. RA, 1830). After only twenty-five months the partnership between Busby and Wilds was dissolved amid considerable acrimony in June 1825, with Busby claiming many buildings as his own. By contrast, Wilds was in partnership with his father from 'c'.1806 to 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 64996


Henry [ii] Overton (fl. 1751-1764), nephew and successor of Henry [i] Overton, was presumably the son of John Overton's fourth son, James. Taking over the business in 1751 he moved vigorously into the market for engraved views, usually publishing in partnership with Robert Sayer. He maintained the White Horse at Snow Hill until at least November 1764. On 29 February 1752 an announcement appeared in the 'London Evening-Post', 'On Thursday last Mr. Overton, an eminent Printseller without Newgate, was married to Miss Dawson, of Gilt-Spur Street, an agreeable young Lady with a considerable Fortune.' Sadly, a correction appeared in the next issue to the effect that the announcement had been 'premature'. A printed catalogue of his stock of 'Common and Fine Prints', issued in 1754, extended to seventy-nine pages. At that time his latest innovation was wallpaper, designed by John Baptist Jackson, 'printed in oil' with special designs 'in chiaro oscuro and in chints colours' to have the effect of prints displayed on the wall. He advertised a new edition of George Bickham's 'Universal Penman' in November 1764 but after that date he disappeared from view. 


@@@@@


doc= 64997


Mary Overton (fl. 1745-1748), widow and successor of Philip Overton, briefly ran the Golden Buck in Fleet Street after her husband's death in February 1745. On 6 January 1747 she married James Sayer at Christ Church, Spitalfields. It would seem that at about this time James's younger brother Robert Sayer became her assistant. In the art dealer Arthur Pond's account books there are a number of references to her buying prints from him. The shop was run by Mary until December 1748 when in newspaper advertisements Robert Sayer was first named as manager. 



@@@@@


doc= 65047


Joseph Ashby Gillett (1795-1853), Quaker shag and shalloon manufacturer of Neithrop, Banbury. Her husband, born on 4 September 1795, was the eldest son of William Gillett (1767-1849), Quaker farmer, textile manufacturer, and semi-banker, of Upper Brailes, near Shipston-on-Stour. The couple had a daughter and four sons, including Charles Gillett (1830-1895). On her marriage Martha received a settlement which allowed Joseph Ashby Gillett to purchase a partnership in Whiteheads Bank at Shipston-on-Stour. The settlement allowed him to borrow $5000 without interest. A part of this sum represented money to which his bride would become entitled on her mother's death. The trustees of this settlement were two of Martha's brothers, Joseph and Brueton Gibbins, and their cousin, Jeffery Bevington Lowe of Eatington, who had married Margaret Whitehead and was a partner in Whiteheads Bank. 
By 1822 Gillett's brother-in-law, Joseph Gibbins, had provided $6000 of capital towards the purchase of the Banbury New Bank (established 1784) from R. and C. Tawney. Although the brothers-in-law were co-partners in the bank, Joseph Gibbins continued to concentrate on his other banking interests, leaving Gillett to manage the Banbury bank. From this point, until its amalgamation with Barclays Bank Ltd in 1919, the Banbury bank always retained at least one Gillett as a partner and became known colloquially as Gilletts Bank. Joseph Ashby Gillett died in 1853, but his wife, Martha, survived him, and died on 27 May 1882 at 2 West Street, Banbury. 
The story of the Banbury bank might have been different, since the bank was forced to close its doors for several weeks during the financial crisis of 1825-6. Joseph Gibbins was, at least in part, responsible for the bank's vulnerability at this time. Gibbins had adopted the practice of discounting Birmingham and Swansea bills using the funds of the Banbury bank to do so. This practice was risky, since it was tantamount to rediscounting, and indeed brought down both the Birmingham and the Swansea banks in 1825 and also caused temporary suspension at Banbury. As a result of his actions Joseph Gibbins was compelled to retire as a partner in the Banbury bank when the firm underwent reconstruction after the crisis. Indeed, from the records of the Birmingham bank of Gibbins, Smith, and Goode, it appears that Gibbins was perhaps less cautious in his business activities than his Quaker religion advised. The bank is said to have had a note circulation which was in excess of its five rival banks put together and, according to the balance sheet at bankruptcy, even after the run on the bank in 1825 which led to its closure, over $52,000 remained in outstanding notes. 
The financial fortunes of Joseph Gibbins had revived sufficiently by the late 1840s to allow him to recompense the Banbury bank for his earlier failing. The bank again faced serious financial difficulties during the crisis of 1847-8. On this occasion, however, it was Joseph Gibbins who came to the rescue by depositing a special loan of $4285 with the bank. In 1866 Joseph again gave financial assistance to the Banbury branch of the family when he lent his nephew Charles Gillett $4000 to increase his capital in the Banbury bank where Charles was now a partner. Two years later Charles received a further $2000 as a gift from his uncle plus a legacy of nearly $1000 on Joseph's death on 24 March 1870 at Houndshill, near Stratford upon Avon. 
The religious and kinship links by marriage between the Gillett and Gibbins families were further reinforced by the early joint business activities of the younger Joseph Gibbins and Joseph Ashby Gillett. This banking partnership between the brothers-in-law is illustrative of the close kinship network which typified the Quaker business world of the day. From this beginning Joseph Ashby Gillett went on to forge a successful career in the banking sector and he is undoubtedly an outstanding figure in the history of Gilletts Bank. While Joseph Gibbins held interests in manufacturing, he was most notable for his involvement in banking and in particular bank promotion. Indeed, Joseph Gibbins played a significant role in the establishment and growth of banking not only in Birmingham but also in south Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 65098


Thomas Poynings, second Lord Poynings (1349-1375), who was heir to his father's properties in Kent and Sussex, became a royal ward; he was coheir with his twelve-year-old brother, Richard ['see below'], to the property held by Kentish gavelkind tenure. Their mother Joan died on 16 May 1369, when her estates in Wiltshire and Buckinghamshire reverted to the Moleyns family. Thomas Poynings succeeded to his father's title, as second Lord Poynings, but died in June 1375 at the age of twenty-six, possibly in consequence of being immured for two years in a Castilian prison after he was captured in the sea battle of La Rochelle in 1372. There were no children of his marriage to Blanche, daughter of John (II) Mowbray, Lord Mowbray. Thomas was succeeded by his brother 


@@@@@


doc= 65099


Richard Poynings, third Baron Poynings (c.1355-1387), who went to Spain with John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, in 1386 (making a will at Plymouth, as the army prepared to sail, in which he made careful provision both for the payment of his debts and the future of his younger children), and died there on 25 May 1387. His wife was Isabel, daughter and heir of Robert Grey (Robert Fitzpayn), a younger son of Richard, Lord Grey of Codnor. 


@@@@@


doc= 65100


Robert Poynings (c.1419-1461). The second Robert's life was dominated by his struggle to acquire the Kentish manors of Tirlingham, Newington, Eastwell, and Westwood, which his father had settled on Eleanor (1428-1484), daughter of Robert's elder brother, Richard, and wife of Henry Percy, third earl of Northumberland and, by right of his wife, fifth Baron Poynings. Robert claimed these manors as heir by gavelkind. He also claimed Great Perching in Sussex. In the summer of 1450 he was one of a handful of gentry to join the Cade rebellion, apparently acting as Cade's carver and sword-bearer. He may have been motivated by another feud, this time with his stepbrother, William Crowmer (whose mother had been the fourth Lord Poynings's second wife), over the fourth Lord Poynings's moveables (Crowmer was a particular target of the rebels). Robert did not take out a pardon until 1457, in the meantime suffering outlawry and imprisonment, but this did not prevent him from sitting as MP for Sussex from October 1450 to May 1451. In 1458 he married Elizabeth (1429?-1487/8), daughter of Judge William Paston, with whom he had a son, Edward Poynings, the future lord deputy of Ireland. Robert was killed fighting for the Yorkists at the battle of St Albans on 17 February 1461. 


@@@@@


doc= 65160


Thomas Worthington (1826-1909), who was born on 11 April 1826 at Crescent Parade, Salford, Lancashire, the fourth of six sons of Thomas Worthington (1779-1842), a merchant of Manchester, and his second wife, Susanna (1792-1869), the daughter of Samuel Barton, a tallow chandler of Hackney. Thomas's twin sister died in infancy and a son of his father by a previous marriage died in 1827. The family were Unitarians and members of the historic Cross Street Chapel, Manchester. Thomas Worthington senior owned a warehouse in High Street, Manchester, then the spine of the city's cotton trade. His death in 1842 left the family impoverished, but Susanna owned property and maintained the family in a smaller house in Cheetham Hill, Manchester. Thomas was educated at the Unitarian school of Dr John R. Beard in Higher Broughton, Salford. At the age of fourteen he was articled for seven years to Henry Bowman and began to 'grind at the drill and routine of an Architect's training' (T. Worthington, 'Memories', 10). The Gothic style championed by A. W. N. Pugin was then at its height, and Bowman, a scholarly architect, published two books of carefully measured and drawn architectural plates: 'Specimens of Ecclesiastical Architecture' (1846) and, with J. S. Crowther, 'Churches of the Middle Ages' (1853). Worthington joined Bowman in 'church hunting' and also assisted in the preparation of plates. In 1844 he won the Royal Society of Arts gold medal for a finely drawn design of a Gothic chancel, and two years later the silver medal essay prize of the Institute of Architects. He was introduced to William Tite, an architect practising on a national scale, who offered him 'a berth'. On completing his articles, Worthington joined Tite's office. For some months he worked from Carlisle on railway projects until a financial crash halted investment and his employment. 
In February 1848 Worthington set out with a Mancunian friend, Henry Darbishire, on a tour of the continent with the aim of seeing Rome and the colourful architecture of northern Italy, then attracting popular attention. Sketching 'en route' (Worthington was a talented watercolour painter), in mid-March they reached Rome, where, apart from a walking tour to Assisi and Perugia, they remained until late May. Worthington then continued alone to Naples and Paestum before returning north to the cities of Tuscany. He arrived home in October with a first-hand knowledge of Italian Gothic and Renaissance architecture which he had recorded in sketchbooks and to which he later referred when in practice. In his memoirs, written fifty years later, Worthington summarized the diary and notes kept during his tour. 
Tite advised Worthington to establish his own practice in Manchester and, after gaining experience of quantity surveying, in 1849 he opened an office in King Street, a prime location in the city. He received commissions for houses in developing residential areas and submitted a design in the competition for a building to house the Great Exhibition of 1851. Though unsuccessful, his entry was noticed by the architectural commissioners and he was appointed secretary to the Manchester local committee for the exhibition; he declined a London appointment, astutely choosing to represent the interests of exhibitors from Lancashire and Yorkshire. 
By 1850 the need to improve the living conditions of the poor was widely recognized. Through his Unitarian inheritance, Worthington actively participated in voluntary societies promoting reform. Foremost was the Manchester Statistical Society, national in the range of its inquiries and the first of its kind in the country. Worthington contributed to its investigations and published two papers in its annual transactions. Housing reform was most conspicuous among his social interests; his first Statistical Society paper was on 'Homes for the poor' ('Transactions', 1860-61), and in 1866, by invitation of Lord Shaftesbury, he lectured on housing to the Social Sciences Association, then meeting in Manchester. His appointment as architect to a charitable body two years later enabled him to realize his ideas. When abroad he had noticed the widespread use of urban tenements, and this and the improved health produced by model housing schemes in London led him to propose multi-storey blocks combining improved facilities with a more humane character. On a congested Salford site he built two four-storey blocks with adequately ventilated dwellings of varied size, each including a scullery, rubbish chute, and WC compartment. Although built economically, and a notable improvement on other contemporary models, Worthington's more generous example was not followed, but in other fields he proved more influential. As architect to a company founded to provide public laundries, baths, and swimming pools in needy areas of Manchester and Salford, between 1855 and 1860 he completed three projects, each meeting different functions and incorporating improvements progressively. These were typologically important and became influential through the technical press. Copies of drawings were purchased for use abroad. 
Less innovative conceptually but of wider significance was Worthington's work on hospital design. From 1858 Florence Nightingale's 'Notes on Hospitals' promoted a vigorous campaign to improve hospital design, mainly by introducing the pavilion principle, which reduced cross-infection by locating airy wards in isolated, cross-ventilated, widely spaced parallel blocks. In Manchester this principle was strongly supported by the Statistical Society, and when in 1862 the building of a new hospital was proposed for the Chorlton Union at Withington, Worthington was entrusted with the design. It contained 480 beds in five three-storey blocks and closely followed the new principles. In 1865 the design was published, and a letter of 23 July 1865 from Miss Nightingale comments that, if the estimated costs were achieved, the hospital would 'set up a model to the whole country' (Pass, 91). Worthington presented a paper on the project to the Statistical Society ('Transactions', 1866-7), and as a pamphlet the design was circulated to all boards of guardians and to centres in Europe and the colonies. Miss Nightingale's forecast was fulfilled and Worthington's reputation was established. 
Worthington's general practice expanded simultaneously with the social projects. In 1862 he was invited to prepare designs for a 'receptacle' in which to house and display a newly commissioned commemorative statue of Prince Albert. His design, a richly decorated Italian Gothic ciborium, received royal approval and preceded G. G. Scott's similar memorial designed for Kensington Gardens, London. Early in 1863 the newly created space was named Albert Square, and the memorial, placed at its centre, became the focal point of the emerging prime civic space of the city. 
A pronounced Italian influence is evident in much of Worthington's architecture. In 1858 he made a second Italian tour concentrating on the Veneto, the inspiration of which is reflected in the handsome memorial hall (which commemorated the deposition of dissenting clergy in 1662), completed in 1866, also in Albert Square. Stylistically, Worthington was a versatile pluralist, equally at ease with the Renaissance palazzo mode as with Venetian Gothic. He also had a flair for English Gothic, which he used in his designs for a number of Unitarian chapels in the Manchester area. A fine, soaring example is Brookfield Unitarian Chapel, Gorton (1871). For his last major commission, Manchester College, Oxford, Worthington looked back to the Perpendicular style he had studied as a pupil. Uncharacteristically, it is ill-suited to its context, but in central Manchester he used the eclectic high Victorian Gothic vocabulary skilfully, and in his police and magistrates' courts in Minshull Street (1868-72) he produced a masterpiece of urban design. 
On 10 April 1863 Worthington had married Elizabeth Ann Scott (1835-1870) of Stourbridge, Worcestershire, and he later built Fieldhead, a house where they lived at Crumpsall, a suburb of north Manchester. Four children, including Percy Scott Worthington ['see below'], were born there, and in 1869 the family moved to Broomfield, Alderley Edge, an attractive house that Worthington had designed in 1847. Elizabeth died shortly after the birth of their fifth child, a son. On 10 October 1873 Worthington married Edith Emma Swanwick (1847-1942), the 26-year-old daughter of a friend. The family increased by six more children, the youngest of whom was Hubert Worthington ['see below']. 
Worthington served as president of the Manchester Society of Architects in 1875, as vice-president of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) from 1885 to 1889, and as president of the Royal Manchester Institution; in 1881-2 he led the negotiations for the transfer of its fine building and modest art collection to Manchester corporation with the proviso that the corporation would spend $2000 annually for twenty-five years on expanding the art collection. Manchester gained a distinguished art gallery, and the funding laid the foundation of the modern collection. 
From 1895 Worthington largely withdrew from the practice and in 1906 his connection was formally dissolved. His interest in architecture remained undimmed and his son Hubert recalled that when he was an architectural student his father could hardly be stopped from taking a hand in his entries for student competitions. Just over 6 feet tall, he had 'a noble head and figure with his snowy white hair and beard and his fresh complexion' (J. H. Worthington, 8). Thomas Worthington died peacefully at Broomfield on 9 November 1909 and was buried in the graveyard of the Unitarian chapel at Dean Row, Wilmslow, where the family had worshipped. 



@@@@@


doc= 65171


(William) Edward Barnsley (1900-1987), designer and craftsman, were born at Pinbury Park on 3 October 1896 and 17 February 1900 respectively. Family life was simple but sociable, despite the fact that their mother had been deaf since the age of nineteen. Looking back, Edward felt that he would have liked to have seen more of 'Big Uncle' as they called Gimson, but the feud made that difficult. As a girl Grace was taught to paint pottery by Alfred and Louise Powell who lived in Oakridge nearby, Alfred an architect in the Gimson-Barnsley mould, Louise a skilful embroiderer and calligrapher. Together, the Powells developed a graceful leafy style of painting on pottery and worked for many years in collaboration with Wedgwoods at Stoke-on-Trent. The young Edward, as one might expect, learned woodworking from his father. 
In 1910 the children were sent to school at Bedales in Hampshire, whose progressive ethos matched that of the arts and crafts movement; Gimson and Alfred Powell both had connections with the school. In 1914 Grace attended Birmingham Municipal School of Art, and by 1916 she was decorating Wedgwood pottery with delicate patterns of flowers and foliage in the manner of the Powells. She worked in this way during the 1920s and 1930s, though she was never directly employed by the firm. Her brother was not so sure what he should do after school, partly because his father told him he could never earn a living as a furniture maker. In 1919 he was apprenticed to Geoffrey Lupton, an idealistic Old Bedalian who worked as a builder round Petersfield; with Lupton, Edward Barnsley spent about a year helping to build the new library at Bedales, which had been designed by Gimson. He learned more from this than he did from the year he then spent at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in London. In 1923 Lupton asked Edward to take over his joinery workshop at Froxfield, which he did; and in 1925 Lupton offered it for sale. Sidney Barnsley bought the property for his son and thus settled that Edward should, after all, do what his father had done. On 12 December the same year Edward married Tatiana Hedvig (Tania) Kellgren, and they left the church under an archway of handsaws. 
The Barnsley brothers were still working at Sapperton, though by 1924 the effort of woodworking had become too much for Sidney. Gimson had died in 1919, and his work was handsomely celebrated in a memorial volume, which made only passing mention of the Barnsleys. Sidney Barnsley was philosophical about the book, but in truth the record had been distorted. The whole Cotswold project had depended on the skills of sociable, business-like Ernest Barnsley, while in their ideals for architecture and the crafts, Gimson and Sidney Barnsley were twin spirits. Part of Gimson's achievement was the creation of a tradition of neo-rural designing and making, and that was also the Barnsleys' achievement. Ernest Barnsley died in Sapperton on 6 January 1926 and Sidney some months later, on 25 September. They were buried with Gimson in the churchyard at Sapperton. About 300 of Sidney Barnsley's drawings for architecture and furniture, together with a drawing by Edward Barnsley and photographs by Herbert Barnsley of the Barnsleys' homes and work, are at Cheltenham Art Gallery and Museum, Gloucestershire. 
On 3 March 1926, between her uncle's and her father's death, Grace Barnsley married Oscar Caradock Davies ('b'. 'c'.1894), son of the rector of Sapperton, who was an officer in the merchant navy. They were not ready to set up a home of their own, and Grace lived with her mother for some years at various addresses while working at her pottery. In the workshop at Froxfield, Edward Barnsley was doing joinery work for Geoffrey Lupton, and beginning to produce handmade furniture in the Gimson-Barnsley style. Like Gimson, he worked mainly as a designer, employing seven craftsmen; though he was a good craftsman himself, he was always anxious to acknowledge their skill. His life was not an idyll of rural craftsmanship, as his father's and Gimson's were supposed to be, for he had almost no money. It was a long struggle to earn his living as a furniture maker. Warm-hearted and a little naive, Edward Barnsley was also insecure and prone to long bouts of depression. He believed in craftsmanship as a way of life, but was uneasy with his men in the workshop. He was happiest of all when walking alone in the Lake District. At home he preferred the solitary dialogue of writing letters, or working in the garden of the cottage where he and Tania lived, next to the workshop. They had two children, Karin ('b'. 1927) and Jon ('b'. 1930), who became an architect. 
In 1934 Grace and Oscar Davies were finally able to settle at Rainham in Kent. They opened a cafe where they sold the products of the local Upchurch Pottery, and Wedgwood wares which Grace continued to decorate. In 1938 they took over Upchurch, renaming it the Roeginga Pottery, and here they produced sturdy earthenwares, some of which Grace decorated with floral patterns. These ventures were, however, cut short in 1939; the war brought Grace's career as a pottery decorator to an end. 
In 1938 Edward Barnsley was appointed design adviser at the East Midlands Training College in Loughborough. Growing up in a little workshop world, he had not thought to look much beyond it; but now he went to Loughborough regularly to talk to the students about making and designing. This brought in a steady if small income. He felt at ease with the trainee teachers and over the next twenty-five years built up a tradition of craft skills at the college. Then, during the Second World War, he was drawn into craft politics and all the difficulties of creating a public face for the crafts. He was involved in the campaign which led, in 1950, to the establishment of the Crafts Centre of Great Britain with its London showroom in Hay Hill, Mayfair, and in attempts in the 1960s to create a craft quango, like the Arts Council and the Council of Industrial Design. It is hard to say whether all his letter-writing, the long committee meetings in London, and the late trains home advanced the cause, but he was driven to them by his belief in craftsmanship. And they were a stretching of his abilities, an exercise of the middle years. 
There were changes in the Edward Barnsley workshop after the war. Bert Upton, who had worked in aircraft production, was appointed foreman and was eager to use more woodworking machinery. Barnsley was unhappy with this development, but the savings made by machinery, especially in the preparation of wood, were too great to be resisted, especially after mains electricity reached Froxfield in the mid-1950s. And Barnsley himself introduced changes. In 1944 he had been struck by the wood-engraver John Farleigh saying that craftspeople had grown too severe and sad, that they should try to catch the temper of the times. His work never ceased to be, like his father's, a celebration of wood and workmanship, but his designs of the 1950s were lighter, looking more to eighteenth-century models. 
Through all this Edward Barnsley held to the values of William Morris and the arts and crafts movement. He was delighted in the 1960s and 1970s with the growing historical interest in Gimson and the Barnsleys: more long letters, more working over the difficult and fruitful past. But, on the other hand, he was dismayed when craft began to be whimsical and think of itself as fine art. This trend became obvious at the 'Craftsman's Art' exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1973; at the opening, Edward Barnsley could be found elsewhere in the museum, consoling himself with the eighteenth century. 
Grace Davies ('nee' Barnsley) died in Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, on 6 March 1975, and was buried in Petersfield, Hampshire. By that time it was becoming increasingly difficult for Edward Barnsley to run his workshop. His clients and admirers were concerned that the workshop might close down, and in 1980 the Edward Barnsley Educational Trust was established to run an apprenticeship scheme within the workshop; it now owns and runs the workshop as well. As he became more vague and forgetful, it distressed him to be where he had worked for so many years. He spent the last months of his life in a hospital in Portsmouth, the dogged, self-critical, generous, and always striving spirit cancelled out for much of the time by Alzheimer's disease. Edward Barnsley died on 2 December 1987 and his ashes were buried in his parents' grave in the churchyard at Sapperton. 


@@@@@


doc= 65286


Timothy Thomas (1753-1821), Particular Baptist minister for forty-seven years at the Devonshire Square church in Bishopsgate, London. Following his marriage to Sarah, daughter of Hugh Evans, president of the Bristol Baptist Academy, he became chairman of the Particular Baptist Fund and a member of the London Education Society, which in turn became the Stepney College and latterly Regent's Park College. He was buried at Bunhill Fields, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 65292


Christopher Sykes (1831-1898), younger brother of the second Sir Tatton Sykes, reacted to his father's bullying by joining the 'swells' of London society in the 1850s. He was born at Sledmere on 10 January 1831, and was educated at Rugby School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, which he entered in 1848 but left without graduating. Never marrying, he became a man of fashion (and a snob), and was a connoisseur of books, china, and furniture. From 1865 to 1868 he was Conservative MP for Beverley, and represented the East Riding of Yorkshire from 1868 to 1885, and the Buckrose constituency of the East Riding from 1886 to 1892. During his long parliamentary career he made only six speeches. His one intervention of note was his 1869 bill for the preservation of seabirds (which were being slaughtered by shooters off the east coast); this earned him the sobriquet the Gull's Friend. 


@@@@@


doc= 65293


Ellen Maria Nicholson Shenton (bap. 1828, d. 1859), also a sculptor. She exhibited Byronic, biblical, and Shakespearian subjects at the Royal Academy between 1850 and 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 65397


William Kennedy (1859-1918) joined him. Kennedy was born on 17 July 1859 at 89 Hospital Street, Glasgow, the son of John Kennedy, master baker, and his wife, Lillian, 'nee' Shedden. He studied at Paisley School of Art and possibly also at Glasgow School of Art, probably at the evening classes. From 1880 to 1885 he spent much of his time in France, studying in Paris under William-Adolphe Bouguereau and A. F. Fleury and later working with Bastien-Lepage, L. J. R. Collin, and Gustave Courtois. By 1884 he was painting in a proficient naturalist manner, as in, for example, 'Spring' (1884; Paisley Museum and Art Gallery), and making drawings and taking photographs of French peasants at work in the fields, which were later translated into paintings. On his return to Scotland he settled near Stirling, where he was attracted by the army camps in Queen's Park. For the rest of his life the daily routine of the military, not its grand set-piece pageants, became his principal subject matter, painted in a much more immediate and colourful manner than his earlier naturalist paintings. Examples include 'In the Cooking Trenches', 'Waiting to Mount Guard', 'The Canteen -- Mid-Day', all exhibited at the Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts in the 1890s. Although never so united in drawing up a constitution as the contemporary New English Art Club in London, the Glasgow Boys, when they did toy with a formal association around 1887, proposed Kennedy as president. The venture was short-lived, however, and never had any real meaning in the development of the school. On 21 September 1898 Kennedy married Helena Fife Scott (Lena) ('b'. 1867/8), also a painter, and soon they began to pay extensive visits to Berkshire, where Kennedy underwent a change of style and subject matter, much influenced by the rural charm of its gentle villages. Kennedy's health caused him to settle in 1912 in Tangier, where Lavery had a house and where he died on 11 December 1918. He was buried in the British section of Tangier cemetery. 
Many of the key naturalist works of the school were painted by the three members of the third group, James Guthrie (1859-1930), Edward Arthur Walton (1860-1922), and 


@@@@@


doc= 65398


Edward Hugh Sothern (1859-1933), born in New Orleans on 12 June 1859 -- his father called him a 'handsome little creole' -- who made his mark independently of his father. He was educated in England and made his stage debut in an American production of 'Brother Sam' in a minor role; his father, in a letter to Lucy Derby Fuller in October 1879, wrote: 'Eddy, my second son, is at the Boston Museum, playing very small parts by my advice.... I wish him to commence at the bottom of the ladder' (E. H. Sothern, 32). He was somewhat shorter than his father and rather thin lipped, but dark haired and good-looking. After touring in the USA and England, he was engaged by Daniel Frohman at his Lyceum Theatre in New York, and for the remainder of his career he was associated with the New York theatre, though he toured occasionally in Britain. He began to make his mark in heroic, romantic roles such as that of Prince Rudolph in 'The Prisoner of Zenda' (1895), but he also showed a flair for romantic comedy, most notably as the lovesick auctioneer in 'The Highest Bidder' (1887). William Winter remained convinced that 'the realm in which he has most naturally, and therefore most freely, moved, is that in which light comedy is commingled with romance' (W. Winter, 'Vagrant Memories', 1915, 432). It was during this period, in 1896, that Sothern met and married his first wife, the actress Virginia Harned (1872-1946). 


@@@@@


doc= 65405


Johann Kerseboom (d. 1708), painter, initially worked in Germany before coming to England in the 1680s with his uncle. Johann's early portrait of 'Lady Grace Carteret' (Petworth House, Sussex) was engraved by John Smith. His portrait of the 'Electress Sophia Dorothea' is known from an engraving by William Faithorne (impression, BM), who also executed six mezzotints after Johann Kerseboom's works. 


@@@@@


doc= 65444


Hakon Paulsson (d. c.1126) eventually went into exile in Sweden leaving Erlend and his sons ruling Orkney. It is said in 'Longer Magnus Saga' that Magnus, in his early manhood, kept evil company with viking marauders, participating in their plunder and killings, but his eulogy in 'Orkneyinga Saga' says he was 'hard and unsparing towards robbers and vikings. He put to death the many men who plundered the bonder [farmers] and common people' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 45). It is difficult to get any realistic impression of the character of Orkney's national saint through the standard hagiographical descriptions. He was: 'a man of extraordinary distinction, tall, with a fine intelligent look about him... a man of strict virtue, successful in war, wise, eloquent, generous and magnanimous, open-handed with money and sound with advice, and altogether the most popular of men. ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 45)' The events that took place during the first major military expedition to the west of Magnus Barelegs, king of Norway, in 1098 were as portentous for Magnus Erlendsson as for his father and uncle, Paul and Erlend, who were deprived of their power and sent to Norway, where they died. Magnus and his brother Erling, along with their cousin Hakon (who, according to 'Orkneyinga Saga', was responsible for encouraging King Magnus to embark on this conquering expedition) were taken into the king's 'hird' ('war-band') -- Magnus being made cup-bearer -- and accompanied the raiding expedition through the Hebrides to north Wales. There, at the battle of Menai Strait against Hugh de Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury, Magnus acted directly against the interest of his overlord and did not participate in the battle. A key tradition in the later cult depicts him refusing to leave the central 'room' in the king's ship, and reading from his psalter he remained there throughout the ensuing battle. He naturally earned the king's displeasure and wisely slipped away from the ship one night, as it was anchored off the Scottish coast. He is said to have spent some years in exile at the court of the Scottish king, with a bishop in Wales (or maybe Cumbria), and with friends in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 65458


John Prinsep (1746-1830) and his wife, Sophia Elizabeth Auriol (1760-1850), sister of James Peter Auriol, secretary to the government of Warren Hastings, whom he married in Calcutta in 1782. Having gone out to India as a military cadet in 1771, John Prinsep had resigned the military service immediately and made a considerable fortune in trade. He trafficked chiefly in indigo, of which industry he may be regarded as the founder, and introduced into Bengal the printing of cotton fabrics. He returned to England in 1787 and settled at Thoby Priory in Essex; he was MP for Queenborough (1802-6) and an alderman of the city of London. He published in 1789 'A Review of the Trade of the East India Company', and this was followed by pamphlets on the cultivation of sugar cane in Bengal and on other East Indian topics. In his later life, after considerable losses in trade, his city influence procured his appointment as bailiff to the court of the borough of Southwark, with a salary of $1500 a year. 


@@@@@


doc= 65464


Roger Curtis Acton (1827-1906), eldest son and second child of the above, was born in Exeter and trained there as a journalist under Thomas Latimer, the crusading editor of the radical 'Western Times'. He later joined the staff of the 'Illustrated London News'. Loyal to his inherited liberalism, in 1860 Acton published (and dedicated to Lord John Russell) a translation of a work by Conte Terenzio Mamiani della Rovere, entitled 'Rights of Nations, or, The New Law of European States', which set out a clear doctrine of national sovereignty. Acton's contributions to the 'Illustrated London News' cannot be traced, but his general area of responsibility is suggested by subsequent publications. In 1869 he provided the narrative history for an account, separately published by the 'Illustrated London News', of the British Abyssinian expedition of 1868 and the life and reign of King Theodore which it ended. An early member of the Royal Colonial Institute (later the Royal Empire Society), he published a descriptive sketch of British possessions in 'Our Colonial Empire' (1881), and in 1899 produced 'The Transvaal Boer Speaking for Himself', an abridged translation of a history of the southern African republic by C. N. J. du Plessis (1836-1928). Acton died in Hale, Cheshire, on 2 March 1906 of broncho-pneumonia and heart failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 65480


Mary Bannister (d. 1877), equestrian performer, worked at the Olympic circus in Leeds where, in 1818, she regularly introduced displays of swordsmanship while on horseback; in addition she advertised lessons in the art of riding to ladies by appointment. She later performed for several seasons at Covent Garden, London, and in pantomime with the celebrated tightrope dancer Thomas Wilson, whom she subsequently married before retiring from the circus in 1832. She died in Camberwell, London, on 20 November 1877 and was buried at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 65481


S. Bannister (b. 1787), equestrian performer and tightrope dancer, was with the equestrian troupe at Stamford in 1804 and in later tours of northern England and Scotland. After her father's business failed she worked at Astley's Amphitheatre, where she was principal equestrian on John Conway Philip Astley's death in October 1821. She remained at the amphitheatre under its new proprietor, William Davis, and was then described by the manager, Charles Dibdin, as possessing 'on the rope and on the horse much celebrity'. She married Edward Wilson; details of her date and place of death are unknown. James Bannister's second daughter, 


@@@@@


doc= 65482


Mary Ann Martin, Lady Martin (1817-1884), mission worker, shared this faith. She was born in London on 5 July 1817, the daughter of William Parker, Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Ann. Her sister married John Meadows Rodwell, the oriental scholar and her father's successor at Bishopsgate. Although she was an invalid throughout her life, this did not stop her acquiring a good education, being cheerful and enterprising, marrying Martin, and joining him in New Zealand in 1842, the year after his arrival there. She settled at Taurarua (Judges Bay, Auckland) and busied herself in setting up a hospital for the Maori, running classes for them and for Europeans, and with religious work. With Sarah Selwyn and Caroline Abraham, she was known as one of the 'three graces' who followed George Selwyn. She was convinced of the need to enlighten the Maori, but treated them with deep respect, regard, and liking, and was privately very critical of European ignorance of their customs. Having returned to England with her husband in 1874 she died on 2 January 1884 at Waldon Hill House, Torquay. Her experiences are described in her book 'Our Maoris' (1884). 


