@@@@@


doc= 67390


Charlton, Francis (bap. 1639, d. 1698), politician and conspirator, was baptized on 16 May 1639 at Wellington, Shropshire, the son of Francis Charlton of Apley Castle, Shropshire (died 1642), and his wife, Mary (died 1661), the daughter of Osmary Hill. This younger Francis Charlton of Apley Castle, treasurer of the Rye House plotters in 1683 and an 'important though shadowy figure' in the world of late Stuart radical politics, is not to be confused with his relative and namesake Sir Francis Charlton of Whitton Court, Shropshire, MP in 1679, 1681, and 1685, who acted consistently in the court interest (Jones, 191). 
Charlton came from a gentry family settled in Shropshire since the fourteenth century. His strongly puritan father died in 1642, and to protect the inheritance of the young boy and his older sisters -- Mary ('bap'. 1631) and Margaret, later Baxter (bap. 1636, d. 1681) ['see under 'Baxter, Richard] -- in the midst of civil war his mother married again; her second husband was Robert Hanmer, a local royalist. The house and estate were nevertheless plundered by both sides, and the family fled to Essex. In 1655 at the age of sixteen Charlton married, possibly against his mother's wishes, Dorothy St John (died 1689), daughter of Oliver St John, fifth Baron St John of Bletso, and a son, John, was born the following year. Probably in connection with this marriage Charlton waged a bitter struggle with his mother to gain control of the estate: he expected her to pay his debts, while she saw herself as fulfilling the terms of her husband's will in protecting the interests of her daughters. He called her a liar and threatened legal action, in July 1658 earning a truly biblical rebuke for this sin of filial disrespect from his future brother-in-law, the formidable puritan divine Richard Baxter, who married Margaret Charlton four years later. At some point, Charlton lost the use of one leg, and was known in adult life as 'Lame Charlton' and even 'One-legged Charlton' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 496; Haley, 520). 
In 1665 Charlton's politics were still sufficiently loyal for him to be made sheriff of Shropshire, but by the 1670s he was consorting closely with his cousin Anthony Ashley Cooper, the first earl of Shaftesbury. During the earl's first imprisonment in the Tower in 1677-8 Charlton and his son, John, were among his most frequent visitors. As a close adviser to the earl Charlton then became deeply involved in the Popish Plot and exclusion crises. By his own admission he paid $400 to Titus Oates 'for subsistence', and helped establish the credibility of another informer, Stephen Dugdale. He took a leading part in organizing and presenting the January 1680 'monster petition' urging closer investigation of the plot, paid for the printing of several thousand copies of pamphlets attacking the duke of York and supporting the duke of Monmouth's claim to legitimacy, and with Shaftesbury and Lord Herbert of Cherbury was one of three leading whigs who were made freemen of the important Skinners' Company of London in 1681. Government plans to put Shaftesbury on trial later that year were hampered by the expectation that Charlton would probably be foreman of any jury that was empanelled. Charlton was also important as a link between Shaftesbury and the duke of Monmouth's camp. He dined regularly with the duke, was often in the company of the latter's man of business Sir Thomas Armstrong, and was prominent among the midlands gentry who attended Monmouth in his quasi-royal tour of the area in September 1681, but neither he nor Armstrong could dispel the suspicion and mistrust which prevented any co-operation between their two principals. 
Charlton's main role, however, was as treasurer to Shaftesbury's whigs. He received at least $600 from the earl, contributed unknown sums of his own, and collected small donations of up to $5 apiece from fifty-six prominent whigs. One conspirator believed he handled as much as $3000. He spent the money subsidizing plot informers and conspirators such as Oates and Robert Ferguson, printing anti-court literature, and, more dangerously, ordering about two dozen muskets and other arms. He allegedly undertook to arm and mount the proposed band of forty Rye House assassins; and there was improbable talk of his raising $10,000 to finance a Scottish rebellion by the duke of Argyll, to coincide with Shaftesbury's last desperate schemes. He did contribute $1500 towards the earl's bail in 1681. When he was arrested in August 1683 an intimate of the duke of York argued that though Charlton was not actually one of the Rye House plotters, yet he supplied them with money and arms and 'was privie to all', and should therefore be very closely questioned ('CSP dom.', 'July-September 1683', 249). The privy council examined four of his servants, questioned other plotters, searched his house, and subjected Charlton to two interrogations in the presence of the king, but no substantial charges could be proven and he was released with other prisoners early in 1684. He continued to meet with some discontented whigs, but though he was contacted before the 1685 uprising he refused to participate and fled to the Netherlands, where for some time he adopted a disguise. An arrest warrant was nevertheless issued for him, and he was excepted from the 1686 general pardon of rebels. 
Charlton returned to England after the 1688 revolution but gained no favour from William, and in 1691 he was reduced to offering to discover Jacobite sympathizers in the north of England. His son, John, flourished, however, becoming a surveyor-general in the Ordnance office and in 1701 a deputy lieutenant for Middlesex. Besides his son, Charlton had two daughters, one of whom died in 1683. His wife, Dorothy, died in 1689, nine years before his own death from unknown causes in 1698. 


@@@@@


doc= 67391


Dyson, (Barbara) Ruth (1917-1997), keyboard player, was born on 28 March 1917 at 5 St Mark's Square, St Pancras, London, the only child of Ernest Andrews Dyson (1884-1979), a doctor, from Sheffield, then serving as captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps, and his wife, Minnie, 'nee' Cornish, sister of Dr Sidney Cornish, a general practitioner in Dorking, Surrey, and -- after the First World War -- Dr Dyson's partner. She spent her childhood and most of her adult life in Dorking. She was educated at home, and in 1935 entered the Royal College of Music, where she studied the piano with Angus Morrison, the violin with W. H. Reed, and harmony with Herbert Howells. 
At the Royal College Dyson was inspired by Kathleen Long's playing of Arne's sonata no. 3 on the piano, and became interested in the collection of old keyboard instruments in the college museum. She first played the harpsichord and clavichord at the Dorking home of the musicologist Susanne (Susi) Jeans, and she acquired a spinet, made by Robert Goble, a former assistant of Arnold Dolmetsch. On 15 November 1941 she made her Wigmore Hall debut on the piano, with the London Women's String Orchestra; her programme included the concerto no. 5 in G minor by Thomas Arne, a composer whose work she was to perform often on the harpsichord. During the Second World War she taught music to children at the War Evacuation Day Nursery in Dorking; her settings of poems written by Rose Fyleman for the children were later published as 'Playgames' (1955). She worked for the Red Cross at Dorking General Hospital as an auxiliary nurse, and toured hospitals, army camps, and factories for the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts (CEMA) as part of the Le Fevre Piano Quartet. 
After the war Dyson developed a career both as a harpsichordist and a pianist, playing concertos with many of the leading orchestras. As a harpsichordist she specialized in the English baroque repertory, especially the works of John Blow, while several contemporary English composers writing for early keyboard instruments, including Alan Ridout, dedicated works to her. Her collection of instruments grew to include a clavichord by Thomas Goff, virginals by Derek Adlam, and a double harpsichord by Michael Johnson. 
On 2 May 1964 Dyson married Edward Eastaway Thomas (1918-1996), a research officer with the joint intelligence bureau until 1970 and one of the team that produced 'British Intelligence in the Second World War' (1971-88). He was the son of Julian Thomas, government auditor, and a nephew of the poet Edward Thomas. Through her husband Dyson acquired a stepson and a stepdaughter. She taught at the Royal College of Music from 1961, and in 1964 she was appointed professor of harpsichord and piano, and lecturer in the history of early keyboard instruments, reflecting the growing enthusiasm for the harpsichord; her pupils included Robert Woolley and Melvyn Tan. She became a fellow of the Royal College of Music in 1980, and continued to teach there until 1987, writing the entry on the history of the piano for the 'New Oxford Companion to Music' (1983). 
Dyson toured extensively for the British Council, giving many recitals in Europe, mainly of English music; she lectured in fluent German to the Telemann Society in Hamburg in 1963 and in French to the world forum of the harpsichord in Paris in 1976, and she represented the United Kingdom as an adjudicator at the Bruges International Festival in 1972. She also made many recordings for the BBC archives on instruments from the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Colt clavier collection, and the Royal College of Music museum of instruments, while on her own modern instruments she recorded the complete works of Herbert Howells for the clavichord, to celebrate his ninetieth birthday in 1982. In the 1980s and 1990s she made recordings with the singer and harpsichordist Peter Medhurst, including an album of Schubert songs recorded at the Colt collection and 'For Two to Play' (1988), a recording of all the double-harpsichord works written up to the time of Mozart. She continued to give recitals with Peter Medhurst until the year of her death. To mark her long association with the BBC a seventieth-birthday recital, 'Dyson's Delight', was broadcast in 1987. 
Dyson also played an important part in the musical life of Surrey. Ralph Vaughan Williams was her father's patient, and as a girl she often took part in haymaking and tea parties organized by 'Uncle Ralph'. At the age of five she participated in one of the first children's days in the Leith Hill Musical Festival, founded in 1905 as a competitive festival for local choirs and conducted by Vaughan Williams every year until 1953; she traced her love of Bach to hearing Harold Samuel play on that occasion. Her father was a member of the committee from 1930 and chief hall steward from 1944 to 1960, and she herself helped informally as one of the 'nymphs' before the war. She was a member of the committee from 1946 to 1962 and from 1977 to 1979, before her election as a vice-president in 1981. Vaughan Williams was a very important influence in her development as a musician. For many years after the war she played among the second violins in the festival orchestra, serving as orchestra librarian from 1948 to 1960, and from 1968 to 1995 she played the harpsichord continuo in the annual performances of Bach's 'St Matthew passion' given by members of the participating choirs. Her final appearance at the Leith Hill festival was in 1995, when she played Walter Leigh's concertino for harpsichord and strings in one of the evening concerts. She also became a friend of the Dolmetsch family, appearing regularly at the Haslemere festival from 1979 and as a tutor at the Dolmetsch summer schools. 
Much loved by her wide circle of friends and colleagues, Ruth Dyson was very hard working and very professional. She died, of a heart attack, at the Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, Surrey, on the final day of the 1997 Dolmetsch summer school, 16 August. Survived by her stepson and stepdaughter, she was buried at St Martin's Church, Dorking. She left her library and most of her instruments to the Royal College of Music. 


@@@@@


doc= 67392


Campbell, Sir George, of Cessnock (fl. 1671-1704), conspirator, was the eldest of four sons of Sir Hugh Campbell (d. 1686) and his wife, Elizabeth, younger daughter and coheir of George Campbell, master of Loudoun. In 1665 he married Lady Anna McMurran (McMoran, McMouran), heir of a Fife estate, with whom he had five children. As substantial contributors to the parish kirk at Galston, Ayrshire, Sir George and his father petitioned the privy council in December 1671 for seats proportional to their contributions. Like his father, Sir George refused to sign a bond pledging not to support conventicles, for which he was outlawed in February 1678. Accused of aiding the covenanter ministers Donald Cargill and John Welsh, the Campbells denied the charge and were absolved. Sir George and his father reputedly provided 400 lances to the Bothwell Bridge rebels in the spring of 1679. 
Three years later the Campbells became involved with other supporters of the earl of Argyll in discussions about a possible insurrection. On 28 April 1682 Alexander Monro of Bearcrofts wrote to Sir George Campbell about a plan to establish a Scottish colony; originally the intent had been to situate it in New York, but the focus was now on Carolina. Sir John Cochrane and Sir George were invited to London to participate in negotiations with the earl of Shaftesbury. By August they had reached an agreement and obtained King Charles's approval (15 August), probably because he shared Hamilton's belief that the colony would attract Scottish dissidents. Argyll was also in London, meeting secretly with Shaftesbury, apparently seeking funds to support a rebellion in Scotland. Sir George and his father were probably working with Argyll by this time. In late January or early February 1683 the duke of Monmouth, Algernon Sidney, John Hampden, and their fellow conspirators sent Aaron Smith to Scotland to invite the Campbells, Cochrane, Monro, and other Argyll supporters to London to explore the possibility of joint insurrections. The Scots arrived in April and May on the pretext of discussing the Carolina colony. Sir George conferred with the plotter Robert Ferguson, and both Campbells met with William Carstares, one of Argyll's agents, who was himself in contact with Ferguson. Distrustful of the English, the Campbells opposed an alliance with Monmouth. Argyll's supporters were still trying to raise money when the government learned of the Rye House plotting. The tangled skein of conspiracies soon led to the Campbells, who were arrested on 26 June. 
Taken to Scotland with his father in September, Sir George Campbell remained in prison without trial until 1685, when he and his father were charged in the Scottish parliament with complicity in plotting an insurrection. After they threw themselves on King James's mercy, he spared their lives, though their estates were annexed and entrusted to Viscount Melfort. Released from prison with his father in August 1685, Sir George was reconfined in October after Cochrane confessed. He was liberated again in January 1686. Following the revolution of 1688, Sir George was appointed justice clerk with a pension of $400 p.a. (December 1689), commissioner of the excise in Ayrshire (January 1690), and sheriff of Ayrshire (June 1690). As a member of the privy council he attended fifty-six meetings in 1690, but only sixteen the following year owing to ill health. Secretary of state James Johnston forced his resignation as justice clerk in 1693. Sir George was again appointed to the privy council in 1696 and 1698. Although parliament had restored his estate in 1690, he was heavily in debt by the late 1690s. His date of death is uncertain: possibly in 1704, though he may still have been alive as late as 1710. No sons survived him; his daughter and heir, Margaret, married in 1697 Alexander Hume, later Alexander Hume Campbell, second earl of Marchmont, to whom she carried the paternal estate in 1729. 


@@@@@


doc= 67393


Elliot, John Herbert (1918-1997), television scriptwriter and producer, was born on 4 July 1918 at 122 Castle Hill, Reading, the son of Herbert Benbow Elliot (1890-1965), then serving as a captain in the eleventh battalion of the tank corps, later a businessman, and his wife, Isabel Louisa, 'nee' Palmer (1889-1969). He was educated at Berkhamsted School and was reading English literature at King's College, London, when the Second World War was declared. He registered as a conscientious objector but subsequently volunteered for the Royal Army Medical Corps. As a corporal he was involved in the evacuation from Dunkirk. He later served in the Middle East and South Asia, and, having been commissioned, served as public relations officer for the commander-in-chief, Ceylon. On 31 August 1945, during leave back in Britain, he married Margaret Elizabeth Haynes ('b'. 1919), who had been a fellow student at King's. She was the daughter of Maurice Holford Haynes, businessman; they had a son, Simon, and two daughters, Julia and Catherine. 
After the war Elliot spent a year in the public relations directorate of the War Office before being demobilized with the rank of major. He then worked for a small film company until in 1949 he joined the BBC's television service at Alexandra Palace. He remained with the BBC for more than twenty years, working as a sequence manager, writer, and producer, except for a brief secondment in 1954-5 to the United Nations in New York as film and television liaison officer. On the death of George VI in 1952 he produced the first television obituary of a British monarch. He was also responsible for Sir Winston Churchill's television obituary in 1965. In 1954 he made 'War in the Air', the first documentary film series that the BBC had made and the first major series about the Second World War made by British television. He later said that he approached it as a pacifist rather than as someone making a chronicle of victory. 
On his return from New York in 1955 Elliot joined the BBC's drama department as a scriptwriter-producer. One of his first programmes was the pioneering drama documentary 'A Man from the Sun' (1956), which looked at the lives of West Indian settlers in post-war Britain. He said: 'I thought that the clash between this mythical Britain and the actual grotty real Britain, which West Indians would face when they got here, was a terribly important and exciting conflict' (Pines, 86). He spent the summer of 1956 researching in Brixton and in other parts of London where there were West Indian communities: 'I just nosed around sinking into the background, talking and listening to people, going to parties, to church, to work, and generally being a fly-on-the-wall... and I turned it into a script... Up until 'A Man from the Sun' there had been no real attempt to do programmes about race relations in this country... It proved to be a bit of a landmark. (Pines, 86-9)' The cast included many of the leading black actors of the day, such as Cy Grant, Nadia Cattouse, Earl Cameron, and Pauline Henriques. The Trinidadian Errol John took the lead role, and in 1963 Elliot offered him the rare opportunity for a black writer to write an original drama for BBC television, resulting in 'The Dawn'. Four years later Elliot was approached by the head of programmes for BBC Birmingham to write and produce a six-part drama series about West Indians, 'Rainbow City' (1967). Errol John again played the chief character, a lawyer with a white wife, living in a racially mixed community in Birmingham. 'This was different, a shift of gear from how these things had been presented before', Elliot noted (ibid., 89). 
Throughout the 1960s Elliot was associated with a number of other ground-breaking BBC television dramas. These included the science fiction classic 'A for Andromeda' (1961), which he co-wrote, and 'Mogul' (1965-72, renamed 'The Troubleshooters' from the second series, starting in 1966), a long-running oil industry drama series which he created and scripted. From 1967 to 1970 he was employed by the BBC as head of programmes, later becoming acting controller for the South and West region, based in Bristol. In 1970, in the face of major changes in regional programming, he resigned and became one of the first former BBC television producers to form a limited company. He went on scripting and making programmes, and was the creator and writer of 'Fall of Eagles' (1974), an acclaimed thirteen-part BBC drama series about the collapse of the German, Russian, and Austro-Hungarian empires during and after the First World War. Leonard Miall later described him as 'one of the medium's most talented pioneers' ('The Independent', 22 Aug 1997). 
In 1951 a documentary Elliot edited (and John Read directed) about the sculptor Henry Moore won the BBC its first international television award at the Venice Festival. In 1959 he received an award from the Guild of Television Producers and Directors, and in 1970 he received the Shell International television award. He lived latterly at 14 Royal York Crescent, Clifton, Bristol, and he died there on 14 August 1997 of bronchopneumonia, having also been suffering from Parkinson's disease. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, and their two daughters, his son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 67394


Everard, Edmund (fl. 1673-1691), informer, is of obscure origins, but may have been of Irish descent. He was apparently employed as an agent to the French court, and was also employed for a time as an assistant secretary to the duke of Monmouth. A Catholic during his time in France, it was claimed that by 1678 he had become a protestant. He appears to have associated with a number of Irish exiles while in Paris, and in his printed version of events there he claimed that in 1673 he met the future Catholic plotter Edward Fitzharris. Everard was also to claim that he had uncovered a popish plot to remove Charles II from the throne in a manner that was very similar to the alleged plot of autumn 1678. When it was discovered that Everard had knowledge of this plot he maintained that he had been threatened with punishment unless he kept quiet. However, another version of the Paris sojourn was that Everard had himself actually threatened some persons there, especially Monmouth, for the non-payment of his arrears. In the event, on visiting London in December 1673 Everard was arrested for treasonable designs. He was incarcerated in the Tower and interrogated for a design to poison 'some great person', whom some thought to be the duke of Monmouth ('Fourth Report', HMC, 234). Everard was later to state that he had been threatened with the rack while in the Tower. 
Everard was finally discharged from the Tower in January 1678. With the outbreak of the Popish Plot scare he naturally became a minor informer on the scene, claiming to be a precursor of Titus Oates and attacking Slingsby Bethell and later Sir Robert Walsh in print. Being an opportunist, Everard was frequently to change his stories, as well as sides, in the years that followed. He gave evidence before the Lords committee and was involved with Edmund Warcup JP, the notorious hunter of papists, as well as the many Irish witnesses who flooded into London. At length in February 1681 Everard once more became involved with Edward Fitzharris. The latter wrote a libellous pamphlet, 'The True Englishman Speaking Plain English in a Letter from a Friend to a Friend', advocating the deposition of Charles II and the exclusion of the duke of York. It seems that Fitzharris hoped to plant this pamphlet in the home of a prominent whig and then make a 'discovery'. Fitzharris contacted Everard to forward this scheme and this was to lead to Fitzharris's death. Everard, whose loyalties were, at least temporarily, whiggish, drew Fitzharris into a trap, duping him into betraying the entire scheme before Sir William Waller, who promptly arrested him and sent him to Newgate on a charge of high treason. Everard gave evidence against Fitzharris at his trial and made an assortment of other unsubstantiated claims that netted him various sums from the secret service fund. 
By 1682 Everard had joined the court faction, but still gave evidence against Warcup, who faced counter-accusations of conspiracy to suborn witnesses. He was also to claim that various nonconformist ministers had offered him a pension if he would retire to the Netherlands. In due course he did so, but for reasons of his own. In the Netherlands in the 1680s he worked as a merchant and spy for Sir Bevil Skelton and was used to spy on his former whig friends. Once they discovered this Everard's life was threatened, his goods were seized, and his debts called in. With the collapse of James II's government Everard seems to have changed sides once more, as by 1691 he was giving evidence against Jacobites and made various accusations in that year. Visiting their haunts in the Netherlands and Flanders he also took to uncovering military intelligence against the French army. He was placed in the Tower in 1691, but disappeared from view shortly afterwards. The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 67399


Dubois, John (bap. 1622, d. 1684), local politician, was baptized on 24 February 1622 in Canterbury, Kent, the son of Jean Dubois (died 1680), physician of Canterbury, and his wife, Catherine de l'Espine. Reared in the French Reformed community of Canterbury, Dubois became active in the French church at Threadneedle Street, London, by the 1650s and eventually became a deacon and an elder. On 11 January 1652 he married Anne (died 1659), daughter of Charles Herle, presbyterian rector of Winwick, Lancashire, and one-time prolocutor of the Westminster assembly. The following year he became free of the London Weavers' Company, presumably upon the completion of an apprenticeship, and he eventually developed a lucrative overseas trade, chiefly as a silk importer from France. His son Charles Dubois was baptized on 10 September 1658 at St Mary Aldermanbury. 
On 27 July 1662, after the death of his first wife, Dubois married Sarah (died 1715), daughter of Daniel Waldo and Anne Claxton. His second marriage further strengthened his ties to English nonconformity, connecting him to a leading London Independent family. His commercial and political career would keep him associated with civic nonconformists thereafter. In 1670, for instance, he joined London dissenters in a major loan to Charles II intended to undermine implementation of the new 'Conventicle Act'. Upset by French commercial competition and tariffs, Dubois joined Thomas Papillon, Sir Patience Ward, and other prominent dissenting and French Reformed merchants in promoting the proposals for English commerce put forward in 'A Scheme of the Trade... between England and France' (1674). He also became a trustee for presbyterian Dr Thomas Gouge's fund to establish schools and to promote literacy in Wales. From 1672 or earlier Dubois resided in St Mary Aldermanbury, London, where he served as churchwarden in 1672-4, and where his children were baptized. Dubois was also a friend of Canterbury dean John Tillotson, who was a trustee for Gouge's fund, and who retained numerous dissenting connections after conforming. 
Dubois was elected to the London common council for Cripplegate Within ward in 1674, and served until 1682. He quickly became a leader of the opposition that emerged in the city as the ministry of Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby, sought to revive the coercive Anglican polity first erected in 1662-5. In March 1675, just before the dramatic parliamentary session of that year, Dubois confronted Danby's civic protege, Lord Mayor Sir Robert Vyner, in common council, claiming that Vyner and the court of aldermen had 'invaded' the rights of the court of common council in making a minor corporation judicial appointment (Coventry MS 16, fol. 9). At court Dubois was counted among those in the city who 'hate Prerogative' and who were provoking trouble for the benefit of country spokesmen in the Commons (BL, Add. MS 34362, fol. 14). He was nevertheless appointed as a London assessment commissioner for 1677-80. Drawing upon the influence of his business associate and brother-in-law, the Liverpool merchant Charles Herle, he was also returned as Liverpool MP for each of the parliaments of 1679-81. 
Dubois was at the centre of parliamentary and London affairs during the crisis of 1679-83. He believed that English protestantism was as vulnerable in those years as it had been in the 1640s, accusing the Jesuits of advancing their cause again by 'divid[ing] Protestants from Protestants' (Grey, 7.414). Parliament must 'determine the Succession' through the exclusion of the Catholic duke of York, he urged his fellow MPs in May 1679, and he served on a Commons' committee for the speedier conviction of recusants (ibid., 7.238). Between parliaments Dubois aided in the election of the dissenters Henry Cornish and Slingsby Bethel as sheriffs of London and Middlesex for 1680-81. In the 1680-81 parliament he was the first speaker on behalf of the 'Exclusion Bill', warning that, 'If the Catholics have such an influence upon the Government under a Protestant Prince, what will they have under a Popish?' (ibid., 7.396). He was equally supportive of endeavours to promote protestant union, and served on the Commons' committee to prepare a bill to achieve it. When the Commons adopted the 'Exclusion Bill', Dubois served on a corporation of London committee that addressed Charles II on its behalf. And when Charles instead prorogued parliament, in January 1681, Dubois sat on another civic committee that drafted a petition to the crown for an immediate resumption of the session. Dubois took a similar role in the short-lived third Exclusion Parliament of March 1681, serving on committees for another 'Exclusion Bill' and for conferring with the Lords about the irregular loss of a bill, approved in the previous parliament, for repealing the Elizabethan statute against sectarians. His outspoken views did not prevent him from serving with the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishop of London on a committee that met weekly in 1681 to distribute money for the relief of arriving French protestant refugees. 
As Charles II's efforts to resolve the crisis on his terms moved from parliament to the city, Dubois stood firmly against him. He was among those who out-manoeuvred civic loyalists in securing another corporation address on behalf of a new parliament in May 1681. He was impanelled by the city's whig sheriffs for the jury that rejected the crown's treason case against the earl of Shaftesbury. On that occasion his detractors claimed that he called the king a papist. In January 1682 he was chosen as a member of the corporation committee to defend the London charter against the crown's 'quo warranto'. As the 1682 midsummer's election of sheriffs approached, and as the crown embarked upon strategies to secure the election of loyalists, the London whigs settled upon Dubois and Thomas Papillon as their candidates. Just prior to the election, a whig effort to secure a vacant aldermanic place for Dubois miscarried. The shrieval election itself was the most protracted contest in the city's electoral history, requiring several common halls and polls between June and September, by which time Dubois had also been elected master of the Weavers' Company. A majority of civic electors clearly favoured Dubois and Papillon, but the crown was determined to prevent their election. 
Dubois and Papillon appeared at the Guildhall on 28 September 1682 for the taking of the shrieval oaths. Loyalist Lord Mayor Sir John Moore instead swore in tory candidates Dudley North and Peter Rich and forced their whig rivals from the hustings. As the court and London loyalists celebrated victory, the whig aldermen took bonds from Dubois and Papillon to serve as sheriffs; and the pair were feasted by Shaftesbury and other whig lords as sheriffs-elect. Indeed, the following day the two whigs wrangled with North and Rich about who should preside, as sheriffs, at the beginning of the mayoral election for 1682-3. After loyalist aldermen adjusted a mayoral poll to advance tory Sir William Pritchard over whig Henry Cornish, the contest for the corporation entered the courts. Recognized by the whigs as the legitimate civic magistrates, Dubois and Papillon sued in king's bench for the shrievalty, and Henry Cornish sued for the mayoralty. The whigs advanced Dubois, without success, for another vacant aldermanic place in December. He was apparently the object of an attempted legal entrapment when a government informer offered him seditious papers; and Cripplegate loyalists secured his replacement on common council for 1683. In the meantime, the government's interference in the London elections turned some whigs to plotting resistance, and John Locke and Algernon Sidney to defending it. 
The legal contest for the London shrievalty reached its climax in April 1683. Lord Mayor Pritchard and several loyalist aldermen were then briefly arrested, on writs taken out by attorney Richard Goodenough, for their failure to respond to Dubois's and Papillon's suits for office. Dubois and his colleague hastily distanced themselves from Goodenough's action. Whether they had any awareness of the seditious conspiracy in which Goodenough and several of his accomplices in making the arrests were already involved seems unlikely. Plot ringleader Robert West apparently feared that Dubois and Papillon might hesitate to seize office in an insurrection, in which case they would need to be 'knocked on the head' ('State trials', 9.420). Dubois's hope of securing the shrievalty by legal means collapsed in May when king's bench convicted several leading London whigs of committing a riot in the course of the election. He was disarmed after the disclosure of whig plotting in June, but the government took no further action against him. 
Dubois died in October 1684 and was buried on 30 October at St Mary Aldermanbury; he was survived by his wife. His death occurred just days before the hearing of Sir William Pritchard's suit against him and Papillon for false arrest. Dubois's personal estate was valued at over $35,000. He owned land in Carmarthen, Kent, and Surrey, where he had a house at Mitcham. He also owned stock in the East India Company and served on its directing committee from 1681 until his death. At his request, John Tillotson preached his funeral sermon. 


@@@@@


doc= 67401


Freke, John (1652-1717), lawyer and conspirator, was born in Hilton, Dorset, on 18 March 1652 and baptized at All Saints' Church, Hilton, on 17 April 1652, the eldest of the three sons and two daughters of John Freke (died in or before 1658) and his wife, Margaret Knightly, of Winterborne Stickland, Dorset. An eighteenth-century family pedigree mistakenly identified him as the son of Robert Freke. He matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, on 2 April 1669, entered the Middle Temple in the same year, and was called to the bar on 5 May 1676. 
Even before being called to the bar John Freke appears to have been committed to a radicalism that would lead the authorities, his second cousin Elizabeth Freke recalled, 'three severall times' to seek his hanging ('Remembrances', 45). The first incident involved the authorship of an intemperate political poem variously entitled 'The History of the Insipids' and 'The Chronicle'. A heavy-handed satire that culminates in the exhortation 'Let's pull all brutish tyrants down' prompted a warrant for his apprehension. Brought before the king's bench on 6 June 1676, he was released on bail because of insufficient witnesses but remained under the threat of prosecution for high treason until September. Within a year he was linked with the first earl of Shaftesbury; soon he also became a member of the Green Ribbon Club, a group of whigs who gathered at the King's Head tavern on Fleet Street. His association with the supporters of Shaftesbury, if not his presence in the earl's inner circle, is further implicit in his signature on a 1679 petition for a new parliament and his role in the Rye House plot of 1683. Freke was among those sought by the privy council in July 1683 for furthering the uprising against the crown encouraged by such men as Lord Russell, Algernon Sidney, and Robert Ferguson. Though Freke admitted only that as Ferguson's counsel he had advised him to flee if guilty, others implicated in the plot characterized him as a conduit for money and a link with the western gentry. Two years later, in May 1685, officials again took him into custody for his alleged efforts in the western counties to assist the duke of Monmouth's rebellion. Released on bail, Freke went to Tunbridge, then joined other exiles in Europe. 
In the Netherlands, Freke formed a warm and enduring friendship with the philosopher John Locke. The correspondence between the two men that began in November 1686 reveals a close personal and political relationship. Over time Freke advised Locke about legal affairs, commented on the books and manuscripts the philosopher shared with him, and helped supervise some of his publications. By November 1694 Freke and their mutual friend Edward Clarke were members of Locke's 'College', the centre of a limited and informal group intent upon influencing political policies. In the next two years Locke particularly relied upon Clarke's position as a member of parliament and Freke's friendship with the lord chancellor, John Somers, to promote his concerns about censorship, recoinage, and banking. Gradually the need for 'the College' diminished and the correspondence waned; the friendship, however, continued until the philosopher's death in 1704: Locke's will entrusted 'my good Freind John Freke of the Middle Temple' with the disposal of $100 ('Correspondence of John Locke', 8.424-5). During the 1690s Freke was one of the whig reformers associated with the Grecian Coffee House in Devereaux Court in the Strand; and by 1701, identified as a propagandist for so-called junto whigs, he and Clarke were mocked as the impersonations E. C. and J. F. in 'The Taunton Dean Letter' and 'Letter from the Grecian Coffee-House'. 
Once Freke moved away from the centre of London politics, he became entrusted with the legal affairs of his second cousin Elizabeth Freke and figured prominently in her unpublished memoirs. Her complaints about his handling of her financial and legal affairs in Ireland and England provide some sense of the lawyer's life in the years 1702 to 1713. Little else is certain. His will was signed on 25 June 1717 and proved on 8 August 1717, though the date and place of burial are unknown. Having never married Freke left his sister Elizabeth and her three children part of the estate; the bulk, which the Freke genealogy estimated at $7000 or $8000, went to his sister Anne Broadrepp. 


@@@@@


doc= 67403


Gairy, Sir Eric Matthew (1922-1997), prime minister of Grenada, was born on 18 February 1922 near Grenville, Grenada, the son of an estate foreman and his wife, a domestic servant. He was educated at a Catholic elementary school. He emigrated to Aruba, where he worked as a clerk in the oil refinery before returning home at the end of 1949. He first came to public attention in 1950, when he negotiated a cash compensation for estate tenants evicted by a new owner. With this intervention he was viewed as the champion of rural workers. He capitalized on this goodwill by establishing the first trade union for agricultural workers, the Grenada Manual and Mental Workers' Union (GMMWU), in July 1950. Within a month of the union's registration Gairy launched a strike on behalf of the sugar workers which resulted in substantial wage increases. His efforts to secure wage increases for workers on the cocoa and nutmeg estates succeeded only after a month-long, island-wide general strike in 1951. 
The loyal following of rural workers created by Gairy's trade union militancy formed the core of support for his Grenada People's Party (by 1953 the Grenada United Labour Party), which he established in 1951. In the first general elections under adult suffrage in October that year Gairy's party won six of the eight seats. By 1951 he had emerged as the major trade unionist and political figure in Grenada. His success challenged the prevailing economic and political order. As a trade unionist he established the power of organized labour in its confrontation with capital. His electoral victory represented a shift of political power from the white and brown elite that had controlled government under a restrictive franchise. The basis of his popular appeal was his identification with the interests of the working class. Thus he presented himself as 'the little black boy' who had forced the 'upper brackets' to come to terms with him (Thorndike, 33). To his supporters he brought a new level of class consciousness by drawing their attention to the domination of a small economic elite in the main export industries, the inadequate compensation of workers, and the existence of colour prejudice which shaped employment practices. 
In his first term in office as minister of trade and production from 1956 to 1957 (following an increased measure of self-government granted by Britain) Gairy introduced reforms which benefited his rural constituency, including land reform and security of tenure for tenants. There were, however, signs that the purpose of the organizations that he led was to sustain his political career rather than to promote social and economic change. The GMMWU lost its early momentum as Gairy used his trade union mainly for political support. He made, moreover, no attempt to develop a party organization, but relied instead on his personal appeal. In the period 1954-7 his electoral support declined with the formation in 1954 of the Grenada National Party (GNP), led by Herbert Blaize. In 1957 the GNP won the general elections, and shortly afterwards Gairy was disfranchised after disrupting a GNP meeting. His franchise was restored in 1961, when he became chief minister under a new constitution with a ministerial system. Gairy's tenure had lasted only ten months when the British government suspended the constitution after a 1962 commission of inquiry charged him with violating the regulations governing expenditure. He subsequently lost the 1962 election. 
On his return to office as chief minister in 1967 Gairy consolidated his power by dispensing concessions to a new class of businessmen and benefiting from their loyalty and financial kickbacks. He centralized decision making in the cabinet, assumed control over civil service appointments, and suppressed dissent by making it difficult for a parliamentary opposition to operate. He thus established an alternative power base to the rural workers, from whom he distanced himself. By the early 1970s organized opposition to his rule grew with the return of professionals who had studied abroad. These individuals emphasized political mobilization outside the electoral cycle. In March 1973 the New Jewel Movement (NJM) was established and by 1973-4 had co-ordinated a broad alliance of political, trade union, business, and religious organizations in opposition to Gairy, who became prime minister of Grenada, and minister of external affairs, planning and development, lands, tourism, information service, public relations, and natural resources, following independence, in 1974. 
Gairy responded to this growing opposition by repression and intimidation. He relied increasingly on the use of paramilitary forces (including the notorious 'Mongoose Gang') to terrorize opponents, and on legislation to close the opposition's access to the media. By 1979 his government had alienated important sections of Grenadian society, including the businessmen, who regarded his corrupt and authoritarian government as a hindrance to economic activity. On 13 March 1979 the NJM seized control of the government during his absence in New York, where he had gone to address the United Nations on one of his favourite topics, unidentified flying objects. He remained in the United States for the four years of the NJM's Marxist regime. After American forces invaded the island in October 1983 and established control, he returned to Grenada and contested the December 1984 elections. His party won only one seat but gained 36 per cent of the popular vote. However, he failed to regain power in the 1990 and 1995 elections. Gairy, who was knighted in 1977, died at Grand Anse, Grenada, on 23 August 1997. He was survived by his wife, Cynthia, 'nee' Clyne, whom he had married in 1949 and who had served as a minister in his cabinet, and two daughters. He had begun his public career as a champion of the working class, but by the late 1970s he had become a repressive tyrant, having used his popular support to advance his political ambitions and financial interests. 


@@@@@


doc= 67404


Gibb, John (d. 1720?), founder of the Sweet Singers or Gibbite sect, was born and raised in Borrowstounness (modern day Bo'ness) in Linlithgowshire, Scotland. There he learned to sail, and was in time appointed to be the purser and master of the merchantman 'The John', which operated out of that port on regular trading voyages to the Low Countries. A strong opponent of the prelacy, Gibb was initially extremely useful to the ejected ministers of the Church of Scotland, ferrying secret correspondence and illegally printed pamphlets between the covenanter rebels and their exiled brethren in the Netherlands under the guise of conducting legitimate trading ventures on behalf of his wealthy patrons. It is entirely probable that during his frequent visits to the Low Countries he had contact with Dutch religious radicals and imbibed the Anabaptist doctrines which were so profoundly to affect the subsequent development of his own spirituality and to shape the conception of his own intensely personal, and idiosyncratic, theology. Certainly by the winter of 1680 his activities had come to the attention of the Scottish privy council, who were determined to seize both his person and his 'seditious books'. However Gibb was warned of his impending arrest, and in November 1680 jumped ship shortly before his vessel returned to port. While he headed inland, 'The John' was impounded and left to rot on the shore, to the dismay and the near ruin of his former employers who went to great pains to persuade the council that Gibb was only their 'servant' and 'neither hath nor had [any] interest in the shipe' ('Reg. PCS', 6.570, 571, 575). 
Gibb now broke with Donald Cargill and the Society People, among whose ranks he had previously been numbered. He strongly believed that Cargill had broken his sacred bond of trust with the Scottish people upon his seeking the safety of a temporary exile in northern England, and moved quickly to assert his own authority over those conventicles left leaderless by this apparent desertion and by the death in action of Richard Cameron during the previous summer. Possessing a formidable charisma and a strong sexual magnetism Gibb, in the early months of 1681, built up a sizeable local following around the neighbourhood of Borrowstounness, and won over 'Twenty six Women and three Men' who were regarded, even by his enemies within the covenanter movement, as being for 'the greater Part... serious, exercised, tender, zealous [and] gracious souls' (Walker, 17). This nucleus served as the foundation of a new sect, known variously as Gibbites, after their acknowledged leader, or as Sweet Singers on account of their tearful singing of 'Psalms' 74, 79, 80, 83, and 117, paralleling the fate of 'Old Testament' Israel with the sufferings of the Scottish church. In April 1681 the development of the sect took a wholly new and unexpected turn, as Gibb led his followers away from their homes and families in an utter rejection of private property and all worldly authority. One group went up into the Pentland hills to wait for the imminent delivery of God's judgment, in the form of fire and tempest, upon the sinful population and city of Edinburgh; while Gibb and his closest friends sought an urgent meeting with Cargill near Clydesdale, in an attempt to gain the support of that influential preacher for their cause. 
However, no agreement could be reached between the two parties and the situation was made even worse when Gibb and his companion, David Jamie, drew pistols upon a group of distraught men who had journeyed to their camp in order to beg for the return of their estranged wives. With the breach between Gibb and Cargill now complete, he was vehemently denounced as the devil incarnate by all of those field preachers still active in the south-west and took refuge, along with his followers, in the wastelands between Lothian and Tweeddale. Removed from the major centres of population, the Sweet Singers implemented a strict regime of prayer, fasting, and mourning, with both sexes preaching extemporary sermons and refusing to do any manual labour on the grounds that work and all 'mechaniks' were the very 'limbs of [the] AntiChrist' ('Reg. PCS', 7.704). Having taken to styling himself as King Solomon and rechristening his followers with similar names, such as 'Isaac... Rheoboam, Deborah, Lidiah [and] the Queen of Sheba', drawn from the pages of the 'Old Testament', Gibb also reiterated the excommunications and abjurations of King Charles II and the duke of York which had first been issued by Cameron and Cargill in the Sanquhar and Torwood declarations of the previous year (ibid., 7.704-5). Posing a clear threat to the established social and political order, troops were dispatched to effect Gibb's arrest, and at the beginning of May 1681 a troop of dragoons swooped upon his encampment at Woodhill Craigs, capturing him and all of his adherents without a struggle, and bringing the first period of his ministry to an abrupt and premature end. Brought to Edinburgh under guard, his followers were separated from one another, according to their gender. The women were incarcerated in the correction house, where several were bailed upon the intercession of their husbands and families, while the men were confined to the Tolbooth to await examination by the members of the Scottish privy council. 
Although Gibb initially failed to impress his interrogators, his case did arouse the interest of James, duke of York, who had recently been appointed viceroy in Scotland. The duke was keen to exploit splits within the covenanter movement and, having convinced himself that the Sweet Singers presented no military threat to his regime, spoke of them as deserving a bedlam rather than a gallows. Indeed, Patrick Walker was to allege that Gibb had received substantial sums of money from the duke of York as bribes, and that as a result he dedicated a 'most blasphemous Paper' to his new royal patron (Walker, 22). While no copies of this publication appear to be extant, it does indeed seem as though Gibb's attitude towards the monarchy and temporal authority underwent a profound change, for he was set free from the Tolbooth on 2 August 1681, having renounced those 'disloyall principalls' which he had once held ('Reg. PCS', 7.177). 
Thereafter, Gibb's career and actions become far more erratic, and harder to chart owing to the overt prejudice of mainstream Scottish presbyterian writers, while his underlying motivations are almost entirely open to conjecture. The most likely explanation for his subsequent conduct is that, during his imprisonment, he had experienced some form of nervous breakdown which led him to wilder delusions and, finally, to an utter rejection of his belief in God. Travelling west with a band of followers dramatically reduced to just three men and two women, he now railed against both the metrical psalms and the 'Bible' itself as being no more than human inventions, and consigned his own 'Bible' -- along with those of his companions -- to the flames of a bonfire raised upon the borders of Airth and Stirling. Upon his re-arrest, Gibb was once again incarcerated in the Tolbooth at Edinburgh. However, his weekly cycle of fasting, followed by sudden and violent periods of bingeing, further weakened his powers of reason and did little to endear him to the other political prisoners held alongside him. Walker writes at length of his demented howlings and ravings, which disturbed his cell mates while they were at public worship and which provoked George Jackson, a Cameronian, to physically assault him and to dash his head repeatedly against the prison wall. It was feared that this attack had killed Gibb outright, but his powerful build and enormous physical strength -- which had previously earned him the nickname Meikle John -- saved him, though ever afterwards he assumed the aspect of a broken and cowed man, hiding away from his fellow prisoners and stuffing his mouth with rags in order to silence his involuntary cries. Sentenced to be transported to America, on 17 May 1684 he sailed across the Atlantic in a ship chartered by merchants from Edinburgh and New York colony. Several of Gibb's erstwhile followers, transported alongside him, later found well-paid employment in the colony and it is likely that he himself spent the rest of his life in New York even after his period of indentured service had come to an end. However, his zest for preaching and prophecy had not entirely left him, and he won a great reputation for his spiritual powers among the local Native American peoples, leading them in sacrifices and ritual celebrations. It is not known if he ever married, but one of his many female followers, Isobel Bon, was described as his constant companion. Given that Gibb styled himself as King Solomon it is conceivable that the woman known as the Queen of Sheba acted as his consort, and perhaps this particular follower was synonymous with Bon. Gibb was believed to have died in 1720 and, though universally excoriated by the overwhelming majority of Scots -- whether episcopalian or presbyterian -- the legacy of his short-lived sect and the persuasiveness of his message continued to reinforce those eighteenth-century sectaries, such as Arden Burnell and the Muggletonians, who championed the validity of personal revelation and held that they themselves had the power to bless or damn at will. 


@@@@@


doc= 67408


Arnold, John (c.1635-1702), politician, was born in Southwark, the first son of Nicholas Arnold (died 1665) of Llanfihangel Crucornau, Monmouthshire, and his wife, Lettice Moore, daughter and heir of Sir Edward Moore of Drogheda, co. Louth. His marriage in September 1666 to Margaret, daughter of William Cooke of Highnam, Gloucestershire, brought him to the attention of the marquess of Worcester, who appointed him to the deputy lieutenancy and commissions of the peace in Monmouthshire. In 1677 he was removed from office by his former patron for opposing the latter's candidate at the contested Monmouthshire by-election ten years earlier and for resisting the enclosure of Wentwood Forest. Afterwards, Arnold joined Sir Trevor Williams and other local gentlemen to oppose Worcester's political ambitions in south Wales. In March 1678 he informed the House of Commons about the existence of a large Catholic community in Monmouthshire. The Commons ordered an inquiry which resulted in his restoration to the bench in 1679. 
The heated political atmosphere of the Popish Plot gave Arnold the opportunity to proceed against Roman Catholics in south Wales. His efforts led to the dispersal of a Jesuit college at Cwm in Herefordshire and the executions of Fathers David Lewis, Philip Evans, John Lloyd, and others. He stood for Monmouth in opposition to Worcester's son at the second general election in 1679, but was defeated. It was thought that his 'violent and malicious proceedings' had cost him political support (Badminton muniments, FmE 4/1/6). However, he was seated after petitioning the committee of privileges (26 November 1680). In the meantime, Arnold worked to revive the flagging Popish Plot. In April 1680 he claimed to have been brutally beaten by papists in Jacknapes Lane, London. One contemporary described it as 'the second part of the Edmund Berry Godfrey tragedy', referring to the sensational murder of the London magistrate in 1678 (Althorp MS C2). The incident generated public sympathy (but also earned him the nickname from his enemies of Cut-Throat Arnold). When Arnold returned home to Monmouthshire he was greeted 'by some hundreds of my friends' and was 'almost hugged to death' ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 483). Only later did the tory journalist Roger L'Estrange show his claims to have been false. 
For several years Arnold played the part of a popular whig hero. He was admitted to the Green Ribbon Club in November 1679 and he enjoyed a reputation as one of 'the most noisy, impudent and ignorant' members of the second Exclusion Parliament (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 1.546). He was re-elected for Monmouth in 1681, taking a large armed guard with him to Oxford to safeguard him from papist attacks. In November 1683 he and Sir Trevor Williams were arrested and charged under the 'Statute of 'Scandalum magnatum''. Arnold was found guilty of saying, among other things, that 'my Lord Marquis of Worcester is a rank papist, for all his dissimulation and outward appearance to blind the world, and if he had his own way... he would be a means to cut the throats of all you that are the Protestant clergy of the Church of England. (Badminton muniments, FmE 3/16)' He also allegedly spoke in favour of a republic, saying 'we shall bring the King's head to the block, as the fool, the ass, his father's was, and then you shall see us play football with the bastards he leaves' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 1.546). He remained in prison until 1686 in lieu of paying the $10,000 fine. 
In 1689 Arnold sat for Southwark in the Convention Parliament, where he was a very active member. He was appointed to ninety-one committees, including those dealing with the comprehension and toleration bills. On 28 January he seconded Gilbert Dolben's motion to declare the throne vacant. He also supported the disabling clause in the bill to restore corporations. A court whig under William III, he sat for Monmouth from 1695 to 1698. After Arnold's death in 1702, his heir, Nicholas Arnold ('b'. 1669), sold Llanthony and Llanfihangel to the Harleys of Brampton Bryan. 


@@@@@


doc= 67414


Huxley, Michael Heathorn (1899-1979), diplomatist and editor, was born on 9 August 1899 at 39 Leinster Gardens, Bayswater, London, the third child of Henry Huxley (1865-1946), general practitioner, and his wife, Sophy Wylde, 'nee' Stobart (1865-1927), daughter of William Stobart, a Durham colliery owner. As a grandson of Thomas Henry Huxley, much was expected of him. He followed his brother Gervas (1894-1971) to Rugby School and studied natural science at Trinity College, Cambridge, apparently intending to follow a career in medicine according to his mother's wishes. He studied for a year at Cambridge and passed a preliminary examination in elementary physics in June 1917 but left the university to join the army in February 1918. He was commissioned into the Grenadier Guards in July 1918, though he did not see active service during the First World War. His love of languages inspired an early desire to travel, and having relinquished his commission in 1920 he spent some time living in continental Europe and learning German, French, Spanish, and Russian. In 1922 he joined the diplomatic service (in which his cousin Laurence Collier was also employed), serving in Tehran, Washington, and London (including the central European department and the news department). 
On 24 April 1926, at the parish church in Beaulieu, Hampshire (with Lord Montagu of Beaulieu as a witness), Huxley married Ottilie de Lotbiniere Mills (1902-1991), daughter of the retired colonel Dudley Acland Mills and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Joly de Lotbiniere, whose father, Henri-Gustave Joly de Lotbiniere, had been premier of Quebec. They had three children, Selma, Thomas, and Henry. From 1929 to 1932 Huxley lived with his family in Washington, where he established many lifelong friendships with diplomats and politicians, including Vincent Massey and Dean Acheson. There the Huxleys led a busy social life: the orientalist Denison Ross, who stayed for a week with them in the winter of 1931, later recalled Ottilie as 'the 'belle' of the Diplomatic Corps' (Ross, 217). After returning to England, they built a house named Longmore at Bosham, near Chichester, in which they entertained many visitors from Britain and overseas including serving and former diplomats, writers, publishers, and academics, as well as members of the extended Huxley family, notably Gervas, his wife, Elspeth Huxley, and Julian Huxley. Ottilie's sociability ensured that Longmore effectively became an extension of Michael's workplace as well as a family home. Frequent visitors included the historian Eileen Power; Rex Leeper and Charles Peake of the Foreign Office news department; the publisher Harold Raymond and his wife, Vera; the American geographer Owen Lattimore and his wife, Eleanor; the film-makers Robert and Frances Flaherty; and in later years Lawrence Kirwan, director of the Royal Geographical Society, and his wife, Stella. 
In 1934, having pondered the decision at length, Huxley resigned from the Foreign Office. For several years, he had been working on a project which became his life's main work: the establishment and editorship of the 'Geographical Magazine'. Impressed with the success of the 'National Geographic', but convinced of the need for a specifically British and higher-quality variant, he approached the Royal Geographical Society for support in 1931. He obtained backing from a number of wealthy businessmen, bankers, and diplomats, and after extended negotiations he finally succeeded in securing a publisher, Chatto and Windus, agreeable to his idea of devoting half of any profits to a fund for the promotion of geographical knowledge. Senior directors of Chatto, including Harold Raymond, a family friend, took a personal interest in the 'Magazine'; under the terms of the publishing agreement, they were also shareholders. First published in 1935, it proved a commercial success in its early years, with a circulation of 50,000 in October 1939, exceeding expectations. 
Huxley's work for the 'Geographical Magazine' was interrupted by his return to government service during the Second World War. Initially he worked as an intermediary between Sir Campbell Stuart's secretly funded Foreign Office propaganda unit at Electra House (a forerunner of the political warfare executive) and the Ministry of Information. He was also involved at this time, with his cousin Julian, in helping Max Nicholson to draft a far-reaching statement by the political and economic planning group on European order and world order. In January 1940 he made a visit to Washington apparently on behalf of Sir Campbell Stuart, returning to London in March to make final preparations for a new position as press attache to Lord Lothian, British ambassador in Washington, with additional responsibility for the British Library of Information in New York. Lothian regarded Huxley's appointment as crucial to his efforts to present the British case in the United States. It was with his personal backing that Huxley returned with his family to Washington in April 1940. Much of his work in Washington was behind the scenes, though he also took part in more public activities: in July 1940, for example, he addressed 3000 Polish Americans at a banquet in Rochester, New York, declaring, 'Poland has been overrun for the last time. We shall win Europe back from darkness and we shall build there a system in which there will be no conquerors' ('Dunkirk Evening Observer' [NY], 8 July 1940). 
From September 1940 Huxley had the task of establishing the Inter-Allied Information Committee and Centre, based in the Rockefeller building in New York, where he worked for a year. Originally a product of the British propaganda effort, designed to co-ordinate the publicity activities of representatives of allied governments in occupied Europe, the committee developed into an effective information bureau, a direct forerunner of the United Nations Information Organisation. Also based in the Rockefeller building was the headquarters of British Security Coordination established by the Canadian industrialist Sir William Stephenson, which controlled clandestine intelligence operations, including black propaganda and the recruitment of agents for missions behind enemy lines. While there is no evidence that Huxley had any direct involvement in these operations, his Italian cousin Max Salvadori (a professor at St Lawrence University, New York, who visited Huxley's Sussex home in January 1940) was recruited by Stephenson and proved to be one of his most prized agents. 
After his return to London in December 1941 Huxley sought further employment in government service. In 1942, with the support of Vincent Massey, now Canadian high commissioner in London, he visited RAF bases across Canada on behalf of the British Council. His report on the education of service personnel resulted in the establishment of what was known as the Canadian Committee, the forerunner of the Canada Foundation, devoted to the promotion of public understanding of Canadian culture. For the remainder of the war years, he worked in various posts concerned with information and post-war reconstruction attached to the Board of Trade and the Foreign Office, and as British representative to the Conference of Allied Ministers of Education, the predecessor of UNESCO, which considered a wide variety of issues from the restitution of looted artworks to the provision of scientific equipment and libraries in post-war Europe. 
At the end of the war Huxley returned to the 'Geographical Magazine', which had been sustained during wartime by a talented editorial team, including Ivy Davison and John Lehmann. By 1945 the magazine's profits were yielding dividends to its shareholders as well as supplying a small fund in support of expeditions and other worthy geographical causes. Huxley was not interested in publishing for an academic audience: rather he wanted contributors who could breathe life into the dry bones of geography, to communicate the feel as well as the facts of the relationship between people and places. His extensive networks in literary and political circles, combined with his punctilious editorial style and a strong personal commitment to the 'Magazine', left their mark on its contents during his long period of editorship, which finally came to an end with his retirement in 1959. Balancing the interests of founder, publisher, advertisers, shareholders, and trustees proved increasingly difficult, especially after 1956 when 'The Times' became the 'Magazine''s publisher. However, Huxley continued to take a strong interest in its fortunes and in its management well after his retirement as editor, seeking to ensure that it remained faithful to his founding vision. In 1958 the Royal Geographical Society conferred on him an honorary fellowship in recognition of his dedication to and generous support of geography. 
The creation of the 'Geographical Magazine' was Huxley's most significant achievement. It was neither an academic journal nor a wholly commercial publication, its contents and style reflecting the values of its founding editor at least until the 1960s, and the peculiar circumstances of its foundation left a lasting legacy. In comparison Huxley's contributions in public service went largely unrecognized. Yet the Inter-Allied Information Committee which he established played its part in sustaining support for the British cause at a critical moment in the war, and also provided a powerful model for international co-operation in the United Nations era. Perhaps strangely for a diplomat, compromise did not come easily to him: according to one obituarist, 'He was a man who stood adamantly by his own high moral and intellectual standards' (obituary, 'Geographical Journal', 145 1979). In his later years he faced considerable personal difficulties, including the death of his younger son in 1968. His final years were spent in quiet retirement at Lodsworth on the South Downs. He died of prostate cancer at the King Edward VII Hospital, Midhurst, West Sussex, on 7 January 1979, and was survived by his wife, Ottilie, and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 67420


Breman, John (bap. 1627, d. 1703), army officer, politician, and conspirator, was baptized on 27 March 1627 at Alton, Hampshire, the eldest surviving son of Thomas Braman (died 1661), mercer of Alton. He first appears in 1647 as one of the regimental agitators of the New Model Army horse regiment of Colonel Nathaniel Rich. The regiment was prominent in opposing parliament's demand to disband and he and his fellow agitator Nicholas Lockyer may have drawn up the regiment's petition of grievances in the spring of that year. 
Breman remained with Rich's regiment until December 1654 when, now a lieutenant, he was implicated in the so-called Overton Plot, when papers criticizing the protectorate were circulated among troops in Scotland. Together with four fellow officers he was court-martialled in February 1655, cashiered, required to post bond for his good behaviour, and sent to England. Breman evidently remained on good terms with Rich, who had broken with Cromwell the previous year and had been deprived of his regiment, for when Rich was restored to his regiment in July 1659 by the Rump Parliament, Breman returned to it as well, now as a captain. Swiftly promoted major, he induced his troops to join a mutinous garrison at Portsmouth that had declared for parliament in December in the wake of an army coup, and which Rich's regiment had been sent to suppress. Rich, who had temporized with the coup, acquiesced in Breman's action, and when the regiment returned to London at the end of the month Breman was included in parliament's thanks. General Monck responded by removing Rich from his command on 26 February 1660. He and Breman tried to contest the order, but, on 1 March, Rich surrendered his commission, and Breman was dismissed as well. 
Breman remained under close surveillance. In April he was arrested on suspicion of complicity in Colonel John Lambert's projected rising. A plot to free him from custody along with the former major-general James Berry was subsequently reported. In September 1661 the erstwhile parliamentary radical Praisegod Barebone visited him in prison. Breman and Berry were among those sent to the Tower for closer confinement on 18 May 1662, and Breman was later sent to Windsor Castle. In 1664 he admitted knowledge of weapons that had been brought into England from the Netherlands and New England. Upon his release the following year he returned to private life in Chichester, Sussex, worshipping as an Independent and apparently maintaining his links to radical activists such as Colonel Henry Danvers. His first wife, Sarah, died in 1657 and about 1665 he married Elizabeth (died in or before 1696), widow of William Marlow of Itchingfield, Sussex, and daughter of Edward Osborne of Hartlip, Kent. However, the ceremony may have been performed by a fellow nonconformist, casting doubt over the marriage's validity. 
In 1678 Breman was offered a commission by an old comrade in arms, Colonel Richard Norton, to serve in Flanders under Colonel George Legge, but declined, citing ill health and his long absence from military service. Two months later, however, he was observed with the prominent republican John Wildman, and was soon actively involved in the politics of the exclusion crisis. Breman served for Chichester in the parliaments of 1679, 1680, and 1681, and at the dissolution of the latter he was reportedly in correspondence with the veteran radicals John Gladman and Richard Rumbold. A consistent supporter of exclusion, he was described in September 1681 as 'a great fanatic' (Zaller, 93) and dissenters were reported to be supporting him for a county seat in the next election. 
Breman remained a visible figure. In October 1682 he was projected as one of the leaders of a cavalry regiment in a plot promoted by the earl of Essex to seize Whitehall on behalf of the duke of Monmouth, the exclusionist candidate for the throne. In February 1683 he and his brother-in-law Richard Farringdon helped mount a demonstration in Chester on behalf of Monmouth. That same month his name appeared on a list of radicals purportedly plotting to raise an insurrection in London, perhaps in connection with a plot to assassinate the duke of York, the heir to the throne. In late July he was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower in connection with the planned general insurrection known as the Rye House plot on the urging of the bishop of Chichester, who described him as a 'desperate' enemy to the king and 'as bad as a plague' locally (Zaller, 94). In October he successfully petitioned for his release, promising 'that he would live a private retired life etc and not serve in Parliament' (DWL, Morrice entring book P, 383). However, in July 1685 he conspired in Monmouth's abortive rising and was again arrested. 
Breman was among the nonconformists briefly courted by James II in 1687 and 1688. In December 1687 he was appointed to a commission of inquiry to investigate unreported fines against dissenters and recusants in the previous ten years. The following May he was included in the Sussex commission of the peace, and in September he received both court and dissenter backing as a candidate for parliament. None the less he joined William of Orange's invasion army in November. In July 1689 he appeared as the major of a volunteer regiment of horse composed of London citizens, whose colonel was William himself. More substantial reward came in 1692 when he was appointed deputy governor of the Isle of Wight. On about 22 September 1696 he married his third wife, Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Mathew of High Street, Lewes, Sussex, and daughter of Thomas Meeres of Glynleigh House, Westham, in the same county. After this marriage he moved to Lewes and died on 25 August 1703. He was buried at All Saints', Lewes, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 67421


Linton, David Leslie (1906-1971), geographer and geomorphologist, was born on 12 July 1906 at 883 Old Kent Road, London, the second of three children of Samuel James Linton, master grocer, and Elizabeth Baird Kennedy. His parents were immigrants from northern Ireland. He was educated at Haberdashers' Aske's Hatcham School and then went up to King's College, University of London, on a scholarship to read for a general honours degree in chemistry, physics, and geology. He was awarded a first class in 1926 and then proceeded to a special honours degree in which he obtained a first class in geography in 1927. He stayed on at King's, where he succeeded S. W. Wooldridge as demonstrator. In 1929 he moved to Edinburgh University and remained there until 1945, although during the Second World War he was on photo-reconnaissance duties with the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, where he held the rank of squadron leader. 
In 1945 Linton was appointed professor of geography at Sheffield University, and then in 1958 professor of geography at Birmingham University, where he remained until his sudden death in 1971. Linton held a range of national positions including the editorship of 'Geography' (from 1947 to 1965), the presidency of section E of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1957), the presidency of the Institute of British Geographers (1962), and the presidency of the Geographical Association (1964). In 1942 he received the Murchison award from the Royal Geographical Society, while in 1971 he was appointed honorary fellow of King's College, London. He was the first chairman of the newly formed British Geomorphological Research Group (1961), a body that rapidly grew in stature and influence. 
Linton's personality was seen as complex by his contemporaries. Though shy and sometimes appearing aloof and distant he was a gifted lecturer and fluent writer. Though capable of charm, fairness, and kindness, he could also appear obdurate, brusque, arrogant, and disinclined to accept opposition to his ideas. He worked long hours and suffered from repeated bouts of insomnia and migraine, yet he was also a devoted family man with four children (three sons and a daughter), having married Vera Cicely ('b'. 1903/4), daughter of William Tebbs, manager, on 13 August 1929. He was an able artist and gifted musician. 
Linton was a geographer with wide interests, though he is most remembered for his work in geomorphology. Under the influence of Sidney Wooldridge, with whom he wrote the classic 'Structure, Surface and Drainage in South East England' (1939, second edition 1955), he became a leading exponent of denudation chronology -- the attempt to reconstruct long-term landform evolution on the basis of the identification of erosional remnants. Although in the 1980s some of the major findings of this work were challenged, it remains as an enduring monument to one of the most distinctive phases of British geomorphology. 
Another area where Linton made a major impact was in the study of tors (upstanding rock features, often of granite, characteristic of Devon and Cornwall). He regarded tors as ancient features that were the product of warm climate weathering. He distrusted those who regarded them as relict periglacial features and this involved him in a less than edifying debate with those who opposed his ideas. He also held firm views about the extent of the impact that glaciation had had on the British landscape, and championed the importance of preglacial events and forms. Above all Linton was a fieldworker in the era before process studies and quantification came into vogue. 
In addition to his work as a geomorphologist Linton also made some contributions to the study of landscape value assessment, and to the geography of development and energy. In his last years he had developed an interest in the landscapes of the moon, but his premature death stopped these and other new ventures. Suffering from carcinoma of the colon he died on 11 April 1971 at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 67426


Crespin, Paul Daniel (1693/4-1770), goldsmith, was born in London, the son of the Huguenot Daniel Crespin of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Westminster. In June 1713, at the late age of nineteen, Paul Crespin was apprenticed to Jean Pons, goldsmith. Between July 1720 and December 1721 he entered his first two marks at Goldsmiths' Hall as a freeman of the Longbowstringmakers' Company. He was working in Compton Street, Soho, London, at the sign of the Golden Ball. In the 1720s Crespin married Margaret (Mary) Branboeuf; by 1743 they had five children. 
Crespin's mature apprenticeship explains the high quality of his earliest work. A 1721 cruet set (Colonial Williamsburg, Virginia) reveals his mastery of the different goldsmiths' skills. The octagonal cruets have pierced covers; their sides are chased with flowers, fruit, and birds; their handles are formed of cast figures of harpies. The stand has a finely chased border. 
In 1724 Crespin received an order for a silver bath for King Joao V of Portugal. This important commission may have come through his younger brother, who was royal goldsmith in Lisbon. A contemporary described the full-size bath as supported on three dolphins, their tails curling up around the outside surface, while inside three mermaids' bodies followed the curve of the tub. The two sides were decorated with scenes of Diana bathing and Perseus and Andromeda. Weighing 6030 ounces, the bath was shown at Kensington Palace to George I, 'who was well pleased with so curious a Piece of Workmanship, which can scarcely be match'd in all Europe' ('Weekly Journal', July 1724). It was destined for the royal palace, Lisbon, but was destroyed in the 1755 earthquake. An unusually large circular basin of 1722 (BM) may have been associated with this commission and used as a footbath. 
In 1726 Crespin contributed to a large service for Empress Catherine I of Russia a silver-gilt cup and cover (Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg). Such important royal commissions attracted noble clients. These included Richard Temple, Viscount Cobham, for whom Crespin made a large sideboard dish with applied profile medallions of classical philosophers (1727). Charles, third duke of Marlborough, commissioned a pair of silver-gilt wine coolers in 1733. Their shape, the faun supporters, and the wave ornament on the base are influenced by contemporary French silver. Crespin's landlord in Soho, the second duke of Portland, ordered large quantities of table silver. A manuscript list of plate supplied by Crespin to Viscount Townsend between 1740 and 1759 illustrates the range of his stock. 
Silver centrepieces and tureens provided the most appropriate vehicles for Crespin's mastery of the craft. A tureen and stand made for Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset, in 1740 (Toledo Museum of Art, Ohio) is supported by recumbent figures of hinds and the cover is decorated with grapes, plums, apples, and pears. The design is close to the centrepiece (V&A) made for John, second earl of Ashburnham, by Nicholas Sprimont (bap. 1715, d. 1771). The elaborate marine silver-gilt centrepiece (1741), bearing Crespin's mark, made for Frederick, prince of Wales, may have been produced in collaboration with Sprimont. The wave ornament, supporting mermen, and presiding figure of Neptune recall the Portuguese royal bath and the Marlborough wine coolers. 
The 'General Advertiser' declared Crespin's bankruptcy in 1747, the year in which Nicholas Sprimont left the goldsmiths' trade to concentrate on the Chelsea Porcelain Manufactory. Crespin's stock intended for the export market was sold by the auctioneer John Heath. It consisted of gold and silver toys, snuff boxes, etuis, watches, jewels, and rings. Crespin's second son, Elias David, educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, and Caius College, Cambridge, was ordained and became dean of Guernsey in 1765. His eldest daughter Magdalen (1729-1795) married the Huguenot watchmaker Francis Barraud (1727-1795) of St Andrew's Street, Seven Dials, London. 
In the 1760s Paul Crespin retired to Southampton, where he died in 1770. He was survived by his wife, who was dead by April 1775. A portrait of Crespin ('c'.1730; V&A) descended in the Barraud family. 


@@@@@


doc= 67433


Kendrew, Sir John Cowdery (1917-1997), molecular biologist, was born on 24 March 1917 in Oxford, the only son of Wilfrid George Kendrew (1884-1962), reader in climatology at the University of Oxford, and his wife, Evelyn May Graham, 'nee' Sandberg (died 1961), art historian, for many years resident in Florence, where she published under the name of Evelyn Sandberg-Vavala; Kendrew was brought up by his father. Kendrew was educated at the Dragon School, Oxford (1923-30), and at Clifton College, Bristol (1930-36), where he became interested in chemistry. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a major entrance scholar, reading chemistry, physics, biochemistry, and advanced mathematics (the latter two as half subjects) for the first part of the natural sciences tripos, and chemistry for the second. In 1938 he was awarded a senior scholarship at Trinity and in 1939 graduated with first-class honours. He then started doctoral research in the department of physical chemistry under E. A. Moelwyn-Hughes. 
Following the outbreak of the Second World War, Kendrew was told to continue his research, but with most of his colleagues leaving for war-related projects he became increasingly dissatisfied and searched for possibilities actively to join the war effort. In February 1940 he was recruited to the Air Ministry Research Establishment (later the Telecommunication Research Establishment) to work on the development of airborne radar. In September 1940 he was attached to the staff of Sir Robert Watson-Watt for operational research duties, a field then in its infancy. From Royal Air Force Coastal Command (1940-41) he moved to Cairo to build up the operational research section at headquarters RAF Middle East (1941-4), and from there to air command south-east Asia, where he served in India and Ceylon as officer in charge of operational research and as scientific adviser to the allied air commander-in-chief (1944-5). He worked mainly on anti-submarine warfare, bombing accuracy, and radio aids. While at Cairo he produced the very successful 'Handbook for Aircrews and Controllers', often referred to by aircrews as the 'bible'. On his move to south-east Asia he was appointed honorary wing commander. He rejoined the Air Ministry in London in June 1945 after a four-month return trip via Australia, the south-west Pacific, and the USA, which he visited on military mission. 
When the war ended Kendrew contemplated a career in the scientific civil service. With others he was convinced that science had an important role to play in post-war reconstruction, and felt that scientists who like him had gained experience of administration and of working alongside government had the moral obligation to remain in government service. However, after some hesitation, he decided to return to academia until career chances in the civil service were more clearly defined. 
In September 1945, having been awarded an ICI research fellowship, Kendrew started research in protein crystallography in the Cavendish Laboratory, under the guidance of Max Perutz and with W. H. Taylor, reader in crystallography, as official supervisor. This represented a clear break from his pre-war research. According to Kendrew's own account it was the crystallographer John Desmond Bernal who, 'in a jungle in Ceylon' while both he and Kendrew were working as advisers to the allied air commander-in-chief, convinced Kendrew that it should be possible to use X-ray diffraction to solve the structure of proteins (video interview with J. Kendrew, 18 June 1997, Laboratory of Molecular Biology Archive). Kendrew also credited the structural chemist Linus Pauling and the embryologist Conrad Waddington, both of whom he had met during the war, with influencing him in his decision to move from chemistry to biology. However, the techniques he employed required a broad range of physical, chemical, mathematical, and organizational skills, for which he was well suited both by education and by talent. He made good use of those skills, thereby making decisive contributions to the new field of protein crystallography. 
Kendrew first collaborated with Perutz in the investigation of the structure of haemoglobin, embarking on a comparison of foetal and adult haemoglobin. This work gained him his PhD in 1949. From the beginning, however, he also attempted the crystal analysis of myoglobin, the protein responsible for oxygen storage in muscle. This project was long hampered by the difficulty of growing crystals of a size suitable for X-ray analysis. Once this hurdle was cleared and sperm whale myoglobin identified as ideal source material the project was much aided by the small size of myoglobin (a quarter that of haemoglobin). By this time protein crystallography in the Cavendish under the aegis of W. Lawrence Bragg was put on a more secure footing by the creation, in 1947, of the Medical Research Council unit for the molecular structure of biological systems, with Perutz and Kendrew as only members. Other scientists as well as assistant staff soon joined, among them Hugh Huxley, Kendrew's first PhD student; Francis Crick; James Watson, originally taken on to help Kendrew with his myoglobin project; Vernon Ingram; and Sydney Brenner. 
In 1957 Kendrew and his collaborators presented a first molecular model of myoglobin at 6 Angstrom resolution. The model, the first of a globular protein ever to be built based on direct structure analysis, was remarkable for the unexpected twists the protein chain performed. It was followed two years later by a 2 Angstrom resolution model, built of meccano and 'Kendrew type' skeletal model parts, which indicated the exact position of most of the 1200 atoms of the molecule. This work gained Kendrew, jointly with Perutz, the 1962 Nobel prize for chemistry. The crystallographic calculation for both models relied decisively on the use of the first electronic digital computers built at Cambridge, EDSAC I and II, of which Kendrew made pioneering use. Together with John Bennett of the mathematical laboratory in Cambridge he wrote the first paper on crystallographic computation with electronic digital computers, published in 'Acta crystallographica' in 1952. His interest in electronic computers built on his long-standing fascination with information handling systems. This pronounced interest, together with his organizational skills, were crucial for the successful completion of the myoglobin project. In her informed guide to Kendrew's extensive collection of papers, Jeannine Alton observed how an interest in note keeping, filing, and organization, present in the schoolboy and fostered by operational research during the war, found a kind of 'bureaucratic apotheosis in the sustained effort of accuracy required for the long haul to the final successful three-dimensional picture [of the protein molecule]' (Alton, 65). 
Kendrew was an active fellow of Peterhouse, where he was first a research fellow (1947-53), then a supernumerary fellow (1953-75), and finally an honorary fellow (1975-97); from 1972 he was also an honorary fellow of Trinity. He was director of studies in natural science for many years and also undertook other college duties, serving successively as librarian, prolector, steward, wine steward, and custodian of the college's paintings. Also from Peterhouse, Kendrew for many years edited the 'Journal of Molecular Biology', founded by him on the initiative of Kurt Jacobi in 1959. The journal contributed decisively to the establishment of molecular biology as a distinctive field of research. Kendrew remained editor-in-chief of the journal until 1987. In 1964 he presented the new biology in a BBC lecture series, later published as a book, 'The Thread of Life' (1966). On 1 May 1948 he married Mary Elizabeth Jarvie ('b'. 1918/19), a widow, and daughter of John Henry Gorvin, civil servant; shortly thereafter she qualified as a medical practitioner. There were no children of the marriage, which was dissolved in 1956. 
When Bragg moved to the Royal Institution in 1954 Kendrew became a part-time reader at the Davy-Faraday Laboratory to help build up protein crystallography there, a post he held until 1968. When in 1962 the MRC unit moved from the Cavendish to the new MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology at Cambridge, he became deputy chairman of the new institution and head of its structural studies division. He continued to work on the refinement of the myoglobin structure, pushing the analysis to 1.4 Angstrom resolution. However, this work was never published. While continuing to run his division effectively his own interest in active research began to wane. Instead he took on an increasing number of advisory and organizational functions relating both to military and to civil research. 
In 1961, on the suggestion of Solly Zuckerman, chief scientific adviser to the Ministry of Defence, who had crossed paths with Kendrew in Cairo during the war, he was appointed part-time scientific adviser to the same ministry. He resigned the position in 1963, but continued to serve as an independent member on numerous defence panels and committees. From 1971 to 1974 he was chairman of the Defence Scientific Advisory Council. Parallel to his military advisory functions he was also involved in civilian science policy. He was a member of the Council for Scientific Policy from its inception under the Labour government in 1964 to its demise in 1972. He served as deputy chairman from 1969. He was also chairman of the standing committee on international scientific relations and chairman or member of many of the council's working groups, notably one on molecular biology. 
In December 1962 Kendrew became involved in the first informal discussions regarding the creation of a European molecular biology laboratory on the model of Conseil Europeen de Recherches Nucleaires, a plan which he embraced wholeheartedly. The successful conclusions of the negotiations, which stretched over more than a decade, owed much to Kendrew's perseverance and diplomatic skills. He was a founder member of the European Molecular Biology Organization; he served on its council (1963-71 and 1975-7) and as its secretary-general (1969-74). He was also secretary-general of the European Molecular Biology Conference, the intergovernmental organization for the support of molecular biology (1970-74). He headed the laboratory committee from its inception in 1969, became project leader in 1971, and in 1975 moved to Heidelberg as first director-general of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory. Kendrew's mediation was particularly decisive for the inclusion of Israel, which contributed with a generous gift to the launch of the plan. 
On his retirement from Heidelberg in 1982 Kendrew became president of St John's College, Oxford, a post which he filled for five years with his usual dedication and effectiveness. In 1987 he returned to his residence at the Old Guildhall, Linton, near Cambridge. 
Among the innumerable other offices he held Kendrew gave particular importance to his long association with the International Council of Scientific Unions, which he served as secretary-general (1974-80), vice-president (1982-3), president (1983-8), and past president (1988-90). He was also a member of the board of governors of the Weizmann Institute of Science (1963-97); a member of the BBC Science Consultative Group (1964-7); president of the International Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics (1969-72); president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1973-4); trustee of the British Museum (1974-9); trustee of the International Foundation for Science (1975-8); chairman of the natural sciences advisory board of the United Kingdom National Commission for UNESCO (1976-84); a member of the council, UN University (1980-86; chairman 1983-5); and chairman of the board of governors of the Joint Research Centre, EEC (1985-92). Among the later responsibilities he took on was the chief editorship of the 'Encyclopedia of Molecular Biology', published in 1994. 
Kendrew was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1960, appointed CBE in 1963, and knighted in 1974. He was a member of numerous societies and academies, including the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1964) and the Leopoldina (1965). He was a recipient of the royal medal of the Royal Society (1965) and held honorary degrees from several universities, including Cambridge (1997). 
Kendrew was highly valued for his sharp intellect, effectiveness, calm judgement, and diplomatic skills, as well as for the breadth of his interests and his sense of humour. Despite being somewhat aloof and reserved he was supportive and encouraging, especially with younger colleagues. He cultivated a deep interest in Renaissance art and music. He was fluent in French, German, and Italian, and spent as much time abroad as at home. A convinced European and socialist, he believed that science could help social development and international relations. 
Kendrew died of cancer at the Evelyn Hospital, Cambridge, on 23 August 1997, and was cremated. A large part of his estate formed a bequest to St John's College, Oxford, dedicated to supporting students from the developing world and to promoting music in the college. His papers were deposited at the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Both the 'sausage' and the 'forest of rods' models of myoglobin were given to the Science Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 67434


Kitson, Alexander Harper (1921-1997), trade unionist, was born on 21 October 1921 at Kirknewton, Midlothian, the son of Alexander Harper Kitson and his wife, Mary Lockhart, 'nee' Greig. His father, a lifelong trade unionist, had been a shale miner until, in the year Kitson was born, he was victimized after a lock-out; he then found a job in the coalmines but again, after the 1926 general strike, was blacklisted and hounded out of the industry. His mother's father, David Greig, was a railwayman and active in the National Union of Railwaymen at local and national level until he retired in 1937. With that family background the young Kitson grew up in a home that was dedicated to trade unionism and socialism -- and with the experience of economic deprivation and struggle. 
Kitson went to the local elementary school at Kirknewton and left at fourteen to become a van boy with St Cuthbert's Co-operative Society in Edinburgh. The year was 1935, when high unemployment throughout Scotland meant that times were hard. Young Kitson had to cycle 15 miles to work every day, but there were few options. Two years later the Co-op moved him to a milk delivery round -- work that was organized by the Shop Assistants' Union, which Kitson joined immediately and in which, in the family tradition, he quickly became a shop steward. It was while he worked that milk round that Kitson met Tommy (later Sean) Connery (Big Tam, as he was known) who became his mate on the milk round. It was the beginning of a lifelong friendship between Kitson and Sean Connery, who later went on to a job as a scene-shifter at Edinburgh's King's Theatre, the first step on the ladder to Hollywood and fame as 007. Connery's father was then a member of the Scottish Horse and Motormen's Union, the organization Kitson was later to lead. Kitson moved from his job with the Co-op to take up work as a road haulage driver and joined the Horse and Motormen's Union. At the age of twenty-five he became a full-time official of the union -- the youngest the union had ever had. During the war he rose rapidly in the hierarchy of the Horse and Motormen. He wanted to join the navy but was rejected on medical grounds and was then conscripted under the wartime regulations of the Ministry of Labour to drive trucks carrying war supplies across the country. On 21 March 1942 he married Annie Brown (1921/2-1997), a baker's confectioner and daughter of George Sutherland McLeod, a mason's labourer. There were two daughters of the marriage, Joyce and Irene. 
By the early 1950s Kitson was a well-known figure at his union conferences, and in 1956 he was appointed national organizer. He was elected general secretary of the union three years later, in 1959. Six years after that he agreed to merge his union, with its 20,000 members, with the Transport and General Workers' Union (TGWU), then under the leadership of Jack Jones. The two men established a firm friendship and Jones appointed Kitson a senior executive officer of the TGWU in 1971. Effectively this placed Kitson as number three to Jones, with Harry Urwin as the deputy general secretary. Many observers then began to regard Kitson as a possible successor to Jones. But that did not happen. When Jones retired in 1977 Kitson fought Moss Evans for the succession but was heavily defeated by Evans. Yet that did not mar their relationship, and when Evans took over as general secretary he appointed Kitson as his deputy on the retirement of Urwin. Indeed when Evans became seriously ill in 1981 Kitson took over control of the TGWU and remained acting general secretary for a full year, holding the post during a critical biennial delegate conference of the union in that year. 
Perhaps the most testing time for Kitson as number two in the TGWU was during the 'winter of discontent' in 1978-79, which eventually led to the fall of the Callaghan government and to Margaret Thatcher's premiership. Kitson worked closely with Evans, who later recalled Kitson's valiant attempt to avoid the worst impact of that period of intense industrial conflict. After weeks of the toughest negotiation with the road haulage employers at the end of December 1978, Kitson reached a compromise in the pay deal for the union's truck-drivers. He was convinced the deal would not only end the strike but much of the surrounding conflict as well. But the transport secretary, Bill Rodgers, vetoed the pay settlement. Kitson exploded and almost came to physical blows with the minister. To the end of his life Kitson held the view that had the Callaghan government allowed him to ratify that pay deal the industrial and political climate could have been transformed and the Callaghan government saved. Yet in some ways Kitson reached the high peak of his career in 1981, when he was acting general secretary of the TGWU and his union's representative on Labour's executive as well as chairman of the Labour Party that year. It was the year of the battle between Denis Healey and Tony Benn for the deputy leadership of the party. Unexpectedly Kitson steered his union vote away from Benn because, though well to the left, he had become persuaded that Benn and his followers might well destroy the Labour Party. With great political courage he led the union away from a vote for Benn -- probably the decisive factor in clearing the way for Healey. 
By the time Kitson retired in 1986 he had completed an exceptional record of posts in the labour movement: twenty-one years a member of the Scottish TUC general council and its chairman in 1966, and seventeen years as a member of Labour's national executive and latterly head of its international committee. He was also a pioneering campaigner for Scottish devolution -- though not independence -- bolstered by his own claim that he had personally persuaded Harold Wilson to change course in the 1970s and support devolution, so launching the Labour Party in that direction. There was one serious blip on Kitson's record of delicate diplomatic balance between his left-wing politics and his pragmatism as a union leader. During a visit to Moscow in 1977 as a fraternal delegate from the Scottish TUC to celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of the Soviet revolution, he was quoted in 'Pravda' as declaring that the Soviets had done more to provide jobs for British workers than any British government that century. It was a declaration that landed Kitson in great trouble, not only with the British media but with his own party leaders in London. He was summoned back from Moscow on the orders of the Callaghan government. Somehow he managed to extricate himself from his troubles, though it always remained something of a mystery as to precisely how he escaped still greater embarrassment. 
Outside trade unionism and politics Kitson's great love was the Heart of Midlothian Football Club, where he was chairman in 1993-4. He became a justice of the peace and ended his life as chairman of the Lothian Region Transport Board, of which he had been a director since 1986. He died at the Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, on 2 August 1997, after a long battle against cancer. He was survived by his two daughters, his wife having predeceased him by a few weeks. His funeral was held at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh, on 7 August 1997, and was attended by a host of Scottish Labour Party and trade union leaders. 


@@@@@


doc= 67435


Mitchell, Jean Brown (1904-1990), geographer, was born on 26 July 1904 at 396 Lower Broughton Road, Manchester, the elder of the two daughters (a son died in infancy) of James Mitchell (1866-1908), a veterinary surgeon, and his wife, Margaret Brodie Cowan (1877-1911). After six years at Macclesfield high school, she went to Cambridge in 1923 as an outstandingly able undergraduate to read for the newly established geographical tripos and graduated with first-class honours. She then lectured at Bedford College, London, before returning in 1931 to her undergraduate college, Newnham, as a research fellow. Later she became a fellow and college lecturer, and from 1945 until her retirement in 1968 she was a university lecturer in geography. 
Jean Mitchell's intellectual inclinations were those of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century naturalists. Endowed with a thirst for knowledge, she allied a sharp eye with a rigorously logical and precise mind. She saw geography as a discipline in which observation and analytic comparison could yield a description and understanding of variation in the earth's features. For her, geographical practice was grounded in observation: 'Let one thing be said at the outset and borne in mind throughout, it [geography] must be studied at first hand, on the ground itself' (Mitchell, 3). Physical geography was her first love, but when constraints of serious illness redirected her research into historical geography her talents found full expression. In unravelling the human geographies of the past her quick eye sought out both natural and man-made features. Her 'ground' included old maps and records. She would explore England by car -- and had travelled most of the roads, even tracks, from England to Scotland. She developed a shrewd knowledge of English architecture and of atlases and rare prints. For recording her observations she became an adept photographer. 
Jean Mitchell set out her creed in her influential 'Historical Geography' (1954), a volume in the 'Teach Yourself Geography' series. The book follows themes in the human geography of England and Wales, showing why topics repay historico-geographical attention and indicating sources and their use. Apart from this, she mainly contributed to compilations, including the 1938 and 1965 volumes prepared for the Cambridge meetings of the British Association. As one of the geographers in Cambridge during the Second World War she wrote part of the volumes of the naval intelligence division geographical handbooks covering Greece (1944-5). But it was rather by the superb quality of her teaching and by sharing her geographical insights in the field that Jean Mitchell influenced generations of geographers. True to her own precept that 'geography like charity should begin at home', she concerned herself much with East Anglian landscapes. Excursions became legendary for the variety of information conveyed, the vividness of the interpretation, the stamina displayed and demanded. Small in physique, Jean Mitchell could outlast most of her audience and outface them too if need be: 'Out of the bus. The rain won't hurt you. Skin is waterproof.' Through these excursions she passed on her message not only to undergraduates (to whom she was strongly committed) but also to lecturers from the colleges of education and her academic peers. 
Jean Mitchell helped to establish the reputation of geography as an academic discipline in Cambridge University and also formed part of the national geographical scene; she served as a member of the council of the Royal Geographical Society from 1951 to 1952 and 1958 to 1961, but Cambridge was her centre. Unmarried, and valiantly combating frequent bouts of severe ill health, she lived in college, unstintingly giving it, and also the department of geography, her loyalty and her time. In this she was a characteristic daughter of her generation. She was not a natural committee woman but was enthusiastically devoted to her students and to caring for and enhancing Newnham's fabric and its artistic contents. She was a generous benefactor to the college. Her interest in antique silver gave opportunities to exercise her discerning eye and taste, and she built for herself a small but fine collection of Scottish silver. Her working life was spent in England, but Scotland, where her parents had come from, remained her spiritual home. She retired to Edinburgh, and died at the Royal Victoria Hospital there on 5 January 1990. She was buried in Mortonhall cemetery, on 10 January. 
As memories of her teaching fade, 'Historical Geography' stands as a lasting testament to Jean Mitchell's qualities. It embodies many of the characteristics of its author: small in size, vigorous, erudite, exemplarily clear in argument, and imbued with enthusiasm, honesty, and humanity. 


@@@@@


doc= 67437


Cunningham, Anna, marchioness of Hamilton (d. 1647), noblewoman, was the fourth daughter of three sons and six daughters born to James Cunningham, sixth earl of Glencairn (c.1552-1630) ['see under 'Cunningham family] and his first wife, Mariot or Margaret (died 1610), daughter of Colin Campbell of Glenorchy and his second wife, Catherine Ruthven. Margaret Cunningham (d. 1622?), who married Sir James Hamilton, master of Evandale, was her sister. Anna's date of birth is unknown, but on 30 January 1603 she was contracted to marry the fourteen-year-old Lord James Hamilton (1589-1625), eldest son of John Hamilton, first marquess of Hamilton (1539/40-1604), bringing with her a dowry of 40,000 merks Scots ($2222 sterling). The following year her husband inherited his father's titles and James VI and I subsequently made him a gentleman of the bedchamber, a privy councillor, and steward of the royal household. He spent much of his time at court, leaving his plain but capable wife to bring up their family of at least eight children, including William Hamilton, later second duke of Hamilton, and run his vast estates. 
This the marchioness did, with energy and decision. She rode constantly round their lands, which stretched from Arran in the west of Scotland to Kinneil in the east, and oversaw all the expenditure. She did not learn to write until adult life, but the accounts bear her signature of authorization and some of them are entirely in her bold, italic hand, her calculations done in an alarming mixture of arabic and roman numerals. She initiated building work, employed the well-known decorative painter Valentine Jenkin to embellish ceilings and walls both at Hamilton Palace, the principal family seat, and at Kinneil, re-stocked the palace deer park, and undertook extensive planting. In the 1630s, thanking her relative Sir Colin Campbell of Glenorchy for fir seeds, she told him: 'Belive me, I think moir of them nor ye can imagin, for I love them moir nor I dou all the frout tris in the wordil. I have alrady ane four or fayf houndir of my awin planting that is pratti treis. (Breadalbane muniments, GD112/860b)' As is evident from her will, the marchioness also supervised industrial activities. She left to her eldest son the rights to her coalworks at Kinneil. In the past, she said, this enterprise had cost her much money and her servants had reaped the rewards, but she believed that the works were now in such a good state that they would bring him substantial benefit. Likewise she left him all her salt pans, 'for the profit wil be greit give [if] God send piece' (Hamilton archives, RH98/29/3). 
After her husband's sudden death in London in 1625, Anna continued to run the estates for their eldest son, James Hamilton, third marquess and later first duke of Hamilton (1606-1649). He was Charles I's principal Scottish adviser, and the outbreak of the first bishops' war in 1639 brought mother and son into conflict. As a convinced covenanter who was said to have attended conventicles in person, and who participated in the Shotts revival about 1630, the marchioness was bitterly opposed to Charles's ecclesiastical innovations, and when her son was appointed to command a royalist fleet sent north in June 1638 to crush the king's opponents she raised a troop of cavalry for the covenanting cause. According to contemporary reports, she rode at its head by day and by night, with her pistols and carbine at her side, threatening to shoot her son with a silver bullet should he set foot in Scotland. 
The marchioness none the less continued to look after her son's estates, and three years later he sent his elder daughter, Anne ['see 'Hamilton, Anne (1632-1716)], to be brought up by her. He himself returned to Hamilton in 1646 and sent for his younger daughter, Susanna. The girls were deeply upset when the marchioness fell seriously ill the following autumn during a visit to Edinburgh. Their father declined to take them to see her, however, telling them, 'Your sorrows would be increased, to be an eye-witness of her weak condition' (Marshall, 'Duchess Anne', 23). She died soon afterwards and was buried on 16 September 1647 at Hamilton parish church as she had wished, 'in the tombe of Hamilton, besayd my deir lord' (Hamilton archives, RH98/29/3). 


@@@@@


doc= 67440


Macdonnell, Angus, Lord Macdonnell and Aros (d. 1680), chief of clan Macdonnell of Glengarry, was the son of Alasdair (or Alexander) Macdonnell of Glengarry and Jean, daughter of Allen Cameron of Lochiel, chief of clan Cameron. He was brought up a Roman Catholic, although it is unclear if he remained so after the late 1640s. By 23 November 1641 his father had died, and Angus was the heir apparent of his grandfather Donald Macdonnell, chief of the Glengarry Macdonnells, and, since the latter was nearly 100 years old, effectively in charge of the clan. That day Sir Donald MacDonald of Sleat, Skye, acted as cautioner to the sum of 10,000 merks that Macdonnell would appear in Edinburgh before the privy council within eight days, in connection with the murder on 15 August that year in Inverness of two followers of William Mackintosh of Torcastle by a group of Glengarry Macdonnells. The murderers had been put to the horn on 20 September, but failed to appear. Macdonnell refused to provide caution for the offenders and the council committed him to Edinburgh Castle. On 1 March 1642, after thirteen weeks in prison, he relented. Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat acted as his cautioner for compliance to the sum of $10,000 Scots. Between 29 October 1642 and 24 January 1643 Macdonnell and Torcastle sought to resolve the issue of compensation for the Mackintoshes; the former's supporters in the arbitration included Tarbat, Thomas Fraser of Strechine, and William Fraser of Culbokie. Some idea of the armament of the Glengarry clan comes from a letter, which refers to Macdonnell's retinue 'neir the parts of Innernes with blowin pipes, bowes, gunnes and other offensive weapons' ('Reg. PCS', 2nd ser., 1.575-6). The final judgment demanded that he pay 2300 merks to the victims' widows and orphans. 
In December 1644 Macdonnell's grandfather sided with the royalist army of James Graham, marquess of Montrose, and Macdonnell, as effective military leader of the clan, took the field. His regiment fought in the centre of the royalist line at Montrose's victory at Inverlochy on 2 February 1645. That day his grandfather died and Angus became chief of the clan. In April he and his men served at the storming of Dundee and during the harrowing retreat from the burgh; on 9 May they helped the marquess win the desperate battle of Auldearn; on 2 July Glengarry commanded the centre of Montrose's army at the victory at Alford; and on 15 August he led 500 Macdonnells in the rout of covenanters at Kilsyth. In the next few months he allied with Alasdair MacColla MacDonald in attacking the covenanter Campbells in Argyll. On 8 September 1646 the synod of Argyll excommunicated him for being an unrepentant royalist, but by the end of that year he had ceased military operations and earned a pardon from the covenanter regime. In June 1647 he reluctantly led some clansmen to Ireland when Alasdair retreated at the approach of David Leslie's covenanter army, and joined the papal-Gaelic faction of the confederates at Charlemont, Armagh. Cardinal Rinuccini divided the force and sent Glengarry to serve with General Thomas Preston's Leinster army in an attempt to take Dublin. On 8 August at Dungan Hill the chief led a regiment to bloody defeat. Few of his men survived the battle, but Glengarry escaped and continued to serve with a contingent of Scots and Irish in the papalist faction. In October 1648 royalist confederates captured him and others in the battle of Wexford, but Randal Macdonnell, marquess of Antrim, successfully pleaded for his release. Glengarry now went into a double exile, travelling to the court of the prince of Wales on the continent. The covenanter regime forfeited him for his royalist and anti-Campbell actions in 1649. 
Glengarry returned to Scotland with Charles II at Garmouth on 24 June 1650, and during the next decade played a large role in highland affairs. During the English rule of Scotland he stoutly opposed the conquerors. In mid-August 1652 he raised 4000 men, and, as acting general of the Scottish royalists, sent a messenger to Charles II. In September to October he headed a coalition of Macdonnells, Macleans, Macleods, Lovat Frasers, and other clans and requested the dispatch of arms and John Middleton as the official commander. On 22 January 1653 English intelligence reported that Glengarry had between 1500 and 2000 men, but that he had failed to hold a royalist conference. In mid-February his army disbanded. Following meetings of royalists in the highlands, Glengarry joined William Cunningham, earl of Glencairn's 1200-man army. By December, despite royalist successes, Glengarry and his allies had retreated into Badenoch. In early April 1654 Glencairn had over 5000 men, but rifts weakened the royalist rising. Glencairn wounded the professional soldier Sir George Monro (serving in his army) in a duel after the latter called the highlanders, chiefly the Glengarry Macdonnells, thieves and robbers. Glengarry himself became involved in a bitter dispute with John Murray, earl of Atholl, that nearly led to a duel when the latter's tenants paid taxes to the English. An earlier difference (spring 1653) with Archibald Campbell, Lord Lorne, over Glencairn's position as leader, nearly caused a duel in September. In October to December, with a warrant from Glencairn, Glengarry sought to arrest Lorne. This dispute eventually quieted down. Meanwhile Lochiel had become disenchanted with Glengarry for failing to make a royalist rendezvous, but instead meeting with the English Colonel William Brayne. 
On 31 October 1653 Glengarry received a royal commission as major-general in Scotland. During the year Charles wrote that he had 'a very good opinion of his affection and ability to serve' (Firth, 'Scotland and the Commonwealth', 310-11), but denied promising him the earldom of Ross. However, on 6 February 1654 the king issued a warrant to John Campbell, earl of Loudoun and chancellor, making Glengarry 'Lord MackDonald and Earle of' (Firth, 'Scotland and the Protectorate', 31). On 30 May Glengarry was noted as the 'only person for dyvers months that adhered to my Lord Glencarne' (ibid., 111). In August he was reputedly leading 1550 men. But by October-November the Macdonnells had become reluctant to follow their chief, probably owing to the English laying waste to the clan lands. In December Glengarry failed in an attempt to rouse the Camerons to loyalty to the royalist cause. The following May he agreed to treat with the English. On 8 June he surrendered in hopes of securing an indemnity for his acts of 1644-55. However, the English forfeited him, and gave his lands to Archibald Campbell, marquess of Argyll, who in turn granted them to Lochiel. In autumn 1656 General George Monck had the chief arrested owing to fears of a royalist rising. On 5 October 1658 Glengarry went to Inverlochy to hear Richard Cromwell proclaimed as lord protector. Between 12 August and 7 September 1659 he signed the engagement for peaceable behaviour with Monck. Nevertheless, some of his clansmen were in arms in November and had started robbing people, which caused the English to give Lochiel a commission against them. 
The Restoration brought a positive uplift to Glengarry's fortunes. Although he failed in his attempt to secure the earldom of Ross, which would have given him precedence over all the other Macdonald chieftains, on 20 December 1660 he received a charter of nobility as Lord Macdonnell and Aros and in practice the Scottish government occasionally called him the leader of all MacDonalds. His military career for the Stuarts had burdened him with debts of $148,000 Scots by 1661, but on 23 February that year the Scottish privy council granted him an annuity of $300, which increased to $500 on 7 February 1676. With his status enhanced and a degree of financial security achieved, Macdonnell became an 'habitue' of the court in London, a house near Inverness, and the parliament in Edinburgh. He attended the last in 1661, 1662, 1663, 1667, 1669, and 1670. On 15 April 1661 the estates overturned the forfeiture imposed on him in 1649. In 1662 it assigned him recompense for his losses as a royalist from the marquess of Argyll's forfeited estates. Parliament also recognized his local prominence by making him a commissioner of supply for Inverness-shire in 1667 and 1678. 
However, the Restoration period was not without problems for the new peer. Macdonnell maintained a consistent hostility to certain parties -- chiefly the Campbells led by Archibald, ninth earl of Argyll -- until his death. In 1665 he joined the Macleans, the MacIans of Glencoe, the Camerons, and the MacDonalds of Keppoch in holding Mull against the earl. His feud with the burgh of Inverness in 1666 led the privy council to demand that both parties post caution of 20,000 merks for peaceful behaviour. In 1667 he found himself pursued by the council due to a charge from the earl of Seaforth. The earl claimed that Macdonnell had stopped a messenger from delivering a summons on 30 October 1667, and that twenty-four Macdonnells armed with swords, pistols, muskets, and dirks had threatened and robbed the messenger. In mid-February 1669 Macdonnell appeared at the council in Edinburgh and signed a bond for peaceable behaviour of his highlanders. Two weeks later, on 4 March, the council found Seaforth's charge unproven, and ordered the earl to pay Macdonnell $600 Scots. In November 1670 Macdonnell was at feud with Cameron of Lochiel, and the council ordered both to keep the peace. His earlier troubles with the Mackintoshes continued; for on 18 July 1672 the council ordered Macdonnell to find caution of 5000 merks due to some of his clansmen troubling the laird of Mackintosh Torcastle. Unsurprisingly, Macdonnell's dispute with the Campbells endured. In 1674 he had joined with other MacDonalds, the MacQuarries, Camerons, and Macleans in opposing the earl of Argyll's quest to gain Mull. Nevertheless, on 18 September 1677 he managed to gain a commission for maintaining peace in the highlands at an annual stipend of $200. The commission continued until mid-November 1678, but thereafter he refused to obey the council. His disobedience in the midst of fears of a highland dimension of the Popish Plot, which led to a council order for disarming Catholic clansmen, was definitely ill-timed. A herald's attempt to cite him to the council or be charged a rebel led to an attack on the official that Christmas at Invergarry by a group of Macdonnell men dressed as women. His fortunes plunged further on 12 April 1679 when the council gave Argyll a commission to pursue the now outlawed Lord Macdonnell. On 27 May the council declared him to be in rebellion, and on 14 August he suffered his third forfeiture. In 1679 Argyll finally managed to overrun Mull and the other Maclean lands, despite Macdonnell's opposition. The change in government (with the fall of Argyll's patron Lauderdale in August to October and the arrival of James, duke of York, as regent in December) rescinded the declarations against Macdonnell. Still, on 15 March 1680 he was publicly rebuked for threatening the lord treasurer in Edinburgh. 
Macdonnell had married in 1646 Margaret, eldest daughter of Sir Donald MacDonald of Sleat. They had a daughter who married Montgomery of Coilsfield, Ayrshire. Macdonnell died in Edinburgh on 6 December 1680, and was buried in Holyrood Abbey. Lacking a direct male heir, the peerage lapsed, and the chiefship fell to his nephew Ranald Macdonnell of Scotus. The judgements on Macdonnell's lengthy career were harsh, even from fellow royalists. Lochiel concluded, 'Glengarry... had he behaved himself with the same integrity to his neightbours ['sic'] as he did to his Prince, he had dyed with a very unblemished character' (Cameron, 259-60). The leading seventeenth-century Gaelic poet Ian Lom MacDonald also condemned him: 'You seem to me to be along time in England, being ruined by gaming. I would prefer you in a coat and plaid than in a cloak which fastens; and that you would walk in a sprightly manner in trews made of tartan cloth and visit for a spell in grassy Glenquoich [the glen in the midst of the clan lands]. (Macinnes, 128)' 



@@@@@


doc= 67445


Forbes, Sir William, of Craigievar, first baronet (d. 1648), politician, was the eldest son of William Forbes (died 'c'.1627), of Menie, later of Craigievar, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Margaret Udward or Edward, daughter of the provost of Edinburgh; his parents had married in 1603. His father, known as Merchant Willie or Dantzig Willie, was a younger brother of Patrick Forbes of Corse, from 1618 bishop of Aberdeen and uncle of the eirenicist John Forbes of Corse. William was served heir to his father for his lands of Craigievar on 24 March 1629. His inheritance included Craigievar Castle, begun in the Flemish style by the Mortimer family but sold to Merchant Willie in 1610 and only completed in 1626. On 30 April 1630, ostensibly for his loyalty but more probably for his money, Charles I created William a baronet of Nova Scotia. In 1635 Forbes married Bathia (died after 1649), second daughter of Sir Archibald Murray of Blackbarony; they had two sons and three daughters. 
Sir William had been appointed a justice of the peace for Aberdeenshire in 1634, but it was through the civil strife that engulfed Scotland over the signing of the national covenant of 1638 that he became a figure of importance, not just in local but also in national affairs. From an early stage of the dispute, in spite of his earlier favour with the king and the Episcopalian tendencies of his kinsmen of Corse, Sir William took the side of the covenanters against the supporters of the king. In 1638, for instance, he used his patronage of the wealthy parsonage of Kincardine to secure the submission to the Glasgow assembly of his younger brother John Forbes, whose opposition to the covenant was driving him to leave Scotland for Ireland. From 1641 onwards Sir William was prominent on the committees through which the covenanters sought to govern Scottish affairs. In that year he was appointed a commissioner for receiving brotherly assistance from the parliament of England and for conserving the treaty, and a commissioner for manufactures. In 1643 he was appointed to the committee for the loan and tax, and to that for war, also serving on the latter in 1644, 1646, and 1648. In 1644 he was also appointed to the committees for the north, for propositions of peace, and for negotiating with Sweden. He served on the committee of estates in 1644-5. He was on the committee on losses in 1645 and the commission of visitation to Aberdeen University in 1645-6, was a commissioner for re-evaluation of Aberdeenshire in 1647, and was appointed sheriff of Aberdeen in 1647. He was granted $10,000 Scots in reparation for war-related losses in 1647 and had the barony of Logiefintray ratified to him by parliament in 1648, but he appears soon afterwards to have suffered a downturn in fortune and favour. Despite his being elected a commissioner of parliament for Aberdeenshire in 1648, another commissioner took his place. 
An eighteenth-century descendant claimed that Forbes, ultimately sickened by the depredations of the covenanters, sought to distance himself from them and, gathering his wealth, planned to put it and himself at the service of the king. The covenanters forestalled this by stripping him of his assets on the pretext of acting for the public good. So affected by this turn of events was Sir William that he died soon afterwards, between 19 June and 13 September 1648, allegedly of a broken heart. His wife survived him, and his twelve-year-old son and heir, John, became liable for payment of significant debts when, in 1653, Alexander Lindsay succeeded in having the family patrimony apprized to the value of $44,612 Scots. 


@@@@@


doc= 67446


Shute, Samuel (d. 1685), local politician, was the son of Francis Shute and his wife, Elizabeth. A linen draper by trade, he lived in the parish of St Peter's Cornhill, London, from 1658, when he married Anne Caryl (died 1711), daughter of the Independent divine Joseph Caryl. They had at least five children: three sons (two of whom died before Samuel and the third the year after) and two daughters, both of whom were alive when he made his will in April 1684. 
Uncertainties in the Shute genealogy make Samuel's relationship to the civil war activist Richard Shute unclear, but they were probably closely related. Samuel and his brother Benjamin, with whom he has been confused, moved in the same London Independent circles that had attracted Richard Shute. They and their wives belonged to Joseph Caryl's gathered church; and, when Caryl's church merged with that of Dr John Owen after Caryl's death in 1673, they were friends of their new pastor and his assistant, Robert Ferguson. Yet Samuel and Benjamin Shute also held offices that point to the prominence the London Shutes had achieved during the civil war and the interregnum: Samuel was the king's draper in 1681; and the brothers were controllers for the ports of Cardiff and Swansea. 
Samuel Shute played a leading role, as a major civic whig, in the London conclusion to the parliamentary crisis of 1678-83. In 1681 he became prime warden of the Dyers' Company. He was nominated for aldermanic vacancies in 1681-2, but he was passed over by the tory aldermanic majority. He served on common council for Cornhill in 1682-3 and, contrary to the wishes of Charles II, he was elected sheriff of London and Middlesex, with Thomas Pilkington, for 1681-2. 
As sheriff Samuel Shute was fully involved in whig efforts to prevent Charles from regaining control of the corporation of London. He and Pilkington impanelled the London juries that returned 'ignoramus' verdicts to the government's indictments of Stephen College in July 1681 and of the earl of Shaftesbury in November 1681. Indeed Shute reportedly encouraged the whig crowds that celebrated Shaftesbury's acquittal with the words, 'Shout, boys,... shout' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 583). Shute and Pilkington were similarly instrumental in securing common hall majorities for whig candidates in the London shrieval election of 1682, only to see them overturned by the crown's agents. They clashed repeatedly with the loyalist lord mayor about polling, defied orders of the privy council, and were dispatched to the Tower at one point by an enraged monarch. Shute was one of fourteen leading civic whigs charged with riot in this election, a charge of which they were convicted in 1683. Shute was then fined 1000 marks. 
Tory satirists such as John Dryden and Nahum Tate dismissed Shute as 'hot-brain'd', as a lightweight 'shuttlecock', and as being as often 'warm with wine' as he was 'drunk with zeal' (Lord and others, 3.275, 195). Shute was regularly in the company of whig grandees such as Shaftesbury and Monmouth during his shrievalty; and, after the disclosures about whig plotting in 1682-3, Lord Howard of Escrick claimed that he had been told that Shute was 'ready for action' ('CSP dom.', 'July-September 1683', 92). Shute's son Francis, who died in 1683, apparently acted as an intermediary between Howard and Robert West, one of the masterminds of the Rye House plot. In the absence of other evidence, the government ignored Howard's information about Samuel Shute. 
Shute died in 1685 with personalty worth about $9000, city property, a house in Essex, and lands in Shropshire, Glamorgan, and Montgomeryshire. He was buried on 12 November 1685 in the parish church of St Peter's Cornhill. Two kinsmen preserved the family's prominence into the next generation. Samuel Shute (1662-1742) was governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony from 1716 to 1727. John Shute Barrington (1678-1734) was MP for Berwick upon Tweed from 1715 to 1723. 


@@@@@


doc= 67447


Campbell, Lord Neil, of Ardmaddie (c.1630-1692), colonial speculator, was the second of six children of Archibald Campbell, marquess of Argyll (1605x7-1661), and his wife, Lady Margaret (1610-1678), second daughter of William Douglas, seventh earl of Morton; his parents lived mainly at Inveraray, Argyll. He was the younger brother of Archibald Campbell, ninth earl of Argyll (d. 1685). It is likely that Lord Neil's formal education began at home, but in 1645 he attended classes at the University of Glasgow. From 1647 to 1649, he and his elder brother made a grand tour of France and Italy. Notwithstanding their father's political ascendancy as covenanter leader during the civil wars of the 1640s, and his political accommodation with Cromwell during the interregnum, there is little extant documentation highlighting Lord Neil's political stance or activities during this period. When, after the restoration of Charles II in 1660, Argyll was indicted for high treason, Lord Neil travelled to London to deal with his father's affairs, but was unable to prevent his execution in May 1661. On 23 January 1668 Lord Neil married his cousin Lady Vere Ker (1649-1674), third daughter of the third earl of Lothian. The couple had two sons, the younger of whom was the Scottish episcopal bishop Archibald Campbell, and three daughters; it is likely that they spent most of their short married life at Ardmaddie Castle, Argyll. 
During the following decade, Lord Neil assisted his brother in the ongoing feud between the Campbell and Gillean clans by leading two invasions on Maclean lands in Mull. As staunch presbyterians and covenanters, both Lord Neil and his brother opposed Charles II's enforced return to episcopacy. Events, centring on the earl's reservations in signing the 'Test Act', conspired to precipitate Argyll's forfeiture and flight to Holland in 1681, and in consequence, to Lord Neil being constantly under suspicion. To provide himself with a transatlantic refuge if the political situation in Scotland became too dangerous, and to shore up his dwindling wealth, Lord Neil participated in colonial ventures in the Americas. First he became a leading undertaker of the little-known Carolina Company, a company set up in 1681 to break into the Anglo-American trade by establishing a colony at Port Royal on the Ashley River, South Carolina; and second, he became an active participator and fractioner in the infant colony of East New Jersey set up by Robert Barclay of Ury. Along with his business partner, Robert Blackwood, an Edinburgh merchant, Lord Neil invested $1100 sterling in transporting servants and goods to East New Jersey, and in buying 8000 acres of land on the Rariton River and a 12-acre site and two plots by the sound in the colony's capital, Perth Amboy. 
In 1685, possibly in March, Lord Neil married his second wife, Susan, eldest daughter of Sir Alexander Menzies of Weem; they had four children. On his brother's return from exile and rebellion against the Stuart monarchy in August 1685, Lord Neil was held under bond in Edinburgh, but was subsequently allowed to sail for East New Jersey. The following year he became the colony's third deputy governor. However, in 1687 he requested the council's permission to resign his position and return to Scotland, where he took up the post of governor of Dumbarton Castle, though he lived mainly at Nether Lorn, Argyll. Despite his colonial ventures and the income from his extensive estates in Lorne and Kintyre, Lord Neil was in considerable debt when he died in April 1692. He was buried on 11 April in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh. By a disposition, dated 8 July 1693, his eldest son and heir, Charles, made over all his inheritance to the earl of Breadalbane for $20,000 Scots ($1666 sterling) and relief of all debts and claims against Lord Neil. 


@@@@@


doc= 67448


Thomas Venner (b. 1641), baptized on 16 May 1641 at Salem, was also to follow his father as a rebel, taking part in the Monmouth rising of 1685. He served as an officer in an English regiment in the Netherlands, but joined Monmouth after he was cashiered. Commissioned lieutenant-colonel by the duke, Venner served in Monmouth's personal regiment, where Nathaniel Wade was one of his majors. An adviser to Lord Grey during the rebellion, Venner sustained a stomach wound at Bridport on 14 June. After learning of Argyll's defeat, he advised Monmouth to flee. When Grey prevailed on Monmouth to continue fighting, Venner and Thomas Parsons returned to the Netherlands, ostensibly at Robert Ferguson's request, to purchase weapons and ammunition with which to launch an uprising in Ireland. But this may have been a story concocted by Captain John Tillier to save his own life following his capture. During the autumn of 1685 Venner was in Cleves, threatening to avenge his father's death. According to the informer Edmund Everard, he belonged to a faction of militant exiles that included Major John Manley, and was expecting the inauguration of Christ's earthly kingdom by 1688. 


@@@@@


doc= 67449


Colville, James, first Lord Colville of Culross (c.1551-1629), soldier and diplomat, was the first son of Sir James Colville, ('b'. 1532?, died in or before 1562), laird of Easter Wemyss, and his wife, Janet, daughter of Sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven. He was the grandson of Sir James Colville of Ochiltree and Easter Wemyss (died 1540). Like many of the Fife gentry at this time Colville was a committed Calvinist and spent his younger years fighting for the Reformation in Scotland and France. In 1567 he reportedly accompanied the earl of Moray to France, where he attached himself to the Huguenot cause, subsequently becoming a lifelong friend of the future Henri IV. By 1569 he had returned to Scotland to fight as a staunch supporter of the king's men in the civil war. In 1570 he married Isabel, daughter of Patrick Ruthven, third Lord Ruthven (c.1520-1566), and his first wife, Jean or Janet Douglas; they had two sons. In 1572 Colville participated in the Leith convention that conferred the regency on James Douglas, earl of Morton. 
Colville spent time in both Scotland and France during the following years, returning from France on 27 July 1582 with letters from Henri and the prince de Conde which, among other things, apparently warned against Esme Stewart and other crypto-Catholics who then dominated the young James VI and his government. A month later Colville participated in the Calvinist 'coup d'etat' that would subsequently be known as the Ruthven raid. The counter-revolution that followed in June 1583 prompted Colville to flee to France, but by September he had returned, made his peace with the king, and obtained pardon. By 1586 he had earned the king's confidence sufficiently to be sent on an embassy to France 'and other places beyond the sea' ('Reg. PCS', 4.127). In 1589 he went as ambassador to England, and James's description of him as 'my trusty and familiar servant' was doubtless more than simply formulaic ('Salisbury MSS', 13.408). Still, his efforts to achieve the grand promises made by Elizabeth at the height of the armada crisis, his prime charge, were unsuccessful, and the mission was generally regarded as having 'wrought little good' -- a circumstance that caused him considerable political embarrassment in Scotland ('CSP Scot.', 10.72). Despite this failure Colville again served as Scottish ambassador to England and also to France in 1594, a mission successful at least in its French objectives. A further mission to France was mooted in 1597 and again in 1598 but probably did not take place. Colville was generally recognized as the key figure in Scottish-French relations, and the individual who restored Scotland's 'ancient' privileges there. 
In spite of his abiding French connections Colville was rightly perceived by contemporaries as one of the most resolute members of the English party in Scotland. He was constantly in touch with the English court, especially with Francis Walsingham, at one point suggesting to Walsingham that he would 'be les suspectit' if he travelled from Paris directly to Scotland rather than via England ('CSP Scot.', 7.210). His strenuous opposition to James's Danish match actually placed him in physical danger from the Edinburgh merchants. On his return to Scotland in 1589 he began raising troops for Henri's service, and eventually joined the king with a force of some 1500 Scottish soldiers. He served briefly as the military governor of St Valery. Yet in December 1595, with the prospect of a second armada invasion, he also offered to help Elizabeth defend England with 'a band of gentlemen his friends of good action' (ibid., 12.74). Immediately after the 1589 mission to England, Colville had written a memorandum in which he claimed, 'I shal insist withe his majestie for the ferm unioun of the realmes' (ibid., 10.72). Colville's commitment to both England and France (and to a French marriage for James) did not strike him or his contemporaries as in any way incompatible. Still less did they appear inconsistent with his Scottish identity. The Reformation gave coherence to all of these endeavours and Colville's ideological priorities are beyond doubt -- steadily worsening his financial circumstances to a point verging on catastrophe by 1601. Meanwhile, his first wife having died, Colville had married some time before 1599 Helen Schaw, widow of Robert Mowbray of Barnbougle. His younger, but by 1595 only surviving son from his first marriage, Robert Colville (died 1614), married after 24 September 1603 Christian Bruce; it was their son James Colville (1604-1654) who was to be Colville's eventual heir. 
Colville's best opportunity to press for a 'ferm unioun' between England and Scotland came with the 1603 union of crowns. Made Lord Colville in 1604 and an occasional participant on the Scottish privy council, he played arguably his most important, if least documented, role as a promoter of King James's British vision. In 1607 and 1608 the government orchestrated a famous test case intended to establish the right of Scots born after the regnal union to inherit property in England. Such right of inheritance was claimed for Colville's three-year-old grandson James, and it is impossible that Colville was other than instrumental in the government's strategy. Raising the case had proved no easy matter, for the English approached the question only with great reluctance, and contemporaries at court spoke of 'all the difficulties in reducing [the issue]... to a public judgement' -- 'the judges misliked any fiction to be used in a case of such consequence' ('Salisbury MSS', 19.275). The government faced a real problem, and Colville's part in its solution cannot have been incidental or trivial. The case -- known in English legal records as 'Robert Calvin's case' (Calvin being a corruption of Colvil or Colvin, and Robert a conflation of the child with his father) -- assumed major importance for three reasons: it raised fundamental constitutional issues about the connection between the person of the king and the fabric of the law, and it defined British citizenship for the next two centuries; but, for the king and Colville, it was virtually the last direct effort to create a genuinely British polity. 
Subsequently, Colville attended the parliaments of 1609 and 1612, the 1625 convention, and, it seems, the 1618 Perth assembly. He also sought to maintain the coherence and privileges of the Scots guards in France, making trips there for that purpose in 1611 and 1623. Colville is said to have died at his home in Tillicoultry, Clackmannanshire, from a fall, in September 1629. His widow was living in August 1630. 


@@@@@


doc= 67452


Barnaby, Francis (b. 1573, d. in or after 1621), Roman Catholic priest, was born in the parish of Cawthorne, Yorkshire, on 21 May 1573 to Thomas Barnaby of Barnby basin and his wife, Beatrice Burdett. According to his own account he was educated at Oxford University and the inns of court, and arrived at Rheims on 13 January 1593. From there he was sent to Rome where he was admitted to the English College on 14 March 1593 and ordained on 30 November 1598. He returned to England the following year and was imprisoned in the Marshalsea by June 1599, but it appears that he was there chiefly to report to the government on his fellow priests. Along with other prisoners he was sent to Framlingham in 1601, by which time he was a strong advocate of the appellants' cause in their row with the Jesuits over loyalty to the regime. He was given leave to go to Rome with Christopher Bagshawe to prosecute the appellants' cause there in 1601, but after a disruptive stay at Douai he did not continue his journey, returning to England by way of Paris early in 1602. He was prisoner in the Clink by 11 April, but was given much freedom, being in constant touch with Bagshawe in Paris, with Bancroft, bishop of London, as a go-between. He was among those appellants who signed the memorial of allegiance in January 1603, and was given permission to cross to Paris where he also signed the memorial to Clement VIII on 3 May 1603. He travelled between the Clink, which was more or less his home, and Paris for the next year, and was probably in Paris when Bagshawe drew up the articles for peace and concord among English Catholic clergy in August 1603 in which it was suggested that Persons, Garnet, and other leading Jesuits be removed from England and the archpriest be deposed. It was in that year that he collaborated with William Clark in publishing a tract against Persons, 'A Reply unto a Certain Libel Lately Set Forth by Fr Persons', arguing the appellants' case. Back in prison in November 1603 Barnaby revealed details of the Bye plot, for which two of his fellow priests were executed, to the government, and in 1604 was granted a special pardon by the archbishop of Canterbury. In that year he was said to be active in Yorkshire, visiting his family home in the company of Anthony Champney, but nothing further is known of his activities until he turned up in Ireland as chaplain to Mabel Browne, a relative of the Catholic peer Viscount Montague, as a signatory to the oath of allegiance in Dublin in 1612. Described in 1599 as 'of personage tall and slender, fair complexion with a fresh colour, his hair reddish; no beard' ('Salisbury MSS', 9.200), his last appearance in the record finds him back at his family home in Barnby on 8 February 1621 writing to the archbishops of York and Canterbury with details of the activities of Catholic priests, an act consistent with his previous commitment to allegiance, but one which tarnished his reputation with his co-religionists at the time and subsequently. 


@@@@@


doc= 67453


Biddulph, Peter (1602-1657), Roman Catholic priest, was born in the county town of Stafford, the fourth son of Richard Biddulph of Biddulph Hall and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Draycott of Painsley, a recusant couple who had two other sons as priests, each of whom also used the alias Fitton. After some schooling in England, where he learned Latin and Greek, Peter studied at the English College at St Omer from 1613 until 1619, when he went to join the English College at Rome, which he entered on 28 October. He received minor orders on 11 July 1621, but two years later, on 23 October 1623, he was expelled for insubordination with five others. He was considered the ringleader of the affair, which became known as the Fitton rebellion, but the Vatican authorities took a more tolerant view, ordering the college on 21 November 1624 to send Biddulph and most of his fellow rebels to Douai, where they were to continue their studies at the expense of the English College. 
Biddulph was ordained priest at Cambrai on 24 September 1625 and remained at Douai until May 1627, save for a brief visit to Paris in 1625. On 14 May 1627 he left for England but returned to Douai on 13 November, moving to Paris a week later, where he continued his studies at Arras College. In July 1631 he was sent to Rome as clergy agent for Bishop Richard Smith, who had taken up residence at Paris that year. Smith's attempts to exercise episcopal authority did not get a sympathetic hearing in Rome and Biddulph's position was an unenviable one, especially given his previous relations with the English College. He asked to be allowed to return home in 1636, and this was granted in March 1638, when he was admitted to court. He gained some credit there and in 1640 was again sent to Rome as clergy agent, this time with the additional responsibility of representing Queen Henrietta Maria until the arrival there of Kenelm Digby. He left Rome in 1643 and was made dean of the English chapter in 1644, though he does not seem to have resided in England but operated through his subdean, Mark Harrington. He was probably living in the exile Catholic community at Paris during these years and was named, along with William Clifford, as superior of the College de Tournai on 20 April 1645. He apparently returned to London to preside at the general assembly of the chapter held in August 1649, and was sent once more to Rome as clergy agent in May 1650, remaining there until 1654, and resigning the agency in January 1655, when he was living in Florence. On the death of Bishop Smith his name was one of those presented to the papal nuncio as episcopabilis. The following year the London chapter wanted him to resume his work as agent in Rome, but his health was poor, and he was given the post of librarian to Prince Leopold, the brother of the grand duke of Tuscany. He died at Florence in the middle of 1657, his death being noted by the chapter at London on 29 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 67455


Goodman, John (bap. 1592, d. 1645), Roman Catholic priest, was baptized at Ruthin, Denbighshire, on 7 November 1592, the son of Gawen Goodman and his second wife, Gaynor Price. He was therefore a first cousin to Godfrey Goodman, bishop of Gloucester, whose ambivalent relationship to the Church of Rome made him an object of suspicion to his more godly colleagues. John Goodman was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1612, graduating BA in 1617. He took orders on 20 September 1618 and went to London, where he was curate of St Nicholas Olave for a time before his conversion to Catholicism by Richard Ireland. This took place in Paris about 1621 and Goodman entered the seminary at Douai on 12 February 1621, but left in minor orders on 6 May 1624 for the Jesuit noviciate at Watten. He did not proceed with the Jesuits, but was ordained as a secular priest somewhere in France about 1631. He returned to England, but was soon arrested and imprisoned in Newgate from 1632 until about 1635, when he was discharged. The release of an active and zealous priest with connections to the establishment was criticized by puritans like William Prynne, and Goodman's freedom was short-lived, for he was prisoner in the Gatehouse on 1 July 1637. He was released shortly afterwards but imprisoned, once again in the Gatehouse, in 1639. Another brief period of freedom followed before his arrest on 17 January 1640 and indictment as a priest on 29 August. He was found not guilty, but on the evidence of a fellow prisoner was later condemned to death on 21 January 1641. His influential connections and the possible intervention of Queen Henrietta Maria secured a reprieve from Charles I, but in the heightened political temperature of the day Goodman's case became an important issue between crown and parliament, the king receiving a remonstrance from both houses demanding Goodman's execution. Lengthy statements were prepared by both his supporters and opponents, with parliament referring especially to his former status as a Church of England clergyman as a further factor against him. In the worsening relations between king and parliament Goodman intervened personally, petitioning Charles that he, Goodman, might be executed rather than become a source of division between the parties. Goodman's letter resulted in parliament withdrawing its demand for the death penalty, a compromise was effected, and Goodman was committed to prison indefinitely, dying in Newgate some time in 1645. 


@@@@@


doc= 67456


Newman, William (1577-1640), Roman Catholic priest, was from Staffordshire. He was at Douai in 1594 and was arrested in England in 1601 and condemned to death for his religion, being charged with aiding the escape of a priest from the home of Anne Line. At the intercession of a noble lady at court the death sentence was commuted to banishment and exile. He went to Seville, where he studied and was ordained priest in 1606. In May 1609 he was sent to Lisbon to take charge of the English residence near St Catherine's Church. This was a house for priests which was supported by donations from the duke of Braganza and the archbishop of Lisbon. Among the duties of the rector was that of visiting ships coming from the British Isles, acting as interpreter and seeing that they conformed to the requirements of the Inquisition. This might entail a search for subversive literature and taking note of any protestants who might be thought to be a threat to the security of the state. There was also chaplaincy work on behalf of English sailors. 
Newman's predecessor, Nicholas Ashton, had bequeathed property to the residence and Newman wished to use the Ashton legacy to found a seminary for the training of priests for the English mission. He visited Madrid and entered negotiations with Thomas More, the agent for Douai College, in order to further this scheme. It was on one of these visits that he made contact with Pedro Coutinho, a retired Portuguese soldier who was anxious to leave some of his fortune for the founding of a religious house and who had recently been told of the plight of Catholics in England. On learning of this the Jesuits considered that Newman had betrayed his trust since they regarded the opening of seminaries in the Peninsula to be their sole responsibility and he was consequently deprived of his chaplaincy. However, the negotiations went ahead and the papal brief founding the college was issued on 22 September 1622. Although it was Newman who brought together the patronage of Pedro Coutinho and the interests of the English secular clergy he was never president of the college, but he was always concerned with its affairs. His idea that the college should be restricted to students of philosophy and theology did not, however, prevail and from the early days younger boys were also accepted to study the humanities. 
Newman became a curate of the Royal Hospital in Lisbon and chaplain at St George's Fort, where he lived much honoured and respected. While ministering at the hospital during an outbreak of sickness he caught a fever and died, on 4 July 1640. He was buried in the college chapel and he left 2000 crowns to the college in his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 67458


Postgate, Nicholas (c.1596-1679), Roman Catholic priest, was born at Ugglebarnby, near Whitby, to James Postgate, a prosperous farmer, and his wife, Margery ('nee' Watson), who were reported as recusants in 1604 when it was claimed that they had married clandestinely and had their children baptized in secret. He may have been the youth of that name who was part of a troupe of travelling players, based at Egton on the North York Moors, who performed in the houses of Catholic gentry over a wide area of Yorkshire and were prosecuted at quarter sessions in 1615. On 4 July 1621 he entered the English College at Douai in company with other candidates from Yorkshire, receiving minor orders in 1627 and being ordained priest by the archbishop of Arras on 20 March 1628. He left for the English mission in 1630, arriving at Whitby on 29 June, and thereafter spent over thirty years as domestic chaplain in successive gentry households in Yorkshire, first with Lady Hungate at Saxton Hall, until her death in 1642, and then with the dowager Viscountess Dunbar at Halsham until 1659. On her death he moved to Everingham, to a junior branch of the Constable family, and from there also served at North Kilvington, where the Meynell family resided. If this career looks like one of retirement in comfortable gentry households, then a letter of Postgate written to George Leyburn at Douai in 1664 dispels that impression: in that letter he describes the achievements of his ministry since 1630, in which he claimed to have married 226 couples, baptized 593 infants, buried 719 co-religionists, and reconciled 2400 to the church. He also claimed to have currently 600 penitents, and could have had more. This letter was written shortly after his ministry took a new direction with his return to the North York Moors, where he lived in a farmhouse on the moors and ministered to the well-established recusant farming communities at Egton and Ugthorpe. During his time there the Catholic community increased in numbers, comprising over one-third of the adult population in 1676. His ministry was cut short by the hysteria surrounding the alleged Popish Plot, and he was arrested on 7 December 1678 while baptizing a child of one of his congregation. On arrest he gave his mother's name of Watson, only one of the aliases he used, the others being variants of Whitemoor, and was brought before the justices at Thirsk. He was eventually tried in York in March 1679 and convicted of being a priest. During his detention in York Castle over the summer months he was given free access to visitors, and tradition recalls that it was in prison that he wrote the hymn which is still sung among Roman Catholics of the region. He was executed on 7 August 1679 on the Knavesmire at York, and a cult quickly established itself, being given literary currency through Thomas Wood's satiric poem 'England's reformation', which attacked the extremes of the Popish Plot and created the image of 'Father Postgate'. Postgate was beatified in 1886 and an annual rally of the Roman Catholic diocese of Middlesbrough continues to meet in his honour at his old mission at Egton Bridge on the first Sunday of July. 


@@@@@


doc= 67459


Radcliffe, Margaret (1582x5-1654), abbess, was the second daughter of Sir Francis Radcliffe (1563-1622) of Dilston, Northumberland, and Derwentwater, Cumberland, and his wife, Isabel, daughter of Sir Ralph Grey of Chillingham, Northumberland. She was the first of Sir Francis's four daughters to enter the English Poor Clare convent at Gravelines in the Spanish Netherlands, making her religious profession on 3 July 1612 aged, according to one source, twenty-seven, and taking the name Margaret Paul. Her sister Elizabeth was professed in 1617, with Dorothy and Ann taking their vows in 1619. 
In 1622 Margaret was sent to assist as abbess at a newly established English cloister in Brussels, accompanied by her sister Elizabeth as her deputy, the vicaress. During this secondment Margaret presided over the profession of twenty-three nuns and oversaw the implementation of the monastery's governmental and spiritual structures. The Brussels convent followed a different, and less rigorous, Franciscan rule (that of the third order of St Francis) to her own Poor Clare training. Margaret nevertheless established a strict observance of the religious life there, which she later worried might have proven 'more strickt then your Rule and constitutions doe require' (Franciscan MS 16, fol. 5). However, the Brussels nuns were so successfully grounded in their order's traditions that within four years it was deemed possible for one of them to assume sole governance, and Margaret and Elizabeth returned to Gravelines. The esteem with which the Radcliffe sisters were held by the Franciscan nuns can be seen in continued correspondence between Margaret and her former charges when years later she was asked for advice about the duties of the vicaress. Moreover, the English translation of the life of Franciscan visionary Joan of the Cross was dedicated to them in 1625 by Francis Bell, the convent's confessor. 
Margaret's return to Gravelines in September 1626 was mired in controversy. Abbess Elizabeth (Sister Clare Mary Ann) Tyldesley was deposed by a Franciscan official who appointed Margaret in her place, causing considerable dissension. A week later part of the convent burnt to the ground in a devastating fire, attributed by the traumatized nuns to divine providence. An inquiry into the monastery's troubles reinstated the former abbess, and in January 1627 Margaret Radcliffe and her supporters were sent to a Poor Clare house in Dunkirk. However, the fracas at Gravelines continued until 1629 when twenty-four nuns, novices, and lay sisters, including those who had gone to Dunkirk, founded a separate cloister at Aire in Artois, with Margaret as abbess. As in many other English convents the Gravelines conflict was about clerical jurisdiction, with a minority favouring the continuing control of the English Franciscan fathers and the majority desiring to be placed under the authority of the bishop, which would allow greater spiritual diversity, namely access to Jesuit confessors. Margaret apparently led the pro-Franciscan faction. Significantly her sisters all joined the Aire filiation, suggesting a family adherence to the order, although subsequent generations joined Benedictine and Augustinian cloisters. 
Margaret Radcliffe was abbess at Aire for seven years. She died there on 26 July or in August 1654 aged seventy-one according to two sources, and was buried there. Her modest obituary noted that she had governed with 'prudence, charitye, and Regular observance [of the Poor Clare rule]' (MS Aire Register). Significantly a notice of her death at Gravelines did not mention her former positions of authority, rather commending her for 'the well Spending of her time, and in gitting of humble work' ('Registers', 40). Margaret Radcliffe is typical of the many post-Reformation English abbesses who achieved the respect of their contemporaries but whose achievements have been lost in the public memory as a consequence of strict monastic enclosure, their geographic isolation from England, and their gender. 


@@@@@


doc= 67460


Southworth, John (1592-1654), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born into an unflinchingly recusant family at Samlesbury, Lancashire. A government spy reported about the time of his birth that there was a popish schoolmaster in Samlesbury, and it is quite possible that this man educated Southworth. He was the third member of the family in a generation to offer himself for the priesthood at Rheims or Douai. He entered the latter in 1613 and was ordained as a secular priest on Holy Saturday 1618, offering his first mass on Easter morning. He was sent to England in December 1619 and spent most of the next thirty-five years in London, except for a twelve-month recall in 1624-5, when he was asked to act as chaplain to the Benedictine nuns in Brussels, and for a brief period in 1627-8 in Lancashire. This culminated in his arrest, trial, and conviction under the Elizabethan statute making it treasonable to be a Catholic priest in England. His execution was stayed, however, and he was transferred to the Clink prison in London. In 1630 he was one of twelve priests who, at the behest of the queen and to mark the peace treaty between England and France, had their sentences commuted to perpetual banishment -- with the king's 'express will and pleasure' that if they remained in or returned to England and Wales, then 'the Law should pass on every several person without further favour' (Reynolds, 38). 
Southworth simply ignored this threat and remained in London, serving in some of the poorest areas of Clerkenwell and Westminster. He is lost to historical view for most of the next twenty-five years, but can be regularly glimpsed signing petitions for the return of Bishop Smith or the appointment of a coadjutor to bring discipline and to instil a common practice among the clergy. He was especially prominent during the plague years in the mid-1630s, when he raised money for the victims and their families, and complained that his co-worker, Henry Morse SJ, administered the sacraments of penance and holy communion but not of extreme unction (since touching the victims of plague would incur unnecessary personal risk). He was arrested four times on the sworn evidence of spies between his release from the Clink in 1630 and the outbreak of civil war, but he was three times released after intervention by secretary of state Windebank. On the fourth occasion, in 1640, he escaped. He is completely lost to view throughout the following decade, but can be traced again, operating from the house of the Spanish ambassador in the early 1650s. He was arrested at a private house on 19 June 1654, brought twice before the common serjeant of London on 24 and 26 June, and ordered to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, a sentence carried out at Tyburn on the 28th. In his final speech he begged that 'Catholics, being free-born subjects should enjoy that liberty [of conscience] as others do as long as they live obedient subjects to the Lord Protector and the laws of the nation' ('Last Speech', 2). 
Southworth was the only Catholic priest executed during the protectorate, and the last ever to be executed simply for being a priest in England. His arrest is probably connected with the discovery in the previous month of an assassination plot against the protector, and the establishment of links between the leading plotters and the French ambassador. This in turn provoked a spasm of heightened anti-popery. The speed of his arraignment and execution, the fact that he was brought before the common serjeant and not the high court of justice (which had been granted sole jurisdictions over treasons), and the fact that he was hanged, drawn, and quartered (a recent ordinance had restricted the manner of execution to hanging only, or to beheading) all point to the fact that he died under his 1627 conviction and under the terms of his 1630 commuted sentence. This bound the hands of the judge, who had only to establish that he was the John Southworth, priest, previously condemned. Certainly Serjeant Steele tried very hard to persuade Southworth to deny, or at least to equivocate over, his priesthood, 'assuring him that if he would so plead his life would be safe, as they had no evidence which could prove him to be a priest' (Challoner, 507). Instead, Southworth 'confessed himself a priest and a condemned man many years since' (Purdie, 116). Foreign ambassadors pleaded for his life, and Cromwell (who had no power of pardon under the 'Instrument of government') made it clear that he was unhappy about this execution. As a grim acknowledgement of this the protector ordered surgeons to be present so that once the law had taken its course, the eviscerated and quartered body could be sewn together and returned to Douai College for burial, on 14 July 1654 -- the only corpse of an English Catholic martyr to survive into modern times. He was beatified by the Vatican in 1929, and in 1970 he was proclaimed one of forty English martyr-saints of the Reformation era. When Douai College was pulled down in the 1920s John Southworth was exhumed and taken to a place of honour in Westminster Cathedral, close to the very spot where he had fearlessly anointed plague victims three hundred years before. 


@@@@@


doc= 67467


Plowden, Anna Bridget (1938-1997), archaeological conservator and restorer, was born on 18 June 1938 at 99 Cromwell Road, Kensington, the second of four children of Edwin Noel Auguste Plowden, Baron Plowden (1907-2001), and Bridget Horatia Plowden (nee Richmond), Lady Plowden (1910-2000). Edwin Plowden was chairman of the Atomic Energy Authority from 1954 until 1959, when he received a life peerage. Lady Plowden was chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority from 1975 to 1980. Anna's elder brother, William Julius Lowthian Plowden (1935-2010), was later a leading political scientist and policy advisor. Anna was educated at New Hall, Chelmsford, and in 1963 graduated with a diploma in conservation from the Institute of Archaeology at University College, London. She was awarded a fellowship by the British School of Archaeology that allowed her to work on the Nimrud ivories in the Museum of Iraq. On her return to England in 1965 she set up in business as a freelance conservator, specializing in archaeological bronzes. She taught practical conservation part-time at the Institute of Archaeology. 
The company Anna Plowden Ltd was formed in 1968, and about that time Plowden began working in conjunction with Peter Smith (R and R) Ltd. The range of work with which this team could deal rapidly expanded and eventually included all types of decorative and fine art. Plowden and Smith were happy to take on projects of any size and secured some important international contracts. The company Plowden and Smith Ltd was formed in 1985. As well as a successful business relationship there was for a long time a close personal relationship between Plowden and Smith. The firm was granted two royal warrants, and after Plowden's death remained one of the largest and most successful businesses in the conservation private sector. 
Anna Plowden was frequently billed as the first scientifically trained conservator of objects to work in the private sector, yet she was very insecure about her understanding of conservation science. She was frequently on the phone to colleagues in the London national museums to seek information and reassurance. This was how she believed the public and private sectors should collaborate; the institutions were good at theory and scientific testing and should willingly share expertise and advice with the private sector. The freelance conservator was, she asserted, more efficient and more practically skilled than the museum conservator but should be willing to pass on these skills freely and openly. 
Between 1979 and 1983 Plowden chaired the conservation committee of the Crafts Council. She used this time to develop links with the national museums and to improve the status and professionalism of freelance conservators. When it seemed that the Crafts Council was trying to minimize its involvement in conservation she caused a dramatic stir by persuading the conservation committee to resign 'en masse'. She was also one of three senior committee members of the United Kingdom Institute for Conservation who in 1984 resigned in disgust when the membership refused to allow an increase in subscriptions so that the process of professional accreditation could begin. Her campaigning ensured the establishment of the conservation unit at the Museums and Galleries Commission in 1987. 
Although a brilliant social networker and often extremely forthright in her manner, Plowden was none the less very shy of formal presentation. She did not write for the professional journals or present papers at any of the major international conferences. She was extremely anxious about the accuracy and usability of the book 'Looking after Antiques', published in 1987, which she co-authored with Frances Halahan. She dreaded having to give an address as president of the Royal Warrant Holders' Association, an office she would have taken up in 1998. In 1990 she became a trustee of the Victoria and Albert Museum. She was scrupulous about conflicts of interest that might have arisen between her business and the work of the museum's conservation department. She spoke rarely but always effectively at board meetings. She gained the respect and affection of the museum's staff by taking a close personal interest in the activities of employees from all levels and across all disciplines. She was appointed CBE in 1997. After a long illness involving painful and debilitating treatments she died from ovarian cancer on 21 August 1997 at the Lister Hospital, Westminster, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 67475


Simon, Ulrich Ernst (1913-1997), theologian, was born in Berlin on 21 September 1913, the younger son of James Martin Simon (1880- 'c'.1944), concert pianist and composer, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Levi (1885-1969), a freelance broadcaster on literary matters. This cultured environment was to bear fruit in the breadth of his learning and culture. He met among others Thomas Mann and Dietrich Bonhoeffer, being a near contemporary of the latter at Grunewald Gymnasium, which he attended from about 1923 to 1931. (The school was later renamed the Walther Rathenau Schule, and Simon retained vivid memories both of the man and of the assassination which took place nearby in 1922.) After escaping from Germany in 1933 -- his father was later to perish in Auschwitz, his brother, Jorn Martin (1910-1937?), almost certainly under Stalin -- he moved to London and, after a brief employment in a small firm in the City, trained for the Anglican priesthood, first at King's College, London (1935-8), and then at Lincoln Theological College (1938), having been baptized in July 1934. He was ordained deacon in 1938 and priest in 1939. In 1949 he married Joan Edith Raynor Westlake ('b'. 1920), daughter of Canon Herbert Francis Westlake (1879-1925), custodian and historian of Westminster Abbey. His wife was herself a teacher of classics and divinity. They had three children: Sophia Anne ('b'. 1950), Martin Francis Andrew ('b'. 1952), and Peter Paul ('b'. 1954). 
After serving in two curacies -- St Helier, Southwark (1938-42), and Upton with Chalvey, Slough (1942-5) -- Simon returned to King's College in 1945 and devoted to it his whole career until retirement in 1980. He taught both 'Old Testament' and Christian theology, and, beginning as lecturer in Hebrew and 'Old Testament', achieved in 1959 both a DD of London University and a readership in theology. He became in 1971 professor of Christian literature, devoting his inaugural lecture to Mann's 'Der Zauberberg' ('The Magic Mountain'). He was elected a fellow of King's College in 1957. 
Simon's outlook matched his experience, and he commented pungently and often pessimistically on his times, being particularly caustic about sloppy thinking which ignored the signs of the times. Indeed, it was his unerring sense of evil which drove his impatience with what he saw as effete and blind liberalism -- he described John Robinson's best-selling 'Honest to God' (1963) as a 'mean little book'. His final years at King's were as dean of the college, in which post he succeeded Sydney Evans in 1978, adapting the office to the reduced circumstances forced on it by changes in the college's constitution. There he both revealed his priorities and strained the patience of his secretary by insisting on reading for a period -- a passage from Proust for instance -- before he faced the morning's correspondence. 
Simon's intellectual achievement was various and reflected the range of his teaching responsibilities and the breadth of his interests. Noteworthy among his ten books was 'A Theology of Auschwitz' (1967), which was unique among the vast literature generated by that evil. More than anything, it was a meditation on the suffering of Simon's own people in the light of the passion of Christ. Other books included 'Theology of Crisis' (1948), 'Heaven in the Christian Tradition' (1958), 'A Theology of Salvation' (1961), a theological commentary on 'Isaiah' 40-55, 'The Trial of Man' (1973), and 'Story and Faith' (1975). He was firmly of the opinion, if that is not too weak a word, that those who have no music in their soul should leave theology alone; indeed, what he took to be a slighting reference to Bach once induced anger. Mozart was another love, one shared with Karl Barth, the theologian who influenced him most, sustaining him during the war and giving him breathing space on a visit to Basel after it, and whose later neglect he deplored. And into all his thinking was fed his reading of literature -- Dante, Shakespeare, and Dostoyevsky perhaps most prominent, but also Goethe, Mann, Milton, and Kierkegaard. 
In 1978 Simon published the characteristically titled 'Sitting in Judgement, 1913-63: an Interpretation of History'. A kind of autobiography, as the first date in the title implied, it was, like many of Simon's writings, idiosyncratic and unusual, far exceeding the expectations aroused by the genre. It both told the story of his first fifty years -- ending in time, though not in the organization of the narrative, with the assassination of Kennedy, which shocked him deeply -- and was the vehicle for characteristic judgements on his times. One chapter, 'This precious isle', took over from the allusion to Shakespeare's words both love for his adopted land and church and sharp observations on those whose apostasy threatened the nation's integrity and liberty. The chapters on the Second World War provided a unique perspective on British society and its leaders, cameos of figures as different as Bishop George Kennedy Allen Bell of Chichester and Victor Gollancz helping to illuminate the atmosphere of the times. One review described the book as 'dazzling in its virtuosity, devastating in its accusation, yet offering hope and not despair' ('Expository Times', 1978, 288). Similarly, his public speaking was eloquent, pungent, and beautifully organized, often with the help of a few scribbled notes. 
Simon's writing virtually ceased after his retirement, reflecting, it would seem, a measure of disillusionment with developments in the Church of England. His musical activities became his main interest; the day before his death (of an aneurism, at his home, 22 Collingwood Avenue, London) on 31 July 1997 he had bought a new set of strings for his violin, of which he was an accomplished player. His ashes were buried in Coton churchyard, Cambridgeshire, on 5 July 1999; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 67476


Skelton, Robin (1925-1997), poet and literary scholar, was born on 12 October 1925 in the schoolhouse at Easington in the East Riding of Yorkshire, the only child of Cyril Frederick William Skelton (1879-1964) and his wife, Lili (1888-1982), daughter of William Robins and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Young. He was educated until the age of almost eleven at Easington village school, where his father was headmaster. He then went as a boarding pupil to Pocklington grammar school. On leaving school in 1943 he was placed on a six-month course, sponsored by the Royal Air Force for potential officers, at Christ's College, Cambridge. His war service in the Royal Air Force was spent mainly in India as a codes and cipher clerk with the rank of sergeant. After demobilization he studied English literature at Leeds University from 1947 to 1950, and obtained a first-class honours BA degree, which was followed by the degree of MA in 1951. 
From 1951 to 1963 Skelton was on the staff of the English department of the University of Manchester, initially as an assistant lecturer but from 1954 as a full lecturer. On 27 August 1953 he married Margaret Mary Lambert ('b'. 1928/9), a schoolteacher; after their divorce he married Sylvia Mary Snow, 'nee' Jarrett (1927/8-1998), also a schoolteacher, on 4 February 1957. A son, Nicholas, and two daughters, Alison and Brigid, were born from the second marriage. 
During his period in Manchester, Skelton became involved in a wide range of literary and artistic activities. As a student he had acquired an interest in a small publishing house, the Lotus Press, and this he continued to manage until 1952. In 1955 he published his first major collection of verse, 'Patmos and Other Poems'. This was followed by further collections, including 'Third Day Lucky' (1958), 'Begging the Dialect' (1960), and 'The Dark Window' (1962). To supplement his university salary, Skelton worked part-time for the 'Manchester Guardian', first as a poetry reviewer and later as a theatre critic. He was also an examiner for the Northern Universities Matriculation Board and subsequently became chairman of examiners for its English O-level examination. While preparing his work on versification, 'The Poetic Pattern' (1956), he made the acquaintance of many of the leading British poets of the time, including William Empson, Louis MacNeice, David Gascoyne, and Kathleen Raine. Always gregarious, Skelton had a wide acquaintance among the local artists and writers active in Manchester, and founded the Peterloo Group in conjunction with Michael Seward Snow and Tony Connor. Later he helped to found the Manchester Institute of Contemporary Arts, drafting its constitution and acting as its first secretary. In 1960 he travelled to Dublin to research into the papers of the Irish playwright J. M. Synge. The visit fostered a lifelong affection and empathy in Skelton for Ireland and its writers, and resulted in a number of publications relating to Irish literature, including an anthology of modern Irish poets, 'Six Irish Poets' (1962), and collected editions of Synge, Jack B. Yeats, and David Gascoyne. 
The turning point in Skelton's career came in 1963, when he and his young family emigrated to Canada so that he could take up a post of associate professor in the newly created University of Victoria, British Columbia. In this new and growing university he had a fruitful environment in which to develop his considerable and many-sided talents as poet, writer, anthologist, editor, literary and drama critic, collage artist, publisher, administrator, and dedicated teacher. With characteristic energy and industry he soon became immersed in all these activities. After three years as associate professor, in 1966 he became a full professor of English, and was from 1967 to 1973 director of the newly formed creative writing programme which he had inaugurated. This became the department of creative writing in 1973 with Skelton as its chairman until 1976. In 1967 he founded and jointly edited the prestigious 'Malahat Review'; he was joint editor until 1971 and sole editor from 1972 to 1983. He received recognition as a Canadian writer, when in 1981 he became vice-chairman and in 1982-3 chairman of the Writers' Union of Canada. Continuing his part-time career as a publisher, Skelton acted as editor-in-chief of two small presses in Victoria, the Sono Nis Press from 1967 to 1982 and the Pharos Press from 1972. His artistic activities included a number of one-man exhibitions of collages, with shows in Victoria in 1966, 1968, and 1980. 
Throughout his years in Canada, Skelton continued to produce scholarly critical and literary works. His output was prodigious, with over 100 separate titles to his credit during his long and fruitful career. Apart from the works on the writers of the Irish Renaissance, he wrote a number of books on versification and the craft of poetry, including 'The Practice of Poetry' (1971), 'The Poet's Calling' (1975), and the posthumously published 'The Shapes of our Singing' (2002), as well as editing several anthologies including the Penguin editions 'Poetry of the Thirties' (1964) and 'Poetry of the Forties' (1968). It is, however, for his own poetry that he is best-known and that he would have liked best to be remembered. Robin Skelton's belief in the importance of poetry as central to his life was held from a very young age. First published in a student magazine at Christ's College, Cambridge, he continued to write and publish poems for the rest of his life, producing an astonishing body of work, which continued to change and develop throughout his career. The earlier poetry published in England in the 1950s and early 1960s was, in the 'new movement' style of the time, relatively low-key and unemotional, but he went on to develop his own distinctive style with the reflective quasi-autobiographical and longer narrative poems of 'Timelight' (1974) and 'Callsigns' (1976) giving way to the shorter, brighter, almost incantatory poems of 'Popping Fuchsias' (1992) and especially 'One Leaf Shaking' (1996). Many of Skelton's poems show the strong influence of his boyhood experiences in his natal village located between the North Sea and the wide Humber estuary, and use the imagery of the sea, its tides and pebbled beaches, and the distant horizons across the estuary mudflats. Throughout his life Skelton was fascinated by the varieties of poetic form and his later poems in particular demonstrate an impressive range of forms taken from cultures as diverse as those of Wales and Japan, as well as forms invented by himself. 
Robin Skelton was an impressive, even eccentric figure whom many of his students found daunting until they discovered his essential kindness and humility. He has been described as looking like an ancient druid with, in later life, his flowing beard, long white hair, talismanic pentagram, tattooed wrist, and chunky rings on his fingers. Skelton was scornful of convention and social conformism. He became interested in the occult, and while in Canada was initiated as a practising witch in the Wiccan tradition and wrote several works on witchcraft including 'Spellcraft' (1978), 'Talismanic Magic' (1985), and 'The Practice of Witchcraft Today' (1988). 
While Skelton was well known and honoured in Canada, in his lifetime he was relatively little known and rarely anthologized in Britain, as he himself complained in his autobiography, 'The Memoirs of a Literary Blockhead' (1988). It is perhaps ironic that his decision to move to Canada which so stimulated his development as a poet should have also isolated him from literary attention in his native country. This is much to be regretted, as his poetry is powerful, haunting, and insightful, and he deserves to be more widely known and read. 
Robin Skelton died after a short illness, brought on by complications resulting from diabetes and congestive heart failure, at his home in Victoria, British Columbia, on 27 August 1997; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 67480


Best, Sigismund Payne (1885-1978), intelligence officer, was born on 14 April 1885 in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, the son of Dr George Payne Best (died 1908), then senior physician at Birmingham General Hospital, and his wife, Catherine Sophia Allinson (died 1908). His maternal grandmother was said to have been the daughter of an Indian maharaja. He was privately educated in Britain and Germany, his father having been appointed 'Dozent' to the medical faculties of various German universities and practising privately in Vienna, Leipzig, and Dresden. At fifteen, Sigismund was apprenticed to a firm of chartered accountants, but he did not qualify. His father, mother, and brother all died within three months of each other in 1908. As the sole heir he was left with a private income of about $800 a year, on the strength of which he married and moved back to Germany, enrolling himself at the University of Munich and at an academy of music in Munich. He returned to England in 1911, becoming a member of the Purley rural district council and otherwise leading the life of a country gentleman. On the outbreak of war with Germany in August 1914 he was recruited into the newly created intelligence corps of the army and sent to France with the rank of second lieutenant. There in 1915 he made the acquaintance of the legendary head of the Secret Intelligence Service, the mysterious 'C', Mansfield Cumming. Cumming's son was killed in the same motor accident in which Cumming lost his leg, and Payne Best won his confidence as the man who arranged his son's burial. Early in 1915 he was sent to the Netherlands to set up an intelligence network to report directly to C. His net recruited Flemish refugees from Belgium and ran agents into German-occupied Belgium, concentrating on the German order of battle in Flanders. He survived various 'turf wars' with rival agencies and networks, ending the war with the rank of captain, earning an OBE and the Belgian Croix de Guerre, and being made a chevalier of the French Legion d'honneur; he also received two unsuccessful recommendations for the Military Cross and two mentions in dispatches. 
On demobilization Payne Best went into business in the Netherlands, where he remarried (his first wife had died in obscure circumstances). His new wife, Bridget Allardyce, was the daughter of a Dutch general. With the advent of Hitler to power in Germany and the increasing prospects of a new European war, he was recruited in 1938 into the newly formed 'Z' organization, a new branch of the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) founded by one of C's deputies, Colonel Claude Dansey, to take over from the increasingly compromised SIS organization in Europe. 
In summer 1939 C's successor, Admiral Sinclair, was diagnosed as suffering from terminal cancer (he died on 4 November 1939). There were two candidates for the succession, Colonel Dansey and Colonel Stewart Menzies. At the same time, Dansey was approached through a Free German organization in London, whose activities had enjoyed some SIS funding, on behalf of a group allegedly of senior German commanders, anxious to thwart Hitler's plans for war and to overthrow him. In fact a number of clandestine contacts between individual members and sections of the conservative-military-bureaucratic opposition to Hitler in Germany were already current, but so far as is known these had not been with the SIS, nor had any of them, so far, mentioned a military coup against Hitler. Menzies took up the contacts with energy and enthusiasm, in which he was supported, against the initial scepticism of the Foreign Office and of Payne Best, by the newly appointed head of the SIS station in The Hague, a Major Stevens. Stevens's previous experience of intelligence work had been confined to India. The contacts were taken very seriously in London. Communications with the allegedly dissident German officers were handled by the foreign secretary, Lord Halifax, himself. British strategy at this time was predicated on the hope that Germany's economic weakness would precipitate internal discontent, which, it was hoped, would be followed by some kind of internal upheaval in which Hitler would be neutralized or removed from office. 
Unfortunately for Stevens and Payne Best, the original contacts proved to have originated with the German SS. The two men, accompanied by a Dutch intelligence officer, were lured to the Dutch-German border at the small village of Venlo and kidnapped across it by an SS commando led by the young and ambitious Walter Schellenberg, who ended the war a full general in the SS and head of the SS external intelligence service (which in 1944 had swallowed the German army's military intelligence arm, the Abwehr). In the turmoil the Dutch officer received fatal wounds. Both Payne Best and Stevens were held for a show trial, together with a German workman who had carried out a one-man attempt to kill Hitler with a bomb in the Munich Bierkeller in which Hitler's attempted coup of 1923 had begun, at the height of the exchanges between the as yet unmasked Schellenberg and the British. Most of the German intelligence was incorporated into the German declaration of 9 May 1940, justifying the German invasion of the Netherlands. 
Payne Best and Stevens were incarcerated initially in the concentration camp at Sachsenhausen. But in the last days of the war they were added to the group of prominent European political figures and relatives of the allied war leaders whom the Germans were keeping as hostages in their forced migration ahead of the allied forces, ending up in the depths of the south Tyrol. Here Payne Best emerged as the undoubted leader of the hostages, persuading their SS guards to disobey orders to execute their charges, overriding a somewhat melodramatic plan by the local Italian partisans to storm their prison and release whoever was fortunate enough to survive such an adventure, and arranging for the prisoners to be liberated by a detachment of American soldiers. 
Payne Best's reward was to be silenced by the SIS authorities and to be suspected of having given everything away, whereas the facts argue that his main fault was to leave Stevens to have his version of events accepted before Payne Best could return to England. The Treasury treated his financial problems with the same lack of engagement that it was to show to most other clandestine claimants upon British generosity. Payne Best was allowed to publish a very much bowdlerized account of the incident, being refused permission to cite the wealth of evidence produced by the official Dutch inquiry in 1947. In retirement he reverted to his youthful passion for classical music and devoted himself to encouraging various young musicians of promise. He died on 21 September 1978 at his home, 18 Lickhill Road, Calne, Wiltshire; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 67483


Cohen, Kenneth Herman Salaman (1900-1984), intelligence officer, was born on 15 March 1900 at 1 Lower Terrace, Branch Hill, Hampstead, London, the son of Jewish parents, Herman Cohen (1860-1932), a barrister and official reporter of cases heard by the court of criminal appeal, and his wife, Bessie Salaman (1873-1950). He was educated at Elstree School and then at Eastbourne College before joining the Royal Navy as a 'special entry' cadet in 1918. He subsequently served on HMS 'Iron Duke', and later became an expert on torpedos. In 1935, as an interpreter in French and Russian, he transferred to the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS). On 22 July 1932 he married Mary Sarah (1910-1991), daughter of Ernest Martin Joseph, architect, with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
Soon after joining SIS Cohen was placed in charge of the London headquarters of a European network known simply as Z, which operated under commercial cover in parallel to the more overt SIS organization that depended upon a string of passport control offices attached to diplomatic premises abroad. Masquerading as Keith Crane and designated Z-2, Cohen worked through a front company, Menoline Ltd, in Maple Street, and an office in Bush House, to recruit sources, including several distinguished foreign correspondents of British newspapers in France, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Czechoslovakia, and Italy. 
Upon the outbreak of war Z's assets were amalgamated into SIS's main organization and Cohen was attached to the French country section known as A5, becoming head of the Vichy section, designated P1 in May 1940. His task was to recruit sources from within the unoccupied zone of France, and one of his successes was Jacques Bridou, who was parachuted into France in March 1941 to establish the Alliance network, based in Pau and Marseilles and later to be headed by the formidable Marie-Madeleine Meric. 
In summer 1943, in anticipation of an invasion of Europe, Cohen was selected to take charge of Brissex, the British component of a large scheme, codenamed Sussex, to parachute sixty two-man allied intelligence teams behind enemy lines. This huge paramilitary enterprise was intended to disrupt Nazi communications and logistics immediately after D-day and then liaise with local resistance organizations until overrun by the allies. The role played by Cohen required considerable tact and diplomacy because the American volunteers were inexperienced and the French intransigent. 
Cohen was appointed CMG in 1946, and in the aftermath of the war he held senior posts in SIS (chief controller of Europe and director of production). He retired in 1953 and was created CB. With his 'sensitivity, astringent mind and understanding of international problems' ('The Times') he served as European adviser to United Steel Companies from 1953 to 1966. During the last twenty years of his life his main interest was in promoting cross-channel friendship, and he served as chairman of the Franco-British Society from 1967 to 1972. He died in the Westminster Hospital, London, on 19 September 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 67487


Hill, George Alexander (1892-1968), intelligence officer, was born in Estonia, the son of a timber merchant whose business interests extended from Siberia to Persia. He was educated by French and German governesses and soon developed exceptional linguistic skills. He spoke six languages and his Russian was fluent. Hill was on a fishing trip to British Columbia when war broke out in 1914. He immediately joined a Canadian infantry regiment and was posted to Ypres in 1915. He showed exceptional daring and bravery and was seriously wounded. He was then sent to the War Office where he began his career as an intelligence officer. 
Hill's first assignment was in Greece, where he flew agents behind enemy lines. In 1917 he was sent to Petrograd as a member of the Royal Flying Corps mission and arrived amid the confusion of the Bolshevik Revolution. According to Hill's own richly embroidered account of his mission he undertook the hazardous task of taking the Romanian crown jewels from the Kremlin to Iasi, helped Leon Trotsky organize a military intelligence service and the Red Air Force, ran guns to Ukrainian nationalists, and recruited a number of German agents for counter-intelligence work. When the British landed in Murmansk he was obliged to flee to Finland with the Cheka close on his heels. 
Hill returned briefly to Russia and then worked for the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) in the Middle East for the next three years, but the service was short of funds and Hill was reduced to living with his wife in a caravan in Sussex. His only recompense was appointment as an MBE and DSO, and the satisfaction of being mentioned in dispatches on three occasions. There followed a series of precarious jobs: a stint with the Royal Dutch-Shell Oil Company, manager of the Globe Theatre on Shaftesbury Avenue in London, and deputy general manager to the impresario C. B. Cochran. During this time he wrote two volumes of memoirs -- 'Go Spy the Land' (1933) and 'The Dreaded Hour' (1936) and two unpublished plays. 
When war broke out Hill was recalled to the SIS with the rank of major and worked as an instructor in section D (destruction) at Brickendonbury Hall near Hertford. His pupils included Kim Philby, who was impressed by 'Jolly George' Hill's knowledge of explosives and wryly remarked that he had actually put sand in axle boxes (Philby, 8). In 1940 the school was taken over by the Special Operations Executive (SOE) and restructured. Hill remained on the staff until 1941 when he was selected to head an SOE mission to Moscow codenamed Sam. Colonel Hill arrived in the Soviet capital in September in time for the signing of two agreements between SOE and NKVD (the Soviet security organization). The first was designed to co-ordinate sabotage and propaganda in occupied Europe and to desist from subversive activities in each other's spheres of influence. It was also agreed that they would help one another infiltrate agents into occupied Europe. The second agreement dealt with targets and priorities. 
Little came of these agreements, as in the winter of 1941 all foreign missions were evacuated to Kuibyshev. Hill did much to enliven this dreary provincial town by mixing some ingenious vodka cocktails that were greatly appreciated. During this time he managed to persuade the British boffins to pass on some ingenious devices to the Soviet partisans and organized the infiltration of some Soviet agents into occupied Europe in operations codenamed Pickaxe. With characteristic chutzpah Hill claims also to have written a handbook on guerrilla warfare for Soviet partisans. 
There were further 'Pickaxes' in 1942 but they began to cause great concern in the Foreign Office, who were alarmed about Britain's allies finding out that they were dropping Soviet agents into their countries. This position was strongly seconded by C. SOE was appalled at the quality of some of the agents they were asked to transport and refused a number of them as totally unsuited to the task. There were only four successful drops in 1942 and Whitehall was getting very impatient with Sam. Anthony Eden, the British foreign secretary, complained that Hill did 'not know his onions' and was wasting the taxpayers' money. Hill countered that the problems resulted from 'sand in axle box tactics' in London and he was enthusiastically supported by the ambassador, Sir Archibald Clark Kerr. 
In 1943 there were only six successful 'Pickaxe' missions and frustrations on both sides were mounting. In April 1944 Hill's opposite number, Colonel Chichayev, complained that SOE had done practically nothing and anyway the Soviets no longer had any need for them. SOE was frustrated by NKVD's refusal to co-operate in Soviet-occupied Europe, particularly with the Polish underground army. Hill can hardly be blamed for the failure of his mission. It was unrealistic to imagine that SOE and NKVD could ever co-operate successfully and this inevitably led to mutual accusations and recriminations. 
Clark Kerr arrived in London in December 1944 and announced that there was little for Hill to do in Moscow. He was now a brigadier and it was felt that he could be replaced by a more junior officer. Hill returned to London in the summer of 1945. After the war he became a director of the British-owned German mineral water company Apollinarius. It was a strange finale for a man who was never known to have refused a drink. He died in 1968 shortly after his second marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 67489


Knight, (Charles Henry) Maxwell (1900-1968), intelligence officer and naturalist, was born on 9 July 1900 at 199 Selhurst Road, South Norwood, Croydon, one of at least two sons of Hugh Coleraine Knight (died 1914), a solicitor, and his wife, Ada Phyllis Roberts, 'nee' Handcock (died 1925). His philandering father managed to bankrupt his legal practice. At fourteen Knight was sent to HMS 'Worcester' (the Thames Nautical Training College), off Greenhithe, Kent, to be trained as an officer for the merchant navy. After the death of an older brother on the western front in 1916, Knight volunteered for the Royal Navy and served on armed merchantmen. After the war he briefly worked at the Ministry of Shipping, before taking a post as a teacher of Latin at a minor preparatory school in Putney. On 29 December 1925 he married Gwladys Evelyn Amy (died 1934), daughter of Charles Edward Hamilton Poole, a military officer. 
Knight was personally recruited for MI5 by Vernon Kell, the director-general, in 1925. Kell saw in Knight someone with a perfect cover: a young gentleman about town, much in demand for debutante parties, whose new career did not interfere with his enthusiasm for the cellar clubs of Soho and Leicester Square, or his enthusiasm for American jazz and new dances like the Charleston. 
At MI5, Knight worked with Guy Liddell in B division, charged with the surveillance of extremists of the right and left. Once trained Knight was given the plum job of recruiting and running individual agents. An apartment at 308 Hood House, Dolphin Square, was rented. As Captain King or Mr K. he was able, perhaps even obliged, to maintain a lively social life as professional cover. He spent the early 1930s dining out with journalists, secretaries, and debutantes. At weekends he joined his wife at the Exmoor pub and hotel which she ran, and where the fishing was splendid. Gwladys died on 17 November 1934, and on 28 August 1937 Knight married Lois Mary, a secretary, daughter of William Drave Coplestone; this marriage was ended by divorce in 1943. 
Penetration of the headquarters of the Communist Party of Great Britain at King Street had long been an MI5 priority. Knight had the phones tapped and party members working in industry were secretly vetted. Knight recruited agents including Olga Gray, who at nineteen volunteered for office duties with the anti-war movement. Gray's dedication and efficiency won the confidence of the Communist Party leaders at King Street and she was given greater responsibilities, culminating in a request that she set up a safe house for the use of a spy ring operating at the Woolwich arsenal. It was as Miss X that she testified at the trial which sent Percy Glading to prison for six years for espionage. The smashing of the Woolwich arsenal spy ring was a triumph of MI5 methodology, and of Knight's patience. 
Knight's agents included Tom Driberg, who was writing the William Hickey column for the 'Daily Express'. Driberg gave Knight access to the 'Cafe Communists', whose public school education and experience at Oxford or Cambridge provided them with superb cover for espionage. Knight recruited Bill Younger, stepson of his friends Dennis and Joan Wheatley, to spy on Oxford undergraduates. Known Nazi sympathizers, such as William Joyce, were also used as informants. Knight seems to have preferred attractive young women of respectable backgrounds for the task of penetrating the inner circle of Britain's domestic Nazis. 
Knight's greatest success against Nazi espionage came in 1940 with the arrest of Tyler Kent, cipher clerk in the American embassy in London. Kent had made contact with Anna Wolkoff, a member of the Right Club, and gave her copies of the telegrams between Churchill and Roosevelt, which were passed to the Italian embassy. Used with some cleverness, the compromising plans for Lend-Lease could have discredited Roosevelt and possibly driven Churchill from office. With the agreement of the American ambassador, Kent was tried in camera and sentenced to seven years in prison. Wolkoff was given ten years. 
In May 1940, five days after the arrest of Tyler Kent, Max Knight's patron, Vernon Kell, was sacked by Churchill. Knight was never again as secure in MI5, and his handling of the case of Ben Greene JP had nearly disastrous consequences for Knight's career. Greene, a cousin of the novelist Graham Greene, was interned after being falsely accused by one of Knight's agents, Harold Kurtz, who had forged letters implicating Greene and had lied about them in court. A member of the Peace Pledge Union and founding member of the British People's Party, Greene was a pacifist who opposed war with Germany. Greene was eventually released. The case weakened confidence in Knight's judgement. 
Knight became obsessed with the suspicion that communists had penetrated MI5. After Driberg was expelled from the Communist Party in 1941, Knight suspected that someone in MI5 had passed on information about him to Harry Pollitt. Anthony Blunt was questioned by MI5 about his role in the betrayal of Driberg. In 1941 Knight asked Roger Hollis and Guy Liddell to investigate Soviet penetration of the security services, and sent a secret report, 'The Comintern is not dead', to his friend Desmond Morton, who was Churchill's private secretary. None of those who read the report was persuaded by the evidence Knight had amassed. 
With the appointment of Sir Percy Sillitoe as director-general of MI5 in 1946 Knight's position was further weakened. Dolphin Square was closed, and Knight felt himself unheeded and bypassed. The running of agents was largely left to his deputy, John Bingham, whose career as a novelist was just beginning. David Cornwell (later the writer John le Carre) was regarded as one of Knight's proteges in the early 1950s. 
On 18 November 1944 Knight married for the third time. His wife, Susan Mary Durell (died 1983), daughter of Henry Durell Barnes, worked in MI5's registry during the war. In 1945 he made the first of many naturalist talks for the BBC, and become a regular contributor to 'The Field' and 'Country Life'. The defections of Maclean and Burgess in May 1951 were followed by the replacement of Sillitoe by Dick White as head of MI5. Guy Liddell was shunted off to the Atomic Energy Authority. But it was too late for Knight to reconstruct his career and he retired from MI5 in 1956. He was appointed OBE. 
Knight had written two thrillers in the 1930s, 'Crime Cargo' (1934) and 'Gunmen's Holiday' (1935), attempting without success to recreate in Britain the American hard-boiled novel. He also wrote several books on natural history for young readers: 'The Young Naturalist's Field Guide' (1952), and the posthumously published 'Pets and their Problems' (1968) and 'Be a Nature Detective' (1969). 
Maxwell Knight died on 24 January 1968 at the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, following a heart attack. At his memorial service he was remembered as Uncle Max, the genial naturalist of the wireless and early days of television. By the 1980s Knight's hidden career was finally revealed: in the inter-war years he had been the MI5 agent-runner who had penetrated espionage operations on both the right and left. Knight was an eccentric and an amateur naturalist; his conduct as head of counter-espionage was professional and exemplary. 


@@@@@


doc= 67490


Liddell, Guy Maynard (1892-1958), intelligence officer, was born on 8 November 1892 at 64 Victoria Street, London, one of three sons of Augustus Frederick Liddell, a retired captain in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Emily Shinner (died 1901). At the time of his birth, Liddell's father worked in the royal household and was comptroller and treasurer to Prince and Princess Christian of Schleswig-Holstein. He studied in Germany, but then served in the Royal Field Artillery during the First World War and was awarded an MC. Having abandoned a promising career as a cellist, Liddell joined Scotland Yard's special branch in 1919 as a subordinate to Sir Basil Thompson in the directorate of intelligence. He was responsible for co-ordinating the police raid on the Arcos building in Moorgate in May 1927 (which also housed the Soviet trade delegation), in pursuit of a missing classified RAF document. Although the document was not recovered, more than enough evidence was found of Soviet espionage, which was enhanced by the unexpected defection of a terrified code clerk, Anton Miller, who had been detained while attempting to burn incriminating files. 
In October 1931, following an amalgamation in Whitehall, Liddell moved with his small team of civilian analysts to the Security Service, MI5, and was appointed deputy director of counter-espionage under Brigadier Jasper Harker. His first great success came late in 1936 when he went to Washington, DC, to inform the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) that a Dundee hairdresser, Mrs Jessie Jordan, was acting as a post-box for German intelligence and relaying letters to and from an address in New York. An immediate FBI investigation identified an immigrant, Gunther Rumrich, as a German spy, and allowed J. Edgar Hoover to take the credit for arresting an extensive transatlantic espionage network. 
Following the success of this first example of co-operation with the FBI, Liddell supervised a brilliant coup in which a long-term MI5 agent, Olga Gray, penetrated the Communist Party of Great Britain and gained the confidence of its national organizer, Percy Glading. She accumulated proof that Glading had been recruiting sources inside the Woolwich arsenal, and when the spy ring was arrested in January 1938, three of its members pleaded guilty to stealing secret blueprints and were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment. The case demonstrated the value of cultivating deep-cover agents, and highlighted the threat of Soviet espionage, although it failed to link the spies with any Soviet officials. 
Liddell was promoted to director of B division in June 1940 and played a key role in the appointment of his subordinates, including Dick White and Anthony Blunt, who were both to become close friends. His reliance on personal contacts led him to choose some impressive intellectual talent, and B division effectively took control of the enemy's entire espionage organization in Britain. This extraordinary achievement, documented by Sir John Masterman in 'The Double Cross System' (1972), resulted in numerous future High Court judges and university dons running a large stable of double agents, thereby providing the deception planners with a reliable conduit into the German high command. Thus Liddell was closely associated with two of MI5's most spectacular accomplishments, the interception and decryption of German intelligence signals by the Radio Security Service, and the famous 'double cross system'. The Radio Security Service had grown, under Liddell's supervision, from an inter-service liaison committee known as the Wireless Board into a sophisticated cryptographic organization that operated in tandem with Bletchley Park, concentrating on 'Abwehr' communications, and enabling MI5 case officers to monitor the progress made by their double agents through the reports submitted by their enemy controllers to Berlin. 
Liddell had many Irish connections, having married Lord Revelstoke's daughter, the Hon. Calypso Baring, in 1926, and he selected his brother Cecil to head MI5's highly successful Irish section. His marriage, however, was to cause him great unhappiness and it was dissolved in 1943 after Calypso had deserted him for her American half-brother, leaving Liddell to fight a long battle for custody of their son and three daughters. 
In December 2002 Liddell's wartime diaries, typewritten in twelve volumes, were released at the Public Record Office. They provide 'an unrivalled account of the internal workings of MI5 from August 1939 to June 1945' ('Sunday Times'). The day-to-day workings of the Security Service are richly documented, including the unmasking of traitors such as John King, a Foreign Office clerk, who passed information to the Soviet Union. The diaries also record more lurid planning: a year before the war in Europe ended, Liddell was discussing a scheme to threaten Germany 'with the uranium bomb' (ibid.) if it fired V2 rockets. 
After the war Liddell was appointed deputy director-general under the new Labour administration's choice of Sir Percy Sillitoe, and he remained in that post until 1953 when, embarrassed by the defection of his friend Guy Burgess, he took early retirement to become security adviser to the Atomic Energy Authority. After a remarkable career in counter-espionage, it was ironic that several of his closest friends were to be exposed as spies, among them the Welsh academic Goronwy Rees, for whose son he was godfather. Before Rees died in 1979 he denounced Liddell as a spy, and the disclosure that Liddell had failed to act against Anthony Blunt when Rees had first named him in 1951 created a furore that, together with his unwise friendships and his preference for homosexual company, posthumously wrecked his reputation as a shrewd intelligence professional. His principal legacy to the Security Service is a collection of diaries recording his daily activities during his career. Highly classified, and codenamed Wallflowers, the document remains the most comprehensive historical account of MI5's clandestine operations. 
Guy Liddell was appointed CBE in 1944 in recognition of his contribution to allied counter-intelligence and made a CB in 1953. He died on 2 December 1958 at his home, 18 Richmond Court, Sloane Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 67491


McKenna, Marthe (1892-c.1969), spy, was born in Westrosebeke, Belgium, one of five children of Felix Cnockaert, farmer, and his wife. Although many details of her family remain obscure, it appears that both parents were Belgian and that she had three brothers and one sister. 
Prior to the outbreak of the First World War Marthe studied at the medical school of Ghent University. Her education was interrupted by the invasion of Belgium by German forces in 1914, which occurred while she was visiting her family. Marthe remained with her parents and was in Westrosebeke when it was overrun by enemy forces. She volunteered her services as a nurse at an emergency hospital set up in the village to treat German and allied soldiers, and was allowed to remain there even after all other villagers had been removed from the area. Marthe was especially valued by the German authorities for her ability to speak fluent English and German, as well as French and Flemish. 
Early in 1915 Marthe was sent to Roeselare, north-east of Ypres, where she was reunited with her parents and where she continued to work as a nurse at a military hospital. At this time she was approached by an old family friend, Lucelle Deldonck, who revealed herself as an agent for British intelligence and who wanted to recruit Marthe into espionage work for the allies. For almost two years Marthe used her position in the hospital and her proximity to German soldiers in a cafe in Roeselare purchased by her parents to gather information on troop movements, artillery concentrations, locations of supply dumps, and other strategic concerns. This information was then passed on through a network of Belgian agents, a number of whom were women. In many cases these women, Marthe included, also aided in the escape of allied prisoners. 
After being involved in the destruction of an ammunition dump Marthe was arrested on espionage charges in November 1916 and sentenced to death. This sentence was later commuted to life in prison when it was discovered she had been awarded the Iron Cross by the German government for her nursing services. She then spent the remainder of the war in very poor conditions in a prison in Ghent. 
All of Marthe's immediate family survived the war, although two of her brothers were permanent invalids due to war injuries. While Marthe herself was recovering from her ordeal in prison she learned that she had been mentioned in dispatches on 8 November 1918 by Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig in recognition of her intelligence work; for this she was given a certificate by the British government noting her 'gallant and distinguished services in the Field' and signed by the secretary of state for war, Winston Churchill (McKenna, 4). The French and Belgian governments both made her a member of the Legion d'honneur. After receiving her demobilization papers and prison pay from British intelligence Marthe returned to Westrosebeke for the first time after the war, where she met a British army officer, John McKenna (died 'c'.1962), whom she married shortly thereafter. 
Marthe McKenna and her husband apparently moved to Manchester following the war, but later returned to Belgium, settling in the rebuilt family home in Westrosebeke. In 1931 an English writer travelling in Belgium happened upon the McKennas and, hearing about her war work, encouraged Marthe to record her story in English for publication. The result was the memoir 'I was a Spy!', ghost-written by her husband and published in 1932, with a glowingly complimentary forward written by Churchill. It was subsequently made into a popular film by Victor Saville, which starred Madeleine Carroll as Marthe. 
Following this well-received volume and a collection of espionage anecdotes published in 1934, the McKennas switched to producing spy fiction under Marthe's name -- publishing over a dozen novels and numerous short stories between the mid-1930s and the early 1950s. Ironically (but perhaps not surprisingly) while the details of these stories often drew on Marthe's wartime experiences, the plots tended to stick to the more familiar format of the day in which the hero was typically male (and English) and women appeared as loyal sidekicks and love interests, damsels in distress, or seductive villains. 
It is difficult to determine the extent to which Marthe McKenna was personally responsible for the numerous works of spy fiction published under her name. Given the nature of the prose and their stylistic similarity to other popular contemporary British thrillers, it is likely that John McKenna was largely responsible for the actual writing. The absence of any publications under Marthe's name after 1951 appears to coincide roughly with the point at which their marriage ended unhappily. Marthe McKenna then lived a secluded life in Westrosebeke until her death, which took place about 1969. 
Although details about many aspects of her life are scarce and her status as an author is uncertain, Marthe McKenna should be recognized for her contributions as an intelligence agent during the First World War, when most modern intelligence services were still in their infancy. Completely inexperienced in such work, she pursued her activities under undeniably dangerous circumstances and paid a heavy price when caught. Her efforts put her in the company of a select group of women agents of the period whose achievements and experiences are only beginning to receive serious attention within the broader field of the history of intelligence operations. 


@@@@@


doc= 67494


Popov, Dusan (1912-1981), spy, was born into a wealthy Dalmatian family in Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia. Although he had a reputation as a playboy, he was educated at the University of Freiburg, Germany. 'Dusko' as he was familiarly known, was working in his own country as a commercial lawyer in 1940 when he was approached by an old university friend, Johann Jebsen, to work for the German intelligence service known as the Abwehr. Appalled, Popov had sought help from Clement Hope, the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) officer attached to the British legation in Yugoslavia under the semi-transparent cover of passport control officer. Hope advised Popov to co-operate with Jebsen and enrolled him as a double agent with the codename Scout. 
When Jebsen suggested that Popov travel to London as a spy, the playboy fell in with his plan, and thus in mid-December 1940 he arrived in Lisbon and made contact with the local SIS station commander, Richman Stopford, who facilitated his flight to Bristol on 20 December. Once in London, responsibility for supervising Popov was passed to the Security Service (MI5) and he was assigned a case officer, William Luke, to help him fulfil his assignment, which included researching the answers to a lengthy Abwehr questionnaire about coastal defences and the location of anti-aircraft batteries. In addition, Popov had been instructed to gather information about the organization dealing with enemy parachutists and Fifth Columnists, and to try to penetrate the staff of Admiral Sir John Tovey, the commander-in-chief, Home Fleet. 
MI5 had good reason to trust Popov because upon his arrival he had disclosed the identity of another German spy in England, a Czech serving with the Free French and named Georges Graf. Unbeknownst to Popov, now known to his handler as Tricycle, Graf was also a double agent, having been codenamed Giraffe by MI5. Both Tricycle and Giraffe were to play key roles in a sophisticated deception scheme known as the 'double cross system', in which the performance of a growing number of individual double agents was monitored by a panel of inter-agency counter-intelligence experts chaired by Professor John Masterman. This group, known as the Twenty Committee because of its roman numerals (xx), co-ordinated the activities of more than forty 'turned' spies and effectively took control of the enemy's entire organization in Britain, thus providing a channel for some exceptionally ingenious operations which were intended to mislead the Abwehr, identify more of its spies, reveal its future plans, compromise the enemy's cryptographic techniques, and extract large sums of money from the axis. 
Popov returned to Lisbon in January 1941 and then attended a meeting in Madrid with Jebsen, who suggested a second mission to London. On this further visit Popov supposedly recruited his Austrian girlfriend, Lisel Gaertner, and another MI5 contact, Dickie Metcalfe, who were actually double agents, codenamed Gelatine and Balloon respectively. At the end of February 1941 Popov reported back to the Abwehr in Lisbon and received his third assignment, which was to establish a conduit for paying other German agents in Britain. With MI5's assistance Popov constructed an ingenious route, involving the unconscious co-operation of a London theatrical agent, Eric Glass, who purportedly supplied cash to the Abwehr's nominees in England in exchange for the appropriate credit in a bank in New York. Having accomplished this, and thereby enabled another MI5 double agent, codenamed Tate, to be put in badly needed funds, Popov himself flew to the United States in mid-August 1941 to undertake his most important mission, which was to include a survey of the Hawaiian island of Oahu. 
In the United States, Popov received minimal support from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which was suspicious of the self-confessed Nazi spy and disapproved of his exotic lifestyle (which included a tumultuous affair with the actress Simone Simon). Frustrated by the bureau's heavy-handed surveillance, he sailed to Brazil to acquire a transmitter on which he was to open a radio link with Lisbon. He was on board ship, half-way through the voyage to Rio de Janeiro, when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, which gave a special significance to many of the items on his Abwehr questionnaire requesting details of the US navy's installations on Oahu. 
Popov returned to Lisbon in October 1942 to receive new instructions from the Abwehr, and then proceeded to London, where, with the help of MI5's Ian Wilson, he developed another network headed by his elder brother Dr Ivo Popov, whom MI5 codenamed Dreadnought. Thereafter the Popovs participated in several deception schemes, intended to mislead the enemy about the allied invasion of Europe, and built an organization that supplied the Nazis with a mass of political and military information, ostensibly from Yugoslav emigre circles. 
After the war Popov operated as a British agent in Germany, running a commercial cover for the SIS in Krefeld, and in 1947 married his first wife, Janine. He became heavily involved in the motor industry, importing Peugeot cars into Germany, and in 1955 was appointed general secretary of the European movement. During this period Popov's business affairs became increasingly murky; he travelled extensively in southern Africa and earned a substantial permanent income from Tiny Rowland, the controversial tycoon who headed Lonrho. He also served a prison sentence in Marseilles in 1959, but in 1962 he married a Swedish student, Jill Jonsson, with whom he had twins. After working in Cape Town for a German cocoa company, Popov and his second wife settled in a magnificent home, formerly the bishop's palace, at Opio in the south of France. It was there that he wrote his wartime memoirs, 'Spy Counterspy', which were published in 1974. Popov died in Opio, Alpes Maritimes, France, on 10 August 1981, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 67495


Jonathan Henry Engleheart (bap. 1808, d. after 1841), engraver, was baptized at St Marylebone on 20 January 1808, and was also probably his father's pupil. His landscape work came to the fore with 'Cardiff Castle', after Henry Gastineau, in the latter's 'Wales Illustrated' (1830), and in T. Rose's 'Westmorland' (1832) he did two plates after George Pickering. 'Col. Maxwell's Last Charge at Assaye', after Abraham Cooper, engraved for W. H. Maxwell's 'Life of the Duke of Wellington' (1839-41), was signed 'Jno H. Engleheart', though most of his work was signed 'J. Engleheart', or occasionally 'J. H. Engleheart'. From 1839 he engraved plates for the 'Sporting Review'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67496


Wiseman, Sir William George Eden, tenth baronet (1885-1962), intelligence officer and businessman, was born on 1 February 1885 at Hatfield Broad Oak, Essex, the only son of a former naval officer, Captain Sir William Wiseman, ninth baronet (1845-1893), and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth (died 1925), the third daughter of Lewis Langworthy of Ellesmere, Putney. He succeeded to the family title in 1893, then attended Winchester College before going up to Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1904. After leaving university without a degree he worked as a journalist with the 'Daily Express', and wrote three unperformed plays. In 1908 he married Florence Marjorie Hulton (died 1961), the daughter of G. F. Sams, rector of Emberton, Buckinghamshire. The following year he went to North America to represent the London banking firm of Herndon's, which financed the Mexican government. He enjoyed modest successes in the Mexican meat-packing industry and in Canadian real estate, then, on the outbreak of the First World War, he returned to England to serve with the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry. In 1915 a German gas attack at Ypres affected his vision in one eye and incapacitated him for further active duty. 
In December of that year Wiseman met Captain Mansfield Cumming, known in intelligence circles as 'C'. As a result of this encounter he was sent back to America, ostensibly to run the British purchasing committee but in reality to take charge of section V. This was the American branch of MI1c, the precursor of the Secret Intelligence Service, popularly known as MI6. His deputy in Washington was Norman Thwaites, another wounded British officer having the advantages of connections in American newspapers and high society and of being friendly with Frank Polk, the state department official who oversaw U-1, the American intelligence co-ordinating organization. Wiseman soon acquired friends among those Americans who were ready to be impressed by a Cambridge bantamweight boxing blue who sported a well-groomed moustache and held a baronetcy stretching back to 1628. 
Both Wiseman and Sir Guy Gaunt, who headed British naval intelligence in Washington, claimed retrospectively that they had been in overall charge of the British secret service in North America. Wiseman's claim is the stronger. He did not, like Gaunt and the British embassy hierarchy, have the encumbrance of knowing too many Republicans at a time of Democratic governance. The politically adroit Wiseman first persuaded his American counterparts that he had a direct channel to the British government independently of the Washington embassy, an apocryphal claim, then won the ear of British officialdom by stating that he had the confidence of high American officials, which by this time was true. By 6 April 1917, when the United States entered the war, Wiseman had forged a working intelligence relationship with his American counterparts. 
Once America was in the fray, Wiseman proved to be a significant diplomatic, as well as intelligence go-between. Wiseman was a sensitive link between the department of state and the Foreign Office, and was able to exploit his particular friendships with Colonel E. M. House, President Woodrow Wilson's personal adviser, and Polk's assistant Gordon Auchincloss. House developed, or was allowed to believe that he had developed, a paternal relationship with the Englishman who had lost his biological father at the age of eight, while Auchincloss used Wiseman's London tailor. 
The functions of section V were to run counter-intelligence operations against Germans and against nationalists from Ireland and the subcontinent of India, to contribute to British propaganda in the United States, and to run certain intelligence operations in central and east central Europe jointly with the Americans. Among the more notable European operations were Wiseman's collaboration with the Czech-American secret agent Emanuel Voska, who stirred up nationalist feelings within the Austrian empire, and with the writer W. Somerset Maugham, dispatched with American funding to report on Russia and try to prevent the Bolshevik take-over. As a diplomatic channel, Wiseman helped to ease problems arising from the financial crisis of 1917, the role of America in the war command, and the disposition of American troops in Europe and in Siberia. At the Paris peace conference Wiseman served his country in a further capacity, as chief adviser on American affairs to the British delegation. 
Wiseman's judgement was sometimes questionable -- it would take more than a covert operation, American dollars, and a gifted English novelist to arrest the tide of social change in Russia. Americans were not universally at ease with him: there were enduring suspicions that Wiseman and the British had led the American policy makers by the nose. But Wiseman's counter-intelligence operations were successful. He showed wisdom in not subjecting America to crude propaganda, and he bequeathed to Britain and America a legacy of intelligence co-operation that flowered once again in the Second World War. In June 1941, when Admiral John Godfrey was in Washington and wished to persuade President Franklin D. Roosevelt to co-operate in clandestine matters, Wiseman was at hand to give him sage advice prior to the presidential meeting. 
On completion of his duties at the Paris peace conference Wiseman became a member of the Wall Street banking firm Kuhn, Loeb. In 1925 his first marriage was dissolved and he married Patrice Clark (died 1951) in Connecticut; he travelled to Reno to divorce her in 1933. His final marriage, in 1944, was to Mrs Joan Mary Lesueur, the daughter of Arthur Phelps, of Harrow. The first marriage yielded three daughters, the second one daughter, and the third a son who succeeded to the baronetcy. In 1950 Wiseman became a member of the Dollar Exports Board, designed to help chancellor of the exchequer Sir Stafford Cripps's assault on the balance of trade problem and the 'dollar gap'. He died in New York on 17 June 1962. 


@@@@@


doc= 67497


Cammell, Donald Seton (1934-1996), film-maker, was born on 17 January 1934 at the Outlook Tower, Castle Hill, Edinburgh, the son of Charles Richard Cammell (1890-1968), author, and his second wife, Iona Katherine Lamont Macdonald (1903-1981), daughter of David Macdonald, medical practitioner, and his wife, Anne Jane, 'nee' Cameron. Charles Cammell had inherited a large fortune from the Cammell Laird shipbuilding company and was able to devote himself to writing. He later became acquainted with the notorious Aleister Crowley, publishing his biography in 1951. Cammell's father was later to observe that: 'There is something 'fey' about Donald's personality, which my wife believes to be due to the fact that a Highland friend of ours... immediately after Donald's birth, took him in her arms and sung to him Hebridean faery-songs' (Cammell, 87). Cammell also showed an early gift for drawing and possessed so clear an idea of perspective that the artist John Duncan, a family friend, maintained that it proved that he had learned the skill in a previous incarnation. Cammell's artistic talent was such that his father had exhibited his work at the Royal Drawing Society from the age of eight. During the early years of the Second World War, Cammell and his brother David ('b'. 1937) lived in the highlands of Scotland, Cammell attending a preparatory school in Fort Augustus. However, in the winter of 1942-3 homesickness resulted in his returning to London, where the family had moved in 1935. He then attended Shrewsbury House School, near Thames Ditton, and Westminster School, before moving to the Byam Shaw School of Art from where, in 1954, he won a scholarship to the Royal Academy. Two years earlier he had travelled in Italy, where he received lessons from Pietro Annigoni. 
On returning to London, Cammell set himself up as a portrait painter in studios at Flood Street, Chelsea. His 1953 portrait of the marquess of Dufferin and Ava was judged society portrait of the year. Cammell was also enjoying a busy social life as part of the 'Chelsea set', a mixture of public schoolboys and debutantes who indulged their tastes for parties and sexual excess, and who had a fascination with working-class crime and violence. There was nothing particularly new in this; members of the British upper classes had long been excited by being close, but not too close, to working-class criminality. In Cammell's case this fascination was an integral part of his major artistic achievement: the film 'Performance'. Another key element of the film, sex, is also crucial to understanding Cammell. Extremely handsome, Cammell had no difficulty in attracting a series of beautiful women to his studio; he also developed a taste for threesomes. On 30 August 1954 he married the actress Mary Antippas 
(formerly Maria Mastrantones; 'b'. 1927/8)
, a divorcee, and daughter of Anthony Antippas, a company secretary. The marriage produced a son, Antony, in 1959, but ended soon thereafter. Cammell then left London and headed for New York; he never resided permanently in Britain again. 
It appears that Cammell had become disenchanted with life as a society portraitist and was looking to adopt other approaches to art. During the late 1950s he met Deborah Dixon, a Texan model, with whom he travelled to Paris in the early 1960s. There he again took up figurative painting, although he now eschewed formal society portraits for something a little more flexible. However, by the mid-1960s his disillusionment with painting was such that he abandoned it for a new medium: film. His first script was for 'The Touchables' (1968); he then went on to write the original script for 'Duffy' (1968), a crime film starring James Coburn as an American hippie who assists two brothers to rob their father. The films, as envisaged by Cammell, contained elements of violence, sex, and rock music, but his vision never made it to the screen. Cammell's experiences with both 'The Touchables' and 'Duffy' were distinctly unhappy. The directors of both films delivered finished products totally at odds with Cammell's original ideas. Indeed, his dissatisfaction with 'Duffy' became so intense that he was eventually thrown off the set. It was apparent that what Cammell craved was control, and the only way he could achieve this was by directing his next project himself. He began shooting in the summer of 1968. 

'Performance', which Cammell co-directed with Nicolas Roeg, is the tale of a gangster, Chas Devlin (played by James Fox), who is on the run from some of his associates and hides out in the home of reclusive rock star Turner (Mick Jagger) and his entourage. The key themes of the film -- sexuality, class, violence, and identity -- are explored as a fusion occurs between the world of East End crime and a flourishing youth culture, exemplified by rock music. The film also contains a liberal amount of references to magic and eastern mysticism. 'Performance' was soon recognized as a minor classic, and the filming of it became surrounded by myths of the excesses said to have taken place on set and by stories of the tensions that developed between the actors. The charming but manipulative Cammell encouraged these tensions in the belief that they would produce a more truthful performance. When Warner Bros. executives saw Cammell's original version of the film, they were horrified. The copious amounts of sex, violence, and drug-taking, not to mention the sight of dirty bathwater in one scene, was too much for them, and they insisted that the film be edited in Los Angeles. 'Performance' was released, to a mixed reaction, in the USA in the summer of 1970 and, to good reviews, in Britain in January 1971. 
What really should have been only the beginning of a successful career for Cammell as a director was, in truth, its pinnacle. The remainder of his career was taken up with battles with studios, and littered with abandoned projects. His only other films were 'Demon Seed' (1977), 'White of the Eye' (1986), and 'Wild Side' (1995), none of which approached the success of 'Performance'. Nevertheless 'Performance' alone was both a key film of the 1960s and a landmark in British cinema. Many film-makers more prolific than Cammell would have been happy with these achievements. In 1978 he married, secondly, China Kong ('b'. 1960). He had been commissioned to direct another film when, on 24 April 1996, he shot himself through the head at the home he shared with his wife at Lookout Mountain, Hollywood. Cammell, who had for some time been interested in suicide, aimed the shot so that death would not be instantaneous, but painless and pleasurable. He remained conscious for some forty-five minutes, during which time he asked for a mirror with which he might view his death. Among his last words were: 'Can you see the picture of Borges now?', a reference to the death of Turner in 'Performance', this too the result of a gunshot to the head. 


@@@@@


doc= 67498


Roberts, Sir Frank Kenyon (1907-1998), diplomatist, was born on 27 October 1907 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, the son of Henry George Roberts of Preston, Lancashire, manager of Unilever in Argentina, and his wife, Gertrude, 'nee' Kenyon, of Blackburn, Lancashire. His maternal grandfather was the film-maker James Kenyon ['see under 'Mitchell, Sagar Jones]. He was sent home to school in England, first to Bedales School (1917-20) and then to Rugby School (1921-6). At both schools, although diminutive in stature, he excelled in games as well as in academic work. At Rugby his headmaster, William Wyamar Vaughan, and his housemaster, John Bruce-Lockhart, regarded him as an outstanding all-rounder: he was head of the school and was in both the rugby and the cricket teams, and he finished his school career by winning a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge. Roberts graduated from Cambridge in 1930 with first-class honours in both parts of the history tripos. After spending the customary periods of study with academic families in France and Germany in order to improve his languages he took the Foreign Office examination in 1930 and passed in top. 
From the first Roberts was recognized in the Foreign Office as exceptionally able, and he quickly made his mark. The Paris embassy was his first post abroad, from October 1932, when he was private secretary to Lord Tyrrell. Tyrrell was a diplomatist of great eminence, known especially for his long and loyal service as private secretary to Sir Edward Grey just before the First World War, and for the fact that he seldom committed himself on paper to a view on policy. From Paris, Roberts went to Cairo in March 1935, again as private secretary, this time to the head of mission, Sir Miles Lampson (later Lord Killearn), then high commissioner in Egypt and a very formidable person. Thus in both Paris and Cairo, Roberts was an observer of the differing styles of two great ambassadors, though it cannot be said that he was to emulate either of them. In Cairo he became engaged to Celeste Leila Beatrix (Cella) Shoucair (died 1990), the daughter of Sir Said Shoucair Pasha, financial adviser to the Sudan government, who was of a distinguished Lebanese family. They married in the Anglican cathedral in Cairo on 1 June 1937. In November that year Roberts and his wife returned to London, where he was to serve in the Foreign Office until the last months of the Second World War. Still a very junior official Roberts was nevertheless in the thick of affairs as a member of the central department, dealing with European questions during the succession of crises just before the outbreak of war. Indeed, he acquired the reputation of always being on hand in the middle of the action and was described in a 'Guardian' obituary as a 'sort of scrum half of diplomacy' (9 Jan 1998); for example, he was the official who took over to the House of Commons the telegram that enabled Mr Chamberlain to announce with high drama the invitation to meet Hitler at Munich in 1938. In March 1939 he was dealing with Polish affairs when Chamberlain made his abrupt change of policy and gave a guarantee to Poland after Hitler's annexation of Czechoslovakia. Later on in the year he accompanied Sir William Strang to Moscow for the negotiations that attempted unsuccessfully to enlist Russian help in stemming German plans for further aggressive acts. He was present in the secretary of state's room at the Foreign Office on 3 September 1939 when the ultimatum ran out and Britain therefore came to be at war with Germany. He was the British joint secretary of the Anglo-French war council in 1939-40. In December 1941, after Hitler's invasion of Russia, he was one of the small party accompanying Anthony Eden to Moscow. Later in the war he was largely responsible for negotiating the Azores agreement with Portugal, providing for the allied use of this important naval base. He was then involved in much of the planning for a post-war settlement that went on in the Foreign Office in 1943 and 1944, and he was present at the famous Yalta conference in 1945. 
Promoted acting counsellor, Roberts was transferred to Moscow with the rank of minister-plenipotentiary in January 1945. The next three years, 1945-7, were to be perhaps the most important period of the middle years of his career, for it was from Moscow that -- as charge d'affaires in close consultation with the United States ambassador, George Kennan -- he sent back to London the powerfully argued analysis of Soviet policy that was to form the basis for the allied policy of containment. The policy of containment was shortly adopted and successfully carried out once it became clear that the Soviet Union was not willing to remain in collaboration with its wartime allies in managing the post-war settlement. It was when in Moscow that Roberts (who had been appointed CMG in 1946) was spotted by Ernest Bevin and invited to become his private secretary at the end of 1947. In this capacity he entered once more into the centre of government affairs at home. He was used by Bevin as his right-hand man in discussions with the Russians and the Americans over the Berlin airlift in 1947 and 1948, and he proved a reliable and skilful negotiator. But the normal duties of a private secretary were not really suited to one of such an active turn of mind and, although at the time reluctant to leave Bevin's side, Roberts's next experience, as number two in the high commission in India from April 1949 to August 1951, was to be of great value in widening his knowledge of the developing world at a very interesting time. From India he returned to London to be the deputy under-secretary responsible for European affairs. By this time Eden had become foreign secretary and Roberts, as his principal adviser on Europe, dealt with the whole complex of problems involved in re-establishing a sovereign state in West Germany and in bringing Germany into the Atlantic Alliance as a major partner of the Western powers. Roberts was at Eden's elbow in 1954 during the whole time in which, after the failure of the French assembly to ratify the European defence treaty, Eden's initiative to provide a new structure for European defence led to agreement on the Western European Union, underpinned by the British commitment of forces to be stationed on the continent. Eden's policy was crowned with success at the Lancaster House conference in October. Eden and Roberts during this important period gave an admirable example of the right partnership between minister and official. Roberts's services were recognized by his appointment as KCMG in 1953. Thereafter Roberts's career took him as ambassador to Tito's Yugoslavia from November 1954 to February 1957, as ambassador to NATO from then until April 1960, and as ambassador to the Soviet Union from then until November 1962. With the key top people in each of these posts -- Tito, Spaak (then secretary-general of NATO), and Khrushchov -- he succeeded in developing an excellent working relationship and he proved an effective advocate and executant of British policies. Finally, at the end of his career Roberts had a five year tour as ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany, from February 1963 to May 1968. He regretted that, for all his efforts, German support for British entry to the EEC was deplorably weak in the face of French opposition, but in all other respects Anglo-German relations were excellent when Roberts left Bonn. He was advanced to GCMG in 1963, and was made GCVO in 1965. 
Roberts was very small in stature, but he enjoyed excellent health, and he remained active in mind and body until his death at the age of ninety. During his diplomatic career he was a glutton for work at all stages, and if he had a fault it was no doubt excessive zeal and an unwillingness to delegate. But his virtues were numerous; he was almost the ideal civil servant -- loyal, well-informed, industrious, even-tempered, ingenious in finding a way through difficulties, and a very intelligent negotiator. He also had something of a genius for entering sympathetically into the minds of those whom he served, and it was this that earned him the confidence of a variety of British ministers -- Churchill, Bevin, Eden, Macmillan, Butler, Heath, Wilson, Stewart, and even George Brown. As for the foreign statesmen with whom he had to deal, they all respected and liked him -- Stalin, Tito, Adenauer, Brandt, and Schmidt. He made a special contribution to understanding between Britain and Germany both during his time as ambassador in Bonn and in his retirement. 
Roberts and his wife had no children. After retirement they lived in an elegant flat in Kensington, London, and for the next twenty or twenty-five years had a busy social life. In the first period after returning to London, Roberts became involved in a good deal of quasi-official work arising from his government service. Thus he was a member of the Duncan committee on overseas representation in 1969, president of the British Atlantic Committee for many years and also of the European Atlantic Group, as well as a member of the council of Chatham House and a frequent participant in their debates and conferences on European affairs. He was president and then vice-president of the German chamber of commerce and industry in the UK; in fact his main political interest continued to be in German affairs and especially in Anglo-German relations. He was chairman of the steering committee of the Konigswinter (Anglo-German) conference and later a founder member of the young Konigswinter conference, which took place annually in Berlin. In this, in spite of the age gap, he was readily accepted as being on the same wavelength as the youthful participants. He managed to combine all this with a number of business activities, such as non-executive directorships of Hoechst, Mercedes Benz, the Amalgamated Metal Corporation, and Unilever. This last directorship gave him much satisfaction because of his father's long membership of the firm. Among his many honorary activities was the chairmanship of the governors of Bedales and membership of various bodies connected with Rugby School. 
After his wife's death in 1990 Roberts took a little while to recover, but he acquired a second wind and in 1991, at the age of eighty-four, he published his diplomatic memoirs, 'Dealing with Dictators'. He had written much of this when his wife was still alive and she had assisted him in the recollection of events, but he had laid it aside until he felt able to complete it. After that he made frequent appearances on television programmes dealing with the history of the 1940s and 1950s. His phenomenally accurate memory of the events of fifty years earlier and his articulate presentation of his recollections were alike impressive. He was still going strong when he died suddenly in the Cromwell Hospital, Kensington, on 7 January 1998. His remains were cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 67502


Mackintosh, Lauchlan, of Torcastle (bap. 1639, d. 1704), chief of clan Mackintosh and captain of clan Chattan, was baptized on 17 October 1639 in Inverness, the son of William Mackintosh (died 1660), chief of the Mackintoshes and captain of clan Chattan, and his wife, Margaret (died 1674), eldest daughter of David Graham, laird of Fintray. After attending schools in Inverness and Elgin, he studied philosophy for two years at King's College, Aberdeen, and later at St Leonard's College, St Andrews. Shortly after the death of his father on 22 November 1660 he succeeded as chief. 
Mackintosh's chiefship saw the cessation of a 300-year-old feud between the Mackintoshes and clan Chattan and the clan Cameron over the lands of Glenlui and Locharkaig in Lochaber, to which the Camerons claimed a right through highland custom and the Mackintoshes claimed a right through law. A reconciliation finally occurred in 1665. Mackintosh also had to deal with the reassertion of independence by the Macphersons in 1664. He tried to dispel this with a renewal of the 1609 bond of union, but while most of the leading men of the clan signed, Andrew Macpherson of Cluny, head of that family, did not. Macpherson determination to break away from the Mackintosh chief was realized when in 1672 Duncan, who had succeeded Andrew, applied for a coat of arms for the name of Macpherson, distinct from that of Mackintosh. However, a compromise was reached with the help of Lauchlan Mackintosh of Kinrara, uncle of the chief, and it was decided that Duncan was responsible for those of his name, but '[without] prejudice always to the Laird of M'Intosh... who are his vassals' ('Loyall Dissuasive and other Papers', 56-7). The chief's authority in the locality was upheld against the marquess of Huntly, whose lands in Lochaber were under the Mackintoshes' stewardry, and who, jealous of Mackintosh's legal right to hold courts, tried with the earl of Moray to prevent him from fulfilling his duties. Mackintosh, however, held court throughout Lochaber, and was granted further powers to deal with lawless elements as he wished. 
On 23 July 1667 Mackintosh married Magdalene (or Margaret), only daughter of John Lindsay of Edzell, with whom he had a son, Lauchlan. Some months after her death he married, on 25 August 1677, Anne, daughter of Sir George Munro of Culrain and widow of Donald, master of Reay, with whom he had a daughter, Christian, who later married David Dunbar of Dunphail. In 1702, for reasons of old age, he transferred the clan estate to his son, Lauchlan. He died two years later, at Dalcross Castle, on 9 December 1704, and was buried at Petty after having lain in state until mid-January. 


@@@@@


doc= 67505


Campbell, Alexander, of Fonab and Monzie (c.1660-1724), army officer, born in Perthshire, was the second but eldest surviving son of Robert Campbell, minister of Moulin, who had bought the Fonab estate, and his wife, Jean, second daughter of Duncan Menzies of Weem. His grandfather was Archibald Campbell of Lagvinshoch and Monzie, son of Sir Duncan Campbell of Glenorchy, a powerful member of the clan Campbell elite. There is no record of his early life or education but we know from his tombstone at Edinample (no longer extant) that he was in Belgium in 1690 as a member of the earl of Argyll's regiment of foot. In 1693 he is recorded as receiving a commission as captain in the same regiment, and is known to have been in Flanders in 1695, and in Holland in 1697, before being reduced to half pay the following year. 
Some time between 1692 and 1699, having inherited his father's estate, Alexander Campbell, known as Fonab, married his cousin Susan Menzies of Weem, widow of Lord Neil Campbell of Ardmaddie, with whom he had a daughter, Jean. It was at this period in his life that he established himself as a hero in a time of national outrage and humiliation. In October 1699 he was appointed a counsellor of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies -- a company which Scots investors hoped would challenge the English trade monopoly and revive the depressed Scottish economy by establishing Scotland's own trading colony in the Americas. He immediately proceeded to New Caledonia, Panama, to help establish the second expedition by defending it against Spanish attack. Arriving in New Caledonia on 2 February 1700, and hearing of the proposed Spanish attack on the colony by both land and sea, three days later, Fonab, along with Lieutenant Robert Turnbull, 200 Scotsmen, and sixty native Indians marched through almost impenetrable forests, jungle, and swamps to confront the Spaniards at Toubacanti. Although greatly outnumbered, and despite being wounded in the shoulder, Fonab led the Scots to victory thanks to his leadership and courage. Notwithstanding this moment of glory, misfortune continued to dog the colonists, and New Caledonia was shortly afterwards abandoned by the Scots. Fonab returned to Scotland in July 1700 where he was honoured as a national hero. The Company of Scotland commissioned a gold medal to be struck for him with the company's arms on the obverse, and a classical figure leading an attack upon the Spanish stockade on the reverse. In addition, his coat of arms was overlaid by that of the Company of Scotland, the only person to receive this distinction. 
Fonab continued his career as a soldier. He was appointed captain of an independent company of foot for preserving the peace in the highlands in July 1701. He was a commissioner of supply in 1702 and 1704, and one of the duke of Argyll's five dependants who managed his estates in Scotland. He was appointed a brevet lieutenant-colonel in 1703. At the time of the Jacobite rising of 1715 Fonab is listed as a freeholder and heritor of Argyll; as a protestant and a member of the clan Campbell, he fought on the government side to support the Hanoverian succession. His dislike of fighting fellow Scots and neighbouring clansmen led to his part in the 'Fifteen being misconstrued by the earl of Ilay as displaying conflicting loyalties. 
On 1 March 1719, his first wife having died, Fonab married Mary Home, daughter of Sir John Home of Blackadder, and with her had three children. He died on 16 September 1724 and was buried at Kilmun, Argyll. His son and heir by his second marriage, Robert, later removed Fonab's remains to Edinample on Loch Earn, Perthshire, where he erected a tombstone; his widow was still living in 1739. 


@@@@@


doc= 67507


Charles Walter Radclyffe (bap. 1817, d. 1903), painter, the youngest son of William Radclyffe, was baptized on 11 March 1817 at St Phillip's, Birmingham, in which city he lived all his life. He became a landscape painter and exhibited three paintings at the Royal Academy between 1849 and 1881. He also exhibited elsewhere in London, and 'The Path through the Wood' is among his best work. Credited with lithographing some views of Rugby School about 1840, Radclyffe also proposed the exhibition of engravings of Birmingham men in 1877. In 1863 he lived at 268 Hagley Road, Birmingham. He died at King's Norton, Birmingham, in the first quarter of 1903, aged eighty-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 67508


Ogilvy, James, first earl of Findlater (d. 1652), nobleman, was the son of Walter Ogilvy of Findlater (died 1623/4), created Lord Ogilvy of Deskford in 1615, and Mary, daughter of William Douglas, earl of Morton. He married, by a contract dated 13 February 1610, Elizabeth, daughter of Andrew Leslie, fifth earl of Rothes, and widow of David Wemyss. After her death he married Marion (died 1661), daughter of William Cunningham, eighth earl of Glencairn. 
On succeeding his father, Ogilvy concerned himself mainly in local Banffshire affairs, becoming a justice of the peace there in 1634. He was admitted to the Scottish privy council on 22 June 1637 and was created earl of Findlater on 20 February 1638 (infuriating the head of his kin, Lord Ogilvy of Airlie, who was not made an earl until a year later). In the early stages of the revolt of the covenanters he inclined to support Charles I, but in March 1639, 'being a man of a peaceable temper, and one who was knowne to have no stomacke for warre' (Gordon, 2.213), he mediated between the royalist marquess of Huntly and the earl of Montrose, who led covenanting forces in the north-east of Scotland. 'Shortly afterwards [Findlater] fell in to the Covenant' (Gordon, 2.213), but he showed no inclination to involve himself in politics (though he took his seat in parliament in 1641, 1645-6, and 1648). In 1644-5 he served intermittently against the marquess of Montrose (who was now leading a royalist rising), perhaps mainly to protect his own estates, but, being involved in the defeat of the covenanters at Auldearn (9 May 1645), he withdrew from the contest. In the war against the Cromwellian invasion in 1651 he was active in raising supplies in the north-east for the Scottish army. He died in 1652 in his house at Cullen. 


@@@@@


doc= 67510


MacGill, James, of Cranstoun Riddel, first viscount of Oxfurd (d. 1663), judge and politician, was the second son of David MacGill of Cranstoun Riddel (died 1607), king's advocate, and his wife, Marie (died 1606), eldest daughter of Sir William Sinclair of Herdmanstoun, and his wife, Sibil. On 10 July 1619 he was served heir to his elder brother, David. By contract dated 20 December 1621 he married his first wife, Katherine, eldest daughter of John Cockburn of Ormiston. They had three sons and four daughters. 
In July 1625 MacGill was named as one of the justices of the peace for Edinburghshire qualified to act as sheriff. On 22 August 1626 he accepted the sheriffship of Edinburgh, and became sheriff-principal in 1628. He was created a baronet on 19 July 1627, and was admitted an ordinary lord of session on 3 November 1629, after which the court chose him to oversee the collection of the tax of 40's'. Scots in every pound land of old extent that had been granted them for their use. The heritors of Edinburghshire elected him their commissioner to the convention of the estates in 1630. In 1631 he was appointed to the commission created to survey Scotland's laws with a view to harmonizing them with those of England, and in 1632 was involved in the discussions on Charles I's plans for fishing. 
It appears that MacGill was sympathetic to the covenanters, as he was a commissioner of exchequer in 1644 and 1645, on the committee of war for Edinburghshire in 1647 and 1648, and a member of the committee of estates in 1651. On 19 April that year Charles II created him viscount of Oxfurd and Lord MacGill of Cousland, but the English occupation of Scotland prevented his assuming the title. During the occupation he was among those approved by the protector's Scottish council in 1656 as a justice of the peace for Edinburghshire, and was named as a commissioner of the cess for the same county in 1655, 1656, and 1660. 
Following the Restoration, Oxfurd was again appointed a judge, although he did not take up his seat, and was named a commissioner of exchequer. In 1661 he sat in parliament as Viscount Oxenford. He died on 5 May 1663, and was buried three days later in Cranston kirk. He was survived by his second wife, Christian (died 1664), daughter of Sir William Livingston of Kilsyth, whom he had married by contract dated 8 July 1646. Although this marriage had also produced many children -- five sons and four daughters -- at least five of Oxfurd's sons predeceased him, and he was succeeded as second viscount by Christian's third son, Robert (1651-1705). 


@@@@@


doc= 67512


Erskine, John, nineteenth or third earl of Mar (c.1585-1653), nobleman, was the only child of John Erskine, eighteenth or second earl of Mar (c.1562-1634), and his first wife, Anna, daughter of David, Lord Drummond. Educated initially at home, Lord Erskine travelled in France as a youth; he was admitted to Gray's Inn on 22 May 1603 and was created MA at Oxford on 30 August 1605. He married Lady Jean (died 1668), daughter of Francis Hay, ninth earl of Erroll (d. 1631), on 6 February 1610; the couple had two sons and two daughters. Created a knight of the Bath on 2 June 1610, Erskine was a member of the privy council in July 1615 and in the same year was appointed governor of Edinburgh Castle. He was named an extraordinary lord of session in 1620. Following his father's death, on 14 December 1634, he succeeded as earl of Mar. 
Mar's support for the covenanting regime of 1638 earned the king's displeasure, and he was deprived of his command of Edinburgh Castle. In 1641 he was forbidden to attend the privy council, but was reinstated by parliament in the same year. Nevertheless, he was soon accused, along with his son Lord Erskine, of reverting to the king's party. In 1645 the pair were said to have lavishly entertained the marquess of Montrose and the principal officers of his army at Alloa, Clackmannanshire, for which act the marquess of Argyll threatened to sack the family home. Mar's defence of compulsion attracted some sympathy, since the forces of Montrose had plundered the latter town and parts of his adjoining lands, and the earl feared further excesses on their part. 
Under pressure from all sides, Mar's political allegiances appear influenced more by his precarious financial affairs than by high principle. His business ventures, which included a monopoly over the leather trade in Scotland, were largely unsuccessful. In 1638 he resigned his lands in favour of his son to avoid his creditors, and surrendered his heritable offices -- including that of sheriff of Stirlingshire -- to the king. Compensation of $8000 was granted in November 1641, but probably never honoured. Equally, Mar suffered financially at the hands of the estates, largely owing to his son's continuing support for Montrose. From the sale of certain of his Scottish lands, the earl purchased an estate in Ireland, which he lost during the Irish rising. The value of his estate much depleted, Mar died between January and October 1653. His son John (died 1668) succeeded as twentieth or fourth earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 67513


Arbuthnott, Robert, first viscount of Arbuthnott (c.1618-1655), politician, was the eldest of seven children of Sir Robert Arbuthnott (died 1633) of Arbuthnott in Kincardineshire and his second wife, Margaret, daughter of Simon Fraser, Lord Lovat. He succeeded his father following his death on 15 March 1633, but as he was still under age, his affairs were initially administered by his uncle James Arbuthnott of Dulladies who, along with Robert Arbuthnott of Findowrie and James Burnett of Craigmyle, had been appointed tutors by his father's will. Identified as a covenanter in 1638, he would became one of the leading figures in the movement in the north-east of Scotland. At some time before 1639 he married his first wife, Lady Marjorie (died 1651), daughter of David Carnegie, first earl of Southesk, and widow of William Halyburton of Pitcur; they had two children, Robert and Margaret. At the age of about twenty-three he was created viscount of Arbuthnott and lord of Bervie (or Inverbervie) by patent dated 17 November 1641 at the palace of Holyroodhouse. He was a ruling elder in the 1641 general assembly and in 1645 and 1649 was one of the ruling elders appointed to the commission for public affairs of the kirk. 
Arbuthnott attended the 1643-4 conventions of estates and the first triennial parliament of 1644-7 and was nominated to important committees with procedural, financial, and military remits. He was a member of the committee for the north, appointed by the 1644 convention on 16 April, and the committee for the northern business, appointed by the 1644 parliament on 19 July. On 24 January 1645 he was nominated a member of the committee for assisting Lieutenant-General Baillie in his campaign against Montrose, while on 10 July he was elected a member of the committee to remain with the army at Perth. He was included on the committee of estates of 8 March 1645, the exchequer commission of 8 March, and the session committee of 1 December dealing with bills and ratifications. In the field of financial affairs, he was also appointed to the committee for moneys (3 February 1646) and the committee for considering and clearing the common burdens of the kingdom (30 January 1647). 
One of the more radical covenanting lords, Robert Baillie, noted that in the 1648 session of parliament Arbuthnott was one of only eight or nine nobles who were hostile to the engagement. With the defeat of the engager party he was appointed a privy councillor on 16 March 1649, and was a member of the commission for the plantation of kirks and the valuation of teinds (15 March 1649) and the commissions for the visitation of the universities of St Andrews (16 January 1649) and Aberdeen (31 July 1649). He used the 1649 parliament to complain about the losses, estimated at $80,000 Scots, which he had suffered on his Kincardineshire estates in March 1645 at the hands of Montrose's royalist forces. Arbuthnott therefore claimed exemption from the proposed levy of February 1649 and this was accepted by parliament on 16 March. On 25 February Arbuthnott had been appointed colonel of the foot for the Mearns and part of Aberdeenshire, although it seems that by 1650 Arbuthnott's foot had not been properly raised. Sir James Balfour noted that Arbuthnott was one of the twelve dissenters of 25 November 1650 who voted against the declaration of the committee of estates, condemning the western remonstrance which had denounced alleged breaches of the covenants and criticized the government's support for an unrepentant Charles II. Following the Cromwellian conquest, he was appointed one of the eleven commissioners for Perth, Fife, and Forfarshire as part of the 1654 commission for visiting the universities, colleges, and schools of learning in Scotland. After the death of his first wife, Marjorie (22 December 1651), he married, on 30 June 1653, his cousin Katherine (1622-1663), daughter of Hugh Fraser, eighth Lord Lovat, and widow of Sir John Sinclair of Dunbeath. With his second wife he had two further children, Alexander and Anna. He died on 10 October 1655. 


@@@@@


doc= 67514


Balfour, John, of Kinloch (fl. 1663-1683), covenanter, was the son of John Balfour (died 'c'.1652), portioner of Kinloch, in the parish of Collessie, and his wife, Grissel Hay (died 'c'.1653). Served heir to his grandfather Robert Balfour on 26 February 1663, he was described as a 'broad man' with 'farid dusk brown hair' (NA Scot., JC2/15, fol. 224'r'). He married Barbara Hackston, sister of David Hackston of Rathillet, and they had a son, perhaps named David. In July 1672 and 1676 Balfour was called before the privy council for attending conventicles, but refused to appear, leaving him open to arrest. In January 1678 he is listed as not having signed the bond for public peace and in the same year he is among those heritors in the parish of Collessie who had not signed the bond against conventicles and disorderly walking. In March 1678 between sixty and eighty armed men met at his house and attacked a troop of horse under Captain Carstares sent by the privy council to capture conventiclers. Balfour participated in the murder of Archbishop Sharp on Magnus Muir (Moor) on 3 May 1679, at which his brother-in-law Hackston was present. He escaped to the west of Scotland and was involved in the declaration of Rutherglen on 29 May 1679, which condemned past violations of the covenants and the reintroduction of episcopacy, and which preceded a covenanter rising. He was one of the officers of the covenanting army at the battle of Drumclog on 1 June 1679 under the name of Captain Burghlie. On 22 June 1679 he took part in the covenanter defeat at the battle of Bothwell Bridge and was among those proclaimed traitors on 26 June. On 14 August 1679 a reward of 10,000 merks and indemnity was offered for Balfour and Hackston for participation in Sharp's murder. Balfour fled to Holland about October 1679 and a process of treason was raised against him about January 1683. On 2 April 1683 the lords of justiciary deemed him a traitor and his goods were pronounced forfeit. His later career is unclear, 'and nothing certain is known of his last deeds and days' (Hewison, 2.512). 


@@@@@


doc= 67516


Gibson, Walter (b. c.1645, d. in or after 1717), merchant and shipowner, was the eldest son of John Gibson (died 1679), portioner of Newtoun (otherwise Overton or Overnewtoun), Lanarkshire. Walter Gibson's brothers John, Andrew, and Ninian were merchants, while another brother, James, was a ship's captain and agent in Amsterdam for the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies during the first Darien expedition of 1698. He captained the 'Rising Sun' on the second expedition of 1699 but after its failure in 1700 he perished with the ship during a hurricane off the coast of Charles Town. Walter Gibson became a merchant burgess and guild brother of Glasgow on 26 December 1670 as son-in-law of William Robertson (died in or before 1670), merchant burgess, whose daughter Jonet (Janet) he had married. With the agreement of James VII and nomination of John Paterson, archbishop of Glasgow, he was 'elected' provost of Glasgow in January 1688, and in December that year was continued provost by royal instruction. 
Gibson began as a malt maker but in the 1680s entered the more lucrative overseas trade. His interests were, at first, in herring, and he chartered Dutch ships to export fish to France, returning with wine, brandy, and salt. In addition, in April 1688, he acquired from the Royal Society of Fishing the valuable ten-year tack for duty charged on exported white fish and herring. He pioneered the smoking of red herrings in his smokeries at Gourock, his herrings being termed 'Glasgow magistrates'. By the late 1680s he had acquired three ships of his own and was also trading with Spain and Norway. He was also 'the first that brought [from Sweden] iron to Glasgow' (McUre, 207). 
Gibson's involvement in Atlantic trade with Virginia and the West Indies was more dramatic and he joined other Glasgow merchants in evading the English navigation acts. In 1687 a cargo of sugar from the plantations was impounded for payment of customs as it appeared to be on a foreign ship. However, Gibson explained to the lords of exchequer that the false name 'St Christopher' had been given to his own vessel, 'such a name being necessary, for other wayes all Scots shipps that trade to the plantations are confiscable' (NA Scot., warrants of exchequer, E 8.40). He encouraged the Darien scheme but provided investment through his vessels and his brother, not as a subscriber to the Company of Scotland. In 1681 Gibson, having volunteered, was commissioned by the privy council to transport banished criminals and covenanters to America, and in 1684 transported at profit over thirty prisoners from the tolbooths of Edinburgh and Glasgow. He seems, however, to have been a religious pragmatist rather than an anti-covenanter, and counted presbyterians such as Henry Erskine, Lord Cardross, among his company and transported the emigrant Cardross to Carolina. None the less, Gibson's ambiguous religious position probably accounts for his removal as provost after the revolution of 1688. 
Gibson and his wife had had several sons. He owned extensive property in and around Glasgow including the lands of Ballshagrie, Clayslopp, Whytinch, Hyndland, Partick, the fishings of Kelvin water, and the coalheughs of Camlauchie. Although apparently remaining wealthy, he was a prisoner in Glasgow tolbooth in 1708 after a dispute, dating back to 1695, over a debt of 5000 merks he owed to the burgh. Commercially combative, this has echoes of his bitter dispute with London merchants in 1690. Gibson's testament has not survived, and his date of death and place of burial are unknown, though he was alive in January 1717. 


@@@@@


doc= 67518


Norton, Edward (bap. 1654, d. 1702), conspirator, was the second son of Sir George Norton (died 1677) of Abbots Leigh, Somerset, and Ellen, daughter of Sir William Owen of Condover in Shropshire. Norton's father, the ward of Sir John Strangeways, remained neutral during the civil war but did conceal Prince Charles at his house during the battle of Worcester, for which he was rewarded with a knighthood following the Restoration. In the late 1670s and early 1680s Edward Norton was active in London whig circles. He joined the notorious Green Ribbon Club and signed the May 1679 whig petition presented to the court of aldermen, which affirmed belief in the Popish Plot and called for a parliament to preserve the king and the protestant religion. He also stood for Westbury, Wiltshire, in 1679 on the interest of his brother-in-law, William Trenchard, unseating a court supporter on petition. 
In September 1681 Norton was summoned before the privy council along with the whig barrister John Ayloffe on charges of suborning a government informer. In November 1681 he led a noisy demonstration in London celebrating the earl of Shaftesbury's acquittal by a Middlesex grand jury in which the mob shouted, 'no Popish successor, no York, a Monmouth, a Buckingham' and 'God bless the earl of Shaftesbury' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 581). Norton was part of the lower circle of Rye House conspirators in 1682-3 along with Nathaniel Wade, Robert West, Robert Ferguson, and John Rumsey. Secretary Jenkins believed that Norton had a 'very deep hand in that treason' ('CSP dom.', 'Jan-June 1683', 353). Following the plot's discovery in June 1683 Norton hid in London, where he lay wounded from 'a Whig and Tory brawl' and eventually escaped to the Netherlands ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 11). On 26 June Secretary Jenkins issued a warrant for his arrest; his estate at Ashe, Dorset, was searched and some arms were discovered. Norton's estate was declared forfeit on 14 June 1684. While in exile Norton took the alias 'Mr Willoughby' and associated with the various whigs and dissenters gathered around the duke of Monmouth and the earl of Argyll. At one point Norton was sent back to England to inform the earl of Macclesfield of Monmouth's coming and to tell his brother Sir George Norton to prepare in Cheshire. Fellow conspirator Elizabeth Gaunt was responsible for his safe travel to and from London. 
Following the failure of Monmouth's rebellion (in which he did not participate), Norton was seen in the company of Robert Ferguson, Monmouth's army chaplain, and was supposedly lodging with him in Amsterdam. At one point Norton was joined by his brother Sir George, who had been in France. In 1686 Norton returned to England; he received a pardon on 10 June on the petition of his brother and on 12 November the outlawry against him was reversed. In November 1688 he readily joined the prince of Orange and received a commission in Captain Lord Mordaunt's regiment. Norton remained in the army from 1691 to 1699 as a major of marines. He was buried at Highgate in November or December 1702. He never married. In his will, dated 8 November 1702, he left 40's'. to his sister Ellen. She had married William Trenchard of Cutteridge, and they eventually inherited the Norton family property. Their eldest son was John Trenchard, who co-authored 'Cato's Letters' and the 'Independent Whig'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67519


Graham, John, fourth earl of Montrose (1573-1626), nobleman, was the son of John Graham, third earl of Montrose (1548-1608), an extraordinary lord of session, lord high treasurer, chancellor, and commissioner-general under James VI, and Jean (died 1598), daughter of David Drummond, Lord Drummond. He received a charter of lands from his father in 1581. He married (contract of 12 December 1593) Lady Margaret, daughter of William Ruthven, first earl of Gowrie. She predeceased him, and was buried on 15 April 1618. They had one son, James Graham, fifth earl and first marquess of Montrose (1612-1650), the covenanting and later royalist leader, and there may have been another son, called John, who died in infancy. At least four of their six daughters survived into adulthood, marrying into various landed families. With an unknown mistress he had a son, John, who was involved in the covenanting wars and was last recorded at his half-brother's funeral in 1661. 
Montrose was involved in national politics from the age of about twenty-three, attending a convention of estates at Perth in 1597 as master of Montrose. Under that title he was admitted to the privy council in March 1604, the king noting 'that it is expedient that men of his rank and qualitie sould in thair youth be trayned up in imployment in our affairis, that, being of rype age, they may be the mair capable' ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 6.605). He carried the great seal at the parliaments of 1604 and 1606, presided over by his father, and succeeded to the earldom on his father's death in November 1608. He was soon after placed in an embarrassing predicament by James VI who had promised 40,000 merks ($26,666 13's'. 4died Scots) for the funeral expenses 'but the promise was not performed, which drew on the greater burthein of his sonne' (Calderwood, 7.38). Although he received licence from the privy council to travel abroad in 1609 and 1613, he remained in Scotland. 
Montrose attended the parliaments of 1609 and 1617, was elected one of the lords of the articles on both occasions, and was appointed to a parliamentary commission on heritable offices in 1617. He was a member of the archiepiscopal court of high commission for the province of St Andrews from 1610 and was reappointed to the unified high commission in 1615. As the king's commissioner to the general assembly at Aberdeen in 1616 he was commanded to 'order the laitie' who attended. He was given the same task in the following year, 'but excused himself with sickeness' (Calderwood, 7.222, 284). In March 1626 Charles I appointed him to the newly established commission for grievances and he was named president of the privy council. Thereafter he attended meetings of the council rarely, probably because of failing health, and was summoned to attend on a number of occasions. He died at Kincardine Castle on 14 November 1626 and was buried at Aberuthven on 3 January 1627. 


@@@@@


doc= 67520


Maxwell, Robert, first earl of Nithsdale (b. after 1586, d. 1646), politician and diplomat, was the second son of John Maxwell, eighth Lord Maxwell (1553-1593), and Lady Elizabeth (died 1637), daughter of David Douglas, earl of Angus. Nothing is known of his early life or education. In May 1612 the fugitive status of his elder brother John Maxwell, ninth Lord Maxwell (b. in or before 1586, d. 1613), led to his own warding in Edinburgh, where the Scottish privy council allowed him 100 merks per month until his release on 26 May 1613, following John's execution; having been known from 1607 as the master of Maxwell, he was now referred to as the Hon. Robert Maxwell of Caerlaverock. By 1612, the Maxwell territories encompassed the 6 merk land of Capenoch, Keri barony, Hollywood parish in Dumfries, and Keri mill, to which was added Castlegour in Kirkcudbright (16 July). As his father's heir, Maxwell received the barony of Caerlaverock in August 1615, and was able to secure his ancestral lands by a parliamentary act of rehabilitation (28 June 1617), and the reassignment of Langholm barony and the living of Maxwell by royal charter of 19 September 1621. 
Maxwell's status as a border magnate was confirmed on 18 December 1617 when he accepted responsibility for his tenants in accordance with the general band of 1602. His profile was extended by his appointment as border commissioner on 4 April 1618, and his instatement as tenth Lord Maxwell on 5 October. As a mark of the royal favour he now enjoyed, the king granted him a special disbursement of $24,000 Scots ($2000 sterling). His new ascendancy was confirmed by his inclusion on the Scottish privy council on 27 March 1619, and enhanced by his marriage on 28 October 1619, at St Mary-le-Strand, London, to Elizabeth (died 1671), daughter of Sir Francis Beaumont and cousin of George Villiers, marquess of Buckingham. On 29 August 1620 he was created earl of Nithsdale, a title that caused controversy among the Scottish nobles, its precedence being based on his father's creation as earl of Morton in 1581. 
On 25 January 1621 Nithsdale sat in the House of Lords as a member for the committee to raise funds for British defence and for the dowry of Princess Elizabeth. He later served as one of the lords of the articles on 25 July, and on 4 August voted in favour of ratifying the five articles of Perth. On 1 April the earl was appointed a commissioner to monitor the waters of Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, and Annandale and prevent the fishing of 'red fish, smolts, and fry' out of season ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 12.640). This assignment coincided with his activities as a border triumvir, which allowed him special justiciary powers, yet his authority was challenged when the Johnstones -- traditional enemies of the Maxwells -- secured temporary exemption from his jurisdiction. On 17 June 1623, however, he and James Johnstone of Westray were publicly reconciled, with the latter agreeing in principle to Nithsdale's authority. It was during this period that the earl initiated construction on Caerlaverock, the Solway stronghold that had belonged to the Maxwell family since the early thirteenth century. He introduced a number of intricate architectural innovations, creating new classically styled ranges for the eastern and southern portions of the castle courtyard and embedding the Maxwell and Beaumont crests in Ionic columns along the eastern range. This ambitious building, thought to have been inspired by the prospect of a royal visit to Dumfriesshire, helped create Nithsdale's crushing debt difficulties. 
On 20 May 1624 the king granted Nithsdale a special licence to travel in France, ordering his creditors not to take advantage of his absence. By 7 September he was in Italy on a mission to secure papal dispensation for the marriage of Prince Charles and Henrietta Maria of France. A severe illness confined him to Florence until the end of October, when he recovered sufficient strength to travel to Rome, returning to Britain early in January 1625. After the death of King James, helped by his friendship with his wife's cousin the duke of Buckingham, Nithsdale continued to receive favourable treatment from Charles I, on whose behalf he returned to Scotland as a collector-general of taxes for the convention of estates in October 1625. On 22 October that year the king granted him a special six-month protection 'contra creditores', indicating that his financial difficulties had not yet been resolved ('Registrum magni sigilli regum Scotorum', 1620-33, 318, no. 883). 
In 1627 Nithsdale resumed his European profile when, on 28 February, the king ordered him to raise 3000 Scottish soldiers in Lower Saxony for Christian IV of Denmark. However, his personal unpopularity within the Scottish privy council, combined with his personal arrogance and steadfast Catholicism, made recruitment difficult. Nithsdale wrote to Charles in May requesting renewed protection for his sureties during his proposed expedition to Germany, from which he would return by 23 February 1628. On this date he was in Scotland, demonstrating his loyalty to Charles by surrendering his lordship of erection. By December he had entered into diplomatic correspondence with Cardinal Richelieu, with whom he exchanged professions of amity between the British and French crowns. 
On 12 January 1633 Nithsdale resumed his role as border commissioner, and on 18 June appeared in parliament at Edinburgh. By 1638 he had fortified Caerlaverock Castle to prepare for the ensuing struggle between the king and the covenanters, though he himself was forced to shelter in Carlisle until a peace was concluded in June 1639. This agreement soon deteriorated, and on 27 March 1640 Charles secretly urged Nithsdale to garrison his castles. Caerlaverock was itself besieged from 29 June, until the earl's surrender of 26 September to Lieutenant-Colonel Home, whose subsequent misuse of both it and Castle Threave led Nithsdale to complain to the king in November 1641. On 22 June 1643 the convention of estates accused him of treason and seized his estates, then valued at $3000 per annum. After launching an attack on Dumfries with Montrose on 15 April 1644, Nithsdale was excommunicated by the general assembly (23 June). His final major act was to accompany General Digby with 1500 horse in a march on Doncaster (1646), a venture that was successfully blocked by parliamentary forces. After regrouping at Skipton, Nithsdale escaped to the Isle of Man, where he died in May 1646. His wife, who survived him, died in 1671. They had two daughters, Jean (died 1649) and Elizabeth, and one son, Robert (1620-1677), who succeeded as second earl of Nithsdale. 


@@@@@


doc= 67521


Carnegie, John, first earl of Northesk (1578/9-1667), nobleman, was the second son of David Carnegie of Colluthie and Kinnaird (d. 1598) and his second wife, Euphame Wemyss (died 1593), daughter of Sir John Wemyss of that ilk. David Carnegie, first earl of Southesk (1574/5-1658), was his elder brother. On 1 March 1595 he received a charter of the barony of Ethie from James VI, his father having resigned the lands into the king's hands, and this grant was confirmed by the king in 1604. In December 1609 he left Scotland to travel on the continent, visiting Marseilles and Paris where, according to his correspondence, he went to some lengths to buy a clock. He returned to Britain in the latter part of 1610 and was knighted. He acquired various lands in Forfarshire (Angus) and became its sheriff-principal in July 1620. 
Carnegie was initially opposed to the national covenant of 1638, and in 1639 he and a number of others of like mind attempted to leave Scotland. Stayed at Dunbar by storms, however, they were arrested and briefly imprisoned. On 20 April of that year Charles I raised Carnegie to the peerage as Lord Lour. He must have subscribed the covenant, for he attended parliament quite regularly during the 1640s and was in 1641 appointed to the first committee of estates, and in 1644 was made a member of the committee of war for Angus and the Mearns. In November 1647 he was made earl of Ethie, Lord Lour and Eglismaldie, and in the following year was again appointed to the committee of estates. His first marriage, some time after March 1610, was to Magdalen, daughter of Sir James Haliburton of Pitcur and widow of John Erskine of Dun. They had three sons and five daughters. She died on 10 March 1650, and on 29 April 1652 he married Marjory, daughter of Andrew Maule of Guildie and widow of William Nairne. They had no children. 
During the Cromwellian occupation of Scotland, Ethie was fined $6000 sterling under Cromwell's ordinance of pardon and grace in April 1654, although an appeal reduced this to only $2000. After the restoration of Charles II, he succeeded his younger brother Sir Robert Carnegie of Dunnichen as dempster of parliament and of the justice and circuit courts of Forfarshire. In 1663 he was appointed by parliament a justice of the peace for Forfarshire. By a patent dated 25 October 1666 Ethie obtained a change in his titles, becoming earl of Northesk, Lord Rosehill and Eglismauldie. He died at Ethie on 8 January 1667, aged eighty-eight, and was buried in the family burial place at Inverkeilor kirk. 


@@@@@


doc= 67522


Mackenzie, Colin, of Kintail, first earl of Seaforth (c.1597-1633), nobleman, was the eldest son of Kenneth Mackenzie, first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail (d. 1611) ['see under 'Mackenzie family of Kintail], and his wife, Jean (died 1604), daughter of George Ross of Balnagowan. Following the death of his father, on 27 February 1611 his minority was dispensed with 'by royal precept', and he inherited estates in the Isle of Lewis and Ross-shire. On 5 June 1614 his political connections were secured by his marriage to Lady Margaret Seton (1599-1630), daughter of Alexander Seton, first earl of Dunfermline (1556-1622), lord chancellor of Scotland, and his first wife, Lilias Drummond. In August 1616 he was appointed JP for Elgin, Forres, and Nairn, a commission renewed on 20 August 1623. He sat as a lord of the Scottish parliament in June 1617 and August 1621, when he voted against ratifying the five articles of Perth. 
Having been created earl of Seaforth on 3 December 1623, he continued to serve as justice and to improve the administration of his estates in Lewis, Kintail, Lochalsh, Lochcarron, Strathconnon, and Lochbrune. He generated controversy in June 1628 when he proposed that Stornoway in Lewis be converted into a royal burgh: this plan was vigorously challenged and defeated by the convention of royal burghs, on the grounds that Seaforth was illegally employing Dutch colonists instead of lowland Scots. His other development projects were less provocative. Reputed to have been 'a most religious & vertuous Lord' (NL Scot., Adv. MS 34.6.27, fol. 27'r'), committed to kirk plantation and ministerial maintenance in the highlands, by the end of his life he had built churches in each of his baronies, and endowed Chanonry with 4000 merks Scots to establish a grammar school. 
Seaforth attended the king at Whitehall in 1629, and was again summoned to court on 3 December 1630, remaining until at least 14 July 1631, when he complained that his brother-in-law Lord Reay had falsely accused him of criticizing the earl of Menteith; despite this accusation, Charles permitted him to travel to Essex to recuperate from an undisclosed sickness, and further bolstered his reputation by proclaiming him 'the best archer in Britain' (Mackenzie, 246). After a long illness Seaforth died at his family seat in Chanonry, Ross-shire, on 15 April 1633, and was buried at Chanonry church on 28 May, having been predeceased by his wife (1630) and son, Alexander (1629). His daughters, Jean and Anna Mackenzie, were declared his heir-portioners on 29 November 1636, while his title passed to his half-brother, George Mackenzie, second earl of Seaforth (d. 1651). 


@@@@@


doc= 67523


Bower, Sir (John) William Nott- (1849-1939), police administrator, was born on 20 March 1849 at 17 Micklegate, York, one of the children of John Bower, a barrister and leader of the bar in the ecclesiastical court of the province of York, and his wife, Charlotte, one among the fourteen children of General Sir William Nott GCB (1782-1845), commander of the army which marched from Kandahar to Kabul in 1842, during the First Anglo-Afghan War. In 1858 the family moved to Wales, where his father bought some slate quarries, and in 1862 he was sent to Cheltenham College. From there he entered the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in 1865, where he won the sword of honour; but after deciding to take up a police career he left the army at the end of 1872, when he managed to get a much sought-after cadetship in the Royal Irish Constabulary through the Liberal politician W. E. Forster, a friend of his father, who gave him a letter of introduction to Lord Hartington, chief secretary for Ireland. After training at the constabulary depot in Phoenix Park, Dublin, Nott-Bower took charge of a large district in the west of Ireland, and moved to Limerick in 1873, before returning to Dublin in 1876 to command a company at the constabulary depot. Again through influential friends of his father he was appointed chief constable of Leeds in 1878, and during his three years there handled the case of the notorious burglar Charles Peace, tried in Leeds for murder and hanged in 1879. 
Nott-Bower was appointed head constable of Liverpool in 1881, and remained there until 1902. On 1 June 1889 he married Florence (died 1920), daughter of Reginald Harrison, a Liverpool surgeon. Two of their five sons were killed in action in the First World War; of the others one, Sir John Nott-Bower (1892-1972), followed his father into the police and served as commissioner of the Metropolitan Police from 1953 to 1958. Liverpool had the largest police force in the country outside London. With high levels of unemployment, over half the working population employed as casual labour in the docks, and large slum areas, the rate of violent crime was rising. In addition there were outbreaks of violence between members of the large Catholic and protestant Irish communities, and shortly before his arrival in Liverpool members of the Fenian Society had attempted to blow up the town hall. He also faced industrial conflict, most notably the great dock strike of 1890, when Nott-Bower, alarmed by the huge processions of dockers, advised the calling in of troops, to be stationed in the docks in order to prevent bloodshed. Not all his problems concerned the working classes: his most famous case was that of Mrs Maybrick, wife of a cotton merchant living in a fashionable suburb, who was sentenced to death in 1889 for poisoning her husband with arsenic, but who was reprieved by the home secretary. 
Nott-Bower initiated a number of reforms in the Liverpool police force. With the help of his future father-in-law, Reginald Harrison, he organized the police ambulance system: it was the duty of the police to remove those injured or taken ill in the streets, but when he arrived in Liverpool, this could be done only by stretcher or handcart. In 1884 he persuaded the watch committee to supply horse-drawn ambulances, to be stationed at the hospitals, which would be part of the police force, and also set up a system of telegraph signal boxes to enable the police to summon the ambulances. He instituted the compulsory training of the Liverpool police in first aid, and was created a knight of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem in recognition of his services to first aid work. In 1886 he formed the Liverpool mounted police to deal with riots and public disorder, and also to control large crowds during public processions, as when Queen Victoria visited Liverpool in 1886. In 1891 he got the watch committee to buy three horse-drawn patrol wagons, on the lines of those introduced in some towns in the United States. He also founded the Liverpool police athletic club, and raised money to build the Liverpool and Bootle police orphanage, which opened in 1895. Although he put pressure on the watch committee to increase the pay of police constables, not enough was done until the implementation of the report of the 1919 Desborough committee. In 1885 his scheme to reorganize the two police divisions into six smaller ones was approved by the home secretary, and after the city boundaries were extended in 1895, increasing the area the police had to patrol from 277 miles of streets to 399 miles, he was able to increase the force from 1294 men to 1460. As his reputation grew, Nott-Bower was asked for advice by police forces as far away as Hong Kong and South Africa, and in 1897 he was asked to give evidence before the royal commission on the liquor licensing laws. 
In March 1902 Nott-Bower was elected commissioner of police of the City of London, the second most prestigious position in the police service in the country. A much smaller force than the Metropolitan Police, the City police was responsible mainly for police arrangements at public functions in the Guildhall, including visits by members of the royal family and foreign heads of state. Nott-Bower made the arrangements for the royal progresses through the City during the 1902 and 1911 coronations, when he rode in front of the royal carriage until it passed the City boundary. He was involved in the battle of Sidney Street in January 1911. On that occasion members of the City and Metropolitan Police forces, reinforced by two squads of Scots Guards from the Tower of London, laid siege to a house in Sidney Street, Whitechapel; there two members of a gang of Russian anarchists, who had murdered three policemen during a raid on a jeweller's shop in Houndsditch, were surrounded. In 1911, in response to a circular from the home secretary, Nott-Bower began to recruit members of the City of London police reserve, who could be called on in case of emergency. They were valuable during the First World War, when many of the regular police were away on active service, helping to deal with the Zeppelin raids in 1915 and aeroplane bombing raids on the City later in the war. He was also confronted with the police strikes of 1918 and 1919, called by the National Union of Police and Prison Officers. He was in sympathy with the 1918 strike, acknowledging that the police were underpaid, but he dismissed all those who went on strike in 1919 because he believed that most of their grievances had already been remedied. He retired from the City police in 1925. 
Nott-Bower was knighted in 1911 and created KCVO in 1918. He published his autobiography, 'Fifty-Two Years a Policeman', in 1926. He died on 4 February 1939 at his home, the Hotel Stuart, Richmond Hill, Richmond, Surrey, and was buried three days later at Bognor Regis, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 67525


Page, Damaris (c.1610-1669), bawd and brothel keeper, was the daughter of one John Aderson (Addersell). Little is known about her private life. She was from an early date publicly known as Damaris Page, but how she acquired that surname is obscure. She was married on 18 April 1653 at St Mary Magdalen, Bermondsey, to James Dry. Two years later, when she was indicted and tried for bigamy, it was alleged that since 1640 she had also been married to one William Baker of Stepney. But it is probable that this was a trumped-up charge, for there is no record of the marriage in the relevant parish register, and she was found not guilty by a jury at Middlesex quarter sessions. James Dry predeceased her and she did not marry again. Towards the end of her life she remained close to her sister Margaret, a widow, to whom she bequeathed an annuity of $10. 
Damaris Page made her fortune as one of the most successful bawds in the east end of London, catering especially to its large seafaring population. By the 1650s she was able to diversify into property speculation, building several houses on Ratcliffe Highway which provided her with a steady income for the remainder of her life. Page herself never learned to write, but at the Restoration in 1660 her public notoriety was reflected and fuelled by a series of Grub Street pamphlets that used her name to peddle fictitious accounts of metropolitan prostitution, beginning with John Garfield's serialized 'The Wandring Whore', in each episode of which she was made to head the list of 'Crafty Bawds'. 
The restored monarchy's massive expansion of the navy in the mid-1660s brought Page further success and a new association with the highest circles of government. The naval high command was desperate for sailors, and she proved adept at recruiting them through her trade. But the connection was unpopular as well as profitable. On Easter Monday 1668 hers was the first house to be targeted in the great bawdy house riots that swept across the capital in protest at the government's repressive religious policies. The tradition of Shrove Tuesday apprentice riots against brothels was appropriated to contrast the regime's laxness in policing morals with its severity in persecuting dissenters. 'Some blood hath been spilt', reported Samuel Pepys a few days later, 'but a great many houses pulled down; and among others, the Duke of York was mighty merry at that of Damaris Page's, the great bawd of the seamen' (Pepys, 'Diary', 9.132). In the propaganda war that accompanied and followed the demonstrations Page's name was again used to attract publicity to scurrilous writings, this time in a satirical 'petition' on behalf of all the whores and bawds of London to their supposed leader, the king's own whore, the countess of Castlemaine, and in the supposed replies by Lady Castlemaine to this. But the riots did not interrupt business for long, and her bawdy house, the Three Tuns in Stepney, was soon resurrected. Barely a year later, in June 1669, the duke of York, the lord high admiral, was no doubt delighted to learn that Sir Edward Spragge, who was about to sail to the Mediterranean, 'was the day before at Damaris Page's, the most famous bawd in town, and there had made so much of her that she had already furnished him with about forty seamen to man his ship the 'Revenge', and that she would do more.' 'As long as Damaris Page lived', Spragge told Pepys publicly, 'he was sure he should not lack men' ('Samuel Pepys and the Second Dutch War', 216-17). A few months later, while in the Marshalsea prison, she fell ill and died on 9 October. She was buried the following day at St George the Martyr, Southwark. 


@@@@@


doc= 67527


Wight, Alexander (d. 1793), advocate and writer on election law, was the son of David Wight, writer, of Edinburgh. Wight attended the University of Edinburgh between 1745 and 1748. He was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates on 6 March 1754 and in time established himself as a leading counsel. In 1773 he published, with a dedication to Lord Mansfield, 'A treatise on the laws concerning the election of the different representatives sent from Scotland to the parliament of Great Britain, with a preliminary view of the constitution of the parliaments of England and Scotland before the union of the two kingdoms'. Wight revised and updated the 'Treatise', his researches resulting in a more substantial work which appeared in 1784 as 'An inquiry into the rise and progress of parliament, chiefly in Scotland; and a complete system of the law concerning the elections of the representatives from Scotland to the parliament of Great Britain'. The work was seen as authoritative; a new and updated edition in two volumes, with cases arranged by William Maxwell Morison, appeared in 1806. It remained the standard work on the subject up to the 'Reform Act' of 1832. Principal Robertson referred to it in his 'History of Scotland' when he wrote 'Various questions concerning the constituent members of the Scottish parliament, concerning the era at which the representatives of the boroughs were introduced into that assembly; and concerning the origin and power of the committee of the lords of articles, occur, and have been agitated with great warmth. Since the first publication of this work, all these disputed points have been considered with calmness and accuracy in Mr Wight's 'Inquiry'. (Robertson, 188n.)' There are scant details with which to give a truly rounded portrait of Wight's career and character. He was an active member of several faculty committees, and in 1777 he was appointed to the dean's council by the dean of the faculty, Henry Dundas. In 1783 Wight succeeded Ilay Campbell as solicitor-general in the administration of the duke of Portland, to whom the 'Inquiry' was dedicated; Wight's interest in electoral reform may have recommended him to the Foxite element in the Portland administration. However, in 1784 William Pitt the younger replaced him by Robert Dundas of Arniston. Wight's distance from his earlier association with Dundas was shown by his subsequent appointment as a councillor of state to the prince of Wales. Wight was vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland and a director of the Musical Society of Edinburgh. He enjoyed a close friendship with another advocate, the gifted but dissipated Andrew Crosbie, and like Crosbie was financially embarrassed by the collapse of Douglas, Heron & Co., the Ayr bank, of which he was a director. Wight was married to Marion Blyth (died 1825), and died in Edinburgh on 18 March 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 67528


Dundas, John (fl. 1698-1731), lawyer, was the second son of James Dundas (third son of George Dundas of Dundas) and Elizabeth, daughter of John Haliburton of Garvock. It is possible, but far from certain, that he was the John Dundas who matriculated as a law student at Utrecht in 1695, aged twenty-three. He was admitted advocate on 29 June 1698. 
Details of Dundas's career are obscure, but he was procurator of the Church of Scotland from 1706 to 1731, and principal clerk to the general assembly. His experience in the legal affairs of the church shaped his career as a commentator. He was the author of 'Method of Procedure by Presbyteries in Settling of Schools in any Parish' (1709) and 'An Abridgement of the Acts of the General Assemblies of the Church of Scotland, 1638-1720' (1721), together with some shorter compilations on contemporary church matters. At its institution in 1709, he became a charter member of the Society in Scotland for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge. He may perhaps be the John Dundas who wrote 'A summary view of the feudal law, with the differences of the Scots law from it: together with a dictionary of the select terms of the Scots and English law by way of appendix' (1710). An alternative author might be John Dundas ('c'.1682-1769), writer to the signet, fifth son of John Dundas of Duddingston. 
On 17 December 1703, at Abercorn, Linlithgowshire, Dundas married Euphame (died 1727), daughter and heir of David Dundas of Philpstoun, Linlithgowshire, and Katharine, daughter of George Swinton of Chesters. With his wife he had three daughters and a son, James Dundas of Philpstoun, who was admitted advocate on 9 February 1734. 


@@@@@


doc= 67529


Stuart, Esme, third duke of Lennox (1579?-1624), nobleman, was the second son of Esme Stuart (c.1542-1583), seigneur d'Aubigny and first duke of Lennox, and Catherine de Balsac d'Entragues (died 'c'.1631). The family was a junior branch of the Scottish royal dynasty that had established itself in France in the fifteenth century. In 1579 the elder Esme travelled to Edinburgh from the French court and quickly became the favourite of James VI, who in 1580 created him duke of Lennox. Driven from power in 1582, Lennox returned to France and died the next year. His eldest son, Ludovick Stuart, who became second duke of Lennox, was sent to be raised at the Scottish court, while the younger Esme remained in France as seigneur d'Aubigny. Aubigny attended the University of Bourges, did homage to Henry IV on April 8 1600, and served in the ceremonial guard of the 'cent gentilhommes' at the French court. 
By 1603 Aubigny had moved to Edinburgh, probably in the company of Lennox, who served as James's ambassador to Paris in 1601. Both brothers followed the king to London in 1603, where they were appointed gentlemen of the newly constituted royal bedchamber. Over the next several years Aubigny was one of the leading recipients of James's bounty, receiving concealed crown lands worth $1000 a year, cash gifts of $18,000, and other rewards. In 1609 the king arranged Aubigny's marriage with Katherine ('c'.1592-1637), only daughter and heir of Gervase, Lord Clifton of Leighton Bromswold, Huntingdonshire; they had nine children. Their eldest son, James Stuart, was born in 1612, and their youngest child, Lord Bernard Stuart, in 1622. During 1619 Aubigny was raised to the English peerage as earl of March and appointed joint lord lieutenant of Huntingdonshire. He became third duke of Lennox on his brother's death, which occurred on 16 February 1624, and knight of the Garter on 22 April the same year, but died of a spotted fever at the house of Sir Christopher Hatton in Kirby, Northamptonshire, on 30 July. He was buried on 6 August in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 67530


Bruce, Alexander (d. 1729), lawyer, was the second son of Andrew Bruce (died 1696) of Earlshall, Fife, and his cousin and second wife, Anna, daughter of Robert Bruce, minister of Ballingry, Fife, and Anna, daughter of George Seaton. He may have been the Alexander Bruce who matriculated at Leiden in 1694, but the name is not uncommon. He was admitted advocate on 5 December 1702. 
Bruce was the author of a number of legal works, including 'Disputatio juridica de re militari' (1702), 'Principia juris feudalis' (1713), 'Tutor's guide, or, Principles of civil and municipal laws and customs relating to pupils and minors and their tutors or curators' (1714), and 'An Institute of Military Law, Ancient and Modern' (1717). Of these the 'Principia juris feudalis' is noted by Professor John Girvan as perhaps 'entitled to a passing reference in respect of the freshness with which he handles from the time to time the subject' (McKechnie, 204), while D. M. Walker notes that the 'Institute of Military Law' 'shows considerable learning and acquaintance with continental jurists' (Walker, 304). Indeed, in all these works Bruce treated Scots law within a framework of the learned 'jus commune' of Europe. 
In 1713 Bruce was appointed collector of decisions for the Faculty of Advocates in succession to William Forbes. He planned to compile a dictionary of decisions from the institution of the college of justice, but this grand scheme made little progress. He produced 'Decisions' for 1714/15, published in 1720 and also bound with Lord Kames's 'Remarkable Decisions' (1728). His 'Decisions' for 1716/17 were printed in 1772 as a supplement to the third volume of 'Faculty Collections'. The Faculty of Advocates' minute book discloses Bruce's steady decline into illness, poverty, and debt, and his many appeals to the faculty for financial assistance. He was dismissed from his post as collector in 1723. He continued until 1725 as clerk of the Faculty of Advocates, much of this work, however, being done by Thomas Ruddiman, the clerk depute. James Boswell refers to him as 'poor Bruce' ('Applause of the Jury', 18). Bruce married, on 24 April 1698, Janet, daughter of William Home, a merchant in Edinburgh; they had at least six children. She predeceased him in 1726. Alexander Bruce died on 6 August 1729. His son, Andrew (died 1745), who was disabled, became a faculty pensioner. Two of his daughters, Anne and Barbara, were still drawing a faculty pension as late as 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 67531


Scott, Anna, duchess of Monmouth and 'suo jure' duchess of Buccleuch (1651-1732), noblewoman, was born in Dundee on 11 February 1651, the third daughter of Francis Scott, second earl of Buccleuch (1626-1651), and his wife, Margaret Leslie (died 1688), daughter of John Leslie, earl of Rothes, and widow of Alexander Leslie, Lord Balgonie. It was her father's early death, and more particularly the absence of a male heir and the nature of the entailing of the Buccleuch estate, that made Anna, following the premature deaths of her two elder sisters, Mary (in 1661) and Margaret (in 1652), so valuable a pawn in the family politics of Restoration Scotland, whence she progressed to the margins of the larger dynastic politics of later Stuart Britain. 
The complex entail of the Buccleuch inheritance informed the objective of Anna's formidable mother, in partnership with her third husband, David, second earl of Wemyss, which was to prevent any attempted marriage to the Buccleuch heiresses by the heirs of John Hay, second earl of Tweeddale. The latter, an ambitious close kinsman and Buccleuch creditor, was married to Jean Scott, sister of Earl Francis and next heir to the Buccleuch inheritance after Francis's three daughters. To this end, eleven-year-old Mary was given in an illegal under-age marriage to another kinsman, fourteen-year-old Walter Scott, created earl of Tarras. The illegality was used to prevent Tarras's subsequently being able to claim the marriage settlement's extremely generous provision upon Mary's early death. Anna remained the Buccleuch heir, and the same anti-Tweeddale objectives would see Lady Wemyss approach Charles II in May 1661 with the plan for Anna's marriage to Charles's eldest bastard, James Crofts (1649-1685), later duke of Monmouth ['see 'Scott, James]. The marriage contract would see Crofts adopt the Scott surname, but in its provision for him it violated both the original entail and the laws of Scotland, settling the inheritance upon Monmouth and his heir should Anna predecease him. Concern in the Scottish parliament was overridden and the contract ratified there. 
The marriage of Anna and James Scott was celebrated at Whitehall on 20 April 1663 and consummated on 9 February 1665. It lasted in conjugal terms until 1679, and produced six children, of whom only two sons, including Henry Scott, first earl of Deloraine, survived childhood. On the scaffold Monmouth remained professedly steady to his six-year attachment to Lady Henrietta Wentworth, his last but not his first infidelity. The Monmouths had in common only financial extravagance and a particular excellence in dancing, which was unhappily ended in May 1668 when Anna sustained a dislocated hip which lamed her for life. That she had no influence over the malleable 'Prince Perkin' was ultimately to her advantage. Her priority following her husband's 1685 rebellion was to protect the interests of her sons and more broadly the Buccleuch inheritance, with which she identified in a manner that echoed the determination and intelligence that had characterized her mother. Having spent the duration of Monmouth's rebellion in the Tower, and with the injured monarch, James II, predisposed in her favour, she finally secured her husband's confirmation that she had known 'nothing of his last design', thereby freeing her sons -- and thus the Buccleuch inheritance -- from the penalties of attainder. Attainder having forfeited Monmouth's English titles, the Buccleuch honours, now a dukedom, and estates were formally restored to Anna and thence her eldest son, restoring the original entail, on 17 November 1687. 
There is no evidence of Anna's having been marked by the smallpox which she contracted in 1661, but contemporary commentators remark on wit rather than beauty. In character she was confessedly self-sufficient and reserved. Her career at court survived its Restoration and revolution incarnations, being sustained by her friendship with Queen Catherine, the then duke and duchess of York, and the future queens Mary and Anne, and extending to Princess, later Queen, Caroline. It was distinguished by a literary and artistic patronage, with roots in her pre-accident support of amateur theatricals at court, and including Dryden, Shadwell, and Kneller. 
In 1688 Anna married Charles, third Baron Cornwallis (1655-1698), with whom she had a further three children, of whom one survived to adulthood; this happier marriage ended with Cornwallis's death in 1698, upon which she retired to Scotland. There she oversaw the lavish rebuilding of Dalkeith Castle and maintained a quasi-regal status, but returned to London upon the Hanoverian succession. She resisted all pressure to relinquish the Buccleuch title in her own lifetime in favour of her son, preferring to be 'a man in my own family'. She died in London in February 1732, short of her eighty-first birthday, and was buried at St Nicholas's Church, Dalkeith. Of Monmouth she would never speak, and there is no reference to him on the inscription of her coffin, though the fatal connection is commemorated in the Monmouth Room at Bowhill. 


@@@@@


doc= 67532


Mac Leoid, Sir Ruairidh, of Harris and Dunvegan (c.1562-1626), clan chief, was the second son of Tormod Mac Leoid (died 1585) and his wife, Sileas NicGilleathain, daughter of Eachann Mor, Maclean of Duart. Ruairidh, called Mor ('great') 'not so much from his size... as from the strength of his parts' (Mackenzie, 59), was from 1590 tutor (in effect a regent) to his nephew, the chief of Siol Tormoid, the MacLeods of Harris and Dunvegan. As such he led mercenary forces to support his fellow Gaels in Ulster fighting the English in 1594-5 and afterwards was involved in war with other clans. By 1596 he had become chief himself and about 1598 married Iseabal NicDhomhnaill (died after 1654), daughter of Donald MacDonald of Glengarry; their son, Norman Macleod of Berneray, became a royalist army officer. His career symbolizes the great changes that occurred in the highlands about 1600, from the semi-independence of the sixteenth-century clan chiefs to the tightening of James VI's control. He came to accept inevitable change and, in the years after his signing of the 1609 statutes of Iona, he became more acceptable to the king, whom he visited in London to receive a knighthood in 1613. He was given the freedom of the city of Edinburgh in 1623, and died in 1626, some time before 22 July, at Fortrose in the Black Isle, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 67533


Bell, Robert (c.1760-1816), lawyer and jurist, was born in Edinburgh, the eldest of the six children of the Revd William Bell (1704-1779), Scottish Episcopal minister in Edinburgh, and Margaret Morrice, his second wife. Little is known of Bell's early life or schooling, though surviving correspondence of relatives indicates that the family lived in straitened circumstances, especially after the death of William Bell. In early manhood, Robert Bell was apprenticed to William Macdonald, writer to the signet, and was admitted a member of the Society of Writers to the Signet on 22 June 1784. In the course of his apprenticeship he would have attended classes in Scots and Roman law in the University of Edinburgh. He married, on 3 April 1790, Mary Hamilton (died 1838), the granddaughter of a country solicitor, and carried on the practice of a writer. 
Bell became interested in the education and training of apprentices to the profession, which was almost exclusively based in Edinburgh. In May 1793 he put a paper before the general meeting of the writers to the signet proposing publication of a collection of decisions of the court of session and the institution of an annual series of lectures on the law and practice of conveyancing. Advising on and drafting property deeds was one of the main activities of writers to the signet at this time. This proposal, if not the salary, was enthusiastically approved later in that year, with Bell being appointed lecturer and collector of decisions. At that time, law reporting was disapproved of by the court, and Bell was warned in the strongest terms. The difficulty was smoothed over only when the course of lectures was finally begun in December 1794 and was well received. Although Bell only published two volumes of cases, he was no longer harried by the court and resigned as official collector of decisions to concentrate on his lectures, which he published in a revised form in 1815. 
Perhaps disillusioned with continuing difficulties in obtaining the full salary for the post of lecturer and the absence of a permanent location from which to teach, Bell resigned from the Society of Writers to the Signet and took the step -- uncommon at the time -- of seeking admission to the Faculty of Advocates, the Scottish bar. He passed advocate on 4 July 1812 and practised at the bar until his death. Nothing is known of his practice, but during his time at the bar his lectures and several other works on conveyancing were published. His son William followed him into that branch of the profession on 14 December 1824, and edited and updated several of Bell's texts. Apart from his lectures, his 'Dictionary of the Law of Scotland' is perhaps his most important work, which has been described as being 'full of still valuable information on nineteenth century law' (Walker, 385). Two of Bell's brothers, Sir Charles Bell and John Bell, were distinguished surgeons, while a third, George Joseph Bell, became professor of Scots law in the University of Edinburgh and a jurist of pre-eminent rank. Robert Bell died, probably in Edinburgh, on 1 November 1816 and was survived by his wife, who died on 4 January 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 67534


Ross, Walter (1738-1789), lawyer, was born on 28 September 1738 in Edinburgh, the son of Charles Ross, merchant, and his wife, Mary Law. Little is known of Ross's early years or schooling. In early manhood he was apprenticed to John Russell of Roseburne, writer to the signet, and was admitted a member of the Society of Writers to the Signet on 25 June 1764. In the course of his apprenticeship, Ross would have attended classes in Scots and Roman law in the University of Edinburgh. Perhaps through the connection of his apprentice master, who was secretary to the Royal Bank of Scotland, as well as his own talent, Ross established a successful practice. At some point after his prosperity was assured, Ross acquired St Bernard's House, a large home in an irregular architectural style in what was then open country near the Water of Leith at Stockbridge, about 2 miles from the centre of Edinburgh. There he lived with his wife, Margaret Moubray. 
With the leisure of wealth, Ross devoted time to writing about the law. In 1783 and 1784 he gave a series of private lectures on the law of conveyancing in Scotland to apprentices of the Society of Writers to the Signet. These were well received but not repeated, perhaps because of the onset of the ill health which dogged Ross's later years. They were published posthumously in 1792 as 'Lectures on the history and practice of the law of Scotland relative to conveyancing and legal diligence'. These lectures were the first attempt to state this branch of the law of Scotland in a coherent and comprehensible way, for Ross believed that 'styles and forms could not be understood without some acquaintance with the ancient customs manners and history both civil and ecclesiastical' (Walker, 273). In this, he paved the way for the work of Robert Bell. Later commentators have referred to Ross's 'Lectures' as being of high authority and entitled to respect -- not least because of the regular references to it in the court of session during the great property litigations of the nineteenth century. 
Ross was also an antiquarian and a patron of the arts, assembling a collection of paintings and antiquities of some note. In the grounds of his home he erected a replica of a Scottish fortified tower (now demolished) which was known to locals as 'Ross's folly'. He died suddenly at his home on 11 March 1789, local lore having it that he did so in a fit of laughter. He was buried on 19 March 1789, in his own grounds next to his folly, to be reinterred in St Cuthbert's churchyard, Edinburgh, in 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 67535


Morison, William Maxwell (d. 1821), advocate, was the eldest son of James Morison, factor to William Maxwell of Nithsdale. He was admitted advocate on 20 July 1784, and was from 1787 to 1789 sheriff-substitute for Clackmannan. On 27 April 1786, in Alloa, Clackmannanshire, he married Sibella Stephen ('c'.1765-1840), daughter of James Stephen, merchant, and Sibella Milner. They had one daughter, also Sibella, who may have died young. 
Morison is remembered for the monumental dictionary of decisions of the court of session which still goes by his name. The need for such a collection, setting out systematically the decisions of Scotland's highest civil court from the beginning, had long been recognized. However, with the exception of the 'Dictionary of Decisions' by Henry Home, Lord Kames, first published in 1741, and continued by Alexander Fraser Tytler, Lord Woodhouselee, in 1797, little had been achieved. Even the more limited objective of collecting the contemporary decisions of the court of session had proved difficult, despite the steady support of the Faculty of Advocates throughout the eighteenth century. In 1800 Morison advertised his intention of publishing 'a complete and uniform edition' of the decisions of the court of session since its institution, following the general method of Lord Kames, and using both published and manuscript sources. He sought subscribers, the venture being at his own risk. The first volume appeared in 1801, with thirty-seven others following in rapid succession, the titles running alphabetically from 'Abbey of Holyroodhouse' to 'Wrongous imprisonment'. In the standard edition of 1811 the original thirty-eight volumes are bound as nineteen, containing 17,074 pages, excluding the appendix, and covering cases from 1540 until 1808. 
The history of the various aids and additions to the dictionary is complicated. Morison produced a 'synopsis' or digest of the collected decisions from 1804 on. This eventually ran to two volumes, commonly numbered 20 and 21. He also produced an appendix (appendix I) of additional cases as he went along. These are usually bound with the original. More confusingly, Morison edited another two-volume 'synopsis', containing cases from 1808 to 1812 and 1812 to 1816 respectively, these volumes sometimes being bound as numbers 23 and 24. He also edited the 'Decisions of the Court of Session' from the year 1733 to the year 1754, originally collected by Patrick Grant, Lord Elchies. These appeared in two volumes in 1813 as 'branch I' of 'appendix II' of his 'Dictionary'. In practice, these are rarely bound with the 'Dictionary'. A further projected 'branch II' of appendix II did not appear. In addition to all these, Morison edited the fifth edition (1812) of the classic 'Institute of the Law of Scotland' by John Erskine of Carnock. 
The value of the 'Dictionary' was enhanced by the publication of W. Tait's 'Index to the Decisions of the Court of Session' (1823), M. P. Brown's 'Supplement to the Dictionary of Decisions' (5 vols., 1826) and Brown's 'General Synopsis of the Decisions of the Court of Session' (4 vols., 1829). Tait's 'Index' also contains an invaluable survey of the history of law reporting in Scotland, including a detailed and critical analysis of Morison's achievement. Despite his criticisms, however, Tait acknowledged that 'Mr Morison's courage and perseverance are entitled to the highest praise. By the publication of his 'Dictionary' he certainly rendered an essential service to the profession, which might have in vain been looked for from another' (Tait, 515). Nearly two hundred years later, Morison's work has still not been replaced or supplanted. 

'Morison's Dictionary', as it is universally known, is still cited on occasion in court. Thus, the leading case of 'Steel's Tr. v. Bradley Homes' (1972), on error in contract, looked back to 'Sword v. Sinclair' (1771), while 'Morgan Guaranty v. Lothian Regional Council' (1995), on unjustified enrichment, looked back to 'Stirling v. Earl of Lauderdale' (1733) -- and, indeed, beyond to the original session papers. Quite apart from its significance as a formal source of law, 'Morison's Dictionary' is an important, although as yet underused source for Scottish social history. William Maxwell Morison died at Portobello, Edinburgh, on 30 June 1821. He was survived by his wife, who died on 26 December 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 67537


Gifford, Hannah (fl. 1629-1668), schoolmistress, was one of at least five children of Bernard Galpin ('b'. 'c'.1565) of Dorchester, Dorset, shoemaker. In 1629 she married Robert Gifford, also of Dorchester and, like her family, a member of the town's self-consciously 'godly' community. When her father, several siblings, and numerous kin sailed on the 'Mary and John' to New England in 1630, Hannah and her husband remained behind. They brought up several children in some degree of poverty: in the 1640s Robert Gifford was a recipient of Richard Bushrod's bequest, distributed annually to the godly poor. 
As part of its drive for spiritual and moral reformation in the town, in October 1651 the corporation of Dorchester decided to establish a school for the education of poor children. Hannah was selected as teacher, and allocated a salary of $10 a year if there were fewer than thirty children attending and $12 if there were more. In the event, the school was instantly popular, and numbers had to be restricted to sixty, although a few dropped out once they had received free new clothing. Hannah proved a conscientious schoolmistress: 'she taught reading and later the catechism, being commended by the Corporation for her 'extraordinary pains' in this' (Underdown, 225). The school, supplied by local booksellers John Long and William Churchill with books and bibles paid for by the corporation from donations given at gunpowder treason anniversary services, 'was one of the most striking achievements of puritan Dorchester' (ibid., 226). It was still functioning with Hannah as teacher in 1668, but by 1676 it seems to have discontinued. It is not known when Hannah died. 


@@@@@


doc= 67538


Baillie, James (bap. 1672, d. 1744), advocate, was baptized on 26 April 1672, the son of William Baillie of Glenlewin (died 1714), advocate, and Eupham(ia) Watson (died before 1682). His father's uncle was a Baillie of Lamington in Lanarkshire, which family had produced at least one judge, William Baillie, Lord Provand (died 1593), and a number of soldiers during the political turbulence of the seventeenth century, including William Baillie (died 1653) and Robert Baillie (died 1684). 
Little is known of James Baillie's early life and education; however, he passed advocate on 25 July 1702, having taken his public examination on a digest title 'de servitudibus'. He was not active in the business and affairs of the Faculty of Advocates at the time, for his name does not feature regularly in the minute books of the faculty. It may thus be supposed that he was not in the front rank of pleaders before the court of session. Baillie married Jean Aytoun (1677-1774), daughter of Aytoun of Kinnaldie, on 29 April 1709. Thereafter little is recorded of Baillie until his edition of the sixteenth-century writer Thomas Craig's great polemic legal and political treatise 'Jus feudale' was published at the press of Thomas and Walter Ruddiman in 1732. Regarded by D. M. Walker in his 'Scottish Jurists' (1985) as the best, Baillie's edition was the third to be published. He included a short life of Craig, and rationalized the order of the text, adding short commentaries on the main subdivisions. He also added useful supplementary notes placing Craig's scholarship in a wider context. This work took up Baillie's energies for some time and at some cost, for the records of the Faculty of Advocates show that a subvention of $30 sterling was paid to him in January 1736, and members of faculty were strongly recommended to purchase their own copies. Baillie died on 17 November 1744. 


@@@@@


doc= 67540


Magennis, Arthur, third Viscount Magennis of Iveagh (1623/1626-1683), army officer, was the son and heir of Hugh Magennis, later second Viscount Magennis of Iveagh (1599-1639), and his wife, Mary (died in or after 1641), the daughter of Sir John Bellew of Castletown, co. Louth. He was a minor, aged either thirteen or sixteen, at the time of his father's death in 1639 but, following representations by his kinsman the earl of Antrim, the government did not insist on asserting wardship on the grounds that 'the youth [Arthur Magennis] hath but little time to be in wardship and was soured already' (Ohlmeyer, 54). In other words he was too old to be a likely convert to protestantism. Iveagh's inheritance (some 44,800 acres), like the estates of most surviving native landowners in Ulster, was threatened by indebtedness; it was valued at $1200 per annum but a third of this was tied up in a jointure to his grandmother Viscountess Sara ('nee' O'Neill, daughter of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone) and the rest was encumbered by a debt of $4500. 
Iveagh was in Dublin when the 1641 rising broke out in October of that year. By the following February he had returned to south co. Down where he reportedly participated in the burning of Downpatrick. In April and May 1642 he led an army of some 2500 men in trying to halt the southward advance of Monro's newly arrived Scottish covenanter army. Monro subsequently captured Newry and the town and its hinterland remained in protestant hands throughout the 1640s. 
Having been forced to leave Ulster, in November 1643 Iveagh was selected as a member of the supreme council, the standing executive of the confederate Catholic regime. As an inducement for French financial aid, the supreme council in 1644 agreed to permit a regiment of infantry to be raised in Ireland for the French service. In November Iveagh embarked at Galway as colonel of this regiment. He subsequently returned and served as colonel of an infantry regiment in Owen Roe O'Neill's army during the latter's campaign in Connaught in summer 1647. By then the confederate Catholics were beginning to sunder into Ormondist and clericalist factions, divided mainly by the religious guarantees in any proposed peace treaty with the royalists. O'Neill's Ulster army, too, split in May 1649. Those officers who owned land in Ulster before the war, including Iveagh, Alexander Mac Donnell, and Phelim O'Neill, sided with the Ormondist party against Owen O'Neill. Oliver Cromwell's lightning campaign in Ireland (September 1649-May 1650) forced an uneasy rapprochement and in March 1650 Iveagh formally acknowledged to the Catholic primate that he had 'sinned against natural, no less than human law' (O'Ferrall and O'Connell, 4.396). In return the primate lifted the sentence of excommunication laid on him for his adherence to the Ormondist party. 
Although Iveagh was away from his regiment when it was attacked by Cromwell in October 1649 as part of the garrison defending Wexford, he remained for the dying days of the Catholic and royalist cause. He was a signatory to last minute reassertions of unity and appeals for foreign aid sent from Inishbofin (off the coast of Galway) in July and August 1652. In March 1653 he signed articles for the surrender of Belturbet (co. Cavan), making this along with nearby Cloughoughter (surrendered in April) the very last Irish strongholds to hold out. The conditions of surrender allowed him to recruit a regiment for service in the Spanish army. Some time after this he transported and, in 1660, was listed as captain-lieutenant (acting company commander) in the duke of Gloucester's regiment of infantry in Spanish Flanders. 
Iveagh lost all his estates in the Cromwellian confiscations and after the Restoration these were not restored to him, despite the intervention of Charles II. Iveagh continued in the king's service abroad for a number of years, but about 1662 he was in prison in London, having been obliged to live on credit in England. Some time afterwards the king awarded him an estate of 1860 acres in Ballintober barony, co. Roscommon, and an annual pension of $150, subsequently raised to $500. This was $1600 in arrears and had fallen back to $300 p.a. at the time of his death in Dublin on 30 April 1683. He was buried on 1 May in St Catherine's Church and was survived by his wife, Margaret, daughter of Philip McHugh O'Reilly of co. Cavan, and four daughters, three of whom were married in 1688; his brother Hugh succeeded to the title. The Ballintober estate may have been sold before his death or shortly after; at any rate it is not included in the list of confiscated Jacobite estates dealt with by the Chichester House trustees after the Williamite wars (1689-91). On the other hand the estate may not have been confiscated, because while the eldest son and heir of his brother, Brian, Lord Iveagh, was an active Jacobite, he enlisted in the service of Austria (an ally of William III) rather than France after the war. 


@@@@@


doc= 67543


William Crooke (bap. 1639, d. 1694), who was not Andrew's son as is sometimes said, but was almost certainly his nephew. William had been baptized in Aston Rowant on 22 December 1639, the son of William Crooke, a yeoman. He was apprenticed to Andrew on 24 January 1656 and was freed on 2 November 1663. On 29 or 30 June of the latter year, William married Andrew's nineteen-year-old stepdaughter, Rebecca Needham ('b'. 1644), at St Benet Paul's Wharf. William set up independently in 1664 at the Three Bibles, Fleet Bridge; after the fire he rejoined his former master, now at Temple Bar, and traded there until his own death. A printed catalogue of Crooke's stock in 1675 included books of plays and poems, travel, gardening, physic, and law. 


@@@@@


doc= 67551


Boyle, Eleanor Vere Crombie (1825-1916), illustrator and author, was born on 1 May 1825 at Auchlunies, Kincardineshire, the youngest of the nine children of Alexander Gordon (1783-1873) of Auchlunies and his wife, Albinia Elizabeth, 'nee' Cumberland. Her father was the illegitimate son of George Gordon, third earl of Aberdeen, and his mistress Penelope Dering. Her mother's parents were Richard Cumberland, army officer, and Lady Albinia, daughter of George Hobart, third earl of Buckinghamshire. Her mother was an amateur painter. Her early childhood was spent at Auchlunies and she was educated at home. She often visited Maryculter, the seat of her father's cousin William Gordon, in the nearby valley, and even after the family moved to Hampton Wick in 1833 they frequently travelled north, particularly to Ellon Castle, Aberdeenshire, which her father inherited in 1840. She also went regularly to Hampton Court, where her grandmother, Lady Albinia Cumberland (formerly maid of honour to Queen Charlotte, wife of George III), occupied grace-and-favour apartments. 
On 23 September 1845, at a ceremony in St George's Hanover Square, Eleanor Gordon married the Hon. and Revd Richard Cavendish Townshend Boyle (1812-1886), the youngest son of Edmund, eighth earl of Cork and Orrery. Her husband was rector of Marston Bigot, Somerset, and in 1847 became chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria. They lived at Marston rectory, Marston Bigot, at that time a remote and old-fashioned area, spending their holidays in Switzerland, the south of France, and Italy. The first of their five children was born in 1846, the fifth and last in 1854. 
Although Boyle undoubtedly received art instruction as a child, it was not until the birth of her own children that she developed her talent -- under the influence of the works of Albrecht Durer, the Pre-Raphaelites, and John Ruskin's 'Modern Painters', and with the benefit of informal advice from William Boxall, Charles Eastlake, and Thomas Landseer; Landseer taught her to etch. Boyle was known professionally as E. V. B. or the Hon. Mrs Richard Boyle, only rarely acknowledging her third forename, or signing as Eleanor Vere Boyle. Between 1852 and 1877 she illustrated fourteen books, the majority fairy tales or nursery rhymes. 'Child's Play' (1852) with seventeen drawings (the first time nursery rhymes had been illustrated) and 'A Children's Summer' (1853) with eleven etchings on steel by the artist (illustrating prose by her husband's cousin, Mary Boyle, and verse by W. M. Call) won praise from John Ruskin, Thomas Landseer, Tom Taylor, and Francis Turner Palgrave, and led to the suggestion that she should be included, with Lady Waterford, in John Millais's sketching club project of 1854. There followed 'Waifs and Strays from a Scrap-Book' (1862), 'Woodland Gossip' (1864), 'A Leaflet from a German Christmas Tree' (1865), 'In the Fir Wood' (1866), 'The Story without an End' (1868), 'A Dream Book' (1870), a new translation of Hans Christian Andersen's 'Fairy Tales' (1872), 'Beauty and the Beast' (1875), 'The Magic Valley, or, Patient Antoine' by Eliza Keary (1877), and 'A New Child's Play' (1877). She also illustrated Thomas Gray's 'Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard' (for 'Favourite English Poems' published by Sampson Low in 1859) and Lord Tennyson's 'May Queen' (1861). Idealized children, often in mysterious natural surroundings with meticulously rendered plants and animals, predominate in her illustrations, most of which, from the 1860s, were reproduced photographically and some subsequently printed in colour. Boyle also exhibited fourteen designs for illustrations and independent works at the Society of Female Artists (Society of Lady Artists from 1869) (1859-79), five at watercolour exhibitions of the Dudley Gallery (1872-80), thirteen at the latter's black and white exhibitions (1877-80), and three at the Grosvenor Gallery (1880, 1881). Constantly involved with charitable work in her husband's parish, Eleanor Boyle often used the proceeds from her sales and publications for good causes: she financed the provision of fresh drinking water in Lower Marston and refurbished her husband's church. 
About 1871, on Richard Boyle's retirement, the family moved to Huntercombe Manor, near Burnham in Buckinghamshire, where Boyle re-created the extensive garden, planting roses on a large scale and 20,000 snowdrops. From 1878, when her husband suffered a stroke, Boyle's artistic output lessened considerably and she devoted herself to writing. Nature, gardens, and what she called 'the day of small things, of Nature's delicate masterpieces' (E. V. Boyle, 'The Peacock's Pleasaunce', 1908, 92) were her main subjects in ten books published between 1884 and 1908, many illustrated with small black and white vignettes. 'Days and Hours in a Garden', dedicated to her husband, who died in 1886, was her most popular work, ten editions appearing between 1884 and 1898. Also successful were 'Ros rosarum ex horta poetarum' (1885), an anthology of poetry about roses to which Tennyson and Bulwer-Lytton contributed verses, and 'Seven Gardens and a Palace' (3rd edn, 1900) -- a collection of essays by Eleanor Boyle reprinted from the 'Anglo-Saxon Review', 'Blackwood's Magazine', 'Country Life', the 'National Review', and the 'Pall Mall Magazine' -- describing gardens she had known since her childhood. She presented a copy of this last work to her friend Queen Alexandra. 
Boyle's views on art were also published. A patroness of the Frome School of Art since its foundation in 1868, she twice addressed its students (in 1870 and 1899), encouraging a 'patient following of Nature for love of Nature's truth' and education of 'the perception of beauty' while decrying impressionism and the 'profoundly joyless' art inspired by Burne-Jones (E. V. Boyle, 'The Peacock's Pleasaunce', 1908, 249, 258, 253). She herself continued to sketch; in 1902 an exhibition was held of her work entitled 'Sketches, dreams and drawings' at Leighton House, Kensington, London. Her last work, drawn for Tennyson in 1911, was 'Love hath us in the Net'. 
Much of Eleanor Boyle's considerable wealth having been lost as a result of unwise investments by her son-in-law, a banker (to whom her fortune was entrusted after the death of her husband), her old age was spent in comparative poverty. She died at Prestwood Dyke Road, Brighton, on 29 July 1916 and was buried in Marston Bigot churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 67552


Frank Bramley (1857-1915) was arguably the most talented and dedicated of the Newlyn painters. He was born at Sibsey, Lincolnshire, on 6 May 1857, the son of Charles Bramley and his wife, Harriet. Like Hall he trained at Lincoln School of Art and the Royal Academy in Antwerp. He went to Newlyn in the winter of 1884. His principal subject was the figure, with a concern for mood and character. Trained in the discipline of northern painting his work tended more towards tonality, less towards colour. One of the finest emotional statements of late nineteenth-century art was his 'A Hopeless Dawn' (1888; Chantrey Bequest, Tate collection), a scene of tragic loss set in the intimate theatre of Bramley's small room in Newlyn. In 1891 he married Katherine, daughter of John Graham of Huntingstile, Grasmere, Westmorland. In 1893 he was elected associate of the Royal Academy, of which he became academician in 1911. In 1894 he left Newlyn; his final years were spent in Grasmere. He died at Hope House, Chalford Hill, Gloucester, on 10 August 1915. 
The arrival of Stanhope Alexander Forbes (1857-1947) in Newlyn in January 1884 marked a turning point for the artists' colony. Forbes was to become the leading figure in the group; he possessed a capacity for action and a practical genius that propelled their work upon a national stage. During his first months in the village he painted 'Fish Sale on a Newlyn Beach' (1885; Plymouth Museum and Art Gallery), which depicts the glistening beach at low tide, a heavy sky over a slate-blue sea. The fishing fleet is anchored offshore and fish are being unloaded and offered for sale on the beach. When the painting was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1885 it was much admired for its freshness and accuracy of observation. Forbes was the first of the Newlyn painters to be elected to the Royal Academy, as associate in 1892 and as academician in 1910. 
Not all who came to Newlyn had the abilities or the ambitions of Langley, Bramley, or Forbes. Ralph Todd (1856-1932) had little success at the Royal Academy but exhibited regularly in Birmingham. A number of other painters were not resident in Newlyn for long periods but came on visits or used it as a sketching-ground. They include William John Wainwright (1855-1931) and Henry Detmold (1854-1924), both from Birmingham; Leghe Suthers (1856-1924) and William Banks Fortescue ('c'.1855-1914), both from Southport, in Lancashire. William Teulon Blandford Fletcher (1859-1936) was one of the few Londoners in the group. 
The Slade School of Fine Art, founded as part of University College, London, attracted some of the most talented of the younger generation, including a number who went to Newlyn. Henry Scott Tuke (1858-1929) made his first extended visit in 1883 but he was mainly associated with his home town of Falmouth. Thomas Cooper Gotch (1854-1931) settled in Newlyn in 1887 and remained there until his death. Percy Robert Craft (1856-1934) arrived in the village in February 1885 and stayed there for about two years, before joining the artists' community in St Ives. Albert Chevallier Tayler (1862-1925) went to Newlyn in the late summer of 1884 and was an irregular resident over a period of eleven years. Frank Wright Bourdillon (1851-1924) had a painting career of about twelve years, most of it spent in Newlyn. In June 1892 he gave up painting to become a missionary. 

Norman Garstin (1847-1926) was born at Cahirconlish, co. Limerick. He was already thirty-one before he began to train in art at the Royal Academy in Antwerp, and in Paris, and went to Newlyn in 1886. His smaller sketches -- studies of sea and landscape -- captured the transient effects of light, but his most robust painting is undoubtedly 'The Rain it Raineth every Day' (1889; Penlee Gallery and Museum, Penzance), which depicts the wide, rain-soaked expanse of the promenade between Newlyn and Penzance. Garstin also had talent as a writer; from 1895 he was a regular contributor to the 'Studio Magazine' with a feature, 'Studio talk', in which the work of the Newlyn and St Ives artists was chronicled. 
Elizabeth Adela Armstrong (1859-1912) ['see 'Forbes, Elizabeth Adela] was born in Ottawa and educated in England. She studied at the South Kensington Schools, London, and at the Art Students League, New York. Later, chaperoned by her mother, she travelled to Europe and painted in Germany, France, and the Netherlands. In November 1885 she made her first visit to Newlyn, although she was not a resident there until her marriage, to Stanhope Alexander Forbes. She painted with a delicacy and clarity that few of the Newlyn painters could match and discovered a theme that she made her own -- the village children. Her painting 'School is out' (1888), exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1889, is a sympathetic description of the children as individuals. In that year Forbes had his own success at the same exhibition, with 'The Health of the Bride', an equally warm portrayal of a village wedding; the work was purchased by Sir Henry Tate and later formed part of his gift to the nation of sixty-eight pictures that led to the formation of the Tate Gallery. 
By the turn of the century Newlyn had changed; the harbour had been enlarged and the fishing trade greatly expanded. This commercial development made it much less interesting to the artists, and many left. Stanhope and Elizabeth Forbes made a decision to stay, and in 1899 opened a school of painting in Newlyn; this marked the beginning of a new era in the artistic life of the village. The school continued until the Second World War, surviving Elizabeth Forbes's death in 1912 and Stanhope Forbes's subsequent marriage, in 1915, to Maudie Palmer. 


@@@@@


doc= 67559


Collier, Thomas (1840-1891), landscape painter, was born on 12 November 1840 at Howardtown, Glossop, Derbyshire, one of four children of Thomas Collier (1796/7-1859), clockmaker and tea dealer, and of Martha Siddall (1800/01-1857). Nothing is known of his childhood or schooling but he attended Manchester School of Art in the early 1860s. By 1864, following in the footsteps of David Cox, he had established himself in one of his favourite milieux, Betws-y-coed in north Wales. In 1863 he exhibited his first watercolour at the Society of British Artists, from a Manchester address, the home of his future wife, Hermione Beatrice Holdstock (1839-1879), whom he married on 28 December 1865. 
Until about 1869 Collier painted in north Wales and occasionally in the Lake District; three Cumbrian subjects were hung at the Royal Academy in 1870. He then moved to London and began to explore the Sussex downs and the byways of rural Surrey. Having been rejected in his efforts to join the Society of Painters in Water Colours, he was elected associate of the Institute of Painters in Water Colours in 1870 and a full member in 1872, the year of a single trip to Scotland. In 1876 he began to work in East Anglia, a favoured sketching ground, and in 1878 he was made chevalier of the Legion d'honneur for a watercolour of Arundel Park, which was shown at the Paris Universal Exhibition. A year later, on 20 December 1879, his wife, tragically, died, just before the completion of their permanent Hampstead home, a residence of substance and good taste, where Collier lived for the rest of his life. 
Inspired by the naturalist tradition of Constable, Cox, and DeWint, Collier eschewed the contemporary Victorian taste for highly finished pictures. He was much the most distinguished of a group of landscape painters in the institute who admired the rougher, wilder, freer late work of Cox and the breadth of early English watercolours. In Collier's case this inspiration sprang not from nostalgia but from conviction, a passionate response to nature. Working in pure watercolour with a restricted palette, and 'en plein air' in all weathers, his work always had the freshness and breadth of a great sketcher. The brooding, overpowering skies of his early work were later, like Constable's, suffused with light. Even in those early years occasional landscapes and beach scenes anticipate this development. His rare figures merge seamlessly with their surroundings as do uncommon and often lonely buildings; almost always these are seen as mere punctuation marks in the vast harmony of nature. Above all his sky painting and feeling for space characterize his work, from tiny sketches to large studio pieces. His few, small-scale, oil paintings earned him election to the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours in 1883. 
Collier's means enabled him to paint how he pleased, without dependence on pupil or public, although his work sold readily enough. The only known photographs of him suggest a sensitive, shy, even melancholy man. He entertained a small circle of artist friends but preferred not to involve himself in art politics. After his wife's death, on 2 July 1881 he married her friend Jessie Ida Tawell (1856-1937), who brought up the two children of his first marriage. Never robust in health Collier struggled with consumption throughout his later years. He died at his home, Etherow, 9 Hampstead Hill Gardens, London, on 14 May 1891 and was buried in the family grave in Highgate cemetery, as were his first wife, his son, his daughter, and eventually his second wife. Substantial collections of his work can be found in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 67560


Michael Maddox (b. 1747), who may have been a nephew rather than a son, and whose extraordinary career as a dancer, equilibrist, and entrepreneur culminated in the award, in 1805, of a pension of 3000 roubles for services to the Russian theatre. While he was known to have performed his slack-wire act in Russia in 1767, Maddox made his first English appearance at the Haymarket on 10 December 1770. He repeated most of Anthony Maddox's tricks, with the additional refinement of simultaneously playing the violin, french horn, and drum while swinging on the wire. From a clipping in the A. M. Broadley Collection at Westminster Public Library, dated 4 January 1772, he is known to have had financially advantageous 'affairs in Sweden', but the nature of those affairs is mysterious. He was probably back in Russia by 1772. There he made and exhibited automata and presented experiments in the physical sciences. He also seems to have invented and installed machinery for the Znamenka Theatre in Moscow, of which he was joint manager with Prince Urasov. 


@@@@@


doc= 67565


Deverell, Walter Howell (1827-1854), painter, was born in Charlottesville, Virginia, USA, on 1 October 1827, the eldest child in the family of five sons and three daughters of Walter Ruding Deverell (1800-1853), originally from Lincolnshire, and his wife, Dorothy Margaretta, 'nee' Phillips (1799-1850). After marrying in London in 1824, his parents had travelled to America with his father's former teacher of German, Dr George Blaetterman, who had been engaged as a professor of modern languages at Thomas Jefferson's newly founded University of Virginia. Walter Deverell senior enrolled at the university in 1825 and in 1826 ran a school for boys near Charlottesville. By 1829 the family had returned to England where, at St Clement Danes, Westminster, on 18 August 1829, Walter Howell Deverell was baptized, along with his sister Margaretta ('b'. 1829). His father's peripatetic career led them to Dublin in 1833; London in 1835, where his father was assistant secretary of the Statistical Society; and then, in February 1841, to Perth, where Deverell senior was assigned to the office of governor of the general prison, a post from which he was removed. While in Scotland, in addition to the educational guidance of his father, the young Walter, then aged about fourteen, went to a private tutor who 'initiated me into the mysteries of Greek participles and Latin verbs' (Memoir). 
In February 1843 Deverell's father became assistant secretary (and, for a time, curator) at the Government School of Design in London. The accommodation at Somerset House provided with the job situated him and his large family of eight children in a building that had been the home of the Royal Academy of Arts until its move to Trafalgar Square in 1837. Deverell's father had plans for his son to train as a solicitor, but eventually he acquiesced in his son's wish to study art. In 1844 Deverell registered at the National Gallery as an art student; in 1845 he joined Henry Sass's academy (then run by F. S. Cary) to learn drawing techniques, while also attending life classes in the evenings. 
At Sass's Deverell befriended the charismatic Gabriel Rossetti with whom he shared an interest in painting and writing poetry. In July 1845 Deverell was admitted as a probationer at the Royal Academy Schools, before becoming a full student in December 1846. Here, with Rossetti, he joined with William Holman Hunt and John Everett Millais to revive a sketching club, known as the Cyclographic Society, with which he had earlier been involved. Deverell inevitably had close links to the school of design: John Rogers Herbert taught him and Richard Burchett was a friend and later superior. By the time the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood formed in September 1848, Deverell was employed as one of the assistant masters at the school of design, a job his father would have had a hand in arranging. Even more important, as a resident in rooms at Somerset House, the young artist had a strong sense of the history surrounding him and he is known to have studied the old masters and admired the work of some current academicians. 
Deverell's first exhibited work, a genre portrait study (priv. coll.), appeared at the Royal Academy in 1847, and was followed the next year by a scene from Faust, a subject shared with Rossetti. As an amateur actor, his love of acting and performance informed 'Twelfth Night' (exh. 1850; priv. coll.), which is his best-known and most fully realized work. He himself modelled for Duke Orsino, Rossetti for Feste, and, famously, in her first appearance in a work by the Pre-Raphaelites, Elizabeth Siddal as Viola. Retrospective accounts for the most part concur that Deverell 'discovered' the young red-haired Lizzie while accompanying his mother on a foray to buy a hat at Madame Tozer's millinery shop in Cranbourne Alley, Leicester Square, in the later part of 1849, as he sought a model for Viola. (An alternative but more prosaic account is that Lizzie showed her own drawings to Deverell's father and that way met the young Deverell.) According to one contemporary account, Deverell himself harboured affections for Lizzie, prior to her relationship with Rossetti. 
Close collaboration among the Pre-Raphaelites extended to painting sections of one another's works -- Deverell assisted Rossetti with 'Ecce ancilla domini!' in 1850. Writing and making art also went hand in hand. Deverell played a key role in the realization of 'The Germ', the short-lived journal, as one of the proprietors who organized the printing and distribution. Here he published the poems 'The Sight Beyond' and 'A Modern Idyl'; his etching 'Viola and Olivia' appeared in the last issue of May 1850. He essayed other Shakespearean subjects at this time, including the 'Banishment of Hamlet' (exh. 1851; destroyed), known by a drawing (Ashmolean Museum, Oxford) which displays the characteristically idiosyncratic traits of Pre-Raphaelite draughtsmanship. 
In October 1850 William Michael Rossetti named Deverell as a member of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, having 'worthily filled up the place left vacant by [James] Collinson' who had resigned earlier that year (Fredeman, 'P. R. B. Journal', 72). Although Deverell was regarded as effectively a member of the brotherhood by at least some of its members, and expected to be elected at its meeting in January 1851, his election was never ratified for reasons which remain unclear (ibid., 241). From January to May 1851 Rossetti and Deverell shared a studio in Red Lion Square. Careless of his attire yet exceptionally handsome, Deverell often modelled for his friends, most notably as the page in Ford Madox Brown's 'Chaucer' (1849-) and Claudio in Hunt's 'Claudio and Isabella' (exh. RA, 1853). He was particularly close to Hunt, whom he relied on as a confidant and adviser. 
With the death of his mother in October 1850 and his father's diminishing role at the school of design following the arrival of Henry Cole as secretary in 1851, family circumstances weighed heavily on Deverell. In 1852, when the school of design relocated to Marlborough House, the Deverells were forced to move. Evening teaching meant that Deverell travelled back and forth from central London to the new family home, Heathfield House, near Kew Gardens, which took its toll on his health. His art, however, flourished, with the beautiful garden and a new muse and model, named Eustatia Davie, serving as inspiration for several scenes of modern life, such as 'A Pet' (exh. 1853; Tate collection) and 'The Pet Parrot' (1853; National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne). 
In June 1853 Deverell's father, with whom he had a tense and unhappy relationship, died. The family had to leave Kew for a smaller house in Chelsea. Under stress from being the sole support of his family, Deverell neglected his health, developing disease of the kidneys. His painful condition worsened and by early 1854 he was bedridden, yet he carried on with ambitious oils such as 'The Irish Beggars by the Roadside' (1853-4; Johannesburg Art Gallery, South Africa). One of his last works was the design for the vignette which appeared on the title-page of William Allingham's 'Day and Night Songs' (1854). Doctors knew the young artist's death was imminent. His friends rallied: Millais visited regularly in the evenings to read the 'Bible' aloud; Millais and Hunt arranged the secret purchase of Deverell's painting 'A Pet' for 90 guineas; Rossetti also lent his moral support and tried to arrange sales with some of his own patrons during the last months and beyond. Deverell died at 3 Margaretta Terrace, Oakley Street, Chelsea, on 3 February 1854, aged twenty-six. It was recorded that he had suffered from albuminuria for some years, ulceration of the bowels for six months, and asthenia from dysentery for six months (d. cert.). His funeral and burial took place at Holy Trinity Church, Brompton. 
Deverell's death marked the end of the great camaraderie of the early Pre-Raphaelites. His friends were loyal well beyond his death, particularly Rossetti, who eventually took charge of Deverell's remaining paintings and planned a raffle in 1869-70 to sell them to raise money for the artist's impoverished sister (two of his other siblings had emigrated to Australia in the 1850s). Closely involved in the earliest years of Pre-Raphaelitism and a member in all but name, Deverell, with his endearing personality, good looks, and sense of humour, was much loved. Owing to his early death and small oeuvre, he did not feature in accounts of the group until retrospective publications, chiefly by William Michael Rossetti, begin to appear in the 1890s. Still later, Deverell's few paintings emerged from his family's collections into exhibitions and then entered public collections. He is now known primarily as the man who discovered Elizabeth Siddal but his work shows many of the salient features of Pre-Raphaelitism both in style and choice of subject. 


@@@@@


doc= 67567


Egley, William Maw (1826-1916), genre painter, was born in Marylebone, London, on 2 October 1826, the son of William Egley (1798-1870), artist, and his first wife, Sarah, 'nee' Maw (1796-1852). William Egley was a successful miniature painter and an exhibitor at the Royal Academy, and his son was working as his assistant by the age of fifteen. 
In 1843 Egley exhibited 'A Monk Preaching' at the Royal Academy. He began exhibiting at the British Institution in 1844, and at the Society of British Artists in 1846. Most of his early works were drawn from historical and literary sources, including Moliere and Shakespeare. In 1848 he created one of the first Christmas cards, an etching illustrating scenes of Christmas charity and festivity. On 16 August 1849 he married, at South Lynn, Norfolk, Mary Ann (1829/30-1883), daughter of Thomas Hubbard, sailmaker. The young couple lived with Egley's parents at 74 Connaught Terrace, London, for the first years of their marriage. 
Egley's early works were not particularly well received by critics, and were disparaged for the hardness of their execution and colour. But several of his works were purchased by art unions and their prizewinners, including 'The Talking Oak' (1857; Detroit Institute of Arts), which was purchased by the Art Union of Glasgow. The style of 'The Talking Oak' was influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites, as was his work of the following year, 'The Lady of Shalott' (1858; Sheffield City Art Galleries), a popular Pre-Raphaelite subject drawn from Tennyson's poem of the same name. 
Egley also worked as an assistant to William Powell Frith, the successful painter of modern-life genre pictures. Under Frith's influence he began painting scenes of contemporary life in the mid-1850s. Egley's most successful painting in this vein was 'Omnibus Life in London' (Tate collection), which he exhibited at the British Institution in 1859. The painting depicts the crowded interior of a bus in Westbourne Grove, and Egley closely studied aspects of the scene from life. He used his friends and relatives as models for the passengers, studied the bus in the yard of a builder, and built a wooden model in his garden to study the light effects. The painting was widely praised for its realistic detail and expressive depiction of character and incident; the Pre-Raphaelite critic F. G. Stephens called it 'a subtle little bit of character cleverly worked out' (Cowling, 104). 
Egley's other notable works in modern-life genre include the pair of paintings 'As the Twig is Bent' and 'The Tree's Inclined' (Philadelphia Museum of Art), which were exhibited at the Royal Institution of Manchester in 1861 and in the art gallery at the Crystal Palace in Sydenham. The first canvas depicts a young boy dressed up as a soldier under the admiring gaze of a blonde girl and the more distant gaze of a dark-haired girl. In the second canvas the trio are young adults and while the grown soldier and the blonde woman flirt, a mirror reflects the image of the brunette, looking on in some dismay. 
In the mid-1860s Egley returned to historical and literary scenes, as the fashion for modern-life genre painting began to wane. Towards the end of the century he painted several scenes from Charles Dickens's novels, including a scene from 'The Old Curiosity Shop' (exh. RA, 1898) and 'Florence Dombey in Captain Cuttle's Parlour' (1888; V & A), which depicts the young woman in the dress of 1848, when the novel 'Dombey and Son' was published. The painting was not originally exhibited at any of the major exhibition venues in London, instead touring the country between 1889 and 1895, appearing in exhibitions at places including Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, the Crystal Palace art gallery, Southport, and Brighton. The painting was for sale, and the price was reduced from $40 to $15 over the course of the tour. Such entrepreneurial methods of exhibition and sale were typical of Egley. Over the course of his long career he painted over 1000 works, details of which he recorded in a catalogue now at the Victoria and Albert Museum. He exhibited in a wide range of venues, and sold large numbers of his pictures directly to dealers like Arthur Tooth and Henry Wallis. 
Egley died on 20 February 1916 at his home at 32 Chiswick Lane, Chiswick, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. Examples of his work are included in the Tate collection, the Detroit Institute of Arts, the Victoria and Albert Museum, Sheffield City Art Galleries, and the Holborne Museum of Art in Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 67573


Fripp, George Arthur (1813-1896), watercolour painter, was born in Bristol on 13 June 1813, the second of the six children of the Revd Samuel Charles Fripp and his wife, Mary Ann (1787-1843), daughter of Nicholas Pocock, the outstanding marine artist. He attended Miss Player's Quaker school at Frenchay, Bristol; Rowland Hill's school in Birmingham; and the Revd W. Field's school in Leamington. He had lessons in oil painting from James Baker Pyne and exhibited three studies from nature and a view of Tintern Abbey at the exhibition of the new Bristol Society of Artists in 1832, giving his father's address: 14 Park Row. 
In July 1834 Fripp set out with the Bristol artist William James Muller on a seven-month sketching tour, visiting Belgium, travelling up the Rhine from Cologne to Schaffhausen, crossing the Alps by the Splugen Pass, and staying for two months in Venice before visiting Rome and Tivoli. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1838, showing a large oil of Tivoli (Bristol Museum and Art Gallery), which had been purchased by a wealthy Bristol cousin, Charles Bowles Hare; he gave a London address but may not have settled there until 1840. He exhibited intermittently at the Royal Academy until 1854, and had a notable success in 1848 with the oil 'Mont Blanc from near Courmayeur, Val d'Aosta' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), which J. M. W. Turner is said to have praised; his oils were close in manner to the work of Muller. In 1841 he showed for the first time at the Old Watercolour Society, exhibiting seven watercolours of Bristol and continental scenes. In the same year he was elected an associate of the society, of which he became a full member in 1845; he was secretary of the society from 1848 until 1854, and relinquished the post only because of the demands of a very large family. He married Mary (died 1887), daughter of Thomas William Percival, a merchant, on 26 March 1846; among his twelve children were Charles Edwin Fripp, artist-reporter for 'The Graphic', and Thomas W. Fripp, a watercolour painter based in Canada. 
Fripp quickly became well known for his watercolours, which were mostly of scenes in Wales, Yorkshire, and Essex, and of views on the Thames and in Dorset. He continued to show views in the Avon Gorge and around Bristol. His early watercolours reflect the influence of Samuel Jackson; however, from the later 1840s the crisp drawing and even colour washes of Jackson's earlier manner gave way to a softer and warmer colouring in Fripp's watercolours. They are characterized 'by refined delicacy and tenderness of aerial effect, by truth of colour, and by the learned breadth and scrupulous balance of their composition' (Roget, 268). A slight darkening of the paper and fading of the colours over time has sometimes reduced that delicacy to mere fastidiousness. However, since the 1980s the market value of Fripp's work has risen sharply, reflecting the success of his aspiration of maintaining the traditions and standards of the finest of the early English watercolour painters. He died on 17 October 1896 at 50 Holmdale Road, Hampstead, after a long illness, and was buried three days later in Highgate cemetery. 
Fripp's brother Alfred Downing Fripp (1822-1895), youngest of the six children, was born in Bristol and probably joined George in London in 1840, at the age of eighteen. He studied with him at the British Museum before becoming a student at the Royal Academy Schools in 1842. In 1843 he made the first of three visits to Ireland, and in the following year visited Wales. There were soon to be many watercolours of Irish and Welsh peasantry, often of one or two poor but picturesque children in a landscape setting. The more crowded and ambitious works, such as 'The Irish Piper' (Bristol Museum and Art Gallery), which had been commissioned by Charles Bowles Hare, were based on innumerable diligent and delicate pencil studies and could be strongly coloured and impressively composed. In 1844 he was elected an associate of the Old Watercolour Society, and progressed quickly to full membership in 1846. 
On 28 April 1849 Fripp married Anne Dalton Allies (died 1850), daughter of Edwin Allies, a gentleman from Clifton. She died in the following year and Fripp moved soon afterwards to Rome. He stayed for periods in Naples, Capri, and Venice, and did not return to England until 1859. In Rome he shared premises with the painter George Hemming Mason and enjoyed the friendship of Frederick Leighton and Edward Poynter. When Ruskin reviewed his Italian subjects at the Old Watercolour Society in 1859 he hoped that Fripp might prove a worthy successor to John Frederick Lewis, the society's late president. However, after Fripp left Italy he returned to his Irish, Welsh, and English subjects, concentrating especially on Dorset scenery, particularly that at Lulworth. On 12 September 1861 he married Eliza Banister Roe (died 1895), daughter of John Banister Roe of Blandford, Dorset, where, probably in that same year, he settled. In 1870 the Fripps and their children moved to London, following Alfred's election as secretary of the Old Watercolour Society, an office that he held with some interruptions until his death. He returned briefly to Italy in 1893 but, writing to his daughter from Rome, he complained that the city was now overrun with Americans. He died in London on 13 March 1895 at his home, 33 Hampstead Hill Gardens, from complications following influenza, and was buried at Tarrant Rushton, Blandford. His wife and younger son were too ill to attend the funeral and died, also of influenza, a few days later. Another son, Sir Alfred D. Fripp (died 1930), was a surgeon, and a daughter, Elizabeth Jane Spencer Fripp (died 1945), married Sir William Hale-White, physician. 


@@@@@


doc= 67574


Gibb, Robert (1845-1932), historical genre and portrait painter, was born in a small cottage in James Street, Lauriston, near Falkirk, on 28 October 1845, the fifth son of David Gibb, journeyman joiner, and his wife, Christian, 'nee' Morrison. The landscape painter William Gibb (1839-1929) was his brother. He began his schooling in Edinburgh where he demonstrated early skills with the pencil, and, like his brother's, his early training was as a lithographer. Drawing classes at the Board of Manufacturers School were followed by the life school of the Royal Scottish Academy. In 1867, aged twenty-five, he exhibited an Arran landscape at the Royal Scottish Academy, the first of 143 works by him exhibited there during his lifetime. It was not landscapes that established his reputation, but his figure studies in historic settings; some of his earliest attempts focused on events in the early history of Scotland. In 1874 he exhibited 'Columba in Sight of Iona', followed two years later by 'The Death of Columba'. 
Gibb's early interest in illustrating Scottish history and portraits of eminent men gave way to a focus on military subjects, particularly depicting Scottish soldiers in battle, into which he channelled his intense patriotism. In 1878 his first major military picture, 'Comrades', was shown at the Royal Scottish Academy (copy, Black Watch Museum). Gibb had been studying the life of Napoleon and had made a sketch of the retreat from Moscow. On seeing a group of three soldiers in the foreground, one of whom had fallen in the snow, a colleague suggested that this vignette would make a suitable composition in its own right and 'Comrades' was the result. A young soldier whispers his last message to a colleague who comforts him amid the snows of the Crimea, both guarded by a stalwart highlander. The work brought him associate membership of the Royal Scottish Academy. The following year Gibb exhibited a finished picture, 'The Retreat from Moscow' (priv. coll.). It was completed in Paris, where the artist had gone to familiarize himself with French soldiers and Napoleonic uniforms. It took the foreground scene from 'Comrades', transposing the Scots with Frenchmen. Behind, a column of struggling troops trudge wearily through the snow. A similar picture to 'Comrades' was 'Schoolmates', his major painting of 1884, depicting two highland officers in the heat of battle, one falling into the arms of the other. 
Perhaps Gibb's greatest work appeared in 1881. 'The Thin Red Line' (exh. Royal Scot. Acad., 1881; National War Museum, Edinburgh Castle) was inspired by Gibb's reading of Alexander Kinglake's book 'The Invasion of the Crimea', and the account of the 93rd highlanders at Balaklava on 25 October 1854. The artist had taken a walking holiday in the Peak District of Derbyshire, and while out walking by the River Wye near Haddon Hall glanced up to a slight rise and imagined he saw a line of highlanders 'all plaided and plumed in their tartan array' (Gilbert, 28). He hastened back to his lodgings where he sketched the image. This would form the theme of one of the finest military paintings of the nineteenth century. The picture represents a line of the 93rd Sutherland Highlanders stretching along a slight rise as Russian cavalry approach. When exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy it 'created so much sensation' ('Magazine of Art', 1881, xxii) and earned full membership of the academy for the artist in February 1882. It was shown at the Royal Academy the following year and thereafter became the property of Archibald Ramsden. After the death of Ramsden it was sold at Christies on 1 February 1917 to the whisky blender Sir Thomas Dewar for $882, although representatives of the regiment also bid for it. 
Kinglake's history also provided the theme for 'Alma: Advance of the 42nd Highlanders' (exh. Royal Scot. Acad., 1889; Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum). The author described how Sir Colin Campbell rode up to the regiment and shouted 'Forward, 42nd!' Information for the piece came from details provided by Colonel Sir Peter Arthur Halkett, who carried the queen's colour at the battle on 25 September 1854. It depicted Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Duncan Alexander Cameron, who commanded the 42nd, and Campbell on horseback urging on another 'thin red line' up the heights above the Alma River towards the distant enemy, although Gibb did include one wounded and two dead Russians for dramatic effect. 
The final picture of Gibb's great Crimean trilogy was ''Saving the Colours': the Guards at Inkerman' (exh. Royal Scot. Acad., 1900; Naval and Military Club, London), although his 1885 canvas 'Letters from Home' (now destroyed) is also set in the Crimea, with two officers in a tent. Painted in a temporary studio constructed on the slopes of the Pentland Hills to the south of Edinburgh, 'Saving the Colours' was begun in 1894 and took four years to complete. While Gibb was working in the makeshift studio soldiers from the Edinburgh garrison were brought to the site to serve as models. It is probable that the location was also the setting for his Alma piece. The canvas portrayed Lieutenant H. W. Verschoyle holding proudly aloft the tattered flag of his regiment while the duke of Cambridge is visible in the right background welcoming the guards. 
Throughout the last decade of the nineteenth century Gibb continued to paint portraits of eminent Scots, particularly clerics, academics, and of explorers like Sir Henry M. Stanley (1885; Livingstone Memorial, Blantyre), but his reputation was established with his battle paintings. In 1895 he became keeper of the National Gallery in Edinburgh, a post he held for twelve years, but he continued to paint actively and returned to the theme of war with 'Hougoumont, 1815' (exh. Royal Scot. Acad., 1903; National War Museum), which turned out to be his last retrospective military scene. The success of the battle of Waterloo turned upon the closing of the gates of Hougoumont, a small chateau situated on the battlefield. Officers and men of the Coldstream and Scots guards are depicted in the act of closing the gate against the onrushing enemy. 
In 1908 Gibb became his majesty's painter and limner for Scotland, the fifth to hold the position since 1823. He turned his attention to contemporary military events, his first such picture being 'Dargai, October 20, 1897' (exh. Royal Scot. Acad., 1909; priv. coll.), representing the Gordon Highlanders in battle on the north-west frontier of India. As with his earlier military pieces he was eager to be as accurate as possible and was able to obtain photographs of a number of the officers present, five complete sets of uniforms, and photographs of the heights taken by the Royal Engineers ('The Scotsman', 13 Feb 1932). He painted two scenes from the First World War, 'Communion at the Front' (exh. Royal Scot. Acad., 1917) and 'Backs to the Wall, 1918' (exh. Royal Scot. Acad., 1929; Arbroath Museum). 
While his earlier paintings, such as the 'Death of Marmion' (exh. 1873), were Romantic in style Gibb's fame lies principally with 'The Thin Red Line'. He was considered by one art historian the only British military painter who could 'be compared with the military painters of France... the sense of reality he conveys is almost equally great' (Caw, 267). This was aided by the fact that he preferred to paint outdoors, which would provide accurate light. Indeed, he was 'among the first of Scottish landscape painters to approach nature as a conscientious student as well as a delineator of scenery' ('Scottish Art Review', 1885, 211). His pictures avoided 'the sentimentality which so often destroys confidence in pictures of the kind' ('The Times', 12 Feb 1932). 
Gibb married, on 3 June 1885, Margaret ('b'. 1851/2), second daughter of John Shennan, builder and dean of guild in Edinburgh. They had no children. Gibb died at his home, 2 Bruntsfield Crescent, Edinburgh, on 11 February 1932 and was buried in Warriston cemetery, his coffin born by six soldiers of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders accompanied by regimental pipers. 


@@@@@


doc= 67575


Godward, John William (1861-1922), genre painter, was born at 2 Woodbine Cottages, Bridge Road West, Battersea, London, on 9 August 1861, the first of five children of John Godward (1836-1904), investment clerk in a life assurance office, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Eborall (1835-1935). The Godwards moved to Fulham and then Wimbledon, where their eldest son lived until leaving home at the age of twenty-six. He initially followed his father's profession, while also studying with the architect William Hoff Wontner from 1879 to 1881. The young Godward did not follow the conventional route of an aspiring Victorian artist; he did not enrol at the Royal Academy of Arts Schools, the Slade School of Art, or in the Paris atelier system. Nevertheless, he must have received formal training at a local art college, as he secured his first entry into the Royal Academy of Arts summer exhibition in 1887 with 'A Yellow Turban' and his first classical subject, 'Poppaea', at the Royal Society of British Artists in the same year. He went on to produce a type of oil painting popularized by Lawrence Alma-Tadema, with women in classical drapery set in a Pompeian-style interior or else on a marble terrace overlooking a Mediterranean sea. 
Following the exhibition of his first works Godward left the family home for Bolton Studios in Kensington, where he lived and worked alongside other classicizing painters, George Lawrence Bulleid and Henry Ryland. In 1889 he moved to a larger residence in St Leonard's Terrace, Chelsea, at the time an area known for its artists' colony. In 1888 Godward was represented by a fashionable London dealer, Arthur Tooth, with whom he sold ten oils, until transferring to another West End firm headed by Thomas Miller McLean. A prolific painter, Godward produced between fifteen and twenty pictures a year, which, selling for $25 to $100, provided a steady income. An engraving contract with the noted German printer Franz Hanfstaengl secured extra revenue from reproductions. 
Exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy and the New Gallery, Godward's work elicited critical coverage. And yet a typical response describes him as 'a disciple of Mr Alma-Tadema' ('Morning Post', 19 March 1890, 4). Alma-Tadema's trademarks appear throughout Godward's work: a fish pond motif, cut-off inscriptions, and the reproduction of familiar classical statuary including a bust of Homer in 'A Classical Beauty' (1892; priv. coll.), the Parthenon frieze in 'In Expectation' (1892; priv. coll.), and Atlases holding the cornice of a room in the Pompeian forum baths in 'The Toilet' (1900; priv. coll.). Likewise the older artist's distinctive representation of female drapery, with a Greek himation wrapped around a chiton, appears in a number of Godward's paintings, as do familiar studio props of animal skins and Pompeian-type lion-legged tables. However, Godward does not borrow from Alma-Tadema alone; his representation of diaphanous drapery is characteristic of Frederic Leighton, while his variegated marble and mosaic architectural decoration recall Edward Poynter. In fact so well was he able to depict materials that the critic of 'The Studio' reported of 'Campaspe' (1896; priv. coll.) that 'behind a nude figure is a mosaic, so marvellously reproduced that it seems a pity the form obscures it' (1896, 111). For all this Godward should not be judged as a mere imitator or his work as total pastiche of the styles of others. At his worst he created over-large canvases of dull, flat nudes, but at his best he painted charming pictures displaying harmonious colour and lively texture. It is noteworthy that his models never conform to a classical ideal, and it is their personalized 'real' faces and bodies that lend a warmth and individuality to his paintings. 
In 1894 Godward moved from St Leonard's Terrace to a larger house in Fulham Road, where he built himself a garden studio. The garden was landscaped with water features and statuary in imitation of a Roman peristyle, but unlike Alma-Tadema or Leighton he never advertised his house as an extension of his art. Far from courting celebrity Godward did not even seek official recognition from the art establishment. Although briefly a member of the Royal Society of British Artists, he was not elected an associate of the Royal Academy, let alone full academician. Godward never married, and his bachelor status, together with his avoidance of London's artistic milieu, have led to his being labelled a recluse; an obituary described him as 'of exceptionally retiring personality' ('The Connoisseur', 1923, 108). 
Godward first visited Italy in 1905, and by 1912 he had made it his permanent home, lodging at one of the artists' residences of the Villa Strohl-Fern in Rome. According to a family story Godward ran away with an Italian model (Swanson, 96), an event that lends romance to a seemingly uneventful biography, although there is no record of him living with a lover in Italy. After he ceased to exhibit in Britain his works were shown on the continent. 'Golden Hours' (1913; priv. coll.) appeared at the Rome International Exhibition, the Paris Universal Exhibition (1914), and the Brussels International Exhibition (1919); 'The Belvedere' (1913; untraced) was awarded the gold medal at the Rome International Exhibition. His paintings were still sold through McLean, whose business, when taken over by Eugene Cremetti, continued to represent the artist in London. Italy produced its own classical subject painters like Augusto Bompiani, Luigi Bazzani, and Giulio Sartorio, and hosted such expatriate classicizers as the Polish-born Henryk Siemiradzki and Ludwig von Langenmantel from Germany. Nevertheless, by the outbreak of the First World War modernist art movements across Europe constituted a systematic challenge to conservative art and its institutions. In Britain the position of the Royal Academy, and, along with it, classical subject painting, was being gradually eroded. With the death of Alma-Tadema in 1912 and Poynter in 1919 the heyday of paintings of dreamy women on marble balconies was over. 
Undaunted, Godward continued to produce the same scenes, usually one-figure compositions of classicizing women draped or nude. Indeed he is one of the few painters of his generation to specialize exclusively in classical subject pictures, even eschewing portraiture, the most reliable source of income for established artists. Avoiding narrative in favour of mood, colour, and form, many of his titles tend to favour obscure Greco-Roman female names, curiously often beginning with the letter C. The buyer of one such canvas wrote to the artist asking: 'You have not answered my question as to how you came to select the name of 'Crytilla'. Perhaps you will kindly let me know' (Swanson, 89). No answer is recorded although the name derives from a figure in Aristophanes' 'Thesmophoriazusae' ('Assembly women'). Other titles have a similar literary or mythological origin: 'Callirhoe' (1889) is a daughter of the river god Achelous; 'Clymene' (1891), the mother of the sun god Phaethon; 'Corinna' (1900), a Greek female poet; 'Cassotis' (1914), a sacred spring at Delphi; 'Crispinella' (1921), a Roman aristocrat mentioned by Tacitus. 
Godward returned to England in 1921, taking up residence in the garden studio of the house at 410 Fulham Road, which was now occupied by his brother Charles Arthur Godward and his wife, Gertrude. The following year, on 13 December 1922, John William Godward killed himself by leaving on the gas ring in his studio. Inquest witnesses noted that he suffered from 'insomnia and acute dyspepsia' and the coroner's verdict was 'suicide whilst of unsound mind' ('Fulham Gazette', 22 Dec 1922, 3). He was buried in the family plot in Old Brompton cemetery. The unfashionable nature of Godward's oeuvre was illustrated by the fact that only one memorial notice appeared in the press. 
In his lifetime Godward's paintings were for the most part bought by private patrons rather than municipal collections and as a result they appear at auction today with relative frequency. A resurgence of interest in Victorian painting from the 1970s onwards ensured that his works increased in value towards the end of the twentieth century. In 1995 Andrew Lloyd Webber bought 'Dolce far niente' (1904) for $361,000. An 1897 painting of the same title, which was sold for $3200 by London's Phillips Gallery in 1976, fetched $746,500 at Sothebys, New York, in 2010. 


@@@@@


doc= 67583


Hayllar family (per. c.1850-c.1900), painters, came to prominence with James Hayllar (1829-1920), who was born on 3 January 1829, probably at The Hornet, Whyke, Chichester. He was baptized on 13 February at St Pancras, Eastgate Square, Chichester, the son of Thomas Hayllar (1794-1859), coal merchant, farmer, and miller, and his wife, Mary Ann Child (1794-1885). Richard Cobden was his cousin on his father's side. He was educated at Midhurst grammar school and subsequently studied under the marine artists William and John Cantiloe Joy. In 1848 he became a resident pupil of Francis Stephen Cary, who had taken over Henry Sass's academy in Bloomsbury in 1842; he remained with the Carys at 21 Bloomsbury Street until 1851 -- even after his entry to the Royal Academy Schools in 1849 -- while working as a portraitist, principally in crayons. In October 1851 he travelled to Italy with his friend John Cavell -- to whose sister Ellen he had recently become engaged -- and spent two years in Rome (where he met Lord Leighton) and Florence studying from the antique and old masters. On his return in October 1853 he resumed portrait painting, mainly in oils, taking studios in London in Berners Street in 1854 and Great Ormond Street in 1855; 'Lady Mynzomdie' (exh. RA, 1854) -- a portrait of Ellen Cavell -- and 'John Cavell' (exh. RA, 1855) were among his first exhibited works. He continued to paint portraits throughout his life, his most famous commissions being for Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn, the duke and duchess of St Albans, and General Hardy. 
On 8 March 1855 James Hayllar married Ellen Phoebe Cavell (1827-1899), the daughter of a law stationer, and aunt of Edith Cavell. Although he exhibited from a studio, 1 Langham Chambers, Langham Place, between 1860 and 1864, from 1855 until 1875 they lived at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, where his father-in-law, John Cavell, was head of the household until his death in 1863 and where, between 1856 and 1868, they had nine children, four boys and five girls. Jessica, Edith, Kate, and Mary ['see below'] all became professional painters. 
James Hayllar had exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (SBA) from 1851. From 1855 his work was also shown at the British Institution, the Liverpool Academy (LA), and the Royal Manchester Institution, and in subsequent years at the Royal Hibernian Academy, the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours, and the Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport, among other galleries. In the 1850s he exhibited landscapes and genre subjects such as 'The Teetotaller and Tippler' (exh. SBA and LA, 1855) and 'Bookworm and Grub' (exh. LA, 1857). During the 1860s he also experimented with historical genre, appending lengthy quotations to titles such as 'The incident out of which arose Lord Mansfield's decision that as soon as a slave set his foot upon English territory, he became free' (exh. RA, 1864; V&A), the latter subject having been suggested to him by Richard Cobden. It was not until 1866 that he won acclaim, with a painting entitled 'Miss Lily's Carriage Stops the Way' (exh. RA, 1866; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), the first of a series that included 'Miss Lily's First Flirtation' (1867; exh. Sothebys, 18 March 1987) and 'Miss Lily's Return from the Ball' (exh. RA, 1867; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), depicting one of his small daughters; all three were engraved by Robert Graves. The charm and importance of children in an adult world became James Hayllar's principal and most popular theme. He missed election as an associate of the Royal Academy by one vote, but in 1876 was successfully elected a member of the Society of British Artists. 
Between 1865 and 1872 the Hayllars rented a country house called Carlton Rookery, near Saxmundham, in Suffolk, where from April they spent five or six months of every year. The children engaged in numerous outdoor activities and acted in plays written by their father. There are also artistic records (chiefly rural genre scenes and landscapes) of visits to Boulogne between 1862 and 1886. The period 1872-5 was spent in London, at which time all five girls attended a day school in Gower Street that was associated with Bedford College. In 1875 the family settled in the country, at Castle Priory, a large house fronting the Thames at Wallingford, Berkshire, where they remained until 1899. George Dunlop Leslie RA, also with a large family, lived next door. Sport and physical exercise were an important part of life at Castle Priory. Hayllar taught his daughters to swim and also to row, as a result of which the four eldest were all accomplished oarswomen; coxed by their father, they used to row their boat 27 miles in a morning to the Henley regatta. On leaving school Hayllar's daughters and his youngest son, Algernon, received art instruction at home. In an old laundry building converted into a studio their father taught them drawing, painting, and perspective, with evenings devoted to modelling, etching, and engraving. His method, according to his daughter Jessica, was 'never to let anything pass that was not quite correct in form or relation to its surroundings' (Hayllar, 13). Algernon Victor ('b'. 1868), having been apprenticed to Cotton Webb for six months, started a career as an engraver and exhibited two engravings at the Royal Academy in 1889. The four daughters who became painters (primarily in oils) specialized initially in meticulously rendered still life and, throughout their careers, in subjects drawn from their comfortable life at Castle Priory. 
Children remained focal in James Hayllar's work, chiefly in the context of local village life, examples being 'The Only Daughter' (exh. RA, 1875; Forbes Magazine Collection, New York), 'As the Twig is Bent so is the Tree Inclined' (exh. SBA, 1879; exh. Christopher Wood Gallery, March 1983), and 'The Centre of Attraction' (exh. RA, 1891; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), for which he was awarded a silver medal. Jessica described his pictures at this time as 'subjects to bring the poor and well-to-do together, kindly acts and interest shown in various ways' (Hayllar, 11). 
James Hayllar last exhibited in 1898, although he continued to sketch landscapes until the end of his life. In 1899 his wife, Ellen, died and he moved with two of his daughters, Jessica and Kate, to Redholme, 14 Cambridge Road, Bournemouth, where he died on 9 March 1920. 
The eldest daughter, Jessica Ellen Hayllar (1858-1940), was born on 16 September 1858 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She was the most prolific painter of the five sisters and exhibited at the Society of British Artists and the Dudley Gallery from 1879, the Royal Academy from 1880 (until 1915), the Royal Manchester Institution from 1882, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours from 1883, and widely in the provinces. After still-life subjects such as 'Going to 'my Uncle's'' (exh. RA, 1880; exh. Christies, 6 May 1983) Jessica Hayllar painted domestic scenes, often including children, that depicted everyday occurrences at Castle Priory -- for example, 'House Cleaning' (exh. SBA, 1882-3) -- as well as more important family occasions, such as 'Christmas Comes but Once a Year' (exh. RA, 1881), 'Fresh from the Font' (exh. RA, 1887), 'The Return from Confirmation', exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, 3 February 1978), and 'The Day of the Wedding' (exh. Royal Manchester Institution, 1882). Her paintings -- which often feature doorways and windows -- are notable for their effective perspective and suggestion of depth; the same recessive view through interconnecting rooms characterizes 'A Coming Event' (exh. RA, 1886), 'Autumn Sunlight' (exh. RA, 1891), and 'Teaching' (1895), and windows provide not only interesting effects of light but detailed views of the garden beyond. Figures (usually family members), furnishings, and flowers are painted with equal emphasis by Jessica Hayllar, whose approach has been compared with that of the snapshot photographer (Wood, May 1974, 5). From about 1900 she was confined to a wheelchair as a result of an accident (according to family tradition she was knocked down by a carriage) and during the rest of her life in Bournemouth she chiefly painted flowers, azaleas in particular. She died, unmarried, on 7 November 1940 at Hill House, Perry Hill, Worplesdon, Surrey. 

Edith Parvin Hayllar (1860-1948) was born on 15 May 1860, also at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She too depicted daily life at Castle Priory, in paintings such as 'Amy's Birthday' (exh. SBA, 1885) and 'More Hindrance than Help' (1893; exh. Sothebys, Belgravia, London, 24 October 1978). Her work reveals a particular interest in subjects connected with the family's numerous sporting activities: these included hunting, as depicted in 'This Way, Sir!' (exh. SBA, 1882; exh. Sotheby Beresford Adams, Chester, 31 July 1981); shooting, as in 'The 1St of September' (exh. RA, 1887; exh. Sothebys, London, 25 November 1983) and 'The 1St of October' (exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, London, 18 October 1974); and tennis -- 'A Summer Shower' (exh. RA, 1883; Forbes Magazine Collection) engagingly portrays an interlude in a mixed doubles. Of the four sisters Edith alone painted the Thames, in works such as 'Feeding the Swans' (exh. Sothebys, 6 November 1996) and 'A Punting Party'. The settings in Edith Hayllar's figure compositions are always painted in great detail, with careful attention to the particularities of flowers, feathers (in dead game), and household objects, as well as to the social interaction between individuals that forms the subject of a work. 
She exhibited at the Society of British Artists (1881/2-1889), the Royal Academy (1882-97), and the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours (1883/4-1895/6). On 9 June 1896 she married the Revd Edward Bruce Mackay (1861-1921), rector of Wallingford and afterwards of Sutton Courtenay, with whom she had four children. She did not paint after her marriage, and died in Guildford, Surrey, on 3 January 1948. 

(Alexandra) Mary Hayllar (1862-1950) was born in Mecklenburgh Square on 18 November 1862. She exhibited still lifes, such as 'Lawn Tennis Season' ('c'.1881; Southampton Art Gallery), and figure subjects usually including children -- for example, 'Helping Gardener' (exh. RA, 1885; exh. Sothebys, 27 March 1996) -- with her subject matter, like that of her sisters, drawn entirely from life at Castle Priory. She was mainly represented at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (1880-85), the Dudley Gallery (1881-4), and the Royal Manchester Institution (1882-4). On 1 July 1885 she married Henry Watkins Wells (1855/6-1932), a brewer, and largely abandoned painting, except for miniatures of children. She died at Stone Hall, Wallingford, Berkshire, on 6 January 1950. (Beatrice) Kate Hayllar (1864-1959) was born on 1 September 1864 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She exhibited still lifes, often featuring flowers, at the Society of British Artists (1883-1888/9) -- where her first exhibited painting was bought by the princess of Wales -- and the Royal Academy (1885-98). About 1898 she became a nurse and in 1899 she moved to Bournemouth with her father and sister Jessica. Later she lived with her sister Mary at Wallingford, Berkshire, where she died on 8 October 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 67584


Hicks, George Elgar (1824-1914), genre painter, was born in Lymington, Hampshire, on 13 March 1824, the youngest son of Edward Hicks (1783/4-1861). His father rose from a cashier to become a partner in St Barbe and Co., the Lymington bank, from which he retired in 1840; he was made a county magistrate in 1843, and in 1837, 1841, and 1847 was mayor of Lymington, where he was active in local charities and promoted the building of churches. Originally Hicks's parents wanted him to follow a medical career, like his elder brother John Braxton Hicks (1823-1897), who became a distinguished London physician and obstetrician; he thus spent three years of what he later described as 'arduous and disagreeable study' pursuing medicine at the University of London (Hicks, 'Guide to Figure Drawing', 30n). However, in 1843 Hicks changed the course of his career by entering Sass's Academy (also called the Bloomsbury School of Art) and in 1844 gained admission to the Royal Academy Schools. That year he won a medal at the Society of Arts for his chalk drawings and also a silver medal at the Royal Academy for one of his studies after the antique. In 1845 he was awarded the Art Union prize of $60 for his renditions of the revelations of St John and was then commissioned by the Art Union to produce drawings for Thomas Campbell's popular poem 'Gertrude of Wyoming' about life in Pennsylvania amid native American conflicts. 
Hicks married, at St Pancras on 27 March 1847, Maria (1825/6-1880), daughter of Joseph Harriss, tallow miller, and settled in Kensington. In the first seven years of marriage they had six (of eight) children. Hicks confided in his notebook that 'the pictures painted during the first 5 years of married life were small and unimportant. Attention too much divided between Parish work, ragged schools, profession, and domestic concerns to make much progress. Possibly if more time and attention had been exclusively devoted to professional study and intercourse with other artists the result would have been better. (Allwood, 54)' Before attaining success as a painter he gained some distinction as an illustrator, having produced thirteen plates for an 1846 edition of Campbell's poem and four illustrations for the 1857 publication of Robert Bloomfield's 'Farmer's Boy'. Drawing from his medical knowledge he also wrote two books aimed at art students, 'A Guide to Figure Drawing' in 1853 and 'Studies of the Human Figure' in 1868, both for George Rowney & Co. For Rowneys educational series he produced a series of 'Rustic Figures' lithographed from his drawings. 
However, it was his paintings that gained Hicks particular recognition. He began exhibiting at the Royal Academy in 1848, and over the course of six decades (until 1908) sent more than a hundred entries, mostly narrative paintings and portraits. He also contributed a dozen entries between 1850 and 1865 to the British Institution, and was a member of the Royal Society of British Artists. 
The turning point in Hicks's career occurred in 1859 with his Royal Academy entry 'Dividend Day, Bank of England' (priv. coll.). This large canvas elicited widespread acclaim, primarily for its original topic, although some thought the characterization of figures verged on caricature. Buoyed by this success Hicks undertook a series of other large-scale, modern life, mostly urban, subjects from everyday life, notably 'The General Post-Office: One Minute to Six' (priv. coll.), exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1860; 'Billingsgate Market' (Worshipful Company of Fishmongers) in 1861; 'Infant Election at the London Tavern' (priv. coll.) in 1865; and 'Before the Magistrates' (priv. coll.) in 1866. These works typically received mixed, and often negative, criticism, with reviewers in the 'Art Journal', 'Athenaeum', the 'Illustrated London News', 'The Times', and other magazines disparaging the allegedly 'vulgar', 'meretricious', and excessively literal elements of Hicks's approach. Many critics linked him with William Powell Frith, whose own contemporary canvases like 'Ramsgate Sands' (Royal Collection) of 1854 and 'Derby Day' (Tate collection) of 1858 galvanized viewers at the Royal Academy and paved the way for the popularity with the public of his own -- and Hicks's -- interpretations of contemporary city life and its colourful activities and denizens. The two artists knew one another (Hicks mentions speaking to Frith about the hanging of a picture in the Royal Academy in 1880; Allwood, 60), but the extent of their interaction remains unexplored. Besides his visual indebtedness to Frith there is evidence that Hicks was inspired by the writings of the journalist George Augustus Sala (ibid., 11-13). 
By 1867 Hicks seems to have shifted some of his focus to historical themes, and by the mid-1870s concentrated primarily on society portraits. The latter earned him a solid income, and his notebooks itemizing his subject pictures and portraits record the increasingly higher prices his portraiture commanded. After the 1870s prices of 350 guineas or more were not uncommon, and this earned him a very comfortable lifestyle. Beyond the realm of portraiture, throughout his career Hicks enjoyed a strong relationship with London dealers, selling most of his subject pictures to them rather than directly to individual collectors. Among his dealers were William Vokins (1815-1895), Louis Flatow (1820-1867), Henry Wallis (1804/5-1890), and the Tooth Gallery, all well-established in the Victorian commercial art domain. 
Besides his large urban canvases of crowds Hicks expended considerable energy on rural subjects, especially in his early career, painting such works as 'Gleaning' (priv. coll.), 1855, which used a wet white technique 'to get [the] vibrations of heat' (Allwood, 20) in a manner reminiscent of William Mulready and the early Pre-Raphaelites. A more unconventional rustic subject was 'Osier Whitening' (priv. coll.), 1856-7, with its frieze-like arrangement of figures preparing willow for basket making and other uses. 
A specialized aspect of Hicks's genre paintings relates to Victorian womanhood and femininity, as found in 'Changing Homes' (Geffrye Museum, London) and the triptych 'Woman's Mission' (central section, Tate collection), both exhibited in 1863 at the Royal Academy. The 'Art Journal' reviewer and others highly approved of 'Woman's Mission', which defined the female roles of angelic guide, companion, and comforter, in relation to the lives and needs of males. The first compartment in the triptych places a young mother in nature guiding her child along a path, while in the second vignette a wife consoles her grieving husband as he contemplates bad news communicated by a black-edged letter he has just received. The third part or denouement depicts a young woman tenderly caring for her aged, bed-ridden father. In addition to numerous literary and religious heroines Hicks painted other works (whose current locations are unknown) with female protagonists, among them 'Maternal Love' (exh. British Institution, 1856), 'Maidenhood' (exh. RA, 1856), 'Maid of All Work' (1856), 'The Sinews of Old England' (1857), 'The Croquet Player' (1864), 'Reflected Smiles' (exh. RA, 1867), 'L'Allegro' and 'Il Penseroso' (both 1865; engravings after them, 1868, V&A), 'Woman's Sanctuary' (exh. RA, 1869), and an exotic rarity of 1871 entitled 'The Banks of the Nile'. 
A related recurrent theme in Hicks's oeuvre involved childhood, as attested by such titles as 'The First Toy' (exh. RA, 1851), 'The Pleasures of Childhood' (1858), 'Childhood' and 'Life's Sunshine' (both 1861), 'First Step' and 'Mother's Idol' (1866), 'Pat-a-Cake' (1870; priv. coll.), 'Football: Will He Do It?' (1875; priv. coll.), and the undated yet poignantly idealized 'Parenthood'. 
By the mid-1870s, however, perhaps for financial purposes, Hicks redirected his efforts to portraiture, producing scores of renderings of affluent sitters like 'Lady Wimborne and Daughter' (exh. RA, 1884). None the less his career encompassed a range of subject matter, some historical ('The Bayeux Tapestry', 1899), others religious ('The Lament of Jephthah's Daughter', exh. RA, 1871), and many invoking modern life and experience. Besides the non-traditional paintings of London in subjects like the post office, fish market, or orphan election, others reflected more typical contemporary issues: poverty in 'Parish Soup Kitchen' (exh. RA, 1852); emigration in 'Letters from Home: Post Office and Store at the Australian Diggings' (exh. RA, 1872); racial issues in 'Skins May Differ, but Affection Dwells in White and Black the Same' (exh. RA, 1874); and death in 'A Cloud with a Silver Lining' (exh. RA, 1890; priv. coll.). 
In content and style Hicks is sometimes termed a follower or imitator of Frith, the most illustrious of all Victorian genre painters. Like Frith, Hicks paid astute attention to detail, character, and incident and was a canny observer of the facial expressions, physiognomy, poses, manners, social class, attire, and objects consonant with the teeming microcosm of Victorian middle- and upper-class life. While much of the detail is crystalline and crisply rendered, Hicks himself expressed a desire to 'avoid hardness and tidiness'. Accordingly he mentioned his 1867 canvas 'Escape of the Countess of Morton' (exh. RA, 1868; priv. coll.) as one of 'many experiments... painted on a brilliant ground of broken color laid on with the palette knife' (Allwood, 56). Despite the broken colour effect in some works it is the pellucid, hard-edged, almost quasi-photographic style of his best-known panoramas of modern life that are mostly connected with his reputation and that of Victorian genre painting overall. 
After the death of his first wife in 1880 Hicks married, in York on 23 September 1884, Anne (1842-1908), daughter of William Ross, of Pendleton, Manchester. By the turn of the twentieth century they were living at Western House, Odiham, Hampshire, where Hicks died on 4 July 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 67587


Hutchison, Robert Gemmell (1855-1936), painter, was born in Edinburgh on 1 July 1855, the oldest son of George Hutchison ('b'. 1830), brass founder, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Forman ('b'. 1829). He was not academically inclined and left school at a young age to be apprenticed to a seal engraver. His artistic talent was evident by the age of seventeen and his mother encouraged him to pursue a career as a painter. He trained at the government art school in Edinburgh (formerly known as the Trustees' Academy) and also received guidance from the artist James Campbell Noble (1846-1913). His first studio was at 1 India Buildings in Edinburgh, where he was established by 1878. In the same year he had three pictures accepted for the annual exhibition of the Royal Scottish Academy, where he exhibited annually until his death. On 24 June 1879 he married Janet ('b'. 1857), daughter of James Boe, grocer, of Biggar. They had four daughters and two sons (one of whom died in infancy). 
Gemmell Hutchison began painting views of the Fife coast, but he soon turned to genre painting, producing sentimental scenes of Scottish rural life, very much in the spirit of the Faed brothers. His debut at the Royal Academy of Arts, London, in 1880 was a work entitled 'The Empty Cradle' and thereafter he began to specialize in images of children and childhood. His first success was with 'Boys Guddling Trout', which was awarded a prize at the Royal Scottish Academy exhibition of 1886 and was purchased by the Royal Association for the Promotion of the Fine Arts in Scotland. He exhibited at the Royal Glasgow Institute for the Fine Arts from 1888 onwards, enjoying immediate commercial success, and by the end of the 1890s he had patrons in Scotland, Manchester, and London. His best-known works from this period include 'The Gundy Man' (1897; McManus Galleries, Dundee) and 'Village Carnival' (1898; priv. coll.), which was bought by Sir Edward Moss, the British theatre impresario. As a mark of his early success Gemmell Hutchison was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1901, along with Edward Atkinson Hornel and William Walls. In 1903 he exhibited for the first time at the Paris Salon. His only submission, 'Bairnies Cuddle Doon', was inspired by the poetry of Alexander Anderson, who wrote in the Scots vernacular under the pen name Surfaceman. The picture won a third-class medal and was purchased by the Scottish Modern Arts Association. 
In 1905 Gemmell Hutchison moved to Musselburgh, a coastal village to the east of Edinburgh. In the same year, perhaps prompted by a large exhibition of Dutch Hague school art in London, he made his first trip to the Netherlands, working at Volendam in North Holland. He greatly admired the work of the Hague school, and paintings like 'Idyll on the Shore' (1907), one of his earliest works to depict young children playing on the foreshore, show the direct influence of Jozef Israels, whose pictures were widely collected and exhibited in Scotland. Some of Gemmell Hutchison's later paintings -- for example 'Sea Urchins', exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1928 -- even appear to take their titles directly from the Dutch artist, and in later life Gemmell Hutchison was often referred to as the Scottish Israels. 
After returning to Scotland Gemmell Hutchison worked at Carnoustie on the Forfarshire coast, painting in the open air and developing a looser technique and lighter palette. Works from this period include 'Seagulls and Sapphire Seas' (1909; Bolton Art Gallery), 'The Breezy Bents' (1910), and 'A Song of the Sea' (1912). An important influence on his developing style was the work of the Scottish artist William McTaggart. From the mid-1880s onwards McTaggart had been working in a broadly impressionist style, painting out of doors at Machrihanish on the Argyll coast, and Gemmell Hutchison followed his example. 
McTaggart died in 1910 and in the following year Gemmell Hutchison was elected in his place as a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy. In the same year he was commissioned to paint the coronation of George V and Queen Mary at Westminster Abbey, for reproduction as a photogravure. In 1912 he moved back to Edinburgh and settled at 8 St Bernard's Crescent and in the next year he submitted his diploma picture, 'Shifting Shadows' (Royal Scot. Acad.). This was a large impressionist canvas, painted in the open air, depicting a maid hanging out washing on a breezy day. In the early summer of 1914 Gemmell Hutchison was again working in the Netherlands and he also exhibited at the Paris Salon. His submission for that year, 'L'oeuvre du passe', was stranded in France at the outbreak of the First World War. 
During and after the war Gemmell Hutchison continued to paint out of doors in the summer months, working mostly at Carnoustie, where he had a cottage, but also at Machrihanish, Easthaven in Forfarshire, and on the Farne Islands. He also painted interior scenes and in 1928 he won a gold medal at the Paris Salon for 'The White Seam' (Paisley Museum and Art Gallery), which was bought by Paisley corporation. In the 1930s he spent the summers at his daughter's house at Coldingham, Berwickshire, and painted at St Abbs on the Berwickshire coast. He died at Coldingham on 22 August 1936, and was buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, on the 26th. His son George Jackson Hutchison (1896-1918), a talented artist specializing in pastoral scenes and animals, was killed in action at Merville, France, six months before the end of the First World War. His daughter (Marion) Maud Gemmell Hutchison (1886-1963) also painted still lifes and coastal scenes. 
Gemmell Hutchison was described by contemporaries as 'a man of strongly individual and forceful personality', possessing 'a vigour of manner and expression which was arresting and often amusing' ('The Scotsman', 24 Aug 1936). His output was prodigious and he reputedly listed his recreational interests as 'work'. His pictures of children playing on the shore remain as popular as they were during his lifetime and it is not surprising that he is represented in numerous British collections, both private and public. 


@@@@@


doc= 67590


Jopling, Louise Jane (1843-1933), portrait painter, was born on 16 November 1843 at 10 Heath Field, Moss Side, Manchester, one of the nine children of Thomas Smith Goode, a railway contractor who held strict views on education, and his wife, Frances Wickstead Pinker. In 1861 at the age of seventeen she married Francis (Frank) Romer, secretary to Baron Nathaniel de Rothschild in Paris, and they had three children. Encouraged by the baroness, Louise Romer began to study art in Paris. Her classes at a state technical school and in Charles Chaplin's studio included anatomy and nude life study. In 1869, when her husband lost his appointment, she returned to London, where she attended Leigh's School of Art and led a fashionable life in London's artist community. Her friends included Frederick Leighton, Val Prinsep, and Kate Perugini. 'Punch' published her first drawing, 'A Sketch from Nursery History', in 1869 as well as her journalism, poems, and stories. She separated from her husband, a compulsive gambler, in 1871, and returned to Paris for a brief period where she met the artists Alfred Stevens and James Tissot. Despite the deaths of Frank Romer (in 1873) and two of her children, her subject painting, for which friends modelled in Japanese robes, 'Five O'Clock Tea', was exhibited at the 1874 Royal Academy exhibition where it was well received and purchased by Agnews. That same year she married Joseph Middleton Jopling (1831-1884), a watercolour painter, and they had one son. Although he was a less successful painter than his wife, Joseph Jopling was superintendent of the fine arts for the Philadelphia International Exhibition in 1876 to which she sent 'Five Sisters of York' based on Charles Dickens's novel 'Nicholas Nickleby'. Sir Coutts and Lady Blanche Lindsay invited her to exhibit at the Grosvenor Gallery, London, from 1877 and, drawing in the fashionable society that attended exhibitions at the Grosvenor, she began to give preview exhibitions of her work in her studio. Her self-portrait from this year is now in Manchester City Galleries. Joseph Jopling introduced his wife to James MacNeill Whistler who painted her portrait, 'Harmony in Flesh Colour & Black: Portrait of Mrs Jopling' (1877; Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow). She was also a friend of John Everett and Effie Millais; Millais painted her portrait in 1879 (priv. coll.). Jopling produced many portraits of intelligent and fashionable women including 'Phyllis' (1883, oil on canvas; formerly collection of Sir Merton and Lady Russell-Cotes, Bournemouth) and worked extensively in pastel; one of her few drawings of men is a portrait of the biographer Samuel Smiles (NPG). Her theatrical portraits included 'Ellen Terry as Portia', exhibited at the Grosvenor Gallery in 1883, and purchased by Sir Henry Irving for the Alhambra theatre. 'Blue and White' (exh. RA, 1896; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight, Cheshire, repr. Lambourne, pl. 373) was purchased by W. H. Lever with the humorous intention that the graceful middle-class women washing blue china would advertise the benefits of Sunlight soap. (An advertising poster, entitled 'Home Bright -- Hearts Light', reproduced the painting and included on the table a packet of Sunlight soap.) Lionel Lambourne notes that Leverhulme saw 'its interest as a document in aesthetic taste' (Lambourne, 311). Joseph Jopling died in 1884 and in 1887 Louise married George William Rowe, a lawyer, and that year she set up a professional art school for women in Clareville Grove, London. The students were trained in perspective and anatomy, drawing, and painting from nature -- nude and clothed models, and casts -- and modelled in clay. In 'Hints for Amateurs' (1891) she outlined basic techniques and materials for drawing, painting, photography, modelling, anatomy, colour, and perspective. Jopling was a member of the Society of Women Artists, the Pastel Society, and the Women's International Art Club. The Royal Society of Portrait Painters, founded in 1891, included a few women whose membership did not grant voting rights, so Jopling led a successful lobby that pressurized the society to reform. She was the first woman member of the Royal Society of British Artists in 1902 and a founder and president of the Society of Immortals. In 1889 Jopling signed the 'Declaration in favour of women's suffrage'; she also supported the National Union of Women's Suffrage and signed a 'Letter from ladies to members of parliament' (published in the 'Woman's Suffrage Journal', June 1885, 125), which highlighted the fact that male suffrage had initially been granted on the basis of property rights. She published 'Poems' in 1913 and 'Tete a tete Bridge' in 1916; in 1925 her autobiography entitled 'Twenty Years of my Life, 1867-87' was published. Louise Jopling died on 19 November 1933 at her home, Manor Farm, Bois Common, Chesham Bois, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 67595


Logsdail, William (1859-1944), artist, was born on 25 May 1859 at 19 Minster Yard, Lincoln, the fifth of seven children of George Logsdail (1827-1905), verger at Lincoln Cathedral, and his wife, Mary Ann (May), 'nee' Jessop (1826-1905). From an early age Logsdail was inspired by the architecture of the cathedral and the city of Lincoln, and he spent much of his career painting picturesque buildings and city street scenes. He was educated locally and studied at Lincoln School of Art where his teachers, Edward Richard Taylor and A. W. Webster, created the 'School of Lincoln', whose members included Logsdail and his friend Frank Bramley, later a prominent Newlyn group artist. Logsdail was a precociously talented painter. At seventeen he had four paintings accepted for the annual Royal Academy exhibition, including 'His Last Vespers' -- the image of a dying clergyman based on a scene he had witnessed while sketching in Lincoln Cathedral. 
Logsdail now moved to London and, unsurprisingly, chose Westminster Abbey as his subject for two new Royal Academy paintings exhibited in 1878. Perhaps discouraged by the limited opportunities for training in the capital, he spent 1878-80 with Frank Bramley at the Academie Royale des Beaux-Arts, Antwerp. From 1879 to 1880 he worked directly with Charles Verlat, who developed his appreciation of rich colour, a form of paint application involving bold touches or dabs of pigment, and his skill in composing groups of figures. Logsdail became the first English painter to win a prize at the academie and his 'Fischafslog op de Fischmarkt en Antwerpen' ('The Antwerp Fishmarket') (Royal Collection) was acquired by Queen Victoria from the RA exhibition of 1880. 
In search of more unusual historical architecture, and inspired by Ruskin's 'Stones of Venice' (1853), Logsdail moved to Venice in 1881. Here he painted his first large work, 'The Piazza of St Mark's, Venice' (Birmingham City Museum and Art Gallery), which created a sensation at the RA in 1883. With this work he began his lifelong practice of portraying friends in street scenes, with Bramley, Edward Taylor, and Logsdail himself appearing in the crowd that thronged the piazza. He also completed much of the canvas out of doors, in what was then still a relatively unusual method. In 1886-7 he travelled in Egypt, Palestine, and the Balkans, and painted architectural and crowd scenes such as the 'Gate of Khalif' (1887). 
In 1887 Logsdail returned to London where he acquired a studio in Primrose Hill and embarked on the unusual and ambitious series of metropolitan subjects for which he is now best known. These London paintings constitute a distinctive vision of the city in the late 1880s in which he abandoned gothic architecture for bustling modernity. The first in the series, 'The Bank' (1887, now 'The Bank and the Royal Exchange'; priv. coll.), portrays the busy intersection by the Royal Exchange, the Bank of England, and the Mansion House. Continuing the practice of depicting friends in his canvases, Logsdail included the artist John William Waterhouse, apparently dozing, in the front row of an omnibus, in which Logsdail also sits (to the rear) in a reciprocal portrait by Waterhouse. For these London paintings Logsdail continued his 'plein air' practice, positioned on cabs and wagons in the middle of his chosen scenes, while for 'St Paul's and Ludgate Hill' (1887; priv. coll.) he rented rooms with a view from Fleet Street to the cathedral. Other subjects from Logsdail's London series include 'St Martin-in-the-Fields' (1888; Chantrey bequest, Tate collection), with its juxtaposition of a poor flower girl and wealthy child on the edge of Trafalgar Square; 'Sunday in the City' (1889), depicting the front portico of St Paul's; and ''So Keep You Cold...' (The Embankment in Winter)', also 1889, which shows Cleopatra's Needle covered in snow. In 1890 Logsdail also produced a series of images of London landmarks for 'The Graphic'. Illustrating articles by Thomas Archer entitled 'Through London by Omnibus', his subjects included the Bank of England, the Royal Courts of Justice, and the churches of St Clement Danes and St Mary le Bow. 
Logsdail's London pictures culminated in his exceptionally large (6 feet by 9 feet) study of the lord mayor's day parade, 'The Ninth of November' (Guildhall Art Gallery, London), which received a mixed reception when exhibited at the RA in 1890. The response had a marked effect on Logsdail who now abandoned the series, convinced of its failure. However, two years later 'The Ninth of November' was published as a plate by the 'Art Journal', suggesting its wider popularity, and it was exhibited in 1893 at the World's Columbian Exhibition, Chicago -- where Logsdail was awarded a medal -- and again at the People's Palace, east London, in 1897. On 7 May 1892 he married Mary Ann Ashman (1870-1958), daughter of George Ashman, shepherd, of Swaffham, Norfolk; they had a daughter, Mary ('b'. 1894), and two sons, Edward William ('b'. 1896) and Stuart ('b'. 1907). 
Following their marriage the couple moved to Venice from where, over the next eight years, Logsdail sent Italian subjects to the RA and other exhibitions. In 1900 he was one of the painters to represent Britain at the Exposition Universelle, Paris. After time in Sicily and Malta, Logsdail and his family returned to London in 1902, where he took lodgings at 5 St Paul's Studios, Talgarth Road, west Kensington. Searching for subject matter at home, he began what he intended to be a series of English cathedrals, and revisited the site of his first works with 'Lincoln Cathedral, Exchequer Gate and Castle Square' (Usher Art Gallery, Lincoln). 
In 1907 Logsdail's career took a new turn when, after exhibiting a painting of his daughter entitled 'An Early Victorian' (exh. RA, 1907), he was commissioned for a series of portraits, including those of Lord and Lady Halifax, Lord Curzon, the literary editor William Blackwood, and William Wace, dean of Westminster. In 1912 he was elected to the Royal Society of Portrait Painters. Ten years later the Logsdails moved to Noke, near Oxford, where William continued to paint portraits, scenes of Oxford, and pictures of flowers and gardens. In a memoir from this period he explained his failure to be elected a fellow of the RA in terms of his modesty, inability to engage in the politics of the art world, and the unwillingness of some fellow artists to promote his case more actively. However, his choice of Antwerp rather than London for his training and his decision to exhibit at the first show of the radical New English Art Club in 1886 also suggest that Logsdail may initially have rejected the idea of the RA as the principal institution by which to gain recognition. This was consistent with his practice of regularly showing new works in Birmingham and Manchester, and in London of preferring the Society of British Artists, the Dudley Gallery, and the RA's main rival, the Grosvenor Gallery. It was also the case that Logsdail's original scenes of modern London did not always find critical favour. That his work was on occasion judged lifeless and mechanical should, however, be set against his attachment to a continental tradition that valued painterly touch over moralizing or sentimental subject matter. His later life, while generally serene, was marked by the death of his elder son during an RAF training flight in 1923. Logsdail himself died of heart failure at the Manor House, Noke, on 3 September 1944, and was survived by his wife and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 67596


Lorimer, John Henry (1856-1936), genre and portrait painter, was born at 22 Hill Street, Edinburgh, on 12 August 1856, the second son of James Lorimer (1818-1890), professor of public law at the University of Edinburgh, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Stodart (1835-1916). The architect Sir Robert Stodart Lorimer was his younger brother. Brought up in an Edinburgh family with scholarly and artistic proclivities, he was educated at the Edinburgh Academy and attended Edinburgh University for a short time before embarking on an artistic career. His professional training began in the School of Art on the Mound, Edinburgh, where he was grounded in the South Kensington system, but he soon graduated into the life school of the Royal Scottish Academy, where he encountered George Paul Chalmers and William McTaggart, deemed a pioneer of impressionism before it was so labelled. Lorimer was wealthy enough to travel extensively, visiting Spain (1877), Italy (1882), and Algiers (1891). During a stay of six months in Venice he copied the old masters as well as sketching from life. Like many of his generation he was drawn to the paintings of Tintoretto and Bellini in Venice and Velasquez in Madrid, which resulted in an interest in 'tone', the effect of light and shade on colour; 'Wintry Gloamin' was his first exhibit at the Royal Scottish Academy, in 1873. 
Lorimer was no artistic rebel; he was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1882 and made a full academician in 1900; he showed 123 works at the academy and forty-three works at the Royal Academy in London. The artist and critic Robert Alan Mowbray Stevenson concluded 'Lorimer is a moderate man, a conscientious artist and anything but a charlatan and yet he has won respectful consideration, not only from the public, but from the profession, not only from England, but from the Continent' (Stevenson, 322). Lorimer's works were well received in Paris; 'The Eleventh Hour', retitled 'Marriage de convenance', won second medal at the Paris Salon of 1896 and took the gold medal at the International Exhibition of 1900, being subsequently purchased by Philadelphia Art Gallery. Previously it had 'hung on the line' at the Royal Academy in 1894, receiving the ultimate accolade, a private royal viewing at Windsor. The French authorities bought 'Grandmother's Birthday -- Saying Grace' (1893) and 'Colonel Anstruther Thomson' for the Luxembourg Gallery. 'Lullabye', having secured honours at the Paris Salon of 1902, was purchased for the Victoria National Gallery, Melbourne. A corresponding member of the Institut de France, Lorimer was obliged to decline the Legion d'honneur owing to Foreign Office regulations. 
Undoubtedly 'conservative', Lorimer's 'quiet style' was 'neither particularly novel nor particularly clever and audacious' (Stevenson, 322). Despite this he was linked in the public's mind with the progressive Glasgow school, which included James Guthrie and John Lavery, owing to his luminosity, the 'flooding effect of real light' (ibid., 323) and his handling of tonal values. These features of his style came from studying in 1884 at the Paris atelier of the successful society portraitist Charles Auguste Emile Durand, known as Carolus-Duran. By this time it was considered necessary to complete an art education in Paris, to acquire the 'practical knowledge of those French methods of teaching and working which had long exercised a potential influence on all Continental art and were beginning to affect the insular independence of English painting' ('The Scotsman', 5 Nov 1936, 11). Yet although coeval with the emergence of impressionism, Lorimer 'scarcely struck out towards innovation', and resisted painting with 'a French accent' (Stevenson, 322-4). 
Lorimer's atelier training can be seen in his audaciously lit compositions, the light emanating from various sources. But he was not seduced by Jules Bastien-Lepage's rural naturalism, instead winning distinction by observing the cultivated life of the middle classes and offering 'delightful glimpses of life as it passes in many a Scottish home' (Caw, 421). Lorimer favoured anecdote: 'The Flight of the Swallows' (1907; Edinburgh City Art Centre), for instance, depicted a charming Edwardian mother and her three pretty daughters, one in tears, watching the flight of swallows at the end of summer. He knew 'how to concentrate the composition in such a way that it shows immediately the connection between the people, things and phenomena' (De Soissons, 114); no great effort is needed to understand his intent. 'The Eleventh Hour / Marriage de covenance' (1894; Kende Gallery, New York) could be classed a 'psychological drama', showing a woman caught in a marital dilemma. Such understated emotion proved Lorimer an 'able psychologist', who knew 'how to play on the human soul' (ibid., 123). 
Following in the footsteps of his fellow Scots Sir William Quiller Orchardson and John Pettie, who found fame and fortune painting sentimental melodramas, Lorimer favoured modern Scottish domesticity. 'Lullabye' (1889; Victoria National Gallery, Melbourne), with its low toned lighting and intimacy, is reminiscent of the conscientious realism of the Dutch masters; Sir James Caw even likened Lorimer to Vermeer. Lorimer's interiors were not considered fanciful or 'cold compilations of archaic research, as commercial combinations of fantasy, bric-a-brac and the odd corners of a furniture shop', rather 'they are natural, habitable, intimate... the inevitable home of the figures that people their dainty seclusion' (Stevenson, 324). Lorimer fabricated this 'dainty seclusion' at Kellie Castle, Pittenweem, Fife, built in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and in his 'pleasant old house' in Edwardes Square, Kensington, London, which was 'fitted up after the fashion of the old castle' (ibid.). 

'The Ordination of Elders in a Scottish Kirk' (1891; NG Scot.), praised by Caw as 'one of the most national pictures ever painted... [touching] the very heart of Scottish piety and reverence' (Caw, 421-2), has become, through copious reproductions, an emblem of the sober-minded Scottish temperament. It treats in a 'sympathetic and satisfactory way' one of the few ceremonials allowed by the presbyterians; 'An Ordination of Elders by a well-beloved minister is a solemn and touching event, held in the greatest honour by a naturally religious people' ('Art Journal', 1893, 308). Despite its being 'a little hard', Stevenson recognized its chief quality as the 'sympathy with which several marked types of Scottish faces have been... rendered' (Stevenson, 324). 

'The Ordination' demonstrates Lorimer's skilful handling of light, which emanates from a number of sources, while also revealing his ability as a portraitist. He established his reputation with a portrait of his father 'hung on the line' at the Royal Academy in 1879. Praised by Sir Frederick Leighton, president of the academy, and John Everett Millais, the leading portrait painter of the day, Lorimer found himself an overnight sensation. After he was propelled into London's artistic elite commissions came thick and fast; some ninety portraits have been identified, now mostly residing in private collections. Portraits of illustrious sitters included 'Sir David Chalmers, Chief Justice of British Guiana' (1882), 'Lord Reay, Governor of Bombay, Lord Rector of St Andrew's University', and 'Sir Joseph Lister, Bart' (1896). But it was observed that his 'over precision frequently gave a hard and rather grim look to his sitters' (Caw, 422). Lorimer retained the primary interest in character that was the chief concern of the 'older school'. But in 'Mrs Edward Salvesen and her Children' (1898) Lorimer proved he could 'catch people in the freedom of their home surroundings, amidst the objects they love and in an unconstrained attitude' (De Soissons, 124). Lorimer's 'quiet' style shows the cautious approach adopted by British artists to French painting, maintaining his 'personal view and his English flavour' while fortifying and broadening his art 'by an impressionism modified to his own use' (Stevenson, 323). 
Lorimer, who was unmarried, lived at Kellie Castle, initially a family summer home, for over sixty years; its walls are still hung with the fruits of his labour. In retirement he contented himself by capturing the gardens surrounding the castle, as in 'September', in which 'the ordered profusion of wealth in the flower-lover's garden is happily realised' ('The Studio', 68, 1916, 15). He died at Gyles House, Pittenweem, Fife, on 4 November 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 67605


North, John William (1842-1924), illustrator and watercolour painter, was born in Walham Green, Fulham, on new year's day 1842, the son of Charles North (died 1890), a linen draper, and his wife, Rosemary Knight (died 1880). His father failed in business as a draper in 1852 and then moved with his family to Worthing. Two years later North's parents emigrated to Canada, taking his younger brother but leaving North with his uncles, Alfred and John North, who lived in Brixton and Dartford. He spent school holidays with a great-uncle who was a farmer in Hertfordshire. Early drawings by North, dating from the mid-1850s, are of agricultural and rustic subjects. 
It seems that North left school at a young age, having already decided to follow a career as an artist. Following a short period of study at the Department of Science and Art's school at Marlborough House, in 1857 or 1858 he was apprenticed to the wood-engraver Josiah Wood Whymper, and so met among his fellow employees Fred Walker (1840-1875) and George John Pinwell (1842-1875). From 1862 to 1866 North worked principally as an illustrator for the Dalziel Brothers, and rapidly gained a reputation for his sensitive interpretation of landscape subjects in the medium of black and white woodblock engraving. He made designs for periodicals including 'Good Words' (in 1863 and 1866), 'Once a Week' (between 1864 and 1867), and the 'Sunday Magazine' (between 1865 and 1867). In addition, he contributed to 'A Round of Days' (1866), 'Wayside Posies' (1867), and Jean Ingelow's 'Poems' (1867). 
In 1860 North made a walking tour of Somerset in company with Edward Whymper (1840-1911), his employer's son who was to become a distinguished alpinist and who in 1865 was to make the first ascent of the Matterhorn. The two came across a rambling and decrepit old house -- originally built as a hunting lodge by Cardinal Beaufort, half-brother of Henry IV -- called Halsway Manor, on the western flank of the Quantock hills. Over the following few years North made several long stays at Halsway, lodging with Mrs Thorne, wife of the tenant farmer, and being accompanied on occasions by Walker and Pinwell (although not together as the two were not themselves friends). Gradually the house itself, with nearby Little Halsway Farm and the surrounding countryside, became North's principal motif and inspiration. About 1868 Halsway changed hands and the easy arrangement with the Thornes ended. By 1869 North settled at Woolston Moor, a village closer to Williton and where he was to remain until 1884, the year of his marriage (on 19 February) to Selina (1862/3- 'c'.1898), the daughter of a Somerset farmer, Abraham Weetch. 
North also maintained a studio in London, from the early 1870s onwards in Charlotte Street, and later at Wynchcombe Studios on Haverstock Hill. He visited Scotland on at least one occasion in the early 1870s, probably as a guest of William Graham MP, and painted views on the River Tay at Stobhall. In 1874-5 he travelled with Walker to Algeria -- for the sake of the latter's health. North remained in Algeria after Walker returned to England, and in due course he had a house built there where he often stayed in the winter months until the time of his marriage. From 1884 to 1898 North and his wife lived (along with North's father, a widower since 1880) at Beggearn Huish House, at Nettlecombe between the sea and the Brendon hills. Eight children were born to them there, although at least two did not survive infancy, and Selina North herself died about 1898. As a widower North lived at Bilbrook and then, from 1904 to 1914, at Withycombe. 
North loved the Somerset countryside and knew it well. Although agriculture itself is seldom represented in his art, he cared about the men and women whose lives were spent working the soil: he wrote articles about their living conditions and campaigned against the game laws. That North was a true countryman is witnessed by his friendship with the writer and naturalist Richard Jefferies (1848-1887), to whose landscape accounts North's watercolours make a pictorial equivalent. Jefferies stayed with North in 1883 when gathering material for his book 'Red Deer'; his memoir of this stay appeared as the essay 'Summer in Somerset' (published in 'English Illustrated Magazine' in 1887 and accompanied by drawings by North). In August 1887 North wrote an obituary of Jefferies for 'Pall Mall Gazette', and organized a subscription to provide for the writer's widow. 
North's watercolours of the 1860s owe something to his experience as a designer of illustrations, retaining a coherent and linear compositional structure, matched with intense colour and careful observation of detail. According to Walker, writing in December 1868, 'each inch [of North's drawings was] wrought with gem-like care' (Marks, 165). A personal and artistic sympathy existed between North and both Walker and Pinwell, each of whom occasionally introduced figures to his landscape compositions, and he felt a great loss when in 1875 both died. North's later subjects are freer and more abstract; a classic North composition might consist of an entangled thicket or a marshy valley, with dense textures of vegetation forming a predominant foreground and all sense of perspectival distance sacrificed to effects of hazy atmosphere. In 1880 his work was characterized in a review in the 'Spectator' as: 'a manner which gives the effect of wandering from place to place in his picture, working now here, now there, and finally, that seeing so much more beauty than he can compass, he stays his hand altogether, and sends his picture out to exhibition as little finished or as much so, as one of Turner's wilder fancies. ('Spectator', 8 May 1880, 594)' Herbert Alexander explained how determined North was to capture the particular aspect of places he cared about, for: 'he did not sit down, like the average painter, in picturesque scenery and arrange it improvingly; but... waited until an entrancing moment in the passage of light or some human episode happily related to its surroundings awoke in his heart the ecstasy which is the poetic state. Then no sacrifice of time or labour was too great in the searching of nature to aid his revelation. The production of a picture was one long agony, and so little was he satisfied with his achievement that it was always painful to him to view his works again. (Alexander, 48)' North's watercolour 'The Old Pear Tree' (exh. Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours 1892; Southampton Art Gallery) -- in which a ravaged tree is weighed down by golden fruit -- was admired as an evocation of a season that brings both fecundity and decay. Alexander described the technique devised by North to suggest the constant variety of nature: 'In water colour and oil an effect of intricate detail is found on examination to be quite illusive -- multitudinous form is conjured by finding it and losing it in endless hide-and-seek till the eye accepts infinity' (ibid.). In the last years of his life North painted pure landscapes that commented ironically upon the destruction of war, titles of which include 'England in September 1914 (an Allegory)' and 'England's Green and Pleasant Land'. 
North exhibited at the Dudley Gallery from the late 1860s until 1871, the year of his election as an associate member of the Old Watercolour Society and to which he then transferred his main allegiance as an exhibitor (he became a full member of the society in 1883). From 1869 he occasionally exhibited at the Royal Academy, and in 1893 he was elected as an associate member. He exhibited at the Grosvenor Gallery between 1880 and 1887, later transferring to the New Gallery on the exhibition committee on which he sat. The purchase by the trustees of the Chantrey Bequest in 1891 of North's sad and symbolical painting 'The Winter Sun' (Tate collection), a work which Herbert Alexander claimed was influential on the rising generation of landscape painters, was said to have been due to the influence of Frederic Leighton. Hubert Herkomer, in his 1892 Slade lecture, sought to identify North as the originator of the idyllist style of landscape. This campaign to raise public awareness of North was an embarrassment and irritation to him, and a final rift occurred when it emerged that he had opposed Herkomer's candidacy for the presidency of the Royal Watercolour Society. 
From 1895 North devoted time and money to a business making drawing papers, and particularly one called O.W. Paper. Its failure left him virtually destitute and he depended in old age on a small pension from the Royal Academy. North died on 20 December 1924 at Stamborough, Old Cleeve, Somerset, the farmhouse high in the Brendon hills that was his last home. He was buried in Nettlecombe cemetery, Somerset. 


@@@@@


doc= 67609


Reid, Sir George (1841-1913), portrait painter, was born on 31 October 1841 in the house above his father's shop at 29 Queen Street, Aberdeen, the fourth of thirteen children and the third son of George Reid, blacksmith and ironmonger, and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Tait. Two of his brothers, Archibald Reid and Samuel Reid (1854-1912), also became artists. He was educated at a school in Constitution Street, Aberdeen, then at Isaac Hill's seminary in Queen Street, and next at the Aberdeen Trades School. At an early age he had begun to sketch in the margins of his schoolbooks, copying engravings and newspaper illustrations. He was enrolled in Mr Cleland's evening drawing class, which was held in the Mechanics' Institute in Aberdeen. In 1853 he was sent to Aberdeen grammar school, but his time there was brought to an abrupt end nine months later when his father was declared bankrupt. The shop and its contents were sold and the family moved into a flat above a baker's shop. 
On 10 July 1854 Reid began a seven-year apprenticeship with the lithographic firm of Keith and Gibb. There he worked on the illustrations for John Stuart's 'Sculptured Stones of Scotland' (published for the Spalding Club in 1856). In 1857-8 he enrolled in the Merchants' Company volunteer force but after four years resigned in order to devote more of his spare time to sketching. He also took painting lessons with Willie Niddrie, a portrait painter who had studied under James Giles, a member of the Royal Scottish Academy. At the end of the apprenticeship, on 31 October 1861, he entered as a student at the Board of Trustees School of Art in Edinburgh. He wrote a review of a visit to the Royal Academy's annual exhibition in London, in which he revealed his admiration for the work of J. E. Millais ('Aberdeen Herald', 18 June 1864); his own work at this time shows a debt to that of Millais, both in subject and treatment. 
Obliged to support his family, Reid returned to Aberdeen in 1864, where he earned a living by colouring photographs, working on illustrations for local newspapers, and copying pages of the 'Book of Deer' for the Spalding Club. When his painting 'Spynie Castle' was accepted to hang at the 1865 annual exhibition at the Royal Scottish Academy, Horatio MacCulloch took the liberty of touching up the work, without Reid's permission. The incident was widely reported and Reid took it as a compliment. The Aberdonian art critic and collector John Forbes White wanted to introduce Reid to the realist artists whom he knew and whose work he collected, and in 1866 funded him to study with Gerrit Mollinger for two months in the Netherlands. Seeing the work of contemporary Dutch artists and old masters, such as Rembrandt, transformed Reid's art. He now emphasized tonality over colour and depicted ordinary working people in undramatic landscapes, exhibiting a new freedom in his painting technique and using large brushes and pure oil paint, rather than the by then rather old-fashioned technique of painting using diluted glazes, applied with fine brushes, that many British artists still favoured. By 1869 Reid had been completely converted to this new way of painting. 
Reid's adoption of European realism was met with consternation by some older members of the Royal Scottish Academy but many of his contemporaries -- including G. P. Chalmers, Joseph Farquharson, William McTaggart, and W. D. Mackay -- also travelled to the Netherlands and came to share his sympathies, abandoning the tenets of Victorian narrative painting earlier than most of their English counterparts. In 1868 White and Reid, writing pseudonymously as Veri Vindex, published a lengthy pamphlet, 'Thoughts on Art and Notes on the Exhibition of the Royal Scottish Academy of 1868', in which they castigated the parochialism of many British painters. Instead they advocated contemporary French and Dutch art. Reid spent four months in Paris in 1869, studying under the history painter Adolphe Yvon. Although the painting style of his tutor was not to his taste he continued to develop his realist methods. In September 1871 Reid went to The Hague to study with Jozef Israels, who had visited Aberdeen in 1870. He travelled to France in 1873 and around northern Europe in 1876 with his friend the theologian William Robertson Smith. 
Reid was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1870, and a full academician in 1877. He increasingly concentrated on portraiture. His distinctive style -- Rembrandtesque atmosphere and use of chiaroscuro, free brushwork, subdued tonality, and an intense penetration of the sitter's psyche -- found favour with his sitters. Although he did paint portraits of women and children his style was best suited to male sitters -- lawyers, academics, provosts, and other members of the Scottish professional classes and, as his reputation rose, members of the Scottish aristocracy. Taking a studio at 22 Scotland Street, Edinburgh, he began to accept an increasing number of portrait commissions. His sitters included, in 1874, the toxicologist and physician Sir Robert Christison, whose portrait Reid painted for the Royal Society of Edinburgh; in 1875 Lord Saltoun; and in 1883 Thomas Stevenson, the lighthouse and harbour engineer (Scot. NPG). In 1879 Queen Victoria asked for examples of Reid's work to be sent to Balmoral and commissioned a portrait of Principal Tulloch of the University of St Andrews and the following year a portrait of the late Norman McLeod of the Church of Scotland. 
In 1875 Reid purchased St Luke's, Kepplestone (now the Gordon Highlanders Museum), on the outskirts of Aberdeen. He had it remodelled and extended by the architect William Leiper, and it became his summer residence. For the next decade he spent his time there painting flowers, pioneering in Scotland a new and distinctively French-style technique of seemingly spontaneous still lifes, often of wild or garden flowers plopped into a vase or thrown onto a surface. His flowers would be simply, or even casually and carelessly, arranged in order to give the impression of a moment in real time. They were distinguished by their dark indeterminate backgrounds, particularly vigorous brushwork, and uncluttered composition. In eighteen years Reid painted fifty-three flower pieces. These were exhibited widely and went on to influence the next generation of Scottish artists. He was also a skilled landscape artist and throughout his career executed landscape scenes and also many townscapes -- including views of Jedburgh, Dunblane, Durham, Montrose, and Venice (all Aberdeen Art Gallery). 
Reid painted very few narrative pictures, one notable exception being 'Savonarola's Last Sleep' of 1879 (Aberdeen Art Gallery), for which his younger brothers Archy and Sam were the models. He was also a talented etcher and illustrated several books, including 'Life of a Scottish Naturalist: Thomas Edward' (1876) and 'Johnny Gibb of Gushetneuk' (1881). On 12 December 1882 he married Margaret (Mia) Best, daughter of Thomas Best, a banker of Aberdeen. After their marriage they lived at 40 Heriot Row, Edinburgh. As with his landscapes and flower paintings Reid's portraits became gradually less detailed and more atmospheric and powerful. Some of his finest portraits came towards the end of his career: his romantic depiction of J. S. Blackie (1892; Scot. NPG) and his arresting portrait of the golfer Tom Morris (1903; St Andrews Golf Club). 
In August 1891, on the death of Sir William Fettes Douglas, Reid was elected president of the Royal Scottish Academy and in November 1891 was knighted. He was also awarded honorary degrees by the universities of St Andrews, Aberdeen, and Edinburgh. Although in his own work he continued to embrace new movements in art and changing fashions, he earned a reputation for being conservative, obdurate, and unsupportive of the younger generation. He defended the position of the academy from the threat of new bodies like the Scottish Society of Artists. Reid had welcomed the academy's supplementary charter of 1891, which had conferred the right to increase the number of associate members, but by 1893 he was convinced that this had gone too far. Twenty-two new associates had been elected between March 1892 and March 1893, thus almost doubling their total number. Reid feared for the decisions made by these young men -- particularly when the academicians, because of their age, ill health, or non-residence, were rarely represented in good number. He wanted the number of associates to be limited to forty. Resentment against him was increased when he gave an interview in which he described the attempts of Scotland's young artists to follow modern French art as 'simply an impertinence' ('Westminster Gazette', 4 Feb 1893). In the ensuing controversy the Glasgow artists whom Reid had criticized decided not to reply, but C. Blatherwick, president of the Glasgow Art Club, did so for them ('Art Journal', April 1893). Reid offered his resignation in 1894 but was persuaded to stay on; however, with a groundswell of dissension, his position became untenable. In 1902 he once again submitted his resignation, and it was accepted. 
After his resignation Reid moved to Somerset, where he dictated his reminiscences and continued to paint portraits. He was also closely involved in the 1905 extension to Aberdeen Art Gallery, playing a major part in determining the layout of the building and what it would contain. He died at his home, Hillylands, Oakhill, Somerset, on 9 February 1913, and was buried at St Peter's cemetery, Aberdeen. It was unfortunate that his presidency of the Royal Scottish Academy, which resulted in a lasting view of him as staid and uncompromising, obscured his achievements as an extremely talented and successful artist who played a critical role in the introduction of realism and ultimately modern art to Scotland and subsequently Great Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 67614


Stanhope, John Roddam Spencer (1829-1908), painter, was born at Cannon Hall, outside the village of Cawthorne, near Barnsley in the West Riding of Yorkshire, on 20 January 1829. He was the younger son and fourth of the five children of John Spencer Stanhope (1787-1873) and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Wilhelmina Coke (died 1873), daughter of the agricultural reformer Thomas William Coke (Coke of Norfolk), first earl of Leicester of the seventh creation. His father -- a reckless traveller in wartime Europe, fellow of the Royal Society, thrice-published author, and eventual bookish recluse -- was the first in a long line of solid Yorkshire proprietors to show signs of originality. His mother had painting lessons from Gainsborough (her sisters, Lady Andover and Lady Anson, became amateur artists of some distinction). Cannon Hall contained no treasures of art, but at Holkham Hall the earls of Leicester had assembled a remarkable collection. These two strains, John Spencer Stanhope's stubborn determination to do whatever he wanted -- and not to do anything he did not -- and Elizabeth Coke's aesthetic sophistication, were combined in their son. 'I never saw anything so crazy as Roddy is on pictures', admitted his mother in 1850 (Stirling, 'Painter of Dreams', 291). 
Stanhope was educated at Rugby School (arriving just after Thomas Arnold's death in 1842) and Christ Church, Oxford (BA, 1851). After university, with a letter of introduction from Ruskin's friend Henry Acland, he entered into an informal apprenticeship with the painter and sculptor George Frederic Watts, which lasted seven years and introduced him to the milieu of Sara Prinsep's salon at Little Holland House. None of his paintings from this period is known to survive. On a visit to Florence during the early 1850s Stanhope concluded that 'all the great painters lived before Raphael's time' (Stirling, 'Painter of dreams', 325). He remained, in this literal sense, a pre-Raphaelite to the end of his days. In 1857 he and Watts produced brightly coloured, sharply focused pictures in the style of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. Stanhope began work on two paintings describing a young girl's descent into prostitution, 'Robins of Modern Times' (exh. Liverpool Academy, 1860; priv. coll.) and 'Thoughts of the Past' (exh. RA, 1859; Tate collection). In subject, at least, these were probably inspired by Watts's painting 'Found Drowned' (1848-50, Watts Gallery) as well as by Holman Hunt's 'The Awakening Conscience' (1853-4; Tate collection). That summer Rossetti brought his protege Edward Burne-Jones to Little Holland House and, impressed by his work, recruited Stanhope to help decorate the new debating chamber of the Oxford Union with scenes from Malory's 'Morte d'Arthur'. 
This project marked the birth of the 'second generation' of Pre-Raphaelites, of which Stanhope is generally held to be a part. After the murals were complete he rented the room below Rossetti's apartment in Blackfriars where he painted 'Thoughts of the Past', incorporating the view from the window overlooking the Thames. Rossetti's influence on Stanhope was brief but crucial, transforming him from a gifted amateur into a professional artist. That of Burne-Jones, of whom he became a close friend, was more profound. Indeed Burne-Jones worried that he might have overwhelmed Stanhope's artistic personality, concluding, years later, that it was 'a great pity he ever saw my work or that he ever saw Botticelli's' (Lago, 77). There is no evidence that Stanhope felt this, however, and with lengthening hindsight it is becoming clear that his individuality was a sturdier thing than his friend understood. 
Stanhope married, on 10 January 1859, Elizabeth (Lilla) Dawson, 'nee' Wyndham-King; she was the daughter of John James King and Charlotte Henrietta Wyndham, granddaughter of Turner's patron George Wyndham, third earl of Egremont, and widow of George Frederick Dawson, a captain in the Royal Engineers who died at Sevastopol. Their only child, Mary, who was born on 9 November 1859 and died of scarlet fever in 1867, was buried next to Elizabeth Barrett Browning in the English cemetery at Florence. Lilla also had a daughter from her first marriage, born after her husband's death in 1855 and named Georgina Frederica in his memory. 
In 1860 the newly married Stanhope commissioned a house, Sandroyd, at Cobham in Surrey, from his architect friend Philip Webb (only his second, after Red House for William Morris). Stanhope was a life-long sufferer from severe asthma and hoped the country air would bring him relief. In this he was disappointed and only four years later moved on, buying a house on Campden Hill, on the green edge of fast-expanding London, and beginning to winter regularly in Italy. During the late 1860s he also established a base in Cawthorne, where he set up a studio in a small converted barn. Hill House, a farmhouse on the Cannon Hall estate made suitable for gentlemanly occupation, was put at his disposal, partly so that he could be close to his parents, who were in declining health. They died, within a week of one another, in 1873. That year Stanhope sold Little Campden House and bought Villa Nuti, on Bellosguardo, overlooking Florence. 
Stanhope was proud of his Yorkshire roots. 'He looks like what he is', observed Lady Paget, who knew him in Florence, 'a Yorkshire squire, though his pictures are of the severest Pre-Raphaelite type' (Paget, 2.301). He was consciously a northern artist, and exhibited regularly at the Liverpool Academy (1858-63) and at the Royal Manchester Institution (1865-90). He did important work in churches near Cannon Hall, most notably at St John the Evangelist, Hoylandswaine ('c'.1870; painted over in 1961). For Stanhope, as for the Renaissance artists he admired, ecclesiastical work was a significant part of his production. In association with his friend the church architect George Frederick Bodley he also undertook major schemes for Marlborough College chapel (1875-9; reworked 1885-7), considered by an obituarist 'the work by which he is likely to be best known in England' ('The Times', 6 Aug 1908), and for Holy Trinity, Florence ('c'.1892-6). 
Stanhope's niece Wilhelmina Stirling remembered him as being 'equally at home in Bohemia or in fashionable society' (Stirling, 'Life's Little Day', 105). Unlike Rossetti, Burne-Jones, or Watts, he was a regular exhibitor (between 1859 and 1872) at the Royal Academy. However, during the same period (1865-74) his work was also shown at the Dudley Gallery, stronghold of the 'poetry without grammar' school, a group of young artists led by Robert Bateman (1842-1922) and including Walter Crane, with whom he was loosely affiliated. 
After their initial experiments with Pre-Raphaelitism neither Watts nor Stanhope had continued to work in that style for long. During the 1860s Stanhope developed a mature, personal style synthesizing up-to-the-minute aestheticism with the older tradition of the Italian Renaissance. He became the leading artist of what was sometimes derided as 'the pseudo-quattrocentist school' (C. Phillips, 'The Grosvenor Gallery', 'Academy', 10 May 1884, 337) because its members were thought to paint in derivative imitation of the Italian artists of the fifteenth century (the 'quattrocento'). They included Crane, Stanhope's former studio assistant John Melhuish Strudwick, and his niece Evelyn De Morgan. Familiar from childhood with his grandfather's extensive collection of classical and Renaissance art, Stanhope felt comfortably at home in a continuous, living tradition rooted in the distant past. He was a pioneer of the tempera revival, and his use of this yolk-of-egg medium, superseded by oil paint during the sixteenth century, contributed to what seemed to some the anachronistic look of his paintings from the early 1870s onwards. 
The critical high-point of Stanhope's career came in 1874, when the Pre-Raphaelite brother F. G. Stephens hailed 'The Banks of the Styx' (exh. Dudley Gallery, 1874; priv. coll.) as 'a fine work, exceptionally excellent in all the higher qualities of painting' ('Athenaeum', 31 Oct 1874, 582-3). Stanhope fought hard to capitalize on this moment of recognition, exhibiting regularly at the prestigious Grosvenor Gallery from its opening in 1877, when he showed what may be his masterpiece, 'Love and the Maiden' (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1877; Legion of Honor Museum, San Francisco). His contributions to this show were praised by the young Oscar Wilde in his first published writing -- 'there is extreme loveliness in this figure of Love by Mr Stanhope, and the whole picture is full of grace' ('Dublin University Magazine', July 1877, 121-2) -- but by almost no one else. Even Stephens damned him with faint praise and suggested that his work was 'the result of culture, over-refinement, and caprice' ('Athenaeum', 5 May 1877, 583-4). The critical tide had turned against him, permanently, as it turned out. 'He was really an artist', Burne-Jones recalled, 'and he wanted to be praised and encouraged, and wasn't so; it was all uphill to him' (Lago, 76). In 1880, finally conceding, perhaps, that his ambitions as an artist were likely to remain unfulfilled in his lifetime, he emigrated permanently to Italy, though he continued to paint, and to send work back to England for exhibition, until the end of his life. His last great painting was probably 'Patience on a Monument' (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1884; priv. coll.). 
In 1890, after Manchester Art Gallery had bought Frederic Leighton's masterpiece 'Captive Andromache' for its permanent collection, Stanhope gave the gallery his own most ambitious painting, 'The Waters of Lethe' (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1880) so that future generations might have the opportunity to compare the pictures and perhaps assign him the place in the front rank he never ceased to feel that he deserved. He died on 3 August 1908 at Villa Nuti, and was buried in the Allori cemetery in via Senese, Florence. 


@@@@@


doc= 67615


Stokes, (Charles) Adrian Scott (1854-1935), artist, was born on 23 December 1854 at 77 Hoghton Street, Southport, the third of the five sons (four surviving) of Scott Nasmyth Stokes (1821-1891), the first Roman Catholic inspector of schools, and his wife, Emma Louisa (1820-1896), daughter of Benjamin Walsh, publisher, of Worcestershire. His younger brothers were the architect Leonard Scott Stokes and the engineer Sir Wilfrid Scott Stokes. Adrian was educated at home, in Rainhill, Lancashire, and at the Liverpool Institute, where he studied art. He worked briefly as a cotton broker but in 1871 his father's promotion meant the family returned to Kensington, London. 
Encouraged by a fellow Catholic artist, John Rogers Herbert, Stokes placed some of his small watercolours for sale through the Society of British Artists. These were accepted for the winter exhibition of 1871 and, duly encouraged, he applied to study art full-time. In June 1872 Stokes enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools, where he was influenced by the academy's president, Frederic Leighton, whose studio he visited frequently. Visits were also made to the studio of James Whistler, and the American's stay at St Ives, Cornwall, in 1884 may have been a prompt for Stokes's first visit to the town two years later. Stokes was also strongly influenced by French landscape painters, most notably Jules Bastien-Lepage, and from 1876 he travelled to Fontainebleau and Barbizon. Despite this enthusiasm for 'plein-air' painting, his early works for the Royal Academy, first accepted in 1876, were genre pieces influenced by Leighton, John Everett Millais, and the Parisian ateliers where he had studied under Pascal Dagnan-Bouveret. Mindful of the need to make a living, Stokes also began to accept commissions for portraits: in 1877 he drew, among others, the author Alice Meynell, who was later to write extensively about Adrian and his wife. In the decade after 1879 he exhibited at the Royal Hibernian Academy, Dublin; at major regional galleries in Manchester, Newcastle, Birmingham, and Nottingham; and from 1880 at Sir Coutts Lindsay's Grosvenor Gallery, London. In the same year he began to illustrate the books of Eliza Tabor, and later of Charlotte Yonge, for Macmillan. 
In summer 1883 Stokes's large crystalline 'St Raphael Var' -- painted in winter over fifty-two consecutive sunny afternoons -- was accepted by the Paris Salon. This may have been the occasion of his meeting with another first-time exhibitor, the Austrian painter Marianne Preindlsberger (1855-1927) ['see 'Stokes, Marianne, 'under' Pre-Raphaelite women artists]. A more likely place for their meeting was the Brittany coast, which was a popular location for travelling artists. Marianne had gone to Brittany to study, and her encounter with Stokes was recorded by the American writer Blanche Howard in the novel 'Guenn' (1884). The couple married on 30 August 1884 at the city church in Marianne's native Graz and their honeymoon, in Italy, was recorded in Stokes's illustrated article 'Capri' for the 'Art Journal'. In March 1884 Stokes had been one of the Founder members of the Art-Workers' Guild, based in London, from which he resigned after two years, resuming his membership between 1904 and 1912. The summers of 1885 and 1886 were spent in the artists' colony at Skagen in northern Denmark, where the couple painted alongside Peder Severin Kroyer, and established a firm friendship with the painters Michael and Anna Ancher. 
Encouraged by artists they had met in Brittany, among them Stanhope Forbes, Adrian and Marianne Stokes settled in 1886 first at Lelant, and then a year later St Ives, where they kept a studio from 1889. This became a meeting place for other artists who settled in the area. Like many of their fellow St Ives and Newlyn painters, the Stokeses were elected (in 1887) to the New English Art Club; some of these artists also had associations with Hubert von Herkomer's art school at Bushey in Hertfordshire. These networks gave landscape and marine painters increasing confidence to liberate themselves from the idea of compulsorily going to France to train. 
In 1888 the Tate Gallery, London, acquired Stokes's 'Upland and Sky' (1886-8) with the aid of the Chantrey bequest. The purchase of the landscape, praised in 'The Times' as 'vigorous and brilliant' (25 May 1888), was marked with a celebratory dinner at the St Ives Arts Club, of which -- from August 1890 -- Stokes was a founder member and the first president. The inclusion of a work in the Grosvenor Gallery exhibition in Melbourne (1887) was followed by the purchase of 'Among the Sandhills, Jutland' (1885) for the art gallery of Christchurch, New Zealand, and the award in 1889 of a silver medal at the Paris Universal Exhibition, for another painting of Cornish dunes. In the same year Leeds City Art Gallery purchased 'The Harbour Bar', a Whistlerian view of the Hayle estuary, and Stokes and his wife were elected to the Royal Anglo-Australian Society of Artists. Over the next decade he exhibited individually at the Venice biennale and Carnegie Institute, Pittsburgh, and with Marianne at the World's Columbian Exhibition, Chicago, and Whistler's International Art Exhibition, Knightsbridge. In 1899 the couple visited the Netherlands -- the first place, according to Stokes, that suited them equally as painters -- and a year later he provided illustrations for a long biographical essay on the couple by Wilfrid Meynell for the 'Art Journal'. In 1898 Stokes moved his studio to Campden Hill, London, and then to Kensington in 1900, though two years later he and Marianne rejoined their Cornish colleagues for an exhibition at the newly founded Whitechapel Gallery in London. 
In August 1905 the couple made the first of at least five trips to Hungary. These resulted in Stokes's 'magnum opus', 'Hungary' (1909), which includes seventy-five colour plates. In the book Adrian wrote warmly of the country's hospitality while the illustrations celebrated the folk and religious traditions of a region rarely visited by artists from western Europe. As artists Adrian and Marianne Stokes were equally well represented in the book, with the former predominantly responsible for the landscapes and Marianne undertaking the distinctive portraits. A showing at London's Leicester Galleries, in 1907, was followed by an invitation from the Nemzeti Szalon, Budapest, to display illustrations from the book in 1910. The collection well conveys the compatibility of their relationship: Adrian a landscape painter with a keen eye for the intricacies of the natural world and Marianne an artist whose work often embodied vernacular and folklorist themes, drawn to the narratives of daily life. Their methods were quite different, though particular works were influenced by the adoption of a favoured technique -- as for example in Stokes's 'Autumn in the Mountains' (1903), which, painted in tempera, was a tribute to his wife's scientific interest in this revived medium. 
In late 1909 Adrian and Marianne moved to Munich and in the following August they travelled to the Alps to meet John Singer Sargent, whom they had known since 1885. Despite a worsening international situation the couple travelled to Austria in 1913 and, with war declared, were interned in the Dolomites, where they continued to paint. Sargent's 'The Master and his Pupils' (1914, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts) shows Stokes at this time working at an easel in the open air surrounded by three girls, modelled by Marianne's maid. From December 1914 the couple were at Vevey in Switzerland, spending the following summer there and at Gruyere. Stokes continued to exhibit at the Royal Academy throughout the war. An associate from 1910, he was elected as a full academician in April 1919, his diploma work being a peaceful, snow-bound 'Lago Maggiore' in oil. By now Stokes was turning to watercolours as his preferred medium and in 1926 he was appointed to the Royal Watercolour Society, becoming its vice-president in 1932. Despite this move towards a new form he did not abandon work in oils. In 1924 four miniatures went on display in Queen Mary's dolls' house (designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens) at the British Empire Exhibition, several of them based upon his larger works, including 'In the Dunes' (National Gallery of Canada) and 'Islands of the Adriatic' (1906, Harris Art Gallery, Preston). Stokes followed this with the publication of 'Landscape Painting' (1925), a generous teaching guide, reprinted in 1956 as 'Practical Landscape Painting'. 
After Marianne's death in 1927 Stokes continued to live at Grantham Place, Park Lane, London, to where the couple had moved in the early 1920s. Much of his time was now spent at the Arts Club, Dover Street, where he befriended a younger generation of Cornish artists including Laura Knight and Lamorna Birch. In 1930 he was elected as the Royal Academy's 'senior academician'. Four years later, at the annual dinner, he attracted publicity by interrupting the prime minister, Ramsay Macdonald, during what Stokes considered a speech that paid too little attention to the current exhibition. In June he prepared his will, in which he requested an academician to destroy all of his works 'that seem unworthy' (Evans, 'Utmost Fidelity', 149), though in the event only 'unfinished, unimportant works' were disposed of ('The Times', 21 Dec 1935). Stokes died of heart failure at 7A Grantham Place on 30 November 1935. After a service at the Jesuit church in Farm Street, London, he was buried on 3 December with his wife at St Mary Magdalen's Roman Catholic Church, Mortlake. The first of two 'Times' obituaries noted how, best known for his 'decorative landscapes', Stokes had developed from 'careful naturalism' to a 'poetical rather than intellectual abstraction' (2 Dec 1935), while Reginald Blomfield recalled a 'delightful painter with a vivid sense of the beauty of quiet landscape' (4 December). In 2009 a touring exhibition of works by Adrian and Marianne Stokes was staged in galleries in Wolverhampton, Southport, Harrogate, Penzance, and Truro. 


@@@@@


doc= 67619


Strudwick, John Melhuish (1849-1937), painter, was born in Clapham on 6 May 1849, the fifth child of William Strudwick (1808-1861), grocer, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Melhuish (1811-1861). On leaving St Saviour's Grammar School, Clapham, he studied at the National Art Training School, South Kensington, and, subsequently, the Royal Academy Schools, where he was enrolled as a probationer on 18 January 1868. Despite being undistinguished as a student he was first taken up by the well-known Scottish academician John Pettie before discovering the allure of the later Pre-Raphaelite school headed by Edward Burne-Jones. 
Although chiefly recalled in accounts of the lives and works of the wider Pre-Raphaelite circle as a studio assistant to both John Roddam Spencer Stanhope and Burne-Jones, Strudwick enjoyed success as a painter in his own right. He became well known in London for a type of painting fashionable in aesthetic movement circles featuring allegorical, literary, or mythological themes. His most notable successes were at the Grosvenor Gallery, which opened in 1877, where he was in the company of such distinguished artists as J. A. McN. Whistler. His allegory on destiny, 'The Golden Thread' (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1885; Tate collection), was bought by the Chantrey Bequest for the National Gallery of British Art. He became a regular exhibitor at the New Gallery on its foundation in 1888. 
Strudwick absorbed many influences from both Spencer Stanhope and Burne-Jones, particularly in the high degree of finish of his canvases and the use of decorative detail. His use of colour is restrained yet harmonious; its faintly gleaming quality is one of the more distinctive and appealing characteristics of his work. If Burne-Jones's compositions displayed more elegance, the two artists shared a lack of animation in their principal figures. Strudwick's heroines seem rapt in a world of tragic or momentous feeling which they barely have the strength to register on their faces. Similarly, the winged figures that populate his works seem depressed rather than comforting. 
Strudwick's pictures demonstrate an enthusiasm for the works of early Italian artists shared by other followers of the Pre-Raphaelites for whom the examples of Botticelli ('c'.1445-1510), Crivelli ('c'.1435- 'c'.1495), and Mantegna ('c'.1431-1506) provided an alternative to the realistic tendency of much contemporary art. As a result Strudwick's main works resemble altarpieces, although his subjects were more often concerned with art and literature than religion. His works are close in style to those of his contemporary Evelyn Pickering De Morgan, although his allegories have none of the campaigning zeal of hers. 
Along with other artists connected to the wider aesthetic movement Strudwick exhibited several paintings depicting musical themes, among them his sole Royal Academy exhibit 'Song without Words' (1876). Other examples include 'A Symphony' (1903; priv. coll.) and 'When Apples were Golden' (1906; Manchester City Art Gallery). His 'St Cecilia' (1897; Sudley House, Liverpool), commissioned by the Liverpool shipowner George Holt, lacks any of the erotic tension of Rossetti's famous design for Edward Moxon's edition of Tennyson's poems in 1857. An attendant angelic figure watches Cecilia with an anxious sympathy while the saint herself stares intensely, her hands frozen over the keyboard of a musical instrument. 
William Michael Rossetti reviewed Strudwick's allegorical composition 'Passing Days' when exhibited at the Grosvenor Gallery in 1878, and observed that the artist had 'produced here a picture with an ample sufficiency of appropriate and well-worked-out thought'. He added: 'Making fair allowance for a painter at an early stage of his career, we can join with Mr. Strudwick's eulogists: not that we think his style perfection, or his idea a portent of profundity, but that he is thoughtful, diligent and artist-like' ('The Academy', 1 June 1878, 494-5). Despite such restrained praise Strudwick's work enjoyed a degree of popular attention for most of a generation. He was particularly fortunate in finding wealthy patrons for his works. Significantly several Liverpool merchants and shipowners, including Joseph Beausire, George Holt, and William Imrie, commissioned paintings from him for their sumptuous homes built or refurbished in the 1890s. 
The most comprehensive overview of Strudwick's work published during his lifetime was by George Bernard Shaw in the 'Art Journal' (April 1891, 97-102). Shaw identified a 'transcendent expressiveness' as the 'moving quality' in Strudwick's works, observing that 'persons who are fully sensitive to it will take almost as a matter of course the charm of the architecture, the bits of landscape, the elaborately beautiful foliage, the ornamental accessories of all sorts, which would distinguish them even in a gallery of early Italian painting'. Much of Shaw's appraisal of the artist was mined by Percy Bate for the second edition of his formative book 'The English Pre-Raphaelite Painters: their Associates and Successors' (1901), which included an assessment of Strudwick's work in relation to 'the Rossetti tradition'. Nevertheless, by the end of the first decade of the twentieth century Strudwick's popularity had declined abruptly; he ceased to exhibit and abandoned painting altogether. When the reassessment of Pre-Raphaelite art began in the 1960s his work continued to be overlooked. At the end of the twentieth century, however, there was a noticeable reawakening of interest in his works reflected in the high prices they fetched at auction. His paintings began to be re-evaluated by collectors, if not by art historians, and appreciated for their beauty as objects, their craft, and meticulous detail, rather than for the somewhat obvious pictorial allegories that the artist laboriously set out on canvas. 
On 4 June 1879 Strudwick married Harriet (1856-1941), daughter of William Reed, cab driver. They had one child, Ethel Strudwick, who became a distinguished educator. The Strudwicks had begun their married life in Edith Villas, Hammersmith (where they lived in the house previously occupied by John Butler Yeats, the Irish Pre-Raphaelite painter), but moved to the more fashionably artistic Marlborough Crescent, Bedford Park, in 1899. They returned to Hammersmith in 1927 to settle with their daughter in the arts and crafts house erected for the high mistress of St Paul's School for Girls in Rowan Road, Brook Green. Strudwick died there on 16 July 1937 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. An obituarist commented that he 'must have been the last of the Pre-Raphaelites' ('The Times', 20 July 1937, 18). 


@@@@@


doc= 67622


Whaite, Henry Clarence (1828-1912), painter, was born in Bridge Street, Manchester, on 27 January 1828, the son of Henry Whaite (1803-1869), carver and gilder, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Slater (1802-1865). His parents had developed a successful business known as Whaite's Fine Art Gallery, which dealt in pictures, manufactured frames, and painted banners. While participating fully in the business (painting armorial devices, for instance), like many other children from artisan backgrounds Whaite developed an ambition to become an art painter, and on leaving Manchester grammar school was able to study at the Manchester School of Design. 
In 1850 Whaite travelled in Switzerland and Germany. He had wished to return the following year but, finding his intentions frustrated, he went instead to Wales to paint, a visit that proved crucial in the development of his career. He was captivated by the subject matter presented by the mountain scenery of Snowdonia, which at that time was attracting the attention of many young painters from the north-west of England. They were drawn in particular to Betws-y-coed in the Conwy valley, where since 1844 David Cox had been a regular summer visitor. Whaite met Cox at Betws in 1852 and over the next decade became a well-known figure among the painters and photographers who frequented the area. 
Nevertheless, although Wales was now established as the prime source for his painting, in the development of his career Whaite remained closely associated with his colleagues in Manchester. He was among the early members of the Manchester Academy of Fine Arts, established in 1859, and held the first major exhibition of his own works in the family gallery in 1864. During the same period Whaite also devoted energy to the development of his career in London, honing his technical skills at Leigh's academy and at the Royal Academy Schools. He showed his work at various London exhibitions and, from 1854, frequently at the Royal Academy. In 1859 he was rewarded for his efforts when an oil, 'The Barley Harvest', and a drawing of Snowdon attracted the attention of Ruskin, who wrote favourably about them in his 'Academy Notes'. At this time Whaite was moving on the periphery of the Pre-Raphaelite circle, having joined the Hogarth Club by 1860. In the early 1860s his London reputation was confirmed by election to the Royal Watercolour Society. 
From the early 1850s Whaite had underpinned his landscape and subject exhibition pictures by working in the open air in pencil and watercolour on a small scale. Entirely for his own reference, he produced hundreds of studies of landscape, weather effects and the common people at work, which displayed not only exceptional technical facility in their simplified, notational form, but a naturalism that seems, in retrospect, remarkable for its period. In addition to his many visits to the Conwy valley and Snowdonia, he also travelled to work in south-west Wales and in south-west England in 1859 and 1863, in Scotland in 1864, and in Italy in 1870, though that visit was relatively unproductive, the hot weather being little to his northern taste. In the series of large oils that he exhibited in the early 1860s Whaite was also breaking new ground. Most notably, 'The Rainbow' (1862; Castle Museum and Art Gallery, Nottingham), a canvas some seven feet wide, was painted in the open air at a temporary studio that Whaite constructed in the mountains near Capel Curig. The picture took two seasons to complete, during the first of which he worked in close proximity to Benjamin Williams Leader, whose 'A Quiet Valley amongst the Welsh Hills' (1860; Worcester City Museum and Art Gallery) presents an overlapping panorama. However, Whaite's picture was more radical in technique, being composed of minute dots of interactive pure colour. It was painted with reference to M. E. Chevreul's 'The Laws of Contrast of Colour, and their Application to the Arts' (a copy of the 1860 English edition of which he owned), two decades before the influence of the book was expressed in a similar way by Seurat in France. 
Whaite's work was also more complex in meaning than that of Leader. He was a devout Christian, brought up in the nonconformist tradition, and for him there existed a close relationship between painting the unsullied mountain landscape and meditation on God's purpose in the creation. In some large-scale pictures he included figures loosely suggestive of contemplative meanings and occasionally representing specific narratives, as in 'The Penitent's Vision'. In this painting Whaite sought to combine truth to observed nature with an overlaid visualization of the mystical experience of the Christian penitent. The work was rejected by the Royal Academy in 1865 but, divided and reworked with narrative reference to 'Pilgrim's Progress' as 'The Awakening of Christian' and 'The Shepherd's Dream' (1884; NMG Wales), it found favour with the selection committee nearly twenty years later. Whaite's deep admiration for G. F. Watts, with whom he corresponded, is apparent in this and in later works of biblical mysticism, such as 'Lot and the Two Angels' (1897; priv. coll.). 
In the early 1870s Whaite decided to live permanently in the Conwy valley, establishing himself at Tyddyn Cynal, Y Gyffin, on the west bank of the river. On 3 February 1876 he married a local woman, Jane Alice Griffiths (1836-1906), and they had one child, Lily Florence Whaite (1876-1959), who also became a painter. Reflecting the growing strength of Celtic and nationalist sentiment in Wales, Whaite painted a number of Welsh subject pictures, including the large watercolour 'The Finding of Taliesin' (1875-6; priv. coll.). Although he was not among the founding group of painters who in 1881 set about the establishment of what became the Royal Cambrian Academy, Whaite was soon involved with its evolution. The combination of his commitment to Wales and his established reputation in Manchester and London led to his election as first president of the Royal Cambrian Academy in 1885, a position he held until his death. Nevertheless, in 1892 his continuing relationship with the city of his birth was recognized when he was elected life president of the Manchester Academy of Fine Arts. He was given a large one-person exhibition at the City Art Gallery in Manchester in 1898. 
Whaite continued to work both in watercolour and on large scale mystical landscapes in oil ('Snowdon', 1910-11; NMG Wales) until late in his life. He died at Tyddyn Cynal on 5 June 1912 and was buried at Llangelynnin New Church three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 67625


Skues, George Edward Mackenzie (1858-1949), angler and writer on fly-fishing, was born on 13 August 1858 at St John's, Newfoundland, the eldest of eight children of William Mackenzie Skues (1828-1892), surgeon-general of Aberdeen, and his wife, Margaret Ayre (1836-1890), daughter of Christopher Ayre, clerk of the parliament and acting colonial secretary of Newfoundland. 
At the age of three Skues was brought to his grandparents' house in Aberdeen from Newfoundland in a sailing vessel. In July 1872 he won a scholarship to Winchester College, which he left in 1877. After a year in the Channel Islands with his parents, he entered the offices of the family's solicitor, James Powell, and by 1895 had become a partner, remaining active until 1940, when he retired at the age of eighty-one. 
Skues learned to fly-fish for trout on the River Itchen while at Winchester, and his fascination with the sport culminated in his becoming probably the finest all-round fly-fisherman and writer on fly-fishing of the twentieth century. The year 1883 was a turning point in Skues's fishing career. He was invited to fish the Abbots Barton stretch of the River Itchen, and fished there until 1938. In 1887 he took up trout-fly dressing after being presented with a copy of 'Floating Flies and How to Dress Them' (1886) by the great Frederic Halford, who pioneered the practice of fishing artificial flies upstream on the surface for rising fish. This was adopted by fly-fishermen world wide. 
In 1891 Skues met Halford during a week's fishing on the River Itchen. By then he was exploring the theory that when trout were not taking the floating natural fly or dun, it was more profitable to use an upstream sunk wet fly. This led to his use of artificial nymphs, being imitations of the larval stage of the natural fly, fished below the surface. His views, expounded in articles in the 'Fishing Gazette' and the 'Flyfishers' Journal', culminated in the publication of his first book, 'Minor Tactics of the Chalk Stream', in 1910. His further researches were embodied, together with an investigation into trout behaviour, in his 1921 book 'The Way of a Trout with a Fly'. A further book, 'Side-Lines, Side-Lights and Reflections', published in 1932, was a collection of articles written for fishing magazines including the 'Bulletin of the Anglers' Club of New York'. This was the most endearing of his books, with glimpses of the man himself and his sense of humour. Among Skues's attributes were a fluent and lively prose style together with great skill and dedication as a practical angler, despite the handicap of poor sight in one eye. 
In 1938 a debate was held at the Flyfishers' Club of London which questioned Skues's theories that the nymph was an effective and ethical way of fishing for chalk-stream trout, and found against him. The disillusioned Skues, at the age of eighty, published a final defence with his 1939 book 'Nymph Fishing for Chalk Stream Trout'. 
Skues's place as one of the greats in fly-fishing history centres on his discovery that trout in chalk streams feed largely on nymphs, even during hatches, and not on the adult, emerged flies. His dressings of artificial nymphs specifically to represent larvae were new and radical. This was extremely controversial and challenged the rigid dry-fly theories of Halford and his disciples. Halford's greatness lay in his exposition of a method which became universal. Skues's forward-looking theories challenged what had become a rigid aridity with methods that were flexible and thoughtful, and were to become a predominant approach on both sides of the Atlantic. 
In 1938, partly because his use of the nymph was not popular with fellow members of his syndicate on the Itchen, Skues left and took a rod on the River Nadder, near Salisbury. He went to live at the Nadder Vale Hotel in 1940 until it closed in 1948, when he moved to be near his brother in Beckenham, Kent. He finally finished fishing at the age of eighty-seven, but continued to maintain an immense correspondence with anglers from all over the world. 
Skues died, unmarried, four days short of his ninety-first birthday, on 9 August 1949, at 23 Kelsey Park Road, Beckenham, succumbing to myocardial degeneration. His ashes were scattered on the banks of his beloved Itchen by his old friend William Mullins, the long-serving head keeper of the syndicate that fished the river. 
Two more of Skues's books were published after his death. 'Silk, Fur and Feather' appeared in 1950, and was a collection of articles on fly tying which had appeared in the 'Fishing Gazette' under one of his many pen names, Val Conson. Skues had directed that the second, 'Itchen Memories' (1951), should be published only after his death. It is a charming recollection of his days on the river he loved so well. 


@@@@@


doc= 67627


Walker, Richard Stuart (1918-1985), angler and engineer, was born on 29 May 1918 at 16 Fishpond Road, Hitchin, Hertfordshire, the only child of Richard Harry Walker (1892-1956), government clerk, and his wife, Elsie May (1892-1990), daughter of Frederick A. Cooper of Stanbridge, Bedfordshire. Both his maternal grandfather, Frederick, and his paternal grandfather, Richard, were important influences upon him and enthused their grandson with their respective passions for the natural world and angling. It was from this background that Britain's most perceptive, informed, and celebrated angler of the twentieth century emerged to become possibly 'the single most important writer in angling history... not even Walton was in the same class' (C. Dyson in Paisley, 33). 
Raised largely by his mother and grandparents, Richard Walker first went to school in Hitchin before attending the notable Quaker Friends' school, at Saffron Walden, Essex. From the age of sixteen he attended the Quaker St Christopher School, Letchworth, Hertfordshire. His scholastic activities included a spell as centre-forward in the first eleven, occasional success as a lower order batsman, and keen support of the camera club. 
In 1936 Walker went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he read engineering. Regrettably the Second World War put an end to his formal academic career and although he took to studying genetics in his spare time he never graduated. During the conflict he served as a military technician based at St Athans, Glamorgan, and then Farnborough, Hampshire. In that capacity not only did he contribute to the ground breaking work on aircraft radar and other installation works, he acquired a bullet scar on his shin, a lifelong dislike of the sea, and two nominal ranks. On the advent of peace Walker joined his family's lawnmower manufactory, Lloyd's of Letchworth, initially as chief designer and ultimately for some thirty years as technical director and general manager. On 21 March 1940 Walker married Ruth Maud (1914-1971), daughter of Henry Burdett-Holcroft, watchmaker and jeweller, and they had three sons. 
It was, however, as an innovative and inspirational angler that Walker was to illuminate post-war Britain. He was only four years old when he caught his first fish; a superb 4 lb trout from the River Lea at Hertford. He placed his first order for twelve trout wet flies from the Hardy catalogue in 1926; it is characteristic of the man that his evident youthful enthusiasm merited a personal reply from the great Laurence R. Hardy himself. This began a fruitful association that lasted for the rest of his life, resulting, among other things, in the production of the world's first carbon fibre rod some forty years later. It is also typical that although this first note of his angling interest refers to the pursuit of game fish, his passion was never restricted to one particular branch of fresh water fishing. Indeed it was in the realm of coarse fishing that the name of Walker exploded upon the angling world. 
In 1950, despite the evidence of Walker's own catches and the writings of Denys Watkins-Pitchford (B.B.), it was still generally considered that catching all but the smallest of carp was next to impossible. Having applied his mind to dispel many of the stale angling conventions of the day by first-hand experience and thorough experimentation with new tackle innovations such as electronic bite alarms and the personally designed and wonderfully effective Mark IV carp rods, Richard Walker and a small group of other famous anglers (Watkins-Pitchford, Pete Thomas, and Maurice Ingham) shared their knowledge and enthusiasm in an informal association called the Carp Catchers' Club. On a very dark September night in 1952 from a small lake in Herefordshire, after an epic struggle now familiar to generations of anglers, Richard Walker landed a huge female common carp of 44 lb, over 25 per cent more than the existing record. This momentous, headline-grabbing, record-breaking triumph and the planned manner of the conquest was soon followed in 1953 by Walker's first major book, 'Still Water Angling' -- a seminal work that succinctly outlined five essentials for catching good fish, defined his approach to angling, and inspired readers with lucid accounts of his captures. Simultaneously, the new weekly magazine 'Angling Times' signed up Richard Walker for a contribution to be known as 'Walker's pitch'. From the rather conservative and sedate pre-war pastime when father's tackle and techniques would be passed on wholesale to the son, coarse angling became the most rapidly evolving area of angling with specimen groups, new tackle, new baits, and new methods adding to the knowledge and success of its many participants. Walker was the inspiration and catalyst for much of this change. 
Always mindful of the advice proffered to him by R. L. Marston, editor of the 'Fishing Gazette' on submission of his second angling article in 1936 (he also wrote under the name Water Rail), Walker always wrote from his own experience. His articles became a 'tour de force' of angling journalism. Considered, provocative, clearly written, and entertaining, his wide reading, phenomenal memory, acute powers of observation, and sheer enthusiasm sustained a weekly journal that only Alistair Cooke's 'Letter from America' has emulated for quality and surpassed for duration. His deserved reputation for original thinking, strong views, relish for an argument, and unconcealed contempt for ill-founded opinion were, mercifully, allied to a generosity and understanding that impressed all who knew him. In his later years, after notable work on other coarse species such as perch and pike, and again developing tackle and techniques and exploring new locations to enhance their capture, his attentions were increasingly drawn to the attractions of trout angling in the burgeoning still waters of England. Dick Walker was thus the most significant advocate of the shooting head, inventor of a truly effective floating and sinking agent, developer of some of the first new generation lures, and captor of an unclaimed 'record' rainbow trout. He was also a strident supporter of the Anglers' Co-operative Association and fiercely critical of both government agencies and the small conservation lobby for their evident disregard for the current fate or future prospects for British fish species and watercourses. 
An active and well-informed man, Walker's enthusiasms included photography, music, poetry, and latterly palaeoanthropology. He was featured on 'Desert Island Discs' on BBC Radio 4 in July 1974, where he revealed his fondness for classic operas and his love and affinity for the rural England captured in Rudyard Kipling's 'Puck of Pook's Hill'. The programme records the 'polite, dignified and gentlemanly' Walker very well (F. Taylor in Paisley, 40). What it fails to reveal is the wicked sense of humour that many close friends had cause to remember in their dealings with him. From his talent for imitating accents to his relish for practical jokes this side to his character was aptly summarized by Ken Sutton: 'Dick, despite his age and fame, had never left the sixth form' (F. Buller in Paisley, 43). Following the death of his first wife Walker married on 6 May 1971 Patricia ('b'. 1932), of 'Fishing Gazette' fame, daughter of Robert Leslie Marston, publisher. They had another son. 
Although in the early 1980s Walker was diagnosed with the cancer that was ultimately to claim his life, he continued to fish, write, and contribute to the angling world with undiminished zeal and inventiveness. He died on 2 August 1985 at his home, 37 Ivel Gardens, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire, and was cremated in Cambridge. He was the author of sixteen books and countless articles, and is widely regarded as the most celebrated British angler to have emerged in the twentieth century, its leading participant, and most accomplished advocate. 


@@@@@


doc= 67628


Binge, Ronald (1910-1979), composer, was born at Derby on 15 July 1910, the eldest of three children of Lawrence Binge, iron moulder, and his wife, Florence Gertrude Davies. His father served as a soldier in the First World War, dying of his wounds in 1920. As a boy Ronnie, as he was known, sang in St Andrew's Church, Derby, soon learning the piano and organ. Private lessons in harmony and counterpoint followed. Straitened circumstances precluded a college education, and at the age of seventeen he took employment as organist at a local cinema, arranging and composing for its small orchestra for silent films. 
In 1931 Binge became pianist to a light orchestra at Great Yarmouth, also playing the piano accordion, upon which he eventually became a virtuoso. After moving to London he played in theatre, dance, and cafe ensembles. In 1935 he began his long association with Mantovani as arranger for his new Tipica orchestra, also playing the accordion. Among his compositions was music for the film 'Thirteen Men and a Gun'. 
Binge served in the Royal Air Force from 1940 to 1945; but it was not long before he began directing musical activities in association with Sidney Torch. He composed his first orchestral success, 'Spitfire', at that time. In 1942 he became a link trainer (flight simulator) operator, and in 1944 he met Vera ('b'. 1922/3), daughter of James Simmons, an electrician. They were married on 2 June the following year. After demobilization, Binge reactivated his association with Mantovani. Much in demand as arranger, he scored Noel Coward's musical 'Pacific 1860' for the Drury Lane Theatre in 1946. 
Binge's successful compositions included 'Madrugado', 'Las Castanuelas', 'The Red Sombrero', and 'Trade Winds'. A composition entitled 'Prelude: the Whispering Valley' featured solo piano with strings. In 1951 he was given a free hand for a new recording while Mantovani was away on tour: in this he created the striking 'cascading strings' effect, which brought international acclaim to the new-style Mantovani orchestra. In his BBC radio programme 'Sunday Rhapsody' Mantovani also performed Binge's compositions. The most notable work by Binge was 'Elizabethan Serenade', which became an outstanding international success, winning an Ivor Novello award in 1957. Its vocal version, 'Where the Gentle Avon Flows', with words by Christopher Hassall, was issued in several forms. 
After these broadcasts Ronald Binge brought to an amicable end his association with Mantovani to concentrate on composition. His subsequent works included music for the films 'Desperate Moment' (1953), 'The Runaway Bus' (1954), 'Dance Little Lady' (1954), 'Our Girl Friday' (1953), and many for American television. He received commissions for BBC light music festivals in 1952 ('Thames Rhapsody') and 1956 (saxophone concerto). He hoped (without success) that colleagues would forget his 'Mantovani sound' achievement, though variants of it came with 'Dance of the Snowflakes' (which can be characterized as 'cascading strings' with trills on) and 'Cornet Carillon', an immediate hit with brass bands. 
Binge produced many miniatures for the recorded background music libraries of publishers. The best-known were 'The Watermill', used as the signature tune for BBC television's 'The Secret Garden', and the deceptively simple 'Sailing By', long cherished as late-night signing-off music for BBC Radio 4. Later compositions include the 'Saturday Symphony' (1966-8), 'Te Deum' (1970), and two albums for solo guitar. From 1952 Binge devised and conducted his own BBC radio programme called 'String Song', creating a new spaciousness in monaural sound. From that time on he regularly conducted his own works at home and abroad. 
On a basis of impeccable technique, Binge's originality is evident in his turn of melody (often of an engaging, quirky nature), his intimate understanding of players and their instruments, and a novel use of texture. 'The Tales of Three Blind Mice' demonstrated his mastery of counterpoint. He composed two ingenious 'palindromes', a toccata for piano entitled 'Vice Versa' and 'Upside, Downside' for a school trio, which reads exactly the same whichever way up the performer places the music. Binge was elected a member of the Royal Philharmonic Society in 1951. He believed firmly in the encouragement of 'light music', however inadequate the term, as its own genre. For some years he served on the BBC music advisory committee and the council of the Songwriters' Guild of Great Britain, and also as a director of the Performing Right Society. Ronald Binge died of cancer on 6 September 1979 at Ringwood, Hampshire; he was survived by his wife, son, and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 67629


Bowen, Edwin Yorke (1884-1961), pianist and composer, was born on 22 February 1884 in Crouch Hill, London, the youngest of the three sons of Edward Bowen (died 1911), founder of the whisky distillers Bowen and McKechnie, and his wife, Ellen Mary (1854-1906), the daughter of the Revd W. B. Dennis, a Wesleyan minister. He was known as York Bowen from about 1906. He showed musical promise at an early age, and his mother gave him his first piano and harmony lessons. He then attended the North Metropolitan College of Music and, from 1892, the Blackheath Conservatoire of Music, where he studied under Alfred Izard. At the age of eight he performed the solo part in one of Dussek's piano concertos. 
When he was fourteen Bowen won the Erard scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music, where he studied composition under Frederick Corder and piano under Tobias Matthay as well as viola and horn, and he was also a proficient organist, enabling him to write idiomatically for a variety of instruments. In 1902 he composed his first symphony and a symphonic poem, 'The Lament of Tasso', which was performed at a Promenade Concert conducted by Henry Wood. Bowen toured Britain, performing his own compositions, including his first piano concerto (December 1903), as well as solos by Chopin, Liszt, Skryabin, and Tchaikovsky. In addition he conducted some of his own orchestral works, which were favourably received. Saint-Saens praised 'the most remarkable of the young British composers' (Potts), and considered Bowen's potential to be greater than that of his fellow student Arnold Bax, who had made his impact as a prodigious pianist but not yet as a composer. In 1905, having won all the prizes for piano and composition, and having been awarded the Worshipful Company of Musicians medal, Bowen left the academy to teach at the Tobias Matthay Pianoforte School. He was elected a fellow of the academy in 1907 and appointed to the staff there in 1909. 
On 23 April 1912 Bowen married (Dorothy) Sylvia Beatrice Dalton (1888-1967), the only daughter of the Revd J. P. Dalton, rector of Creech St Michael, Somerset. Sylvia had acted with the Old Vic Company, but following her marriage to Bowen she studied lieder and later gave recitals with her husband. Their son, Philip, was born on 25 March 1913. During the First World War Bowen joined the Scots Guards and played the horn in the regimental band. He went to France, but returned in 1916 with pneumonia. 
Bowen's early musical style was influenced by Liszt, Wagner, Richard Strauss, and the Russian nationalists. He was fascinated by the music of Debussy and Ravel, and temporarily resigned from the Royal Academy following a disagreement on this matter with the principal, Alexander Mackenzie. With his friend Benjamin Dale he frequently attended Wagner operas. He began his compositional career when abstract Romantic music was popular and he continued writing in this lyrical style long after the end of the First World War, when it was considered old-fashioned. The war had signalled a turning point for many European composers, including his contemporaries Bax, Ireland, and Bridge, but Bowen disapproved of all modernist trends, vehemently objecting to music which lacked tonality and melody. His rejection of prevailing fashions won him the admiration of the composer and pianist Kaikhosru Sorabji, who compared him with Rakhmaninov and Medtner, and who hired the Bechstein Hall about 1946 in order to hear Bowen perform his twenty-four preludes and fugues, op. 102. 
As one would expect from a pianist-composer, piano music on both a small and large scale dominates Bowen's 'oeuvre'. His orchestral output includes four symphonies and four piano concertos. Chamber music was frequently performed by his friends, among them Lionel Tertis, Carl Dolmetsch, Leon Goossens, and Aubrey Brain. Bowen composed a number of secular songs for his wife and some piano duets and two-piano pieces, which he performed with Harry Isaacs. 
Although he was primarily a performer, Bowen spent much of his life teaching. He wrote pedagogical works for piano students and edited works by Chopin and Mozart. He frequently examined or adjudicated at competitions and festivals and from 1951 he sat on the audition panel for the BBC. In 1959, having reached the age of seventy-five, he retired from the Royal Academy, and in the following year he recorded a selection of his piano pieces for Lyrita. He continued to lead an active life as a composer, recitalist, examiner, and teacher, and he had been preparing for a broadcast when he suffered a fatal coronary thrombosis and died in New End Hospital, Hampstead, on 23 November 1961. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. 
Monica Watson commemorated Bowen's centenary by writing a biography. While sometimes appearing aloof, he had a sense of humour and was remembered affectionately by friends and pupils. A York Bowen Society was founded by John Lindsay to promote his music and that of other neglected British composers, and Bowen's manuscripts are housed in the Royal Academy of Music. 


@@@@@


doc= 67630


Coates, Albert Henry (1882-1953), conductor and composer, was born on 23 April 1882 at St Petersburg, Russia, the youngest of seven sons of Charles Thomas Coates, businessman, and his wife, also born near St Petersburg, daughter of James Gibson and Mary Randall. 
Coates was educated in England. After attending the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, he read science at the Liverpool Institute and studied music informally with an elder brother. Later he returned to St Petersburg and joined his father's business. But music continued to attract him and he entered the Leipzig Conservatorium in 1902. There he studied the cello with Paul Klengel, the piano with Robert Teichmuller, and conducting with Arthur Nikisch. Coming from an affluent, bourgeois background, Coates was able to exploit his period at the institution fully. Envied by other students for his possession of two pianos, he used his financial security to further his knowledge. By buying and studying newly published works in four-hand arrangements for piano, he was able to experience new and progressive works at first hand. 
Impressed by Coates's potential as an executant, Nikisch offered him work at the Leipzig Opera. Having started as a volunteer repetiteur, Coates was promoted quickly, and in 1904 he made his conducting debut with Offenbach's 'The Tales of Hoffmann'. After a string of successful performances, Nikisch recommended Coates for the post of first conductor at the Elberfeld Stadttheater in 1905. But his tenure was short, and he moved to the prestigious Dresden Hofoper in 1907. Impulsive by nature, he soon came into conflict with his immediate superior, Ernst von Schuch, and decided to accept a post at Mannheim in 1909. Again his tenure was short and, after a performance of Wagner's 'Siegfried' at St Petersburg, his appointment as principal conductor of the Russian Imperial Opera was announced in 1910. On 23 July that year he married Ella Lizzie Holland ('b'. 1881/2), daughter of Alfred Robert Holland. 
Coates returned to Britain in 1919. Although his experience was gained mostly in the opera houses of continental Europe, he was familiar to London audiences: in 1910 he made his Queen's Hall debut with the London Symphony Orchestra; in 1911 he performed for the Royal Philharmonic Society for the first time; and on 11 February 1914 he conducted Wagner's 'Tristan und Isolde' at Covent Garden. But June 1919 was a watershed for the conductor: after returning successfully to Covent Garden, he was appointed principal conductor of the London Symphony Orchestra. Accepting the post at a time of financial uncertainty for the ensemble, Coates refused to accept a fee for their first six performances together. But the orchestra's fiscal problems did not inhibit his adventurous programming policy, and at his first concert on 27 October 1919 the inclusion of Skryabin's 'Poeme de l'extase' affirmed his commitment to both that composer and Russian music in general. But Coates was also a champion of British music, and as principal conductor he gave the first reading of the revised version of Vaughan Williams's 'London Symphony' (1920), the first complete performance of Holst's 'The Planets' (1920), and the premiere of Bax's symphony no. 1 (1922). 
Successful in the theatre and the concert hall, Coates soon attracted the interest of the fast-growing gramophone industry. And it is unsurprising that the works he recorded first were by Russian composers. For Columbia he recorded Tchaikovsky's 'Romeo and Juliet' on 6 August 1919, part of Rimsky-Korsakov's 'Scheherazade' on 13 December 1919, and Skryabin's 'Poeme de l'extase' on 27 April and 7 May 1920. He continued to work for Columbia until 1935, and his recordings of Bach's mass in B minor, extensive excerpts from Wagner's stage works, and Stravinsky's 'Petrouchka' and 'Firebird' suite were important additions to that company's catalogue. 
Coates made his American debut in 1920, and three years later was appointed co-conductor of the Rochester Philharmonic. Sharing its 1923-4 season with Eugene Goossens, Coates conducted the ensemble between 16 January and 19 April 1924. His performances were successful, and he returned in 1925. Later that year he performed at the Leeds festival, conducting the first English performance of his tone poem 'The Eagle' and the premiere of Holst's 'Choral Symphony'. But his career had begun to lack focus, and from the mid-1920s it began to decline slowly. For much of the next twenty years he toured as a guest conductor, directing performances with, among others, the Berlin State Opera and the Vienna Philharmonic. 
Unfulfilled as an executant, Coates returned to composition: on 21 December 1929 his fourth opera, 'Samuel Pepys', was performed at Munich, and on 20 November 1936 his fifth opera, 'Pickwick', was staged at Covent Garden. 'Pickwick' was the climax of the British Music-Drama Opera Company's first season. But both the organization, formed by Coates and the producer Vladimir Rosing, and the opera were moribund: the work fell from the repertory and the company disbanded after one season. Even so, 'Pickwick' was important historically: it was the first opera shown on British television. Uncertain of his future in Britain, Coates spent most of the Second World War in the USA. He appeared as a guest conductor with the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra and was involved in the films 'Song of Russia' (1944) and 'Two Girls and a Sailor' (1944). After the hostilities he returned to London and recorded for Decca. But his relationship with the company was short, and his six recordings of Russian music failed to impress either critically or financially. By 1946 it was clear that Coates's career had reached its nadir. That year he announced that he was moving to South Africa, and after a period with the Johannesburg Symphony Orchestra he settled in Cape Town. There he directed the local orchestra, taught at the university, and supervised the performance of his seventh opera, 'Van Hunks and the Devil: the Legend of Table Mountain', in 1952. 
Coates was a talented musician whose inability to hold a tenured post for long periods harmed his career. Although he was important to the fortunes of the London Symphony Orchestra immediately after the First World War, his contribution to British musical life was ephemeral. As a composer he has lost his place in the repertory, and as an executant he is remembered generally by collectors with an interest in historic recordings. His second wife was Vera Joanna Nettlefold; little else is known about his personal life. Coates died at Milnerton, near Cape Town, South Africa, on 11 December 1953. 


