@@@@@


doc= 67631


Norton, Frederic (1869-1946), singer and songwriter, was born at 1 Sun Terrace, Great Cheetham Street, Broughton, Salford, Lancashire, on 11 October 1869, the son of George Norton, a cheese factor, and his wife, Ann Hunstone. He had at least one sister. Having worked originally as a clerk in insurance, he later became a professional singer, touring as an operatic chorister with the Carl Rosa Opera Company and making occasional appearances in the musical theatre. At the same time he wrote the music for a number of parlour songs, which he performed in recital with 'an agreeable voice and pleasing delivery' ('The Era', 22 Nov 1902), and had the occasional number performed in West End musical comedies. In 1903 he was invited to Sandringham to entertain the king and queen with his songs at the piano ('Mama's Baby Boy', 'The Camel and the Butterfly', 'Madcap Marjorie', 'Tatters and Tucks', 'Oh Mr Moon', 'Naughty Little Maid', and so on). In 1908 he was introduced by Mrs T. P. O'Connor to the artist and writer W. Graham Robertson, and the two composed the words and music to a musical fairy play, 'Pinkie and the Fairies', which, thanks to Robertson's high-theatrical connections, was produced as a Christmas entertainment at His Majesty's Theatre, with Ellen Terry and Mrs Patrick Campbell among its cast. 
Norton later returned to His Majesty's Theatre to help Herbert Beerbohm Tree with his organization of Offenbach's score for 'Orpheus in the Underground' (1912), but thereafter he worked as a singer in the Musketeers concert party and as an intermittent composer of songs for revue and music hall until he was once again recalled to work with Tree. This time the commission was a larger one, to provide the score for Oscar Asche's fairy-tale spectacular 'Chu Chin Chow' (1916). 'Chu Chin Chow' was a record-breaking wartime success in London, and went on to be seen in America and Australia and also on the cinema screen before returning for several revivals on the British stage and even as an ice show. Norton's score threw up the two most popular songs he had ever written -- the duet 'Any Time's Kissing Time', introduced by Courtice Pounds and Aileen d'Orme, and the baritone 'Cobbler's Song', which would remain a concert standard for more than half a century. It also included some rather more appreciable music from a composer whose usual produce was of the lightest kind, with such pieces as the lament 'I Long for the Sun', where the long phrased soprano lines seem to reach out in front of the singer. Norton made the most of his big hit, going on at various times in several of 'Chu Chin Chow''s principal parts, notably in Pounds's star role of Ali Baba. 
Norton never wrote another piece of the scope of 'Chu Chin Chow'. On the back of his hit he was hired to do the score for Lilie Elsie's pale and not very lingering comeback piece 'Pamela' (1917), but thereafter he returned to the same kind of work he had always done, providing the occasional song for interpolation in scores by others and writing little tunes for such pieces as the amateur 'The Willow Pattern Plate' or the children's Christmas show 'Teddie Tail' (1920). 'Chu Chin Chow', however, ensured that his name appeared regularly on theatre bills right up to the end of his life. Norton never married. He died at his home, Hare Knap, Holford, near Bridgwater, Somerset, on 15 December 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 67632


Craxton, (Thomas) Harold Hunt (1885-1971), pianist and teacher, was born on 30 April 1885 at 6 Dorchester Place, Marylebone, London, the first son of Thomas Robert Craxton (1858-1908), a surveyor's assistant, and his wife, Sarah Jane Hunt (1852-1905). The Craxtons originated in Northamptonshire. Before marriage Sarah Jane Hunt had been headmistress of a girls' school, and she sang in a forerunner of the Royal Choral Society. By Harold's first birthday the family had moved to Devizes, Wiltshire, where his father set up as a publican. At the age of seven Harold passed the first grade of the Trinity College of Music examinations, entering the room nervously because he thought that two dummy knights guarding the entrance were the examiners. 
Thomas Robert Craxton's business proved unsuccessful. The family moved to the poorer part of the town while the father sought work in London; there were now five boys to support. By 1898 they were reunited in London, and a Miss Collins of Trinity received '$1. 8s 0d for 12 pianoforte and theory lessons for Master Harold Craxton (plus 2s 6d for Beringer's Technical Studies)' (private information). 'Master Craxton's First Grand Evening Concert' took place at Hammersmith town hall on 23 January 1901. The 'West London Observer' reported that he was 'the possessor of exceptional qualities'. From 1902 he worked in light-music ensembles. His early training thus took place far from the great musical centres, and not until 1907 did he enter the Tobias Matthay School, studying with Cuthbert Whitemore and Matthay himself. 
From 1909 to 1911 Craxton was accompanist to Emma Albani. The year 1911 also saw the publication of his first compositions. Extensive tours on both sides of the Atlantic with Dame Clara Butt and her husband, Kennerley Rumford, made him the most celebrated accompanist in the United Kingdom. Dame Clara performed several of his compositions and also smoothed the way for his marriage on 12 December 1914, initially opposed by her parents, to the violinist Essie May Faulkner (1890-1977), daughter of Charles W. Faulkner, an art publisher. In 1919 Craxton became professor of piano at the Royal Academy of Music; thereafter his career was London-based. 
Craxton also undertook performances as a soloist; but although as an accompanist he covered an enormous range of music, this and his work as a teacher left him little time to enlarge his solo repertory. He had a great love of early English music -- invariably beginning recitals with a group of such pieces -- and was reported to have found a rare magic in them. Chopin, Schumann, Brahms, and Debussy were also especially dear to him, and he was proud of his collaboration with Sir Donald Tovey in the Associated Board edition of the Beethoven piano sonatas (1931). He no longer performed publicly after 1954. However, Craxton's work as accompanist was preserved on several recordings; his largest project was a recording of the Delius cello sonata with Beatrice Harrison (1926). In addition, his recordings of lieder with Elena Gerhardt (1924-7), and also of Purcell songs with Astra Desmond in the 1940s, were innovative in their day. He recorded many lighter pieces with the violinist Jacques Thibaud. 
Yet however significant Craxton was as a pianist, it is as a teacher that he will be remembered. He jocularly remarked, 'the right Bach at the right time for the pupil or trouble always happens' (autobiography); and the secret of his whole approach can be divined from this phrase. He was acutely aware that each pupil had a completely different set of needs, which he diagnosed with exceptional capacity. Craxton had absorbed from Matthay fundamental ideas such as economy of movement, a relaxed wrist, and a strong first joint, and the pupil who did not possess these by nature did exercises until he or she obtained them. Craxton knew that standards in England were fairly amateurish, and if attitudes towards the technical side of musical studies had improved by the time he retired, no small credit was due to him. Very often his method consisted simply in selecting the right piece of music at the right time. A pupil might realize only long afterwards why a particular piece had been chosen. The final analysis is of almost underhand teaching, outwardly benign and democratic, which none the less stemmed from a clear idea of where each pupil had to go, and got him there. On his retirement from the Royal Academy of Music in 1960 Craxton was awarded the OBE. 
A collateral aspect was the legendary Craxton hospitality. Blessed with a large house post-war in Kidderpore Avenue, Hampstead, and with a still larger pre-war one in Grove End Road, St John's Wood, Craxton virtually adopted some students, the dinner table was always crowded, and the upstairs rooms were permanently full of pails of soaking students' socks. Presiding over the household was Essie, the 'universal mother' to family and students alike, and even to her husband, whom she escorted to the Royal Academy of Music in the battered Rolls-Royce he was unable to drive himself. After retirement he still received students privately and always showed interest in their careers. The novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard, who was taught by him, has given a memorable description of Craxton in 1936: 'His appearance was unusual and fascinating. He wore his hair much longer than other people. He had a broad and noble brow, large, pale blue eyes whose blandness often concealed an acute sense of humour and a degree of perception that I was unused to; a long nose, a long, indented upper lip below which curled a delicately sardonic mouth, a purposeful chin and large elegant ears. (Howard)' Craxton was modest about his compositions, yet showed a genuine melodic gift, and the four unpublished Shakespeare settings (1944) achieve the lucidity upon which he insisted in his playing and teaching. The mixture of old and new in such very free transcriptions of early English pieces as 'The Plaint of Love' and 'Siciliano and Rigadon' (1935) has its own fascination. His editions of old English keyboard compositions brought the music to a wider public. 
Harold Craxton died on 30 March 1971 in New End Hospital, Hampstead. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. A memorial concert was held at Fairfield Hall, Croydon, on 17 September 1971, and several years later his ashes were scattered on Hindhead golf course. His wife survived him. Of their six children only Janet Craxton (1929-1981), an oboist, became a professional musician; Antony (1918-1999), for long a distinguished BBC producer, brought classical music to the television; and John Leith Craxton (1922-2009) became a noted painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 67633


Craxton, Janet Helen Rosemary (1929-1981), oboist and teacher, was born on 17 May 1929 at 8 Grove End Road, London, the only daughter and the youngest of the six children of (Thomas) Harold Hunt Craxton (1885-1971) and his wife, Essie May Faulkner (1890-1977). Her father was the eldest son of Thomas Robert Craxton of Devizes, Wiltshire, and senior piano professor at the Royal Academy of Music. Previously at the Matthay School, he was an outstanding pianist, accompanist, and music editor. Her mother was an intelligently modest, 'saintly' woman. They married in 1914. 
Few musicians have had a more fortunate background than Janet Craxton, except perhaps Mozart himself, or Craxton's Hampstead neighbour and near contemporary at the academy, the remarkable horn player Dennis Brain (1921-1957). Indeed, there are many similarities in their lives and careers: each was brought up in an exceptionally musical family, with the father a notable teacher, and became an outstanding wind instrumentalist at the academy; each became a leading soloist, orchestral principal, and chamber music player, and had major works composed for him or her; and each died suddenly and was greatly missed. 
Janet Craxton had five elder brothers, which may explain why she was something of a tomboy: she spoke in low, sonorous, oboe-like tones, and was tall and willowy. Anthony, her eldest brother (1918-1999), became a senior television producer. John Craxton (1922-2009), the artist, first visited Crete in 1947 and made his home there from 1960. She grew up at 8 Grove End Road, in north-west London; the family's post-war home was 14 Kidderpore Avenue, Hampstead. By 1930 the Craxtons had become the most talked-about and most loved family in musical London. 
After attending Francis Holland School, Baker Street, and King Alfred's School, Hampstead, Craxton entered the Royal Academy of Music, where between 1945 and 1948 she studied the oboe with Helen Gaskell, the piano with her father, and musicianship with Priaulx Rainier; she then went to the Paris Conservatoire as a pupil of Pierre Bajeux (1948-9), each Wednesday afternoon attending Nadia Boulanger's seminar in the rue Ballu. In 1958 she was appointed both oboe professor at the academy and tutor to the National Youth Orchestra. The oboe faculty at the academy was a remarkable and cohesive group with such luminaries as Leonard Brain (Dennis's brother), Neil Black, and Michael Dobson, who said: 'The lovely sound that she produced was a reflection of the naturalness and warmth of her own personality' (private information). Another was Evelyn Barbirolli, who remembered her as 'a very dear loyal friend, a great musician, inspired teacher and performer' (ibid.). 
Craxton was principal oboist in the Halle Orchestra (1949-52), the London Mozart Players (1952-4), the BBC Symphony Orchestra (1954-63), the London Sinfonietta (1969-81), and the orchestra of the Royal Opera House (1979-81). She toured the USA with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and the USSR with the English Opera Group. In 1957, while on a tour of Canada, Leon Goossens chanced to overhear a radio broadcast, not knowing which orchestra was playing. He suddenly remarked: 'It must be the BBC from home: only Janet can play like that' (private information). And so it was. 
A perfectionist, Janet Craxton preferred to make her own reeds. Once, being dissatisfied with her own performance in an orchestral concert, she returned her performer's fee. She was determined: having decided to do something, she had that rare ability to make things happen. In 1967 Craxton formed the London Oboe Quartet; she was fortunate in having a personal following which ensured her a good audience, and the quartet gave many concerts and broadcasts. She also played in the London Concertante among other ensembles. 
Janet Craxton was sought after as a soloist, and gave a number of world premieres. These works included Ralph Vaughan Williams's 'Ten Blake Songs' (1958) with the tenor Wilfred Brown, and three compositions by Lennox Berkeley: the sonatina for oboe and piano, op. 61 (1962), dedicated to Janet and her brother John; the oboe quartet, op. 70 (1967); and the 'Sinfonia concertante', op. 84, with large chamber orchestra (commissioned by the BBC for the 1973 Promenade Concerts). Other commissions were from Alan Rawsthorne, Elisabeth Lutyens, Elizabeth Maconchy, Richard Stoker, and Priaulx Rainier. 
On 17 July 1961 Janet Craxton married Alan Richardson (1904-1978), composer, piano professor at the academy, and a former pupil of her father. At their summer cottage, High Latch, in the Lammermuir Hills south of Edinburgh, she pursued wide interests, including cycling, gardening, golf, and organic cooking. Craxton was an environmentalist, loved animals, and was an excellent draughtsman, but photography took first place among these activities: her camera went with her everywhere. After many happy years, she made time to nurse both parents and husband during their final illnesses. 
Janet Craxton died suddenly and unexpectedly on 18 July 1981 at Lodge Farm Cottage, Rossway, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. It was impossible to ascertain the cause of death. She left her body to science. There was a service shortly after her death. She left funds to the Craxton memorial trust and to the Royal Academy of Music. A thanksgiving concert was given at the Wigmore Hall on Saturday 24 April 1982; the performers included Sir Peter Pears, who spoke about her, Denis Matthews, Nina Milkina, Celia Nicklin, Bernard Roberts, the London Sinfonietta, the Trio Cannello, the Philip Jones Brass Ensemble, and remaining members of the London Oboe Quartet. Works by Alan Richardson and Neil Saunders were performed. 
Craxton's pupil Valerie Taylor Lockwood has said: 'Janet hated pretentiousness and anyone in music for their own ends. She was caring and understanding of shortcomings, but had the highest musical standards so she could be quite exacting. Her sense of humour was wicked. She loved cats and children, talking to both in their own language. As an oboist Janet had a completely different tone; although Paris-trained it was a darker Germanic sound with total control. (private information, V. Taylor Lockwood)' Asked if she had any shortcomings, Valerie Taylor Lockwood replied: 'No, in my opinion she was perfect. I find myself thinking of her almost every day in my teaching' (ibid.). Janet Craxton was an outstanding person in every way, dedicated, caring, intensely musical, deeply conscientious. 


@@@@@


doc= 67634


Dale, Benjamin James (1885-1943), composer, was born on 17 July 1885 at 7 Hill Side, Upper Holloway, London, a son of Charles James Dale ('b'. 1842), potter, and his wife, Frances Anne Hallett. His father was an amateur musician who conducted the Finsbury Choral Association. Sir Henry Hallett Dale, the physiologist and pharmacologist, was his brother. 
Dale attended the Stationers' Company's School, Hornsey, and Oakfield School, Crouch End. The fourteen-year-old made his debut as a composer with the performance of his orchestral overture 'Horatius'. At the Royal Academy of Music, where he enrolled in 1900 on the same day as Arnold Bax, he studied the piano and organ. Here Dale won several prizes, including the Sir Michael Costa composition prize and the Charles Mortimer prize in 1902, the Charles Lucas medal in 1903, and the Royal Academy of Music club prize and the Dove medal in 1905. 
The piano sonata in D minor, one of Dale's most significant works, was begun in 1902 while he was still a student. Completed in 1905, it was an ambitious and virtuosic piece consisting of four substantial movements, lasting in total about forty-five minutes and covering sixty-two pages of printed music. As well as following a Lisztian model, it demonstrated the influences of Richard Wagner, Richard Strauss, and the Russian nationalists, composers to whom Frederick Corder, his teacher at the academy, introduced his pupils. 
The Russian pianist Mark Hambourg had established an annual competition for a new piano work at the Royal Academy of Music. At the last minute Dale decided to submit his piano sonata, which was chosen in 1906 as the winner from sixty entries. Hambourg played only the variations, and his interpretation was not faithful to Dale's score. Dale refused to join him on stage, despite the rapturous reception, and he subsequently returned the prize. Dale's fellow students York Bowen (to whom he dedicated the sonata), Myra Hess, and Irene Scharrer subsequently performed the sonata in public recitals. The technical demands of Dale's sonata and its colossal length prevented it from getting firmly established in the repertory. The movements were sometimes performed separately, but the issue of the sonata on pianola roll in 1910, and its subsequent reissue in 1924, helped to bring the work to a wider public. 
Dale is remembered also for his compositions for viola. Inspired by Lionel Tertis, he wrote his suite for viola and piano in 1906. The final two movements were orchestrated, with the 'Romance' becoming one of the most frequently played pieces in Tertis's repertory because of its wonderful and memorable melodic line. Dale also wrote a 'Phantasy' for viola and piano, and an 'Introduction and Andante' for six violas for Tertis's pupils. In 1913 he completed a choral setting of Christina Rossetti's Christmas hymn 'Before the paling of the stars'. 
Before the First World War, Dale held several posts as organist in London, and he was appointed professor of harmony at the Royal Academy of Music in 1909. He was devoted to German and Norwegian culture, and admired the music of Grieg. A frequent visitor to Germany, he was on his way to the Bayreuth Festival in 1914 when war broke out. Along with many other musicians, Dale was interned in Ruhleben, Germany, where he continued to write music, now for camp entertainments. Towards the end of the war he broke his arm and was moved to the Netherlands. 
Dale returned to England in 1918, but his health had suffered during internment, and he composed little until his return from an examining tour of Australia and New Zealand in 1919-20. This tour prompted him to write a violin sonata in 1921-2 and the festival anthem 'A Song of Praise' in 1923. His last work, 'The Flowing Tide', was sketched in 1924, although not completed until 1943. Dale married former composition student Kathleen Richards (1895-1984) in October 1921. A composer and musicologist, she was also a pianist, who broadcast frequently from 1927 to 1931. Following their divorce Dale married (Frieda Emma Auguste) Margit Kaspar of Munich in December 1936. 
In later years Dale worked as a professor of composition and harmony at the Royal Academy of Music, and was appointed warden there in 1936. He continued to examine for the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music, and was one of the three musicians on the BBC's music advisory panel from 1936. His administrative and teaching roles left him little time to compose, and this, coupled with his hypercritical approach, meant that he produced few works. He had a precocious talent, and it is remarkable that a young student composer should have developed his own style so quickly, but the activity burnt him out. Dale wrote demanding and lengthy works, which were infrequently played. His musical style was an extension of the Romantic aesthetic, which fell out of favour after the First World War; he was strongly opposed to advanced contemporary trends. 
During rehearsals in London on 30 July 1943 for 'The Flowing Tide', Dale collapsed with a heart attack, and he died on the way to St Mary Abbots Hospital, Kensington. Sixty years after his death he was still remembered as an understanding and inspiring teacher with a great sense of humour. 


@@@@@


doc= 67636


Davies, Frances Mary Jemima Woodhill (1861-1934), pianist, was born at Bouet, St Peter Port, Guernsey, on 27 June 1861, the first child of Alfred Arnold Davies ('b'. 1829/30), a schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Jemima Woodhill ('b'. 1830), the daughter of a gifted amateur cellist. At an early age Fanny was sent to Birmingham to live with her aunt, Eliza Woodhill, who ran a thriving girls' school. Fanny began piano lessons there and gave her first public performance in Birmingham town hall at the age of six, but otherwise was exempt from the life of a prodigy. She later studied the piano and harmony with noted local teachers Charles Flavell and Alfred Gaul; she also learned the violin with Henry Hayward ('the Wolverhampton Paganini'), who instilled in her a love of chamber music. 
Owing to delicate lungs Davies spent two winters indoors, studying music. Pianistically she was first inspired by Arabella Goddard, whom she heard in Birmingham in 1870. Encouraged by Charles Halle, she went to Leipzig in 1882 to study with Carl Reinecke and Oscar Paul, but a year later she fulfilled her dream of studying with Clara Schumann, enrolling at the Hoch Conservatorium in Frankfurt in September 1883. 
Returning to England in 1885, Davies made her London debut at the Crystal Palace on 17 October, performing Beethoven's fourth piano concerto and some solos by Schumann and C. H. Graun. A month later she made her first appearance in the Monday Popular Concerts, playing solo and chamber music. At a time when pupils of Liszt such as Sophie Menter were dazzling audiences with muscular virtuosity, Davies's more restrained manner caused the 'Musical Times' to hail her as 'a legitimate, as opposed to phenomenal or eccentric' pianist ('Musical Times', 26, 1885, 656-7). She went on to enjoy a successful career as a soloist and a chamber musician in England and abroad, performing extensively in Europe both before and after the First World War. An important influence in her early career was the violinist Joseph Joachim; with the cellist Alfredo Piatti they formed a trio, giving six performances in the 'Popular' concerts of 1885-6. Fanny Davies also performed in the Joachim Quartet concerts in 1906. She remained committed to the music of Schumann and Brahms, regularly performing their concertos and major solo works. She gave the first performance of Brahms's D minor violin sonata, op. 108, in Berlin with Joachim and introduced the 'Klavierstucke', opp. 116 and 117, to English audiences. In addition, she took part in the first performances of Brahms's clarinet trio, op. 114, and the clarinet sonatas, op. 120, with their dedicatee, Richard Muhlfeld (1856-1907). 
Davies also championed music by English composers: in 1886 she performed Sterndale Bennett's piano concerto at a Philharmonic Concert, and she was the dedicatee of Elgar's bravura 'Concert Allegro', op. 46. She explored both early and contemporary English repertory, as well as early Netherlandish and Italian keyboard music. According to Benton Fletcher ('The Times', 4 Sept 1934) she owned a 1762 Tschudi harpsichord, though she did not perform publicly on it. 
As a chamber musician Fanny Davies performed with some of the greatest artists of the day. In 1907 she undertook a concert tour of Germany with the tenor Gervase Elwes, whose singing of Brahms lieder was well received. She played with the Rose Quartet in Vienna in 1897 and later joined forces with the Bohemian String Quartet, championing music by Czech composers. In Prague she was hailed as 'the Daviesova' by an enchanted critic. She was also a friend of the cellist Pablo Casals, who invited her to play with his orchestra in Barcelona in 1923. 
A protegee of Clara Schumann, Davies maintained her teacher's principles throughout her life, despite a rift with the family in 1893-4. She maintained warm friendships with fellow Schumann pupils such as Leonard Borwick and Mathilde Verne, and with them and others marked the Schumann centenary in 1910 with a gala concert. She also contributed articles on Schumann and Brahms to 'Cobbett's Cyclopedia of Chamber Music' (1929). 
Davies was also a sought-after teacher. Pupils found her demanding but supportive, and a former headmistress of the Francis Holland School, London, which still has a Fanny Davies prize, remembered the pianist as 'a sparkling raconteuse with an inexhaustible fund of anecdotes' ('Daily Telegraph', 6 Sept 1934). She was president of the Society of Women Musicians from 1925 to 1926 -- an apt choice as she had played with most of the leading women instrumentalists of the day. She had connections with Steinway from fairly early on, and was invited by them to record on piano rolls for the Welte-Mignon Company in 1909. They continued to support her, supplying pianos even in remote places, a privilege granted to only a select few. She later recorded for the Columbia Graphophone Company. 
A popular performer at private concerts, Davies was famous for her party trick of imitating the mannerisms of contemporary pianists. Edward Speyer, who knew her from the beginning of her career, commented on her formidable memory which had so impressed Casals, and her ability to play for hours in private and congenial company without fatigue. Dorothy Mayer recalled 'the dreamy warmth' of her playing, as well as her 'lively sense of the ridiculous, and combination of whimsy and dignity' (Mayer, 776-9). Never married, she lived for some time with her companion Harriette Grist and had a wide circle of friends. A warm-hearted and exuberant woman, she was undaunted by her small stature, and 'small hands not ideally suited to piano playing' ('The Times', 3 Sept 1934). 
Davies remained professionally active until near the end of her life, when she suffered a stroke and was moved into a west London nursing home at 25 Leinster Square, where she died on 1 September 1934. The obituarist in the 'Birmingham Post' (3 September 1934) described her as a 'personal messenger for Schumann and Brahms', which was perhaps her main legacy to twentieth-century pianism, though she was also an exponent of later composers such as Debussy and Granados. In an interview published in the 'Musical Times' of June 1905 she stated that 'Clara Schumann's aim was to be technically perfect but never to think too much of the instrument and too little of the music' (46.370). It was a tradition she maintained to the end. 


@@@@@


doc= 67638


Frankel, Benjamin (1906-1973), composer, was born on 31 January 1906 at 705 Fulham Road, Hammersmith, London, the second of three children of Charles Frankel ('c'.1871-1935) and his wife, Golda Dora Adler ('c'.1869-1958). His father, born in Warsaw, served in the tsarist army before settling in London as a tobacconist, later becoming a synagogue beadle; his mother was born in the Polish town of Tarnopol, then part of the Austro-Hungarian empire. Like his elder brother and younger sister, Frankel demonstrated a considerable early talent for music, but he was alone in pursuing it seriously. 
Frankel was educated at the Latymer foundation school, Hammersmith, leaving to become a watchmaker's apprentice at fourteen. A year later he began studying the violin and the piano at Trinity College of Music, London; he subsequently concentrated on the piano under the American virtuoso Victor Benham, who taught him for two years at no cost, latterly in Cologne and Berlin. After returning to England in 1923, Frankel earned a living for many years as a jazz violinist, pianist, and arranger, for Carroll Gibbons and Henry Hall among others. His formal training continued with Orlando Morgan on a composition scholarship (1929-34) from the Worshipful Company of Musicians at the Guildhall School of Music in London, where later he became principal composition teacher (1946-57). 
Frankel was a leading committee member of the International Society for Contemporary Music from 1952 to 1955, serving as a vice-president during 1954-5. A leading and prolific film composer from 1934, he composed 104 film scores including music for 'The Seventh Veil' (1945), 'The Man in the White Suit' (1951), 'The Importance of being Earnest' (1952), 'Night of the Iguana' (1964), and 'Battle of the Bulge' (1965). During the 1930s and 1940s he was also musical director for shows by C. B. Cochran, Noel Coward, and others in London's West End. 
Frankel's earliest surviving concert work dates from 1926, but he gained recognition with his clarinet trio (1943), first sonata for solo violin (1945), and first four string quartets (1944-9), their introspective lyricism revealing an individual style. His violin concerto (1951) -- commissioned by the violinist Max Rostal for the Festival of Britain -- was his first major work and cemented his reputation. Inscribed 'to the Six Million', it was a heartfelt lament for the victims of the holocaust. 
Frankel was a member of the Communist Party of Great Britain for twelve years; and works by him such as 'May Day' (1947) indicated his political affiliations. In 1952, however, outraged by the show trials and summary executions of alleged spies in Prague, he publicly resigned from the party in a letter to the 'New Statesman and Nation' (published on 13 December 1952). A secular Jew who none the less identified absolutely with his roots, Frankel was drawn late in life to Roman Catholicism, though he never converted. 
Always dapper, Frankel had a strong personality and an imposing, high-domed forehead which disguised a diminutive stature. He was married three times. His first marriage, on 13 February 1932, to Joyce Stanmore Rayner ('b'. 1908), was dissolved in 1944. They had two sons and one daughter. The second, on 14 October 1944, was to Phyllis Anna Leat (1905-1967). His third marriage, to Xenia Hamilton-Kennaway, 'nee' Szladkowska ('b'. 1926), a musician, took place in 1972. 
After leaving the parental home at 190 Hammersmith Road on his marriage, Frankel was itinerant for many years, eventually settling at 17 Soho Square, London, with his second wife, then at Rodmell Hill, Rodmell, near Lewes, from 1953 to 1957, where he entertained a lively artistic circle that included the poet Cecil Day Lewis, the film director Anthony Asquith, and the political writer Leonard Woolf (his neighbour). He settled in 1958 in Locarno, initially at Verbanella Alta, Minusio (1958-63), then at via ai Monti 31 (1963 onwards). 
After adopting Schoenbergian serialism (broadly, the use of all twelve musical pitches in predetermined order), Frankel began his important cycle of eight symphonies 'that crystallised his position as one of the major English symphonists of our time' ('Daily Telegraph', 13 Feb 1973). These works were completed in the period 1958-71: no. 1 in 1958; no. 2 in 1962; no. 3 in 1964; no. 4 in 1966; no. 5 in 1967; no. 6 in 1969; no. 7 in 1970; and no. 8 in 1971. 
Other significant works by Frankel included his viola concerto (1967) and his last work, the opera 'Marching Song' (1971-3), after the play by John Whiting and to a libretto by Hans Keller. He left many chamber works, of which the piano quartet (1954), clarinet quintet (1956), and fifth string quartet (1965) are outstanding examples, as well as song cycles, orchestral overtures, and an instrumental mass. Many works were commissioned for the Cheltenham Festival. He also broadcast many stimulating talks for BBC radio. 
The onset of heart disease in 1959 led to a long and courageous battle against severe odds, as when Frankel continued writing his sixth symphony while critically ill in hospital. His final years were divided between his house in Locarno and long visits to London for medical treatment and musical engagements. Despite the increasing success of his music, Frankel was frequently in debt on account of his generosity, lack of financial acumen, heavy medical bills, and love of the good life. He left debts approaching $50,000 (though these were eventually settled by posthumous royalties). 
Frankel died, following a coronary thrombosis, in New End Hospital, London, on 12 February 1973. His ashes were buried in Golders Green crematorium, London, on 13 March 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 67639


Simson, Harold Fraser- (1872-1944), composer, was born at 3 Dawson Place, Kensington, London, on 15 August 1872, the son of a flourishing merchant, Arthur Theodore Simson (1840-1924), and his Scottish wife, Jane Anne Catherine Fraser (1850/51-1913), of Reelig. Educated mostly in France, but also at Charterhouse School and King's College, London, he operated as a commercial shipowner from an office in Mincing Lane, while at the same time turning his hand to composing light music in a dilettante way. He married, in 1897, May Frances, 'nee' Bucknall, with whom he had a daughter. 
In 1911 Fraser-Simson wrote the musical score, to a colourful if conventional text by the striving stage writer Walter Wadham Peacock, for a comic opera called 'Bonita', and organized a syndicate to produce it in the West End. Several well-known artists were hired to take part, but Simson's coup was the securing of the avant-garde director H. Granville Barker to stage the piece. 'Bonita' was not a success, but its music was well received, and thus, five years later, when Howard Talbot and Paul Rubens proved unavailable to set the new libretto by an unknown author being prepared by Bobbie Evett for Daly's Theatre, Simson (some said, at the price of an investment) was offered the job. His score to Freddie Lonsdale's text for 'The Maid of the Mountains' (1916, including 'Farewell', 'Love will Find a Way', and 'Husbands and Wives') made him famous. 
His reputation secure, as the composer of one of the biggest musical-theatre successes of the era, Simson subsequently supplied Evett with the scores for two other vehicles for the star of 'The Maid of the Mountains', Jose Collins -- the splendidly successful 'A Southern Maid' (1917) and a Peg Woffington musical, 'Our Peg' (1919). The latter was initially frozen out of the West End because of the success of its long-running predecessors, but it later played at the Gaiety in a revised form as 'Our Nell' (1924) with the star as Nell Gwynne. 
The composer had less joy with a touring musical called 'Missy Jo' (1921) and a vehicle for the comedian W. H. Berry, 'Head over Heels' (1923), but he scored another fine success when he returned once again to themes costume and romantic and teamed once more with Lonsdale on a musical about artists in Montmartre, 'The Street Singer' (1924). Phyllis Dare purchased the show and had it mounted as a vehicle for her talents, and it ran for nearly a year at London's Lyric Theatre before going round the country. Thereafter Simson wrote only one further musical play for the West End stage, a charming light romantic piece based on Hastings Turner's 'The Lilies of the Field', which was produced in 1925 under the title 'Betty in Mayfair', with Evelyn Laye featured. However, four years later he supplied the music to A. A. Milne's adaptation of Kenneth Grahame's classic 'The Wind in the Willows', which was produced at Liverpool as 'Toad of Toad Hall'. The little show established itself as a perennial favourite, and more than half a century later it was still regularly produced in Britain as a children's Christmas entertainment. The composer achieved one more, posthumous, stage credit when, in 1970, Julian Slade adapted Milne's 'Winnie the Pooh' to the stage with his song cycle 'The Hums of Pooh' as its musical part. 
Simson married secondly, in 1919, (Anna) Cicely 'nee' Devenish. Latterly he lived in London and the family seat at Dalcross Castle, Croy, Inverness-shire, where he died on 19 January 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 67640


Gibbs, Cecil Armstrong (1889-1960), composer, was born at The Vineyards, Great Baddow, near Chelmsford, Essex, on 10 August 1889, the first child of the London businessman David Cecil Gibbs (1850-1912) and his first wife, Ida (1865-1891), daughter of the Revd James Thornely Whitehead, a Unitarian minister. Gibbs's mother died in 1891 after bearing a stillborn second son, and Gibbs was subsequently cared for by his five maiden aunts. He very early showed musical talent but was steered away from a career in music by his father, who inflicted substantial psychological damage on his sensitive son. Gibbs attended the Wick School, Hove (1899-1902), Winchester College (classical scholarship 1902-8), won an exhibition and sizarship for history at Trinity College, Cambridge (BA, 1911), and, his father having died in 1912, gained a MusB in 1913. 
After a year teaching at Copthorne School, East Grinstead, and finding himself unable to join the army (he was refused on medical grounds) Gibbs taught classics, history, and English at his old school, the Wick. Adrian Boult funded a year's study at the Royal College of Music (1919-20) where Gibbs studied theory with Charles Wood, score reading and conducting with Boult, and composition with Vaughan Williams, for which he won the Arthur Sullivan prize. 
Gibbs taught at the Royal College of Music from 1921 to 1939; he was awarded a doctorate of music (composition) at Cambridge in 1931, and the Cobbett gold medal for chamber music in 1934; and he was vice-chairman of the British Federation of Music Festivals from 1937 to 1952. Gibbs married Honor Mary Mitchell (1892-1958); they had a son, David (1919-1943), and a daughter, Elizabeth ('b'. 1922). His spiritual home was in Danbury, Essex, where he founded the Danbury Choral Society and conducted it from 1921 to 1960. During the Second World War he temporarily moved his household to Cumberland, where he involved himself thoroughly in the county's musical affairs. In 1951 he chaired the selection committee for the British Federation of Music Societies' national competition festival and he continued to compose, conduct, adjudicate, and find willing publishers for his work until his death of pneumonia on 12 May 1960 in the Chelmsford and Essex Hospital. Gibbs was buried in Danbury churchyard on 16 May. 
A large man with considerable public presence, booming voice, red hair, and a temper to match, inside Gibbs was insecure, agoraphobic, and frightened by the increasing speed of the world around him and what he saw as the destructive progress of 'science'. A man of contradictions, consumed by fears and mighty joys, his ambition was to produce a top-rate light opera or a magnificent string quartet. He composed many grand works such as the choral symphony 'Odysseus' (1937-8) and wrote for film and stage, but few of these undertakings exhibit the quality of craftsmanship that is so evident in his some 160 songs. As a miniaturist he excelled; a constant source of inspiration was the poetry of his friend Walter de la Mare, and Gibbs's settings of 'Five Eyes' (1917) and 'Silver' (1920) have an enduring appeal. Gibbs found especial satisfaction in his music festival work and wrote generously for amateur performers, of whom he was a self-proclaimed champion. 


@@@@@


doc= 67641


Harrison, Beatrice Bohun (1892-1965), cellist, was born on 9 December 1892 in Roorkee, in the North-Western Provinces of India, the second of the four daughters of Colonel John H. C. Harrison RE (died 1936), at that time principal of the College of Sappers and Miners, and his wife, Annie (died 1934), daughter of Charles Martin, a civil engineer. All four daughters were musical, as was their mother, who had been a pupil of George Henschel, and two others besides Beatrice became professional musicians: May (1890-1959), a violinist, and Margaret (1899-1995), a violinist and later a pianist. Shortly after Beatrice's birth, the family returned to England, where Colonel Harrison was given the command of the home battalion of the Royal Engineers at Chatham barracks, and also took charge of the band of the Royal Engineers. In 1902 he retired in order to devote his life to his family. 
The girls were educated at home, starting music lessons at a very early age, but Beatrice did not begin to learn the cello until she was nine, when her mother gave her a full-size cello, taller than she. After being awarded the gold medal of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music at the age of ten, in 1904 she won an exhibition to the Royal College of Music, London, where she studied with William Whitehouse, and a scholarship in 1907; in the latter year she made her debut at the Queen's Hall, playing the Saint-Saens cello concerto no. 1 in A minor under Henry Wood. After playing to King Edward VII at a private dinner party she became a close friend of Princess Victoria, a good pianist, and it was she who paid for her cello (Pietro Guarneri, 1739) after her American benefactress died. In 1908 the whole family moved to Berlin so that she could have lessons with Hugo Becker at the Hochschule fur Musik, where in 1910 she was the youngest student ever to win the Mendelssohn prize, and she made her European debut in Berlin in 1910. 
After returning to England in 1910 Beatrice Harrison embarked on a solo career, with many tours to Europe and North America. In the United States, in 1913, she was the first woman cellist to play at Carnegie Hall, and the first to play with the Boston Symphony Orchestra. It was after a performance in Manchester in 1914, with her sister May, of the Brahms double concerto with the Halle orchestra under Thomas Beecham, that she first met Frederick Delius, who became a close friend of the Harrison family. Delius greatly admired Beatrice's passionate playing and full tone, and she played an important part in introducing Delius's works to American audiences. Delius wrote his double concerto (1915) for Beatrice and May Harrison, encouraging Beatrice to make any alterations she wished to the solo cello part; he wrote these into the definitive score, and they gave the first performance in the presence of the composer at the Queen's Hall in 1920. She gave the first performance of his cello sonata (1916), dedicated to her, with Hamilton Harty at the Wigmore Hall, and the British premiere of his cello concerto (1921), which Delius had begun to compose in the Harrisons' garden, in 1923. She performed the serenade from Delius's incidental music to 'Hassan', arranged by Eric Fenby in 1929 for solo cello and chamber orchestra, in Boston in 1930, and Delius wrote 'Caprice and Elegy' (1930) for her for this American tour. It was Beatrice Harrison's recording of 'Caprice and Elegy', made for HMV, that was played by the BBC after Neville Chamberlain's broadcast on 3 September 1939 announcing that England was at war with Germany. After Delius's death in France in 1934 the Harrisons arranged for his body to be taken to England in 1935, and he was reburied in Limpsfield churchyard in Surrey, close to the Harrison family grave. 
Beatrice Harrison became closely associated with the Elgar cello concerto (1919), recording first an abridged version for HMV in 1919, with a complete recording, conducted by Elgar, following in 1928, and it was thanks to her many performances that it became so popular. Elgar felt she conveyed the spirit of the work as he had intended it, and always used her as the soloist when he conducted the work. She performed works by other contemporary British composers, many of whom were inspired to write for her: Arnold Bax became a close friend, and she commissioned a cello sonata (1923) from him, which she first performed in 1924 with Harriet Cohen. He wrote 'Rhapsodic Ballad' (1939) for her, and she gave many performances of his cello concerto (1934), including two at the Promenade Concerts during the Second World War. Roger Quilter's cello solo 'L'amour de moy' and John Ireland's cello sonata (1923) were written for her, and her recording of an old Irish folk tune, 'The Lament of Fanaid Grove' (1926), arranged by the Irish composer Herbert Hughes and dedicated to her, became very famous. She also gave the first performances in Britain of Kodaly's sonata for unaccompanied cello (1915) and, with her sister Margaret, Ravel's sonata for cello and violin (1920-22). 
But to the wider public Beatrice Harrison was known for her famous nightingale broadcasts. She had discovered while playing her cello in the woods at night in the garden of the Harrisons' house, Foyle Riding, in Surrey, that she could make a nightingale sing with her, and in 1924 persuaded John Reith, general manager of the BBC, to arrange an outside broadcast. At midnight on 19 May 1924 over a million people listened while she played a duet with the nightingale, and for the next twelve years the BBC broadcast her nightingale concerts in May. Thousands of visitors flocked to Foyle Riding during the nightingale season; the Harrisons entertained musicians and friends, and chartered buses to bring families from the East End, giving them tea and beer until midnight. The broadcasts gave her a good deal of publicity, and the nightingale was depicted on her concert posters and embroidered on her concert dresses. 
Her mother's death in 1934 was a great blow. Beatrice had always lived at home with her parents and sisters, and had never led an independent life. Her mother had organized all her concert tours and usually accompanied her on them. Her youngest sister Margaret took over their mother's role, often also accompanying Beatrice on the piano. Beatrice continued to perform regularly until the 1950s, and her last public performance was a televised recital in 1958 to raise money for the rebuilding of Coventry Cathedral. 
Beatrice Harrison died on 10 March 1965 at Smallfield, near Horley, Surrey, and was buried on 16 March. She was unmarried. Strikingly beautiful with dark auburn hair, she had many suitors, but she devoted her life single-mindedly to the cello. The leading British cellist of her generation, she was also the first British cellist to win an international reputation. Her autobiography, 'The Cello and the Nightingales', was published in 1985. To mark the centenary of her birth, a radio play, 'The Cello and the Nightingale', by Patricia Cleveland-Peck, was broadcast in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 67642


Harrison, Julius Allan Greenway (1885-1963), conductor and composer, was born on 26 March 1885 in Bewdley Road, Lower Mitton, Worcestershire, the eldest in the family of four sons and three daughters of Walter Henry Harrison ('b'. 1852), grocer and candle maker, and his wife, Henriette Julien Schoeller (1860-1936), who came from Heidelberg, Germany. His parents had met while his mother was working in England as a governess. He grew up in a musical household: his father conducted the Stourport Glee Union, and he was taught the piano by his mother before taking organ and violin lessons from the organist of Wilden church. He also sang in the church choir, where the future prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, was a fellow chorister. 
Educated at Queen Elizabeth's School, Hartlebury, from 1903 to 1907 Harrison trained at the Midland Institute School of Music in Birmingham, where Granville Bantock was principal. From 1905 to 1908 he was organist at Hartlebury parish church, and after winning first prize in the composition class at the 1908 Norwich musical festival for his cantata 'Cleopatra', he moved to London to work as a freelance musician. While working for the Orchestrelle Company, correcting and editing piano rolls for player-pianos, he gained conducting experience with amateur musicians, including the Dulwich Philharmonic Society and the Hampstead Opera Comique. He was also organist of the Union Chapel, Highbury, where he had the opportunity to write music for the choir, including 'Harvest Cantata' (1910) and 'Christmas Cantata' (1911). He found time for composing other works, including the tone poem 'Night on the Mountains' (1910), which Hans Richter invited him to conduct at a London Symphony Orchestra concert. On 16 December 1913 he married (Florence) Mary ('b'. 1886/7), a singer, of Eastbourne, Sussex, daughter of Joseph Cooper Eddison; they had two daughters. 
Harrison's career as an opera conductor began in the autumn of 1913, when he was engaged to conduct for the season at Covent Garden, London; he had worked as pianist and coach for the German opera there in the spring, when he was able to observe Arthur Nikisch rehearse Wagner's 'Ring' cycle. At the end of the season he visited Bayreuth to hear Hans Richter conduct, and in 1914 he went to Paris as a member of the Covent Garden syndicate, which was promoting a German opera season there, to rehearse Wagner's 'Parsifal' and 'Tristan und Isolde' for Nikisch, and 'Die Meistersinger' for Felix Weingartner. He was one of the conductors for the Beecham Opera Company, formed by Thomas Beecham, during its existence from 1915 to 1919, and although he was called up in 1916 and was commissioned into the Royal Flying Corps his postings, first to Northolt to supervise the testing of aeroplane engines and then to the Royal Flying Corps's depot in Regent's Park, allowed him to continue to work for the opera company. In 1920 he was appointed conductor of the Bradford Permanent Orchestra, a post he held until 1927, and from 1920 to 1923 he was also co-conductor, with Landon Ronald, of the Scottish Orchestra, which had a three-month summer season in Glasgow. When Beecham founded the British National Opera Company in 1922, he invited Harrison to be a principal conductor; Harrison worked for several seasons at Covent Garden, specializing in Wagner operas and conducting twenty-two performances of 'Tristan und Isolde'. He left the company in 1924, when appointed director of opera and professor of composition at the Royal Academy of Music, and for five years prepared the opera class for the academy's annual opera week at the Scala Theatre. He was divorced from his first wife in 1929, and on 28 October that year married Dorothy Helen ('b'. 1904/5), a musician, of Baldock, Hertfordshire, daughter of Francis William Henry Langston Day; she had been a member of his harmony class at the academy. They had one son. 
In 1930 Harrison was appointed conductor of the Hastings Municipal Orchestra, a post that involved organizing an annual festival and conducting as many as twelve concerts a week during the summer season. After the orchestra was disbanded in 1940, he was director of music at Malvern College until 1942, when he became a conductor of the BBC Northern Orchestra in Manchester. As his deafness grew more severe, however, he accepted fewer conducting engagements, and after conducting the final concert of the Malvern Elgar Festival, of which he was artistic director in 1947, he was forced to give up conducting altogether. 
Harrison had always resented having to earn his living by conducting, and he was now able to devote most of his time to composition, while doing some teaching at Trinity College of Music and the Birmingham School of Music. Although he had been composing all his life, he had destroyed most of his early unpublished works, and his orchestral 'Worcestershire Suite' (1917), first performed in 1920, was his first work to attract widespread attention. This was followed by 'Requiem of Archangels for the World' (1920) for chorus and organ, but it was not until 1938, with 'Autumn Landscape' for string orchestra, written after the death of his elder daughter in 1935, that Harrison began to emerge as a mature composer with his own voice. Traditional in style, and strongly influenced by the works of Brahms, he was never interested in modernism, and hated the avant-garde. Harrison began working on his mass in C in 1936, as a memorial to his daughter, but this was not finished until 1947. It was performed regularly in his lifetime -- he heard twenty-eight performances -- and the BBC broadcast it in 1955 in celebration of his seventieth birthday. Other important works include 'Bredon Hill' (1942), a rhapsody for violin and orchestra often compared to Vaughan Williams's 'The Lark Ascending', with the score headed by lines from A. E. Housman's poem 'Here of a Sunday Morning'; the viola sonata (1946); and 'Missa liturgica' (1950). From 1947 to 1957 he was writing his 'Requiem', dedicated to Sir Edward Elgar and first performed at the Worcester festival in 1957, the year of the Elgar centenary. 
Although he never wrote a symphony himself, Harrison was an expert on the form, and published the monograph 'Brahms and his Four Symphonies' (1939). He contributed the chapter on Dvorak's orchestral music to 'Antonin Dvorak: his Achievement' (1943), edited by Viktor Fischl, and wrote four chapters for Robert Simpson's symposium 'The Symphony' (1967), which was dedicated to his memory. He also began an autobiography, 'The Red Earth of Worcestershire', which was completed by his wife but never published. 
A quiet, gentle, and sensitive man, Harrison suffered ill health for much of his life. The stress of overwork led to the development of a duodenal ulcer in early middle age at the same time as the onset of deafness, which was possibly caused by his work during the First World War. He died on 5 April 1963 at his home, The Greenwood, 28 Ox Lane, Harpenden, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 67643


Harwood, Elizabeth Jean (1938-1990), singer, was born on 27 May 1938 at Hawnby, Markton Lane, Barton Seagrave, Kettering, Northamptonshire, the daughter of Sydney Curtis Harwood, local government officer, and his wife, Constance Read. Her mother had herself been a professional soprano (after studies at the Royal Academy of Music, London) and gave Elizabeth her first childhood singing lessons. Harwood was educated at Skipton Girls' High School and went on to the Royal Manchester College of Music, the family having moved to Yorkshire. As a vocal student there of Elsie Thurston she was encouraged by the college principal, Frederic Cox, to involve herself in opera; he had recognized that with her alluring blonde glamour and outgoing personality Harwood, a soprano, was a 'natural' for the stage. 
After graduating in 1960 Harwood won the Kathleen Ferrier memorial prize and joined the Glyndebourne Festival Chorus, making her debut there as Second Boy in Mozart's 'Die Zauberflote'. In the following year she was engaged by Sadler's Wells Opera in London, where she was first cast in coloratura roles and won success as Gilda ('Rigoletto'), Zerbinetta ('Ariadne auf Naxos'), and Constanze ('Die Entfuhrung aus dem Serail'). Colin Davis, then music director of the company, was a strong influence on her stage development, while audiences much enjoyed the sense of fun she regularly imparted in her singing. 
Harwood's international reputation developed after she was joint winner of the 1963 international Verdi competition at Busseto, Italy, and in 1965 she toured Australia in starring roles with the Sutherland-Williamson company, an 'ad hoc' ensemble formed primarily to showcase Joan Sutherland's return to her native country as an international celebrity and for whom Harwood was engaged as the alternate soprano for specific performances. These included the title role in 'Lucia di Lammermoor' (Donizetti) and the leading roles in 'La sonnambula' (Bellini) and 'L'elisir d'amore' (Donizetti), parts that Harwood then also sang after her return to England. In the year after the Australia tour, on 15 January 1966, she married Julian Adam Christopher Royle ('b'. 1937/8), a company director, with whom she shared a happy home life in the Essex countryside, becoming an accomplished horsewoman and keen swimmer. They had a son. 
During the next decade Harwood was probably heard at her best, although not always on first nights, while recurring throat infections forced her to cancel some performances altogether. She nevertheless became a famously memorable partner to Janet Baker in productions of 'Cosi fan tutte' and 'Der Rosenkavalier' for Scottish Opera (their complementary eloquence and style in both Mozart and Richard Strauss were an enduring memory). Harwood further enhanced her reputation with engagements at the major festivals of Aix-en-Provence in 1967-9, while also making her Covent Garden debut in 1968 as the Fiakermilli in 'Arabella' (Strauss). Here she went on to sing Gilda, Teresa in 'Benvenuto Cellini' (Berlioz), and, in a rare excursion into contemporary opera, Bella in 'The Midsummer Marriage' (Tippett). 
At Aix-en-Provence Harwood was heard in 'Don Giovanni' by the conductor Herbert von Karajan, who engaged her for the prestigious Salzburg Festival in 1970; she regularly returned there until 1976, mainly singing Mozart roles. Meanwhile she made her debut at the Metropolitan Opera, New York, in 1972 as Fiordiligi ('Cosi fan tutte'), and returned there in subsequent seasons, also making successful guest appearances in Hamburg, Stuttgart, and Paris and at La Scala, Milan. In 1975 she captured Viennese hearts as Rosalinde in 'Die Fledermaus', and even persuaded listeners that an Englishwoman could successfully become the quintessentially Viennese operetta heroine, Hannah Glawari, in the title role of Lehar's 'Die lustige Witwe' ('The Merry Widow') with the recording she made under Herbert von Karajan, treasured by many for the infectious vocal character she brought to the role. 
Harwood was often described as 'bubbly', an apt epithet for her offstage persona, which was warm and friendly, even to a professional critic whom she was not averse to accompanying to a concert that interested her. She also brought endearing vocal character to her varied oratorio and song performances, of which several recordings fortunately constitute a living legacy, and she liked to organize musical evenings at home as well as bringing the benefit of her experience to aspiring young singers, whom she greatly enjoyed musically 'mothering'. She died after a long struggle against carcinomatosis and cancer of the breast at her home, Masonettes, Fryerning, Ingatestone, Essex, on 22 June 1990, aged fifty-two. Her husband survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 67644


Redlich, Hans Ferdinand (1903-1968), musicologist, was born on 11 February 1903 in Vienna, the only son of Professor Joseph Redlich and his wife, Alix Leo Simon. He was educated at the Schotten Gymnasium in Vienna, and after studying the piano with Paul Weingarten, theory with Hugo Kauder, and composition with Carl Orff he entered the University of Vienna in 1921. He also studied in Munich. He pursued a career as an opera conductor in the 1920s, as assistant conductor at the Charlottenburg opera house in Berlin from 1924 to 1925 and as conductor at the Stadttheater in Mainz from 1925 to 1929. In 1930 he married Elise Gerlach (died 1959). It may have been the influence of Carl Orff, who was working on Monteverdi in Munich in the 1920s and who produced realizations of several scores, including a new realization of 'Orfeo' in 1923, that led Redlich to write a thesis on the madrigals of Monteverdi for his doctorate at the University of Frankfurt am Main, awarded in 1931. This was published in book form in 1932. 
Redlich moved to England in 1939 and took British nationality in 1947. He was involved in the Morley College concerts during and after the war, and in 1948 the college choir and orchestra gave the first London performance of Monteverdi's 'The Coronation of Poppea', a concert performance using the score prepared by Redlich, who played the harpsichord accompaniment. From 1942 to 1955 he was a very popular extramural lecturer for the universities of Cambridge and Birmingham, before his appointment in 1955 as lecturer in the history of music at the University of Edinburgh. In 1962 he moved to the chair of music at the University of Manchester. 
Redlich wrote in German and in English on Monteverdi, including 'Monteverdi: Leben und Werk' (1949), translated into English in 1952, a work that played an important part in the revival of interest in the composer, and he published an edition of the Monteverdi 'Vespers' in Vienna in 1949. He also wrote about late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Austrian music: his books included 'Bruckner and Mahler' (1955) and 'Alban Berg: the Man and his Music' (1957). He wrote about Wagner's operas, with books on 'Tristan and Isolde' (1945), 'Lohengrin' (1949), and 'Parsifal' (1951). He produced editions of Handel's early works composed in Halle and his twelve concerti grossi, op. 6; his editions of the 'Water Music' and 'Music for the Royal Fireworks', published in 1962, gave English audiences their first opportunity to hear these as originally scored rather than the modern arrangements, as orchestral suites, by Hamilton Harty. He was engaged on a new critical edition of Handel when he died. He was also general editor of the Eulenburg miniature scores, and in 1968 contributed the chapter on early baroque church music to volume 4 of the 'New Oxford History of Music'. In his Percival lecture, 'The meaning and the aims of musicology', to the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society in 1963, he made a plea for greater importance to be attached to the study of the history of music in British universities. 
Redlich married again in 1961; his second wife was Erika Burger. In 1967 he was awarded an honorary DMus by the University of Edinburgh. He died on 27 November 1968 at his home, 1 Morville Road, Manchester, and was cremated in Manchester two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 67645


Irving, (Kelville) Ernest (1877-1953), musical director and composer, was born on 6 November 1877 in Pound Hill, Godalming, the eldest child of Ashley Alfred Irving ('b'. 'c'.1844/5, died in or before 1898), ironmonger, and his wife, Emma Fenner ('b'. 'c'.1854/5). His boyhood was much influenced by his maternal grandmother, whose late husband had been organist of Godalming parish church. Ernest became a choirboy at the same church at the age of seven and was later educated at Charterhouse School. On leaving school he sought musical engagements, and in 1895, at the age of seventeen, he became musical director of a musical burlesque in Maidenhead. There followed a succession of similar engagements around the country. At Fylde register office on 11 May 1898, aged twenty but claiming to be twenty-four, he married Bertha Newall ('b'. 1871/2) of Blackpool, the daughter of John Newall, a contractor. The marriage produced two children but did not last. 
Among other subsequent touring engagements, Irving was musical director of a company playing British musical shows at the Teatro Comedia in Madrid in 1907. Then in 1910 he was engaged for the touring companies of George Edwardes, and in 1918 he finally obtained an extended London engagement as musical director of the Charles Cuvillier operetta 'The Lilac Domino' at the Empire. He conducted the opening attraction of the Palace (later the Mogador) in Paris, and through membership of the Savage Club he became closely associated with Norman O'Neill. He conducted many of O'Neill's incidental scores, and through him was appointed to the committees of both the Savage Club and the Royal Philharmonic Society. During the 1920s and 1930s he conducted at virtually all London theatres, notably as musical director of 'Lilac Time' from 1922 to 1924. He was also engaged for 'The Land of Smiles' at Drury Lane with Richard Tauber, 'The Dubarry' at His Majesty's with Anny Ahlers, and 'Henry IV' at His Majesty's with George Robey. On 19 December 1930, following divorce from his first wife, he married Muriel (1898-1983), daughter of George Walter Heath, a woollen goods manufacturer. His wife was a contralto who had won prizes at the Guildhall School of Music and who had appeared in 'Lilac Time'. They had one daughter; but the marriage was soon overshadowed by financial problems and bankruptcy from which, to avoid publicity, Irving never sought discharge. 
Irving composed or arranged incidental music for forty-four plays in all, including 'The Circle of Chalk' (1931) and eight Shakespeare scores for the Alhambra in London, the Hippodrome in Manchester, the Malvern Festival, and the Memorial Theatre in Stratford upon Avon. He also composed the operettas 'The Two Bouquets' (1936) and 'An Elephant in Arcady' (1938). During the Second World War he was musical director for the Entertainments National Service Association and also for the International Ballet. 
Irving's most notable achievement was almost certainly his work in film music. Shortly after the First World War he had conducted music to accompany trade shows of the Gaumont-British Film Producing Company at the Empire Theatre, and this gave him early experience of fitting music to action on film. It led to other engagements and in due course brought him to the attention of Basil Dean, co-founder of Associated Talking Pictures. Irving directed the music for Dean's film 'Escape' in 1930, and in 1935 was appointed musical director of Ealing Studios, a post he held almost until his death. He directed the music for over 100 films, including those of Gracie Fields and George Formby as well as such classics as 'Pink String and Sealing Wax' (1945). He also composed film music, most notably for 'Whisky Galore' (1949), and he arranged Handel's music for 'The Great Mr Handel' (1943). Irving sought to raise the standard of film music by engaging distinguished composers, including John Ireland for 'The Overlanders' (1946), Alan Rawsthorne for 'The Captive Heart' (1946), and Ralph Vaughan Williams for 'The Loves of Joanna Godden' (1947) and 'Scott of the Antarctic' (1949). When Vaughan Williams based his 'Sinfonia antartica' on the music for the latter film he dedicated it to Irving, who was also dedicatee of string quartets by William Walton and Rawsthorne. 
Irving was well known as a lecturer and a writer on film music and was a member of the British Film Academy. He was for many years a committee member of the Royal Philharmonic Society and in 1951 was awarded the distinction of honorary membership. He also held an honorary degree of the Royal Academy of Music. A keen rock walker in his younger days, he was always an outstanding chess player. As such he was correspondent of the 'Illustrated London News' and was known to frighten impresarios by playing chess with members of his orchestras during theatre performances. 
After ill health compelled him to retire from Ealing Studios at the end of April 1953, Irving remained confined to bed at his home at 4 The Lawn, Ealing Green, adjoining the studios, and wrote a witty autobiography, 'Cue for Music', which was published posthumously in 1959. He died at home on 24 October 1953, aged seventy-five. A man of wide learning, Irving could -- in his own words -- be disputatious and didactic at times; but he was much valued as 'a character'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67646


Jaeger, August Johannes (1860-1909), music critic, was born on 18 March 1860 in Dusseldorf, Germany, the second son and the third of the six surviving children of Gottfried Jaeger (1822-1880), a cattle dealer, and his wife, Caroline Obenstintenberg (1826-1910). He was educated at the Dusseldorf Gymnasium and also received tuition in violin and piano, in which instruments he became proficient, although he was forbidden by his father from pursuing a professional musical career. Despite Dusseldorf's longstanding musical traditions, Jaeger left the city in 1878 at the age of eighteen, turning his back, like many others, on Bismarckian authoritarianism in favour of the liberalism of the 'land without music' (Northrop Moore, 48). He settled with his family in London, working as a clerk while continuing to pursue music through choral singing and frequent concertgoing. In particular he followed the Richter concerts, with their revelatory programmes of the most modern orchestral music of the day -- particularly Wagner, to whom the young enthusiast became devoted. His first opportunities to experience the music dramas themselves came in 1882, when three complete cycles of 'The Ring' were given in London, together with the English premieres of 'The Mastersingers' and 'Tristan'. 
In 1890 Jaeger was appointed publishing office manager of Novellos, the leading English music publisher of the time. He gradually became an unofficial musical adviser with a highly individual position, enabling him to pursue a personal mission to discover and encourage new English composers. Ideally placed in a position of some power, he built up a wide network of contacts in support of his efforts, joining the ranks of the critics when he became a staff writer for the 'Musical Times'. This enabled him to add campaigning journalism to his direct lobbying of conductors, the Novello's directors, and others, in a determined search for performance and publication opportunities for new composers. Most importantly, he offered direct encouragement and technical advice through detailed and sometimes extended correspondence, where a rigorous critical judgement was fully and frankly exercised, albeit in a warm and personal way; several of his proteges became family friends. But the response from Novellos could be negative and frustrating, as Jaeger tended to be seen as something of an advanced left-winger in an essentially conservative musical establishment slow to embrace the new. 
During the 1890s Jaeger did much to establish the reputation of the American Horatio Parker, but his most important efforts during this period were on behalf of Edward Elgar, Walford Davies, and Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, in support of whose highly successful 'Hiawatha's Wedding Feast' he gave much specific criticism and advice. Shortly after its first performance, on 22 December 1898 Jaeger married Isabella Donkersley (1864-1938), a former violin student at the Royal College of Music. She combined occasional work as a soloist with teaching, providing extra income to support their two children when Jaeger had to retire early through ill health. 
During his career Jaeger actively helped a variety of other young composers, including Cyril Scott, Havergal Brian, Josef Holbrooke, John McEwen, John Foulds, and William Henry Bell; and even such a senior figure as Hubert Parry benefited from his advice. But it is for his work for Elgar, with whom he first made contact in 1897 and with whom he enjoyed an instant rapport, that he is best known. He worked tirelessly to encourage the frequently moody composer, to smooth his path at Novellos, to ensure the accurate production of his scores -- often against tight deadlines -- and to engineer performances of his works at home and abroad, particularly in Germany. He directly exercised critical judgement over the 'Enigma Variations' and 'The Dream of Gerontius', insisting on important changes, and he largely suggested the form and instrumentation of the 'Introduction and Allegro for Strings'. In order, too, to prepare the public for the new complexities of Elgar's oratorios, Jaeger wrote lengthy analyses of these works at great labour, although he failed to please the composer by an oversimplistic labelling of leitmotifs. Such efforts further weakened a constitution already at risk from chronic overwork, and lowered resistances exacerbated a family tendency to tuberculosis. Despite treatments at Swiss sanatoria, partly financed by Parry, Jaeger died at his home, 37 Curzon Road, Muswell Hill, on 18 May 1909, aged forty-nine. He was cremated at Golders Green on 22 May. 
By temperament Jaeger was essentially an artist, ill-adjusted to the drudgery of office routine, but the exigencies of life put him in a position where his own practical musicianship became subsumed into wider fields; one of the obituaries wrote of 'his genius for discovering genius' (Allen, 283), and Jaeger may be said to have done as much if not more than anyone not a composer or conductor to contribute to the dynamic of the English musical renaissance, albeit from a strongly German perspective. His superbly well-judged suggestions for improvement in Elgar's music remain without parallel in relations between composer and publisher, and his Dusseldorf contacts paved the way for performances of Elgar's music in Germany which established the composer's reputation in his own country as well as in Europe. Elgar recorded deep gratitude for his friend's intimate understanding and encouragement in the celebrated 'Nimrod' movement of the 'Enigma Variations', music which has become a familiar part of English national life and cultural heritage, even if the unmistakably German name of its modest, frail, but determined subject has remained known to comparatively few. And Elgar knew that the movement does not portray the whole man, for he wrote that, in order fully to portray Jaeger's character and temperament, something 'ardent and mercurial' would have been needed. 


@@@@@


doc= 67649


Lemare, Edwin Henry (1865-1934), organist and composer, was born on 9 September 1865 in Ventnor, Isle of Wight, the son of Edwin Lemare, music teacher and organist, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Wicker. He spent his boyhood on the island and was a chorister and organ pupil, under his father's direction, at Holy Trinity Church, Ventnor. Then, in 1876, he won a John Goss scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music, where he studied for six years under George and Walter Macfarren and the organists Charles Steggall and Edmund Hart Turpin. In 1882 he was made organist at St John's Church, Finsbury Park, London. He first established a reputation as a concert organist at the International Inventions Exhibition at South Kensington in 1885; there he played works by Louis Lefebure-Wely, Alexandre Guilmant, Bach, and other composers twice daily for a total of over 100 recitals to demonstrate the new tubular-pneumatic action of the one-manual Brindley and Foster organ. This further led to his employment by competing organ-builders. 
In 1886 Lemare began recitals twice a week at the Park Hall, Cardiff, and in the same year he was appointed organist at the parish church and the Albert Hall, Sheffield. In 1892 he returned to London, as organist of Holy Trinity, Sloane Street, and on 1 June he married Marian Broomhead Colton Fox ('b'. 1863/4), daughter of Barnard Platts Broomhead Colton Fox, solicitor. He also became an organ professor and examiner for the Associated Board of the Royal Academy of Music and the Royal College of Music. In 1897 he followed his vicar to St Margaret's, Westminster, where a new Walker instrument was installed. 
Lemare's performances in the concert hall were by now leading to his being compared with virtuosi such as the pianists Ignacy Jan Paderewski and Leopold Godowsky. His reputation was heightened by his own organ compositions, among which he enjoyed particular success with 'Andantino in D[flat]' (1892), which was also arranged for small orchestra by Gustav Holst. In 1900-01 he made his first tour of the USA and Canada, sponsored by the organ manufacturer John Austin. The tour encompassed over 100 recitals and led to Lemare's becoming one of the Austin Organ Company's most ardent champions. His marriage meanwhile having failed, on 7 January 1902 he married Elsie Frances ('b'. 1876/7), daughter of David Reith, honorary canon of Rochester Cathedral. He seemingly also married again after he settled in the USA when he became organist of the Carnegie Institute in Pittsburgh from 1902 to 1905. 
As time went on Lemare's recitals triumphed to the extent that he became the highest-paid organist in the world. Altogether tours took him across the Atlantic several dozen times and across the Pacific four times, his appearances in Melbourne and Sydney being noteworthy events. In 1908 he inaugurated the huge Hope-Jones pipe organ at Ocean Grove, New Jersey, and in 1915 he performed a series of 121 concerts on the Austin organ at the Panama-Pacific Exposition. When that instrument was relocated to San Francisco's Civic Auditorium in 1917, he became municipal organist there. He remained until 1921, when he took a similar post at City Hall in Portland, Maine, and later he was in Chattanooga, Tennessee, where in 1927 he designed an especially impressive Austin organ. 
Lemare's virtuoso organ compositions embraced some 200 opus numbers. They included two symphonies, published in 1899 and 1906, a sonata, a toccata and fugue, and various services of thanksgiving. He also made transcriptions of a wide range of compositions, ranging from Handel's 'Largo' and Schubert's 'Serenade' to Tchaikovsky's 'Romeo and Juliet' overture and Elgar's 'Pomp and Circumstance' march no. 1, via Suppe's 'Poet and Peasant' overture and some Neapolitan songs. His transcriptions and performances of Wagner compositions were of especial note, originating a style of registering and organ-scoring that did much to develop organ tone qualities. He made some 120 player rolls for the Aeolian and Welte companies. 
In 1925 Lemare's 'Andantino in D[flat]' achieved renewed popularity when adapted by Ben Black and Neil Moret into the song 'Moonlight and Roses'. However, even these royalties could not prevent him from declining into poverty when his health, fame, and technique began to fade. He died in Hollywood on 24 September 1934. In 1956 a volume of his memoirs, augmented by reminiscences by his wife and friends, was published in Los Angeles as 'Organs I have Met'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67650


Lewis, Richard (1914-1990), singer, was born on 10 May 1914 at 69 Baden Street, Ardwick, Manchester, only son and the younger of the two children of Thomas Thomas (died 1949) and his wife, Mary Hannah, 'nee' Lewis (died 1963), who had moved to Manchester from Wales when Thomas was offered the job of coachman to the manager of the London, Midland, and Scottish Railway. They were Methodists, and he was brought up on Methodist hymns played on the harmonium by his mother. A boy soprano, he won gold medals at festivals all over the north of England until his voice broke when he was sixteen. He left Didsbury Central secondary school in 1930 to work as a clerk at the Calico Printers' Association, but he studied harmony and counterpoint in his spare time and continued to sing; after winning the gold medal of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music in 1938, he won a scholarship to the Royal Manchester College of Music in 1939, to study with the bass Norman Allin. 
In 1940 Thomas joined the Entertainments National Service Association, and in 1941 he made his debut with the Carl Rosa Opera Company as Pinkerton in Puccini's 'Madama Butterfly' and Almaviva in Rossini's 'The Barber of Seville'. He was called up into the Royal Corps of Signals in 1941, but remained in England until 1944. In 1943 he married Mary, daughter of Joseph Lingard, first flute in the Halle Orchestra and professor of flute at the Royal Manchester College of Music; they had one son. Thomas was posted to Normandy in 1944, and then to Brussels, where he was able to study at the Brussels conservatory and sang in Brussels, Antwerp, and Liege, including several performances of Benjamin Britten's 'Les Illuminations', the beginning of a close association with Britten's music. It was at this point that he took the name Richard Lewis. He sang Britten's 'Serenade for Tenor, Horn, and Strings' in Copenhagen in 1945, and while stationed in Germany in 1946 took lessons from Pacho Kochen in Hamburg. After demobilization he enrolled in January 1947 at the Royal Academy of Music, where Norman Allin was now teaching, but his career was already taking off: he replaced Peter Pears in Britten's 'Serenade' with the Southern Philharmonic Orchestra in Brighton in January, and after touring with the English Opera Group in Britten's 'Albert Herring' in the summer of 1947 he made his debut at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, on 10 November 1947, as the Male Chorus in Britten's 'The Rape of Lucretia' and took over the title role in 'Peter Grimes' on 28 November 1947. 
Richard Lewis sang in his first Glyndebourne season in 1950 as Ferrando in 'Cosi fan tutte', after singing Don Ottavio in 'Don Giovanni' with the Glyndebourne Opera Company at the Edinburgh festival in 1948, and he sang there every year until 1967, except for 1957 and 1965, and returned in 1972 to sing Eumeaus with Janet Baker in Peter Hall's production of Monteverdi's 'Il ritorno d'Ulisse'. During this period he sang in twelve different roles, most notably that of Tom Rakewell in Igor Stravinsky's 'The Rake's Progress' (in which he sang in the British premiere at the Edinburgh festival in 1953), which became one of the most popular operas at Glyndebourne in the 1950s. He was the leading Mozart tenor at Glyndebourne for many years, singing in every 'Idomeneo' from 1951 to 1974. He made his final appearance at Glyndebourne in 1979, in 'Il ritorno d'Ulisse'. Lewis also sang regularly at Covent Garden, where he was particularly in demand as an interpreter of contemporary opera, including the role of Captain Vere in Britten's 'Billy Budd', which he first sang in 1949 and sang for the next thirty years, taking over at short notice in 1979, his final appearance at Covent Garden. He created Troilus in William Walton's 'Troilus and Cressida' in 1954, and also the role of Mark in Michael Tippett's 'The Midsummer Marriage' in 1955, when he sang opposite Joan Sutherland, and in 1962 he created Achilles in Tippett's 'King Priam'. One of his most memorable performances was as Aaron in Schoenberg's 'Moses and Aaron' in 1965. 
The first British singer to be engaged by a major American opera company since before the war, Lewis made his American debut in 1955 as Don Jose in 'Carmen' in San Francisco, and he returned every autumn until 1968 to sing with the San Francisco Opera. He also sang regularly with the Metropolitan Opera in New York. In the United States he formed the Bach Aria Group, a group of singers and instrumentalists which performed in New York and toured the universities. He appeared in the major European opera houses, and created Amphitryon in Giselher Klebe's 'Alkmene' in Berlin in 1961. In 1956 he sang the tenor solo in the first performance of Stravinsky's 'Sacrum canticum' in St Mark's, Venice. As a singer of oratorio he was most renowned for his Gerontius in Sir Edward Elgar's 'The Dream of Gerontius', which he first performed with Sir Malcolm Sargent in 1949, and he was noted for his interpretations of Mahler's 'Das Lied von der Erde'. He also sang regularly with the Handel Opera Society. 
In 1963 Lewis was appointed CBE. In that year he was divorced from his first wife, and married Elizabeth, a singer, daughter of the television reporter (James) Fyfe Robertson; they had one son. His widowed elder sister married Fyfe Robertson, by then a widower, in 1978. In 1967 Lewis accepted an appointment as professor of singing at the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia, and he taught there from 1968 to 1971, performing regularly with the Philadelphia Orchestra under its musical director, Eugene Ormandy; during this period he also had a home in Bermuda. He returned to England in 1972 and continued to perform until 1982, when he made his last appearance, in Britten's 'Spring Symphony', with the Concertgebouw Orchestra in Amsterdam. His most memorable recordings include Tippett's 'A Child of our Time', Mendelssohn's 'Elijah' (recorded in 1969 with Eugene Ormandy and the Philadelphia Orchestra), and a series of Gilbert and Sullivan operas, including 'The Gondoliers' and 'The Mikado', conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent. He recorded 'The Dream of Gerontius' twice, with Marjorie Thomas as the Angel in 1955, conducted by Sargent, and with Janet Baker and Sir John Barbirolli in 1965. Lewis was awarded the honorary degree of DMus by the universities of St Andrews in 1984 and Manchester in 1986. He died on 13 November 1990 at his home, Coombe House, 22 Church Street, Old Willingdon, Eastbourne, Sussex, and was cremated on 19 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 67651


Webber, William Southcombe Lloyd (1914-1982), composer and organist, was born at 274 King's Road, Chelsea, London, on 11 March 1914, the son of William Charles Henry Webber, a self-employed plumber, and his wife, Mary Winifred Gittins. His father was a considerable authority on pipe-organ building, and from an early age the younger William was taken to see famous organs all over the country, developing an almost obsessional interest in the instrument. Aged thirteen he broadcast a recital from St Mary-le-Bow in London, and by the age of fourteen he was well known throughout the country as a recitalist. Webber won an organ scholarship to Mercer's School in 1925 and the Sir John Goss scholarship to the Royal College of Music in 1931. It was at this time that he changed his surname to Lloyd Webber, as there was another organist at the Royal College with a similar name. He studied composition with Ralph Vaughan Williams and the organ with Dr Henry Ley. In 1933 he obtained the fellowship diploma of the Royal College of Organists, becoming the youngest person ever to do so. 
Throughout his life Lloyd Webber maintained an interest in the organ, becoming successively organist at Christchurch, Newgate Street (1929-32), St Cyprian's, Clarence Gate (1933-9), All Saints, Margaret Street (1939-48), and Westminster Central Hall (1958-82). As a performer, he was much admired. A former curate of All Saints remarked that he was 'an organist of rare distinction. His playing had about it a vitality and colour and crispness which were unequalled' (Williams, 117). At the Royal College of Music he played Max Reger's fiendishly complicated 'Phantasie und Fuge uber B-A-C-H' from memory, only a week after purchasing a copy of the score. This raw talent never left him; as a reviewer in the 'Musical Times' noted on one performance, 'Dr Lloyd Webber really must not give up the instrument that was his first enthusiasm... we cannot afford to spare native ability such as that' (Farmer). He gained his BMus in 1933 and his DMus from the London College of Music in 1938. In 1942 he married Jean Hermione Johnstone, a violinist and pianist who too was a pupil of Vaughan Williams. They met at All Saints, Margaret Street, where Jean was one of several sopranos who had been drafted in to sing in the choir in the wartime absence of the boys. They had two sons, Andrew ('b'. 1948), a popular composer, and Julian ('b'. 1951), a cellist. Life as a professional musician during the Second World War and in its immediate aftermath was difficult. Lloyd Webber was forced to supplement the meagre income he made from composing with various academic posts. From 1942 he taught as professor and examiner in theory and composition at the Royal College of Music, and he became the director of the London College of Music in 1964. He was appointed CBE for his services to music education in 1980. 
Lloyd Webber wanted to make his living as a composer, but as he noted in an interview in the 'Daily Mail' shortly before his death, 'it became basically a matter of finance. It's very difficult to make a living out of composition unless you succeed in the kind of work that Andrew does' (Gillard). As a composer, Lloyd Webber can be seen very much as a man in another age. His style is post-Romantic, echoing Rachmaninoff, Sibelius, and Franck, but never mere pastiche. Ironically, his own harmonic language is, in places, almost as daring as that of composers who were experimenting with the serialist and avante-garde techniques that he deplored, and yet he felt his style to be at odds with what was expected of composers at the time. His unwillingness to promote himself as a composer, in an era that heralded musicians such as Benjamin Britten, Michael Tippett, and William Walton, meant that most of his music did not receive the attention that it deserved until after his death. There were too many exceptional British composers active at the time for the music of the rather reserved Lloyd Webber to make any real impact. The reviewer and critic Felix Aprahamian noted, 'It was the same in France. We've all heard of Debussy and Ravel, but contemporary with these were at least twenty marvellous French composers... too many of them to find room at the top' (Campbell, 4). Lloyd Webber took each rejection as a profound and bitter blow. He all but ceased composing between 1960 and 1980, but, as the small number of works that date from this period demonstrate, the criticism of his music that he so painfully endured did not diminish his ability to compose, but rather his desire to do so. 
At heart, Lloyd Webber was a miniaturist. He had a great capacity for expressing himself in a short space of time, and often much emotion is distilled in brief, intense statements. This leads some way towards an understanding of the brevity of much of his output, which consists largely of chamber music, songs, and works for solo instruments. Among his orchestral music, the tone poem 'Aurora' (1951), depicting the arrival of the Roman goddess of the dawn, is his only real symphonic statement. Lloyd Webber seems to have been proud of this piece, given that he would talk about it with family and friends -- something that he rarely did in the case of any of his other works. There are a large number of sacred works, comprising short anthems, motets, and canticles and two settings of the ordinary of the mass -- the 'Missa princeps pacis' (1962), written for the choir of Westminster Cathedral, and the 'Missa sanctae Mariae Magdelenae' (1979). In addition to this, there are three larger-scale oratorios, of which 'St Francis of Assisi' (1951) is of note. 
Lloyd Webber died at Beaumont House, Beaumont Street, Westminster, London on 29 October 1982, having suffered a heart attack; his wife, Jean, survived him. With him died virtually all knowledge of his ability as a musician and composer, save for that of his family and a few close friends. By the beginning of the twenty-first century his music had begun to undergo something of a renaissance, and it was only posthumously that he came to be regarded by some as 'One of the finest all-round musicians this country has produced this century. A fine and refined composer whose contribution... was of considerable significance' (Hesford). 


@@@@@


doc= 67652


Mantovani, Annunzio Paolo (1905-1980), orchestra leader and musical arranger, was born on 15 November 1905 in Venice, Italy, the son of (Bismark) Benedetto Mantovani and his wife, Iparia Gandino (died 1969). His father, born in Rovigo, was a violinist and leader of the orchestra at La Scala, Milan, and had played under Arturo Toscanini, Hans Richter, Thomas Beecham, Camille Saint-Saens, and Pietro Mascagni. He was also professor at two Italian conservatories (and held the title cavaliere). 
In 1909, when Mantovani was four, his father went to London as leader of the orchestra of the Italian Opera Company at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden. At the end of one season he decided to stay in England with his family: wife, son, Annunzio, and daughter, Remila ('b'. 1907). A second daughter was born in England. The young Mantovani went to Archbishop Tenison's Grammar School and L'Ecole Notre Dame, London. His father, who wanted him to be an engineer, gave him piano lessons and at an early age he showed great musical aptitude. At fourteen he developed a passion for the violin and his father, now won over, promised that the boy should have his Testori violin, which had been presented to him by a Russian princess, if he could play the Kreutzer violin concerto before he was sixteen. This was accomplished nine months before his birthday. His father now agreed that he should go to the Trinity College of Music, where he studied violin and composition. He became a professional violinist and gave recitals at the Wigmore Hall and played the Saint-Saens concerto at the Queen's Hall. He played in various hotel restaurant orchestras, including the Midland Hotel in Birmingham in 1923, and by 1927 he was leading a small orchestra at the fashionable Metropole Hotel, London, which had in its ranks such future talents as Reginald Kilbey and George Melachrino, as well as Mantovani's father on violin. He first recorded about 1927 under the name of Leonelli Gandino on the Imperial label, and made many records between 1927 and 1932 with various dance orchestras; he first recorded under his own name on the Regal label from 1928. By 1930 he was leading his Tipica Orchestra, resident at the Monseigneur Restaurant in Piccadilly from 1931 to 1934, where he began to build his national reputation through a series of lunchtime broadcasts. From 1932 to 1935 he recorded for the Homophone group of labels under various names and, with his Tipica Orchestra (title dropped in 1937), for Columbia, in 1935-40. Later he was resident at the Cafe de Paris, the Mario, and the Hollywood restaurants, and worked at Butlin's holiday camps. He became an experienced theatre conductor, for a time musical director for Noel Coward -- with 'Sigh No More' (1945), 'Pacific 1860' (1946), 'Ace of Clubs' (1950), and Noel Gay's 'Bob's your Uncle' (1948), among the shows he directed, the last being J. B. Fagan's 'And So to Bed' (1951), a musical romp based on the life of Samuel Pepys. 
In July 1935 Mantovani became a naturalized British subject, having married Winifred Kathleen Moss (1909-1977), the daughter of a City company director, William James Moss, on 4 August 1934. For most of their marriage they had a house in Bournemouth and kept a flat in St John's Wood, with Winifred his constant support and encouragement during a long and happy marriage. They had a son, Kenneth Paul, and a daughter, Paula Irene. 
Monty, as Mantovani was always known, might well have continued as just one of many accomplished and admired orchestra leaders had he not attained great popular fame through his phenomenal success as a recording artist. The fruition of his musical ideas came in a neatly coincidental way with the recording boom prompted by the launching of the hi-fi long-playing record. In the late 1940s the lightly lush Mantovani style had a steady following in the USA as well as in Britain and it was decided to make a fresh appeal to the record market by launching a comparatively large light orchestra of about forty-five players with some thirty-two strings, proportions far beyond the scope of the general palm court sort of ensemble. The talented composer/arranger Ronald Binge (1910-1979), who had played with and arranged for Mantovani since 1935, conceived the idea of a delayed entry device in the string writing which gave a shimmering, cascading effect; it was first successfully employed in the 1951 recording of 'Charmaine', which quickly sold a million copies. The novelty caught on in a big way and the LPs issued by the Decca Record Company, for whom he had started recording in 1940, began to sell in very large numbers. By 1971 his LPs had sold some 35 million copies. Now very popular in the USA, he made the first of many American tours in 1955, also regularly visiting Europe, South Africa, Canada, and the Far East until 1969. 
The huge record sales continued into the 1970s, his first twenty-five years with Decca being celebrated in 1965 when Mantovani was presented with a diamond studded baton. By then he had also been rewarded with eighteen gold discs, each celebrating million-selling recordings. He made his last LP in 1975, the year in which ill health forced his retirement. Beyond his skills as a conceptual director and arranger of most of his scores, and the fame that came with the cascading strings, he was also an accomplished composer of orchestral pieces, his works including 'Royal Blue Waltz', 'Toyshop Ballet' (which won a Novello award in 1957), 'Serenata d'amore' -- which became his best-known creation -- and the song 'Cara mia' which was made a no. 1 hit by the singer David Whitfield. 
Mantovani was a strict disciplinarian at work, a trait that was always made acceptable by his innate courtesy and charm. He was appreciated by his players as a thorough technician and a musician of experience and quality. He maintained a quietly dignified manner in his soft-voiced introductions and allowed the music to speak for its flamboyant self; but his quiet and unassuming manner changed when the baton was in his hand. He liked to think that his head was British and his heart Italian -- an ancestry that came out in his music-making. He always enjoyed his role as the maestro and would be found seated elegantly at his grand piano, pen in hand, when one visited him at his large flat off Regent's Park. He passed his retirement years in Dorset, and died in the Clarence Nursing Home, 3/4 Clarence Road, Tunbridge Wells, on 30 March 1980. He was cremated at Tunbridge Wells on 8 April and his ashes were interred in Bournemouth, next to his wife's. 


@@@@@


doc= 67653


Mayerl, William Joseph (1902-1959), pianist and composer, was born on 31 May 1902 at 53 Tottenham Court Road, London, the second of three children of Joseph Mayerl (1871-1937), violinist, and his wife, Elise (1881-1938), daughter of Adam August Umbach, a clarinettist from Holland. His paternal grandfather was Anton Mayerl, probably from Bohemia. There were professional musicians on both sides of Mayerl's family but his only formal study was on a scholarship in the junior department at Trinity College of Music, London, from 1911 to 1914. He was a child prodigy, apparently playing Grieg's piano concerto in the Queen's Hall at the age of nine. But before he had finished even these minimal studies he was employed in cinemas, in the days of silent films, billed as the 'Wonder boy pianist'. He was fascinated by American popular music, learning the tunes from the mechanical penny-in-the-slot machines. In 1919 Mayerl became a published composer but, in spite of his own energetic promotion, he was mortified when his 'Egyptian Suite' was not a success. But success was to come. He graduated from cinemas to playing in dance bands. It was probably in 1921 that he was heard in Southampton by the American saxophonist and bandleader Bert Ralton, who was building up a band at the Savoy Hotel in London, and made him an immediate offer. The Savoy Havana and the Savoy Orpheans became the most famous of all dance bands through their regular appearances on BBC radio in the earliest days of broadcasting. As pianist in the Savoy Havana, Mayerl was in a unique position to present his own dazzling piano playing, including his compositions such as 'The Jazz Master', 'The Jazz Mistress', and 'Jazzaristrix'. These titles suggested jazz but the genre was novelty piano since Mayerl was never an improvising player. His effortless high-speed playing caused him to be known as 'the pianist with the lightning fingers' and he was filmed in slow motion to try to see how it was done. Mayerl was an admirer of George Gershwin and gave the first British public performance of 'Rhapsody in Blue' at the Queen's Hall on 28 October 1925. 
On 19 April 1923 Mayerl married a fellow cinema pianist, Ermenegilda 
(Gilda, Gil, and later Jill; 1896-1984)
, daughter of Isidoro Bernini, a tailor, who had come to this country from Italy as a child. There were no children. This was a particularly happy marriage and it gave Mayerl the stability to launch into three simultaneous careers when he left the Savoy in 1926. He became a celebrity on the music halls; he worked in the musical theatre; and, along with the businessman novelist Geoffrey Clayton, he started the Billy Mayerl School of Music, where the teaching was done by post supported by 78 r.p.m. recordings. Between the wars syncopated piano playing was all the rage and both amateurs and professionals wanted to learn how to update their style. The Billy Mayerl School had thirteen branches in England and five abroad; it issued the 'Billy Mayerl Club Magazine' every month from 1934 until the war, and the club enrolled almost 2000 members. Mayerl had some famous pupils and the prince of Wales (later Edward VIII) was a fan who used to enjoy accompanying him on drums. In the theatre Mayerl's first full-length show was 'Nippy', about a waitress in a cafe which belonged to the popular chain of Lyons Corner Houses. The title role was taken by the glamorous Binnie Hale and the show contained 'A couple of fine old schools', which turned out to be a song about Eton College and Borstal prison. Throughout the 1930s, with extraordinary energy, Mayerl composed and conducted musical comedies designed as vehicles for some of the most celebrated actors of the period, went on broadcasting regularly, and appeared on the early pre-war television broadcasts. When the war came this world collapsed. Mayerl's school went into liquidation and, turned down for active service, he took a routine job directing the band at the Grosvenor House Hotel on Park Lane. Increasingly Mayerl felt at home in the field of British light music, helping to start the Light Music Society in 1957 and editing its magazine until his death. 
Mayerl's stunning pianism is preserved in many recordings, but he left a unique body of piano music, consisting of some 300 piano solos and more than 100 transcriptions of popular songs. Mayerl encapsulated the mood of the 1920s perfectly in his 'Six Pianolettes' and 'Four Piano Exaggerations' which demand a virtuosity few pianists have been able to match. In the 1930s the 'Four Aces Suite' and the 'Aquarium Suite' reflected two of his enthusiasms -- playing cards and fish -- and Mayerl also developed what he called syncopated impressions. He was a keen gardener so these lyrical pieces often had floral titles. For millions his name has always been synonymous with one of these in particular -- Marigold (which he used as the name of his house). But he also thought of himself as a more serious composer in orchestral works such as 'Sennen Cove' and 'The Forgotten Forest'. By the 1990s, thanks to Eric Parkin's series of recordings and reissues of Mayerl himself, his attractive music was being recognized in a category somewhere between classical music and jazz. Mayerl enjoyed his friends and his success but his later years were dogged by ill health exacerbated by overwork since early youth. A heavy smoker, he died of coronary thrombosis and arteriosclerosis at Marigold Lodge, Pyebush Lane, Beaconsfield, on 25 March 1959, and was cremated at Golders Green on 31 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 67654


Samuel, Harold Solomon (1879-1937), pianist, was born on 23 May 1879 at 37 Bristol Gardens, Paddington, London, the son of Moses Samuel, an auctioneer, and his wife, Victoria Mallaw. At seventeen he entered the Royal College of Music, where he studied piano with Edward Dannreuther and composition with Charles Villiers Stanford. At first he was known mainly as a brilliant player of Liszt, but soon he became interested in a wider range of music and virtually abandoned the virtuoso repertoire. Typically, he became one of the coaches in the opera class at the college, and was involved in the earliest English performances of Verdi's 'Falstaff', given by students of the college under the direction of Stanford. 
Samuel gave his first piano recital on 14 March 1900 at the Steinway Hall in Wigmore Street. The main part of his programme was devoted to the hour-long 'Goldberg' variations by J. S. Bach. Today this would cause little surprise; but at that time Bach's keyboard music was rarely heard other than in transcriptions by Liszt, Tausig, or Busoni. In spite of the recital's success, Samuel was forced to abandon the hazardous career of a soloist for the early death of his father had left him with unexpected financial responsibilities. Instead he turned to the more secure if less glamorous work of accompanying and teaching. 
At the comparatively late age of forty Samuel took the courageous step of giving up accompanying entirely and devoting himself to solo work. Two years later he gave a series of six daily Bach recitals at the Wigmore Hall (30 May - 4 June 1921), thus establishing himself in the public mind as a Bach specialist (a term he disliked intensely). In all, Samuel gave six of these 'Bach weeks' in London, and one in New York in 1928. In later years he restricted himself to single recitals, partly because the mental and physical strain of the 'weeks' was excessive, and partly because he felt that his missionary work in establishing Bach's keyboard music had already been accomplished. 
Samuel was also a notable chamber music player, and in the 1930s formed a partnership with violinist Isolde Menges, with whom he gave many concerts in the Netherlands and elsewhere. In 1924, at the invitation of Mrs Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge, he gave the first of many tours in the USA. He was an important influence, both personally and musically, on another and considerably younger composer, Howard Ferguson (1908-1999). 
During the twenty years before he became a soloist, Samuel wrote songs and piano pieces, and a musical comedy, 'The Hon'Able Phil', which had a London run. But by far his greatest success in this field was merely acknowledged on the printed cover as 'arranged by H. S.'. It was the piano accompaniment to Frederick E. Weatherly's sentimental words, 'Danny Boy', written to the tune of the 'Londonderry Air'. 
In 1936 Samuel toured South Africa for the last time. On the homeward journey in November he had a severe coronary attack on board ship, and spent six weeks in a nursing home in Southampton. When he finally reached London by ambulance in December his condition was seen to deteriorate, and gradually it became apparent that he had had a secondary attack -- probably when being moved from the ship -- and that his brain was being affected. On 15 January 1937 Samuel died at his home, 34 Willoughby Road, Hampstead, London; although he was never a practising Jew, a memorial service was held for him three days later at the West London Synagogue. His remains were cremated at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 67655


Melachrino, George Miltiades (1909-1965), conductor and composer, was born at 57 Albany Street, London, on 1 May 1909, the eldest son of John Melachrino, a tobacco merchant, and his wife, Ellen Emms. The very versatile musician who was to have a great influence on British light music was something of a child prodigy and was playing on a small-sized violin when he was only four and performed in public when he was thirteen. He went to Trinity College of Music, London, at the age of fourteen, where he led a band, emerging four years later as an accomplished exponent of the violin, viola, oboe, alto and tenor saxophone, and clarinet, and as pianist and singer. He was one of the first musicians to broadcast from 2LO at Savoy Hill and became a leading light in British dance music, working with bands led by Mantovani, Ambrose, Jack Jackson, Jay Wilbur, and Carroll Gibbons at various times. He was given the opportunity to lead his own orchestra at the Cafe de Paris in London just before the outbreak of war in 1939. If, at first, it looked as if the war might be cutting short a promising career, it became a golden opportunity when, after touring with the Stars In Battledress company, he was chosen to lead 'The orchestra in khaki', which was made up of top professional musicians serving in the army. This became, in 1944, the fifty-piece British Band of the Allied Expeditionary Forces. As a result, and through regular wartime broadcasts that brought his music to the general public as well as the forces, he became known as one of the top British arranger-conductors. He also sang with the equivalent United States and Canadian forces bands led by Glenn Miller and Robert Farnon. 
After the war the band remained together, operating as two separate musical units, the full-scale Melachrino Orchestra and the Melachrino Strings, which tapped the same demand for mood music that helped Mantovani to his similar success. Melachrino achieved a worldwide reputation through regular broadcasts and recordings, and such albums as 'Music for Dining', 'Music for Relaxation', and 'Music for Two People Alone' became best-sellers on the Decca, HMV, and RCA labels. There were later stereo LPs on ABC Paramount. He appeared with his full orchestra in the London Hippodrome show 'Starlight Roof' (1947), which introduced Julie Andrews as a budding young singer. He wrote the score for this show including the novel and high spirited 'Starlight Roof' waltz. He also ran the Melachrino Organization, one of the largest agencies for bands and orchestras in the country, and the provider of stage shows for MGM's Empire cinemas in the 1950s. He helped to found the Arcadia Publishing Company which promoted his own works as well as those of contemporaries like Ernest Tomlinson. 
Melachrino's popularity was founded on the distinctive sound of the Melachrino Strings, an expanded orchestral form of the typical dance band score, breaking away from the usual classically orientated light music sound with scores that used the various tones of musical sections in a clearly spotlighted way, with distinctive harmonies, above a regular dance band type of rhythm. He was also a gifted composer in this same field and the traits outlined above were well demonstrated in the 'Starlight Roof' waltz, as in 'Winter Sunshine', 'Woodland Revel', and his theme tune 'First Rhapsody'. He also wrote film music, including that for 'No Orchids for Miss Blandish' (1948) which the 'Daily Express' critic branded as the worst film he had ever seen. 
Melachrino's career was sadly cut short at the age of fifty-six, when he drowned in his bath on 18 June 1965 at his home at 11 Gordon Place, Kensington. The coroner pronounced a verdict of accidental death. 


@@@@@


doc= 67656


Morris, Reginald Owen (1886-1948), composer and musicologist, was born on 3 March 1886 at 3 Grosvenor Terrace, St Giles, York, the son of Reginald Frank Morris, army officer, and his wife, Georgiana Susan Sherard. 
Morris was educated at Harrow School, New College, Oxford, and the Royal College of Music, where he was later appointed to the teaching staff. Before the First World War he began to attract attention as a music journalist, and he contributed a memoir of George Butterworth to 'George Butterworth, 1885-1916' (1918). In 1920 Oxford University Press invited him to write the introduction and notes for their new edition of 'Lorna Doone', and his article on Hubert Parry appeared in 'Music and Letters'. In the following year that journal printed his essay on 'Maurice Ravel', and in 1922 his first composition, 'Fantasy', a string quartet, was published under the Carnegie scheme. In that year Oxford University Press issued his 'Contrapuntal Technique in the Sixteenth Century', which secured his reputation as a musicologist. The book was praised for its use of deductive reasoning, its balanced scholarship, and its literary style. More important, it broke new ground by distinguishing between national schools and by arguing that the study of counterpoint should be based on the techniques of individual composers rather than on arbitrary trends. 
After 'Contrapuntal Technique in the Sixteenth Century', Oxford University Press published Morris's 'Foundations of Practical Harmony and Counterpoint' in 1925. With these books he began to attract international attention, and in 1926 he was appointed head of the department of theory at the Curtis Institute, Philadelphia. But his tenure was short, and he rejoined the staff of the Royal College of Music in 1928. Though occupied principally with his duties as professor of harmony, counterpoint, and composition, he returned briefly to composing. Between 1929 and 1933 he arranged two groups of English folksongs; set texts by Sir Walter Scott, Thomas Campion, and Robert Bridges; composed 'Corinna's Maying' for chorus and orchestra; and wrote a series of instrumental works that included a symphony and a violin concerto. While his arrangements and song settings were only moderately popular, his works for orchestra commanded greater respect: in November 1930 Adrian Boult and Arthur Bliss conducted a concert devoted to his instrumental music, and on 1 January 1934 his symphony in D was performed at the Queen's Hall. But by the early 1930s he had lost interest in composing, and he refused to discuss his music in later life. 
Having rejected composition, Morris began to concentrate on writing and teaching, and as an author his body of work expanded rapidly: published in 1931 were 'Preparatory Exercises in Score-Reading' (with Howard Ferguson), 'Figured Harmony at the Keyboard', and 'An introduction to music', in 'An Outline of Modern Knowledge' (ed. W. Rose); in 1935 'The Structure of Music' was released; in 1937 he gained his DMus by examination; in 1944 'Introduction to Counterpoint' was issued; and in 1946 'The Oxford Harmony: Volume 1' became available. Never given to oversimplification, his books were designed to educate rather than to entertain; they were for the professional or the aspiring professional, and not for the layman. He was concerned that theory and execution should be complementary, and this belief dominated his activities as a teacher. In the classroom he argued that technical ability should be matched by a clear understanding of music history and style; that formalist ideas should be avoided; that students should expand their knowledge through experience; and that strict counterpoint should not be taught, as it was based on a false premise. He had the ability to explain clearly when teaching, often drawing upon parallels when clarifying an obscure point. But he was a hard taskmaster and he expected his students to work diligently; he had little sympathy for those who lacked dedication. 
Morris's complex personality often puzzled those in his circle: he was pernickety about food, but was knowledgeable about wines; he could be austere, but often displayed a good sense of humour; he disliked ostentation and ebullience, but was often relaxed about life; and he could be aloof, yet was passionate about cats, cricket, and crossword puzzles. Professionally, he was also a paradox: composers like Ralph Vaughan Williams, Gerald Finzi, and Edmund Rubbra spoke highly of his works but performers generally ignored them. W. H. Mellers, writing in 'Musical Opinion', probably assessed Morris best: '[He] is a teacher who writes music rather than a composer who teaches, and perhaps because of rather than in spite of our respect for him as a teacher we tend to lose sight of the fact that he is, if a small composer, a real one. ('Musical Opinion', July 1941, 437-8)' Morris died at 2 Addison Gardens, Kensington, London, on 15 December 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 67658


Cutler, Ann (1759-1794), hand-loom weaver and Methodist evangelist, was born in Thornley, near Longridge, in the parish of Chipping, Lancashire; nothing is known of her parents. After living a strict, moral life she was converted in 1785 by the revivalist Wesleyan William Bramwell, and in the same year received the gift of 'entire sanctification' taught by John Wesley, whom she later met at Preston in 1790. She soon began to obtain converts by praying in public meetings. Nicknamed 'Praying Nanny', she customarily rose at midnight for prayer, slept until 4 a.m., prayed until 5 or 6 a.m., then studied the 'Bible' and prayed again. When weaving she prayed briefly twelve or fourteen times daily. Her public prayers, though brief, were generally in a loud voice. She searched the 'New Testament' 'to know what blessings were promised to her; and if she could satisfy herself... of what the promise contained, she instantly believed that the Lord would give it' (Bramwell, 1796, 9). Her greatest gift was not in argument or exhortation but in her powerful praying and her insight into individual spiritual conditions. Like other Methodist women of this period she had the unusual mystical experience of visions of the Trinity perceived in the three separate persons: 'I have union with the Trinity thus. I see the Son through the Spirit, I find the Father through the Son, and God is my all in all' (ibid., 19). 
Ann's early evangelism was in the Lancashire Fylde district, where she was sometimes accompanied by Martha Thompson (1733-1820), reputed to be the first Methodist in Preston. Martha exhorted and sang, Ann prayed and directed people to conversion. Eventually Martha's father, fearing for his daughter's health, warned her not to continue: 'Nanny Cutler will soon kill thee. She is as strong as a horse, and thou hast no business to try to work with her' (Taylor, 131). Ann's greatest successes were in the Yorkshire revival of 1792-4, when she worked with William Bramwell to stir up revivals, notably in Dewsbury, Birstall, and the Bradford and Otley areas, and possibly also in Leeds. She provoked many conversions and claims to entire sanctification, a doctrine she often emphasized. During 1794 she helped to stimulate revivals in Lancashire (notably Oldham and Manchester), Cheshire, Staffordshire, and Derby. Though probably influenced by worsening social conditions and the troubled state of Methodism following Wesley's death in 1791, these revivals owed much to the charisma of Bramwell and Cutler. 
By strict self-discipline and self-denial -- she apparently lived chiefly on milk and herb tea -- Ann Cutler, despite her humble origins, became a powerful evangelist. In appearance she was 'of medium height and build, of comely appearance, plain and neat in her dress and of a very modest, retiring disposition' (Taylor, 60). She never married and apparently, unlike most Methodists, had covenanted with God to live a single life. Anxious to avoid any appearance of impropriety, she rejected any escort from young men, even when working late in the evening. She died in Macclesfield, of a chest infection, on 29 December 1794 and was buried there in the churchyard of Christ Church, whose minister was the Revd David Simpson, a friend of John Wesley. 


@@@@@


doc= 67659


Scott, Marion Margaret (1877-1953), musicologist, was born on 16 July 1877 at 66 Longton Grove, Sydenham, London, one of the two daughters of Sydney Charles Scott (1850-1926), a solicitor, and his wife, Annie Prince (died 1942). She grew up in Norwood, south-east London, and inspired perhaps by the concerts at the Crystal Palace decided to train as a violinist at the Royal College of Music, where she studied with Fernandez Arbos from 1896 to 1901, gaining her ARCM in 1900. She published a book of poems, 'Violin Verses', in 1905. Until the late 1920s she pursued a career as a violinist, forming her own string quartet and organizing concerts of contemporary British music; she was leader of the Morley College orchestra when Gustav Holst was director of music. Her interest in contemporary music extended to that of Paul Hindemith, and she read a paper, 'Paul Hindemith: his music and its characteristics', to the Musical Association in 1930. During the war she published articles in the 'Listener' on Michael Tippett (1943) and Holst (1944). She remained closely connected with the Royal College of Music all her life, and in 1906 helped to found the RCM Union, a society which enabled former students to keep in touch with each other and the college: she was joint honorary secretary from 1906 to 1937, when she became editor of the 'R. C. M. Magazine', until 1944. One of the founders of the Society of Women Musicians in 1911, she served as president from 1915 to 1916. 
Marion Scott first met the poet and composer Ivor Gurney (1890-1937) in 1912, when he was a student at the Royal College of Music, and despite the difference in their ages they became close friends. She encouraged him, and after he had enlisted in the army in 1915 corresponded with him at the front, and he sent her his poetry for safekeeping. She was instrumental in getting his first volume of poems, 'Severn and Somme', published in 1917, and championed his poetry in her presidential address to the Society of Women Musicians in December 1916, 'Contemporary British war-poetry, music, and patriotism', which was published in the 'Musical Times' in March 1917. When Gurney was committed to the City of London Mental Hospital in Dartford in 1922 she remained in close touch, visiting him, and helping to pay his bills, and in 1923 she began to collect his manuscripts, including all that he was writing in the asylum, and persuaded his family to send her any music, poems, and letters in their possession. She began to make plans for publication, but although a few poems appeared in magazines, and 'Lights Out', Gurney's settings of six poems by Edward Thomas, was published privately in 1926, it was not until 1938 that the first two of five volumes of fifty of his songs were published, with prefaces by Scott. This was as a result of pressure over several years from Gurney's friend Gerald Finzi. Finzi had first suggested publication in 1925, but he found Scott difficult to deal with, guarding the manuscripts possessively, but too busy, or too inefficient, to make a selection and prepare them for publication. In the end most of the editing was done by Finzi, Herbert Howells, and Howard Ferguson, and they also did most of the work involved in preparing a symposium of articles on Gurney for the January 1938 edition of 'Music and Letters'. Scott gained full control of Gurney's literary estate after his death in 1937, and she wrote the preface for the third volume of songs, which appeared in 1952. The two final volumes came out in 1959 and 1979. 
In the 1930s Marion Scott became the leading British authority on the life and music of Haydn. Her first article -- on the chronology of Haydn's string quartets, written at the request of the editor, A. H. Fox-Strangways -- appeared in 'Music and Letters' in 1930, and she went on to prepare an edition of the quartet she had established as the original op.1, no.1: in the introduction she wrote, 'Haydn did not 'invent' the string quartet; he 'made' it -- an infinitely higher achievement'. Other scholarly articles followed, including two in 1932, the bicentenary of Haydn's birth, in 'Music and Letters', and the 'Musical Quarterly', on Haydn's visits to England. In 'Mi-Jo Haydn' ('Monthly Musical Record', 1939), she analysed the arguments in a dispute over the authorship of a symphony attributed to Haydn's brother Michael, concluding that the first two movements were by Michael, and the finale by Joseph. In 'Haydn and folksong' ('Music and Letters', 1950) she argued that Haydn used folk melodies because he was an early collector of folk-song. She prepared an exhaustive catalogue of Haydn's works for the fifth edition of Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1954), but although she planned to publish a book on Haydn she had completed only three chapters by her death, and her only book was 'Beethoven' (1934), in the 'Master Musicians' series. From 1945 to 1952 she edited the proceedings of the Royal Musical Association. She also collected rare eighteenth-century Haydn editions, a collection which she left to Cambridge University Library. 
Although she suffered from ill health for much of her life, and was a semi-invalid for many years following an accident when she was thrown out of a hansom cab in her youth, Scott had great determination. She lived with her parents until her mother's death in 1942, when she moved to Kensington. She died after a long illness on 24 December 1953 at her home, 4 Rutland House, Marloes Road, Kensington, London, and was cremated at Golders Green four days later. She was unmarried. At the time of her death, her election to a fellowship of the Royal College of Music had just been approved. 


@@@@@


doc= 67660


Seiber, Matyas Gyorgy (1905-1960), composer and teacher of music, was born on 4 May 1905 to a musical family in Budapest; his father, Michael Seiber, was a civil engineer, and his mother a piano teacher. In his teens he studied the cello at the Budapest Academy of Music with Adolf Shiffer and composition there with Zoltan Kodaly -- who was later to defend publicly the music of his young pupil -- as, indeed, did Bela Bartok. In his early twenties Seiber was based in Frankfurt am Main, where he started his teaching career and took a class in jazz, the first of its kind, at the Hoch Conservatorium; he also conducted in musical theatres and was cellist of the Lenjewski quartet. At one stage he joined a ship's orchestra as a cellist. With the advent of Hitler, Seiber left Frankfurt in the autumn of 1933 and returned to Budapest; he visited Russia, but went in 1935 to England, where he was to live for the rest of his life. On 12 April 1946 he married a dancing teacher, Lilla Levy ('b'. 1912/13), daughter of Emil Bauer, an architect, and they had a daughter. In 1948 he settled in Caterham, Surrey. 
The freelance pattern of Seiber's various activities continued in England. He wrote a ten-volume accordion tutor; he lectured on jazz; and he composed music for cartoon films. In 1942 his central involvement with the English musical scene began when Michael Tippett invited him to teach at Morley College, London; this distinguished and lively evening institute became the focus of his activities for the next fifteen years. He created and directed the Dorian Singers during this time. The premiere by the Morley College choir and orchestra of Seiber's cantata 'Ulysses' in 1949 was not only to make his own name widely known, but it gave the first taste for many English audiences of continental modernism. He remained in closer touch with continental musical life than most of his English contemporaries. He attended the international Bartok festival at Budapest in 1948, and frequently thereafter went abroad for the festivals of the International Society for Contemporary Music, which often included performances of his own music. On a visit to Budapest just before the 1956 uprising he met and befriended the young Gyorgy Ligeti, whose 'Atmospheres' (1961) is dedicated to Seiber's memory. 
In 1943 Seiber had helped Francis Chagrin to found the Committee (later Society) for the Promotion of New Music, which was to assist in moulding and encouraging a whole generation of young English composers. After the war he became the best-known -- and undoubtedly the best -- teacher of composition in England: his pupils included Peter Racine Fricker, Don Banks, Anthony Milner, Ingvar Lidholm, Peter Schat, Hugh Wood, and Anthony Gilbert. His teaching (to quote his own words about Kodaly) had 'that curiously compulsive and suggestive power of drawing out from his pupils all their latent ability' (Wood, 110). He would strengthen a pupil's musical logic by continually asking 'why?', and enrich both his culture and technique by referring to a very wide range of music past and present. 
Seiber's own music covered a wide range. He wrote a popular song in 1956 which not only was successful but won an award; he wrote film music and incidental music to radio plays; and, on the other hand, he wrote chamber, orchestral, and choral music of high calibre and permanent worth. His lifelong studies in folk-song, his interest in jazz, the abiding influence of his teacher Kodaly were all meaningful elements in a mature style which owed much to the absorption and successful synthesis of Bartok and Arnold Schoenberg: his second string quartet and, in particular, his happily Bergian third string quartet bear eloquent witness of this. His small output of orchestral music is mainly for various solo instruments and orchestra: all of it is marked by the high standards of craftsmanship which his music invariably possessed. 
Seiber's cantata 'Ulysses' is quite rightly his best-known and most widely admired work; his poetic response to James Joyce's marvellous text, his sure feeling (gained through much practical experience) for choral writing, and a gift for glitteringly effective orchestration are here masterfully combined. A later Joyce setting, 'Three Fragments' (using a text from 'Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man'), is one of a late group of works in which he turned to stricter, more individual methods of organization. Outstanding among these are two works for violin and piano: the powerful 'Concert Piece' of 1954 and the violin sonata of 1960. This fine work proved to be his last, and over it hangs the question mark posed by the untimely death of any creative artist. In 1960 Seiber was invited to lecture to South African universities, and it was during this visit that he was killed in a car crash in the Kruger National Park on 24 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 67661


Smith, Cyril James (1909-1974), pianist, was born on 11 August 1909 at 101 Costa Street, Middlesbrough, Yorkshire, the youngest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Charles Ernest Smith, a bricklayer at an iron foundry, and his wife, Eva Mary Harrison. His father played the cornet in a brass band and organized piano lessons from local teachers for his children. Cyril Smith won a scholarship to Middlesbrough high school, and in 1926 was awarded a scholarship by the Royal College of Music, where he studied with Herbert Fryer and won the silver medal of the Worshipful Society of Musicians (1928) and the Dannreuther concerto prize. In 1929, while still a student, he was asked by Adrian Boult to perform the Brahms piano concerto no. 2 in B[flat] with the Birmingham City Orchestra, and this led to his first appearance at a Henry Wood Promenade Concert, in 1930, when he again played the Brahms concerto. After leaving the Royal College of Music in 1930, he took a job at the Baird television studio in Long Acre, London, accompanying the entertainment transmitted experimentally by the BBC every night after radio broadcasting had finished. He remained at this job after the BBC took over altogether and moved the studio to Broadcasting House, until 1934, when he was appointed professor of pianoforte at the Royal College of Music. 
Cyril Smith became a very successful concert pianist, known especially as an interpreter of Rachmaninov's concertos and 'Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini'. Rachmaninov thought his performances of the notoriously difficult third concerto the best he had heard from an English pianist, and arranged for him to record the work with Malcolm Sargent. Smith was married twice. A first marriage on 11 August 1931 to Andree Antoinette Marie ('b'. 1903/4), daughter of Elie Paty, a doctor, ended in divorce. 
On 16 October 1937 Smith married his second wife, 
Cyril Smith and Phyllis Sellick formed a duet partnership in 1941, when Sir Henry Wood asked them to play Saint-Saens's 'Carnival of the Animals' on the opening night of the 1941 series of Promenade Concerts, the first to be held in the Royal Albert Hall following the bombing of the Queen's Hall. After this, they built up their two-piano repertory, touring together for the British Council and the Entertainments National Service Association and notably making a tour of the Far East for the latter in September 1945. Their repertory increased as British composers began to write works for them: Vaughan Williams wrote 'Introduction and Fugue' (1946), 'for Phyllis and Cyril'; Joseph Cooper arranged Vaughan Williams's 1930 piano concerto, and they gave the first performance of this work, entitled 'Concerto for Two Pianos and Orchestra', under Adrian Boult in 1946; and they gave the first performance of Lennox Berkeley's concerto for two pianos, op. 30 (1948), which was also dedicated to them. At the same time, Cyril Smith had a heavy international touring schedule of solo recitals, mainly of pieces by Beethoven, Chopin, Liszt, and Rachmaninov, and performed concertos by Rachmaninov (nos. 2 and 3), Grieg, Tchaikovsky, and Beethoven (nos. 4 and 5). While he worked with many conductors, he had the closest relationship with Malcom Sargent. 
In 1956 Cyril Smith and Phyllis Sellick -- who had two children, Graham ('b'. 1947) and Claire ('b'. 1949) -- took part in a tour by British musicians of the Soviet Union as part of a cultural mission led by Sir Arthur Bliss, master of the queen's music. In Kharkov, in Ukraine, Smith had a stroke, as a result of which he lost the use of his left arm. This stimulated friends and pupils to take the four-hand piano repertory and rearrange it for three hands: in his autobiography, 'Duet for Three Hands' (1958), Smith describes the difficulty of learning to play one-third of the music with his right hand, while his wife had to learn to play one-third with each hand. Their first public performance as a three-handed act was in the summer of 1957, in Birmingham town hall, playing an arrangement of Mozart's concerto in E[flat] for two pianos, K365. Sir Arthur Bliss arranged his concerto for two pianos (1924) as a concerto for two pianos (three hands) for them, and they gave the first performance in 1968. Malcolm Arnold was one of several composers who wrote new works: Smith and Sellick gave the first performance of his 'Concerto for Phyllis and Cyril' in 1969, and Gordon Jacob wrote a concerto for piano duet (three hands) and orchestra (1969). They recorded a three-hands arrangement of Lennox Berkeley's 'Polka, Nocturne, and Capriccio', op. 5, originally written for two pianos in 1934. 
Cyril Smith and Phyllis Sellick were both appointed OBE in 1971. Smith died suddenly on 2 August 1974 at their home, Oak Lodge, 33 Fife Road, East Sheen, Surrey. After her husband's death Sellick formed a new professional partnership with the pianist Terence Beckles, but increasingly concentrated on her work as a piano teacher, continuing to give lessons until incapacitated by a stroke in 2006. One of her pupils, the Venezuelan virtuoso Clara Rodriguez, described her as 'a real inspiration in every way' ('Daily Telegraph', 28 May 2007). She died at Galsworthy House nursing home, Kingston Hill, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 26 May 2007, after another stroke. She was survived by her daughter Claire, a photographer, her son Graham having predeceased her in 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 67664


Hughes, Joan Lily Amelia (1918-1993), airwoman, was born on 28 April 1918 at Eversley, Glengall Road, Woodford, Essex, the only daughter of Arthur Edward Hughes, a braid manufacturer, and his wife, Lily Amelia Lekeup. She had one older brother. Growing up in the golden era of aviation in the 1920s and early 1930s, Joan Hughes was bitten by the flying bug at an early age. So determined was she to become a pilot that at fifteen her parents allowed her, together with her brother, to have flying lessons once a week at the East Anglian Aero Club, at a cost of $2 10's'. per hour. She was soon flying solo, but an accident in which a sixteen-year-old boy was killed resulted in a legal limit of seventeen years for solo flying being imposed. This temporarily halted Joan's ambitions but in 1935 she obtained her pilot's licence. 
Joan Hughes obtained her first job as a flying instructor at Chigwell Flying Club and, but for the war, a club flying instructor is probably what she would have remained. The formation of the Civil Air Guard (CAG) in October 1938, providing cheap subsidized flying for anyone of either sex between the ages of eighteen and fifty, resulted in hundreds of applications from many who could not otherwise obtain a pilot's licence. This provided more work for flying clubs and their instructors. At the outbreak of war Hughes was instructing in the women's corps of the CAG at Romford, Essex, and had accrued over 500 flying hours. She was one of a small band of women instructors who then applied to join the Air Transport Auxiliary (ATA). Composed of older men and those not considered fit for combat activities with the RAF, it was not deemed a suitable organization for those fit and active young women with hundreds of hours of flying experience. However, as a result of the persistence of Pauline Gower and lobbying from these women, it was eventually agreed that a small pool of women based at Hatfield could be formed to ferry De Havilland Tiger Moths from factories to storage units dispersed around the UK. 
In January 1940 Joan Hughes became the youngest of the first eight selected by Pauline Gower for what was at the time considered merely an experiment. For much of her time in the ATA she worked as an instructor, initially on Tiger Moths and Miles Magisters. By the end of hostilities she and ten of her contemporaries were flying four-engined aircraft and Joan herself was instructing both sexes at the Advanced Flying Training School (AFTS) at White Waltham. She was the only woman instructor on all types of aircraft (including Oxfords, Harvards, Hudsons, and Wellingtons), with the exception of seaplanes and four-engined types. 
Hughes served in the ATA for six years, until December 1945, never losing an aircraft, though she did have one or two hair-raising experiences. The first occurred when she was ferrying a Hurricane from Silloth to Hatfield in August 1941. After take-off she was unable to move the selector lever in order to raise the undercarriage. Aware that these first Hurricane flights by women were attracting undue attention and fearing that if she returned to complain it might be thought that she lacked the stature and strength to cope, she used her foot to move the lever. The undercarriage retracted but the lever would not return to neutral. Arriving at Finningley to refuel, she could lower neither the undercarriage nor the flaps since both worked off the same lever. After orbiting for some time she had no alternative but to make a flapless belly-landing. Oblivious of her personal safety, she was mainly worried about what the accident committee would say and the effect it would have on women's capabilities to fly Hurricanes. In the event the aircraft slid smoothly over the grass, the only damage a bent propeller. Happily, Hughes was exonerated by the accident committee. Much later, in March 1943, she was on a conversion course on the Stirling four-engined bomber at Stradishall when, on her second take-off, a tyre went flat and the aircraft ran off the runway -- confirming the expectations of onlookers who were sure that a slip of a girl would never be able to keep a large aircraft like the Stirling straight. However, she progressed with the course and ferried her first Stirling four days later on 4 April. With the end of hostilities Joan returned to civilian flying as a flying instructor at the West London Flying Club at White Waltham, where her wartime colleague Margot Gore was chief flying instructor. Here she taught many Air Training Corps cadets who became RAF pilots. After Margot left, Joan succeeded her for a brief period as chief instructor but administration was not her style and she moved on to the British Airways Flying Club at Booker in 1961. 
It was during her Booker years that Hughes's reputation and ability to fly almost anything made her a natural film stunt pilot. She coached Kenneth More for his role as Douglas Bader in the film 'Reach for the Sky' (1956). When a lightweight was needed to fly the tiny replica 1909 Santos-Dumont Demoiselle, Hughes undertook the flying sequences for 'Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines' in 1965. She also flew replicas of First World War German aircraft in simulated dog-fights for 'The Blue Max' (1966). Her most notable flying episode in films was as a stand-in pilot for Lady Penelope in the 1968 film version of the television series 'Thunderbirds'. The storyline led her to obtain permission to land a Tiger Moth biplane on a motorway near High Wycombe, taxi under the bridge, and take off again. In the event, she flew under the bridge and found herself on seven charges of dangerous flying at Buckinghamshire quarter sessions. In court she pleaded that in her judgement turbulent weather made it safer to fly straight through. After a three-day hearing she was acquitted on all charges. 
Joan Hughes retired after fifty years of flying with 11,800 hours in her log book, 10,000 of which were spent instructing. On retirement she moved from Wargrave to Somerset. She returned to White Waltham in 1991 for the unveiling by Prince Michael of Kent of Roderick Lovesay's painting 'Tribute to Women Aviators', in which she was one of the twelve women pilots depicted. She was appointed MBE in 1945 for her wartime service in the ATA. In 1954 she finally gained her wings from the RAF. She was awarded the British Women Pilots Association's most prestigious trophy, the Jean Lennox Bird jade vase, in 1962. The Royal Aero Club of Great Britain awarded her the bronze medal in 1967 for outstanding service to aviation in every sphere. She died of cancer on 16 August 1993 at Musgrave Park Hospital, Taunton, and was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 67665


Fairweather, Margaret (1901-1944), airwoman, was born at West Denton Hall, near Newcastle upon Tyne, on 23 September 1901, the second in a family of two sons and three daughters of Walter Runciman, first Viscount Runciman (1870-1949), and his wife, Hilda Stevenson (1869-1956) ['see 'Runciman, Hilda]. Margie, as she was always known, was educated initially at home together with her younger brother Steven (later Sir Steven Runciman) by a governess who taught them Greek and Latin at an early age. She then attended a number of educational institutions including The Mount, a Quaker school in York, and Notting Hill high school, from where she went to Girton College, Cambridge. After a year she dropped out of Girton to study singing in Paris, though she never performed professionally. She married Roderick Sydney Nettleton King-Farlow (1900-1988), the son of Sir Sydney Charles Nettleton King-Farlow, at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 15 July 1925. A daughter was born in 1931. The marriage ended in divorce in 1936. 
In the autumn of 1936 Margie learned to fly at Newcastle Aero Club and was issued with her aviator's certificate (licence no. 14687) by the Royal Aero Club on 13 January 1937. She was planning to fly solo to Australia but changed her mind when she met a fellow pilot, Douglas Keith Fairweather (1891-1944), son of Sir Walter Fairweather. They were married on 28 March 1938. In that year Lord Runciman was sent on the ill-fated mission to Prague to mediate between the German and Czech governments. Fairweather flew out herself to visit him. During a European tour that same year she and Douglas, under the guise of tourists, photographed unrecorded German airfields. She also sent back letters to her brother Steven which seemingly contained only trivial domestic details. On her return, however, she decoded these to recover intelligence data. 
With the threat of war looming, in October 1938 the Civil Air Guard scheme was inaugurated to provide subsidized training of pilots through the civil flying clubs. As experienced pilots, Margie and her husband became instructors at Renfrew. Douglas Fairweather was one of the first to sign contracts with the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) for service with the Air Transport Auxiliary (ATA) in September 1939. 
Many women, qualified flying instructors with considerable flying experience, volunteered to serve with the ATA. However, the pilots enrolled by BOAC under the ATA scheme were employed in RAF ferry pilots' pools and the RAF would not agree to the employment of women in their ferry pools. This problem was solved in December 1939 when Pauline Gower (who became commandant of the women's ATA) was informed that a small pool of eight women based at Hatfield could be formed to ferry Tiger Moths to stored reserves. 
With over 1000 flying hours, Margaret Fairweather was one of that select band who signed contracts with the ATA on 1 January 1940. This departure from tradition caused a furore in a world in which professional women were still a novelty. Press and newsreel gave full publicity to the event and the so-called 'ATA girls' were under constant scrutiny. However, ferrying Tiger Moths from Hatfield to storage reserves, some as far away as Kinloss, Perth, and Lossiemouth, and returning by overnight train, often with no sleeper in midwinter, was not the glamorous occupation some imagined. In July 1941 ATA women pilots were cleared to fly operational aircraft and Margaret Fairweather was one of the first four chosen to do practice landings in a Hurricane. These four carried a burden of responsibility as the future of all women pilots in the ATA depended on them. 
Meanwhile Douglas Fairweather was joint commanding officer at Prestwick. In 1942 he was posted to no. 1 ferry pool, White Waltham, to take charge of the air movements flight. Margie was then posted to join him. For the rest of her time there she was engaged in communication duties and it was on one such assignment that she met her death -- the only one not to survive among the original eight who served from the very beginning. 
Gradually more operational types of plane were being flown by women and the progression was made from single engine to twin aircraft to advanced twin, and eventually eleven women pilots were qualified to fly four-engined aircraft. Fairweather was one of the eleven. She was considered by her fellow pilots to be one of the most intelligent and able, though rather quiet and self-effacing. In fact, according to her daughter, her nickname was Mrs Cold Front. 
On 3 April 1944 Douglas Fairweather volunteered to go to Prestwick to collect an ambulance case requiring special treatment. In appalling weather, somewhere over the Irish Sea, the Anson came down and both he and the nurse travelling with him were lost. Margie gave birth to their daughter Elizabeth a few days later. Margie returned to flying only to be killed herself four months later. She was piloting a Proctor to Scotland on 4 August 1944 with two passengers on board when the engine failed near Malpas, Cheshire. All three were taken to Chester Royal Infirmary where Fairweather died soon afterwards. Her passengers were her sister, the Hon. Kitty Farrer, adjutant of the ATA, and Louis Kendrick of the Ministry of Aircraft Production. They recovered, escaping with injuries. Douglas Fairweather's body was washed up on the Ayrshire coast. Margaret Fairweather and he were both buried in the small churchyard of Dunure, Ayrshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 67666


Watson, Alexandra Mary Chalmers (1872-1936), medical practitioner and head of the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps, was born in India on 31 May 1872, the eldest child of Acland (later Auckland) Campbell Geddes (1831-1908), civil engineer, and his wife, Christina Helen MacLeod Geddes, 'nee' Anderson (1850-1914). Eric Campbell Geddes was among her younger siblings. Mona Geddes was educated at St Leonard's School, St Andrews. Her first choice of career was teaching and she went to Aberdeen to study, but her mother fell ill and Mona returned home to Edinburgh. During this period she became attracted to medicine; this was not surprising because her mother and another relative, Elizabeth Garrett Anderson -- the first woman to qualify as a doctor in England -- were both pioneers in the cause of the medical education of women. Mona began the study of medicine in 1891 in the Medical College for Women, Edinburgh, of which her mother was one of the founders. Those were the days, according to the 'Medical Women's Federation Quarterly Review' of October 1936, when to be a woman medical student in Edinburgh almost meant social ostracism: 'Certainly, although the era of rotten eggs and flour had passed, the throwing of contemptuous glances and sneering remarks was still in vogue.' 
After graduating MB CM at Edinburgh University in 1896 Mona Geddes went to London, where she spent a year in Plaistow, working as medical officer in the Maternity District Association and for six months in Dr Barnardo's Homes, Kent. Her work at Plaistow formed the subject of her MD thesis, using a record of more than 1000 confinements with a mortality rate of just over 1 per 1000. She returned to Edinburgh and took her MD degree on 30 July 1898. The 'Scots Pictorial' (8 Sept 1917), in commenting on her graduation, reported: 'The men took the innovation gallantly, and when the young lady, modest and charming, but wearing that air of immense capability that distinguishes all her family, appeared to be 'capped', she was greeted with the very heartiest applause.' She had delayed her wedding until she could write MD after her name, and on the afternoon of her graduation day was married to Dr Douglas Chalmers Watson. The two then set up private practice together in 11 Walker Street, Edinburgh. 
Chalmers Watson's years of private practice in Edinburgh were strenuous for she had her home and family responsibilities as well as many outside interests. One of her patients is on record as saying: 'She never left you without your realising that you had been given not merely professional skill and advice but a part of herself.' While her husband specialized in nutrition, Mona Chalmers Watson -- inspired by Dame Millicent Garrett Fawcett, a relative by marriage -- was drawn towards the suffrage movement, but she departed from Dame Millicent's constitutional organization and joined the ranks of the militant Women's Social and Political Union. Although she was not called upon to fight as a 'shock trooper' herself, her support was always active and not passive. 
Although Chalmers Watson had two young sons, Irvine and Rupert, she still found time to take part in the development of the Queen Mary Nursing Home, and in the founding of the Elsie Inglis Hospital for Women, a pioneer institution of its kind, and to support actively the Patriotic Food League, the Women's Emergency Corps -- of which she was honorary secretary -- and the Scottish Women's Medical Association, of which she later became president. For a few years she was on the staff of the Edinburgh (Bruntsfield) Hospital for Women and Children and she assisted her husband in the editorship of the 'Encyclopedia medica' (1899-1910), a work of fifteen volumes, in which she wrote the article on invalid feeding. She and Douglas also published 'Food and Feeding in Health and Disease' (1910) and 'The Book of Diet' (1913). She was for a time a manager of the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, and was also one of the two secretaries of the Queen's Institute of District Nursing. She also did much in securing the introduction of women medical students into Edinburgh University on an equal footing with the men. In addition to her professional activities she found time to become the first president of the Scottish Women's Hockey Association. 
In December 1916, after two years of war and faced with the mounting toll of slaughter in the trenches, the War Office considered the formation of a women's corps to undertake some of the non-combatant duties in France. This scheme was supported by Sir Neville Macready, the adjutant-general, and the commander in the field, General Sir Douglas Haig. The urgency of the situation demanded swift action, and the director of recruiting at the War Office, Brigadier-General Sir Auckland Geddes, Mona Chalmers Watson's brother, called his sister to London to attend a meeting of leaders of women's organizations on 26 January 1917. Lord Derby, who convened the meeting, opposed the full enlistment of women and, although discussion ranged over several topics, no firm decision was taken on the formation of a women's corps. 
Sir Auckland urged his sister to seek a private interview with Macready. Their meeting lasted for ninety minutes, during which time Mona submitted her ideas in the form of rough notes that she had specially prepared. When she returned to London on Friday 9 February 1917 Sir Neville asked her to head the new corps, saying that although Lord Derby favoured the appointment of 'a lady of title', he personally preferred a professional woman for the post (Terry, 40). She accepted on condition that she could appoint a deputy to command the women's forces in France; her choice fell on Helen Gwynne-Vaughan. It was an ideal partnership: Mona had a commanding and attractive presence, yet was charming, motherly, and good-humoured, with a record of superb organizational skills, while Helen was striking and statuesque with an hauteur born of her aristocratic background, yet impulsive and at times undiplomatic -- they complemented each other perfectly. The combination of Mona's tact and Helen's forceful determination could hardly have been bettered and it contributed greatly to the success of the large organization which they were to head. 
The Women's Army Auxiliary Corps (WAAC) was formally instituted by an Army Council instruction, dated 7 July 1917, and Mona Chalmers Watson described its formation as a step forward in two directions: 'It is an advance of the women's movement and it is a national advance', she wrote in the 'B.E.U. Monthly Record' in November 1917. 'Women have now a direct and officially recognised share in the task of our armies both at home and overseas.' Mona was appointed chief controller of the WAAC, equivalent to the rank of brigadier-general, with an annual salary of $500. The official headquarters of the corps were established at Devonshire House in Piccadilly, London. Eighteen months of a life beyond their imaginings, doing a man's job in what had been strictly a man's world, lay ahead of Mona Chalmers Watson in London, Helen Gwynne-Vaughan in France, and the women they recruited. When it was all over they would return to a new Britain, and some of them would build on the feminist foundations that were even then being laid. During these early months of the WAAC Mona Chalmers Watson undertook the immense task of recruiting 40,000 women. In a recruiting pamphlet she wrote: 'This is the great opportunity for every strong, healthy and active woman not already employed on work of national importance to offer her services to her country' (Terry, 48). She devoted all of her energies to the task and, on 25 August 1917, she was among the first recipients of the newly instituted CBE. By February 1918 Mona realized that the strain of running the WAAC and also undertaking her domestic duties was proving too much: when one of her sons became seriously ill after an appendectomy she decided to resign so that she could return to her family in Edinburgh. There were many tributes to Mona Chalmers Watson's work. The 'Ladies' Pictorial' on 20 February 1918 said she had 'nobly done her bit' and the 'Daily Sketch' reported on the same day that she 'had organised and set going that most useful corps with conspicuous success'. There is no doubt that the cause of women's suffrage, for which she had worked more directly in the past, was advanced by her clear-sighted and capable direction of the WAAC. 
In 1923 the Chalmers Watsons inherited a farm, Fenton Barns, near North Berwick, East Lothian, from Douglas's uncle, James Glendinning; there they began the task of breeding a herd of tuberculin-tested cattle. In the next few years the dairy farm became renowned across Europe as a pioneer in experiments directed towards improving the quality of milk and the production and distribution of certified milk for the safer feeding of children. The irradiation of milk, its use in the feeding of premature infants, the production of milk with a specially digestible curd, and other associated problems occupied Mona Chalmers Watson's thought and energies. 
When women were given the vote in 1918 Mona Chalmers Watson became the first president of the Edinburgh Women Citizens' Association. She was also instrumental in securing funds for the development of the Women's United Services Club in Drumsheugh Gardens, Edinburgh, and she was a director of Time and Tide Publishing Company. When news of Mona Chalmers Watson's death on 7 August 1936 -- at the home of her brother Sir Auckland Geddes at Frensham, Rolvenden, Kent -- reached Edinburgh, the first stunned reaction was the question of what all of the women's organizations would do without her. A contemporary wrote in 'The Scotsman' (8 Aug 1936): 'Societies, hospitals, Queen's Nurses, Boards were upheld by her support and inspired by her practical energy.' She was notable for her clear thinking and her opinions had a weight beyond her own estimate of them. As a hostess she was charming, with a natural ease and grace. 
'It has been an honour', she told a medical contemporary when reviewing her career, 'to have lived through such great times for women, and to know that the generation after us will not have the same fight for liberty'. Her contribution to feminist causes was considerable and her work as the first head of the WAAC, later the Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps, laid the foundations for the Auxiliary Territorial Service in the Second World War, and for the Women's Royal Army Corps which it became in 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 67667


Pennant, Violet Blanche Douglas- (1869-1945), air force officer, was born on 31 January 1869 at 23 Chapel Street, Belgrave Square, London, the sixth daughter of George Sholto Gordon Douglas-Pennant, second Baron Penrhyn (1836-1907), JP and MP for Caernarvonshire, and his first wife, Pamela Blanche (1839-1869), who died five days after her daughter's birth, daughter of Sir Charles Rushout of Sezincote, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Cecilia Olivia Geraldine. Her father, a Welsh peer, was of Scottish descent, and her mother English. After a conventional upbringing Douglas-Pennant threw herself into philanthropy and local government. An interest in girls' youth clubs led to her becoming a volunteer worker with disabled children and the unemployed poor in London; she later acted as manager of various schools, and she served on Finsbury borough council's unemployment committee. Her interest in the Workers' Educational Association took her onto other local government committees in south London, some dealing with workers' pensions, and ultimately onto the London county council education committee. She also became a governor of the University College of South Wales, and was on its selection and executive committee for training women medical students. Though not a suffragette, she was on the council of the Conservative and Unionist Women's Franchise Association. In 1911 she was appointed national health insurance commissioner for south Wales. In the same year she became a lady-in-waiting to Princess Louise, the duchess of Argyll; during the early years of the First World War she accompanied Louise on visits to the British Red Cross hospitals in France. Douglas-Pennant had already raised money in 1914 to fund a 500-bed emergency hospital in Belgium, was a member of the South Wales Belgian Refugee Committee, and had chaired a selection committee on nursing staff for the Scottish Women's Hospital unit in Serbia. In 1917 she had been one of the moving spirits behind the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps (WAAC), and had later made recruiting speeches for the new Women's Royal Naval Service and the Women's Legion. Thus, although she had no direct experience of the new air force, she was a natural choice when the position of commandant of the Women's Royal Air Force (WRAF) became vacant. 
The WRAF started with three different commandants in six months -- a record that few organizations could survive. The reason was that near the end of the First World War, on 1 April 1918, the WRAF was created at the same time as the Royal Air Force, but the WRAF was a last-minute decision. Its nucleus was to be women formerly serving on air stations, who were to transfer from the army, the navy, and the British Legion, and the WRAF suffered from such a scrambled start. Its first commandant left after only a month, dismayed at its problems. Violet Douglas-Pennant was its second. She was the choice of Sir Godfrey Paine, director general of RAF manning. At forty-nine she was a handsome, dark-eyed woman of action, a fine public speaker with a silvery laugh and great charm. She later recalled, 'I was asked to take over the position on May 13 [1918] -- unlucky day... and at first declined, but afterwards agreed to take a month's look around... I knew there had been serious difficulties before' ('The Aeroplane', 15 Jan 1919, 308). Subsequently, on a week's tour, she found 14,000 WRAF supervised by only 75 officers scattered over 500 or so camps, many under inexperienced commanding officers. Some girls were without their promised uniforms and bonuses, in bad living and working conditions, and were undisciplined and prone to strike. Douglas-Pennant quickly saw that the root of the problem was a shortage of WRAF officers: existing provisions had trained only twenty-five in three weeks, while Berridge House, which was on loan to the RAF and had the capacity to train several hundred officers, stood empty. Her efforts to equip Berridge House met with endless bureaucratic delays, as she was expected to work through hidebound, often hostile, intermediaries. She wrote to Paine on 11 June, 'I am very sorry to be obliged to decline the appointment of Commandant... seeming to assume responsibilities to which I was not entitled, so I was blocked at every turn' (Mitchell, 231-2). Determined to keep her, Paine promised to have RAF orders defining her position published. Unfortunately this was not done until November, but her appointment was confirmed on 18 June. 
Meanwhile nothing improved: necessary transport was rarely available; uniforms were still delayed; and, with no secretarial help, office work accumulated. The attitude of Douglas-Pennant's three deputies was casual and influenced by inter-service jealousies: five ladies who expected top jobs in the WRAF, but were offered lower ones, left in a huff, then Douglas-Pennant's deputies resigned 'en bloc'. Douglas-Pennant brought in a clerk from her former staff and, with two RAF friends, she toiled late, dealing with neglected correspondence, ordering a chaotic filing system, and planning. She advised Lord Weir, secretary of state for air, to slow down WRAF recruiting, while through her London county council contacts she 'borrowed' Eltham Teacher Training College during the vacation, where she eventually trained 450 of her officers. Nevertheless, after three adverse parliamentary questions, on 3 August, Douglas-Pennant was overworked and frustrated, and she made two further attempts to resign, which Paine again rejected, assuring her of his approval and support. 
Dissatisfaction with the WRAF was growing however. On 22 August the minister of national service wrote to Weir, 'I propose to embargo recruiting for the WRAF if things are not improved' (Reader, 78). To this Weir replied, 'I have made up my mind to supersede Miss Violet Pennant' (Mitchell, 234), and he delegated this task to Paine's replacement, General Sir Sefton Brancker. Brancker spent his first four days in post studying WRAF problems. His opinion that the commandant was meddlesome was reinforced when she refused certain WRAF accommodation as unsuitable and complained of immorality at Hurst Park, where his friend was commanding officer. On 27 August Douglas-Pennant was away settling a strike of 1000 women in Berkshire, but on the next day, summoned to Brancker's office, he told her brusquely, 'You have got to go, not because you are inefficient... [he thought she was efficient enough] but because you are so unpopular' ('The Aeroplane', 15 Jan 1919, 308). When? 'Now! At once! Tomorrow morning!' (Izzard, 194). White and rigid with shock, she refused his outstretched hand and left, though she conscientiously remained in her office for five days to clear outstanding work. 
The injudicious and callous dismissal of Violet Douglas-Pennant caused much publicity and public sympathy. A pamphlet war ensued, and her cause, somewhat exaggeratedly, became known as the British Dreyfus case. The two officers most involved with her dismissal were retired or demoted; there was a private inquiry by the prime minister's office; and there were debates in parliament, a select committee inquiry in the House of Lords, and libel suits, as well as Douglas-Pennant's own private crusade, which was ended only by her death on 12 October 1945. She never married. 
An innocent in the military world, Violet Douglas-Pennant was too much of a lady to bully and she lacked the right contacts within the military's higher echelons to apply pressure in the right quarters. These qualities, however, were possessed in abundance by her successor, Mrs Helen Gwynne-Vaughan. This lady had been chief controller of the WAAC in France since March 1917 and, under the urgent persuasion of Major-General Brancker, had agreed to become the third commandant of the WRAF. She inherited the undeniable groundwork laid down so painfully by Violet Douglas-Pennant. It had blighted Douglas-Pennant's fruitful public career, her mental health, and the rest of her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 67668


Gamwell, (Antonia) Marian (1891-1977), volunteer ambulance driver and commanding officer of the FANY, was born on 28 July 1891 at 169 Knight's Hill Road, West Norwood, the eldest daughter of Frederick Robison Gamwell (1835-1901), an East India merchant, and his wife, Marian Antonia Bankart (1864-1922). Her sister 
Both the Gamwell sisters were educated at Roedean School. They had a very strict upbringing but they inherited a sense of adventure from their mother, a qualified nurse, who was always encouraging the girls to go ahead and do things. Mrs Gamwell was one of the first people in England to own a car and the two girls learned to drive about the age of fifteen. Marian and Hope used to spend hours stripping the engine to repair faults and putting it together again. In these early years they wore their hair in thick, long plaits, but later, in 1914, had it cropped in the style which remained a characteristic of the two sisters for the rest of their lives. 
During her youth Marian developed an interest in farming and when she left school in 1910 she sought to study agriculture. However, none of the agricultural colleges would accept a woman as a student. Instead, she went to work on poultry and dairy farms in Gloucestershire and Berkshire and eventually travelled to Saskatchewan in Canada where she worked on a dairy-cum-wheat farm. She sailed home about December 1912 on the British liner 'Lusitania' (sunk in 1915). 
By this time Marian's mother had moved to Llanbedr, Merioneth, and was living in a country house called Aber Artro, which during the First World War became a British Red Cross auxiliary hospital. After the war broke out in 1914, Mrs Gamwell took her two daughters to France at the suggestion of Dr Elsie Inglis, who founded the Scottish Women's Hospitals for Foreign Service, to prepare a hospital for the French army at the Abbaye de Royaumont, near Viarmes, 30 miles from Paris. Marian described the old abbey, which had been used as stables, as filthy (Gamwell and Albrecht). They set about cleaning it and while Marian drove ambulances Hope worked in the X-ray room. They worked there until May 1915 when the two sisters went to Calais where they joined the FANY, which had been founded in 1907 as a corps of nurses on horseback 'tending Britain's soldiers on the field' (Terry, 25). Their mother returned to north Wales. 
Marian and Hope were set to work at the first FANY hospital, Lamarck, which had 100 beds and was housed in a convent school in the rue de la Riviere, Calais. Their patients consisted mainly of cases of typhoid which was then raging in the Belgian army. Thanks to the generosity of their mother the sisters were able to provide an ambulance and a mobile bath for Lamarck transport. The mobile bath was an enormous Daimler car fitted with six canvas baths on each side. Water was heated by Primus stoves inside the body of the car. It gave 250 baths a day and disinfected the men's clothes (Ward, 47). 
On 1 January 1916 the Calais convoy came into being to relieve the men ambulance drivers and for the first time women were officially driving ambulances for the British army. Thus the FANYs became the guinea pigs for women at war. Their vehicles were ill-equipped for the weather and the conditions. They had rudimentary windscreens, inefficient springs, unreliable engines, no self-starters, and tyres which punctured easily. The women drivers had to maintain the vehicles and during the winter months they had to crank the engines at hourly intervals to warm them up. On Good Friday 1916 Marian broke an arm when the engine backfired and the starting-handle smashed into her right arm. 
In April 1918 Marian, suffering from appendicitis, returned to England leaving Hope to take over her task as sergeant responsible for stores for the servicing of the vehicle fleet. She spent the rest of the war working for Rolls-Royce as a member of the aircraft inspection department. 
After the war Hope returned to England in 1919 to become a member of the newly formed FANY headquarters staff committee and played a decisive part in the development of the corps. Marian, while retaining membership of FANY, spent some time in Greece. Apart from their many other pursuits, the two sisters were keen sailors and found time to cruise from Bangor in Marian's yawl, 'Boudja'. They sold the house in Wales after their mother's death and went to Africa to prospect for land on which to farm. On 6 November 1928 they set off from Nairobi in a Rugby car to drive across Kenya and Tanganyika (Tanzania). The roads in Africa at that time consisted mainly of cattle tracks, and bridges across the streams and rivers were rudimentary. However, the intrepid Gamwell sisters allowed nothing to impede their progress and they arrived at Abercorn (now called Mlala) in Northern Rhodesia (Zambia) on 19 December 1928. Here they acquired what Marian called 'a plot of land' (Gamwell and Albrecht) consisting of 999 acres at the southern tip of Lake Tanganyika which they called Chilongolwelo. 
The two sisters with their team of workers hacked a farm out of the virgin Rhodesian bush, built their home, and planted coffee. They had to battle against predators, locusts, tsetse flies, and malaria. During trips to England, Marian and Hope trained as pilots at the London Aeroplane Club at Hanworth. Marian says in her manuscript autobiography that she was the first woman to drive a motor car in Dresden, the first to ride a motor bicycle in Athens, and the first to cycle in Majorca. 
When they were ready for the first picking of coffee, the Second World War broke out and the FANYs sent an urgent request to the Gamwell sisters to return. Hope flew home immediately while Marian set about burning the crop because it was against the law to leave the coffee untended. When Marian returned to London in 1940 she found herself embroiled in a battle to maintain the autonomy of the FANYs against the formidable opposition of Helen Gwynne-Vaughan, director of the Auxiliary Territorial Service. Part of the FANYs formed the basis of the driver training centre at Camberley under Mary Baxter-Ellis while the Gamwell sisters, referred to by a certain brigadier as 'the thick one [Hope] and the thin one [Marian]' (Popham, 134), took over the running of the corps unit. Marian became commandant of the independent FANYs and Hope went to Scotland to command the corps unit attached to the Polish forces before returning to London to recruit for the special operations executive (SOE), which infiltrated agents into occupied territory in Europe. This, according to Marian (Gamwell and Albrecht), was undoubtedly the most important work that the FANYs undertook during the war. In April 1942 the first women to join SOE as agents were selected and sent for training. By 1944 just over fifty had been sent into France, thirty-nine of them FANYs, or members of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force who became FANYs on recruitment to SOE. Of these thirty-nine, thirteen died in concentration camps. Three of these women agents were awarded the George Cross, two posthumously. Some 2000 other FANYs provided the backbone of SOE, working with ciphers and signals, as agent-conducting officers, and administering the special training schools. In all the FANYs served in forty-four countries with Hope playing a prominent part in the organization of SOE in Egypt and Italy ('FANY Gazette', 18). 
During the war both Marian and Hope travelled extensively visiting FANY outposts abroad. An illustration of Marian's spirit of adventure is the story of one of her wartime trips when, needing to get to Baghdad, with no other form of transport available from Cairo, she seriously suggested that she might take a camel (Popham, 134). Marian became an OBE in the 1946 new year's honours and was mentioned in dispatches. 
Hope Gamwell returned to their Abercorn farm in December 1945 and Marian followed in June 1946. Instead of coffee they embarked on growing rice, wheat, and millet and Marian took up bee-keeping. They remained on their farm until October 1964 when Marian, aged seventy-three, and Hope, aged seventy-one, returned to the United Kingdom to live in Jersey. 
While Hope was shy, reserved, and self-effacing, Marian was the born leader, a competent administrator, a strategist, a builder who never shirked responsibility. Both sisters were tall with a martial bearing, emphasized by their crisp, no-nonsense manner, their cropped hair, and the khaki drill they wore which became almost a Gamwell trade mark. Dr F. O. Albrecht in a foreword to Marian's autobiography says they formed a perfect team working in a kind of symbiotic unity, each knowing the other's mind without actually saying a word (Gamwell and Albrecht, iii). The contribution of the two sisters was immense and stories of their wartime experiences are an integral part of FANY lore. Both died in Jersey, Hope on 25 April 1974 and Marian on 13 May 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 67669


(Anne) Hope Gamwell (1893-1974), who was also a senior member of the FANY during the Second World War, was born at Innisfail, 79 Beulah Hill, Upper Norwood, on 15 May 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 67670


Gore, Margaret Wyndham (1913-1993), airwoman and osteopath, was born on 24 January 1913 at Carclew, Brighton Road, Worthing, the daughter of William Wyndham Gore, a mining engineer, and his wife, Martha Lord. Known as Margot, she had one brother, her twin. The family moved to Ireland and she grew up enjoying an adventurous childhood, riding her pony to the hunt and ignoring physical discomforts. 
Margot Gore had a little formal education but this ceased at sixteen when the family returned to England. Her desire was to study medicine, but her basic education and lack of financial support prevented this. Instead, she turned to her second enthusiasm -- flying. She had taken a menial job at Smithfield market in order to pay for her flying lessons. The formation of the Civil Air Guard in 1938, which provided subsidized flight training at civilian flying schools throughout the country, created a need for more instructors. This was the opportunity Margot needed, and by the outbreak of war she was instructing at Romford Flying Club, Essex. In spite of official disquiet, in January 1940 the women's section of the Air Transport Auxiliary (ATA) with its initial intake of eight experienced airwomen became a reality under its commandant, Pauline Gower. They were to supplement the older airmen who formed the ATA. Margot Gore was recruited with the second intake in June 1940 and quickly adapted to the role of flying new and repaired Tiger Moths between factories and operational airfields. 
In September 1941, when no. 15 ferry pool Hamble-on-Solent became the second all-women's pool, Margot Gore was promoted captain and became its commanding officer. Here her natural qualities of leadership together with the high standard she set herself as a pilot earned her the respect of her team of fellow pilots, engineers, and administrative staff. In spite of the exhausting flying duties, often interrupted by enemy action, and the discomfort of return journeys by train in wartime winters, Hamble is remembered by the women who served there as having a happy, harmonious atmosphere. 
In 1943 Gore was the first woman to go to RAF Marston Moor class 5 unit to convert to flying the Handley Page four-engined Halifax bomber, quickly followed by a further ten women who made up the eleven ATA women qualified to fly any type of aircraft. Margot herself is believed to have been the first woman to fly the huge Boeing B17, generally known as the 'Flying Fortress'. Once when flying an American Lockheed Hudson in the heavily defended Southampton-Portsmouth area she had a narrow escape on encountering a large barrage balloon, rising just as she was approaching Eastleigh. She managed to clear the lethal cables by inches. 
For her wartime services Gore was appointed MBE in 1945, and when the war ended she continued flying as chief flying instructor at the West London Flying Club at White Waltham, Berkshire. On the formation of the WAAF Voluntary Reserve in October 1947, the first recruits were Margot Gore and her former ATA colleague Joan Naylor. 
By 1948 Gore began to consider again the possibility of a career in her earlier interest of medicine and, with encouragement from her close friend Ben Blediscoe, she decided on a career in osteopathy. With characteristic thoroughness, she studied chemistry, physics, and biology to higher certificate standard in order to gain entrance to the British School of Osteopathy (BSO) in September 1951. Qualifying in June 1954, she was awarded the gold medal as the outstanding student of her year. She started a private practice in Kensington but nevertheless kept close links with the BSO. Motivated no doubt by her own early lack of educational qualifications, she became in the late 1950s one of the five lecturers to introduce a basic science course for first-year students lacking the necessary A-levels or first MB science qualifications. In 1964 she was appointed head of the department of anatomy and physiology, and the following year was elected to the board of governing directors of the BSO, serving as the board representative on the council of the Osteopathic Educational Foundation. She became vice-chairman of the Osteopathic Educational Foundation in 1968. In 1970 she moved with her elderly mother to Cookley Green, Oxfordshire, and reduced her practising activities. 
Gore's exceptional organizing ability was recognized when she served as chairman of the board of governing directors of the BSO (1978-82). This was a key period in the school's history in which Gore led the team that realized the capital of the freehold of 16 Buckingham Gate and purchased a long lease on nos. 1-4 Suffolk Street, thus increasing the student accommodation from 80 to 400 and enabling the clinic to take an extra 300 patients per week. It was this move in 1979, allied to the educational expansion and reorganization, that culminated in the validation of the diploma course to honours degree status. In recognition of her outstanding services to the school Margot was awarded an honorary fellowship of the BSO in 1983. 
Margot Gore was an accomplished golfer and played at county level. In later life she became the ladies' captain of the Huntercombe Golf Club. She was a very private person and rarely attended social functions, and only those professional functions where her presence was expected. However, she co-operated in making documentary films concerning the ATA for the BBC in 1984 and recorded an interview with the Imperial War Museum in 1986. Margot Gore died of cancer on 20 August 1993 at the Sue Ryder Home, Nettlebed, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 67672


Spicer, Dorothy Norman (1908-1946), aviator and aeronautical engineer, was born on 31 July 1908 at Hadley Wood, Middlesex, the only daughter of Norman Spicer (died 1936), a stockbroker, and his wife, Hilda Mary Sisterson. She was educated at the Godolphin School in Brussels and at University College, London, before learning to fly in 1929 at the London Aeroplane Club, Stag Lane. During her flying training she met Pauline Gower who was there to study for her 'B' (commercial) pilot's licence. They became great friends and decided that as soon as they had finished training they would form a business partnership. 
In July 1931 Dorothy Spicer and Pauline Gower went to work; Pauline was licensed to carry passengers for 'hire or reward', and Dorothy qualified as a ground engineer (only the second woman in the world to do so) and the holder of an 'A' (private) pilot's licence. They started with a hired Gipsy Moth but soon had a plane of their own. However, times were not easy and often they had barely enough money to buy food. Dorothy and her partner were determined to prove that it was possible for an aeronautical business run entirely by women to succeed, despite the severe economic depression. 
With the idea of increasing their income Dorothy and Pauline decided to join the Crimson Fleet air circus and later the British hospitals' air pageant. The work was hectic, as in common with traditional circuses they were constantly on the move. While the pilots flew the planes the engineers were extremely busy maintaining them, doing running repairs, helping passengers into the aircraft, collecting the money, and organizing the queues. During this period Dorothy gained valuable experience especially as she had to strip down, repair, and rebuild the Spartan's engine on several occasions. Her skills became so well known that she was much sought after as a speaker and contributor to various aeronautical publications. She decided to add to her qualifications and to study for the 'B' engineer's licence. As a woman it was very difficult to acquire this type of training because institutions offering advanced courses were restricted to men. However, she persuaded the manufacturers of their Spartan plane to allow her to obtain the necessary practical and theoretical training at their workshops and thus earned her 'B' licence, becoming the first woman in the world to do so. Rather than return to touring Dorothy and Pauline decided to provide joyrides and aerial taxi trips from the holiday town of Hunstanton, Norfolk, where the constantly changing population would provide regular customers. Their business was going well so they decided to list it as a commercial company, thus giving birth to the first registered aeronautical company staffed and owned by women. 
By early 1935 Dorothy Spicer was again keen to add to her impressive list of qualifications. Already she was the only woman in the world to hold 'A' and 'B' licences and a recently acquired 'C' engineering licence. The goal this time was a 'D' licence. At the time it was not possible for a woman to study at such an advanced level and it became so only when Air Vice-Marshal A. E. Borton persuaded Sir Harold Snagge, the chairman of the Napier Engineering Company Ltd, to make special arrangements. Six months later she won an award not possessed by any other woman and became authorized to inspect, pass out, and repair both engines and airframes. She was in fact qualified to build all aspects of an aircraft, airframe, and engine from scratch, and to approve the materials required for the work. It was an extraordinary achievement for anyone, let alone someone who had literally so many 'man-made' barriers to overcome. 
After two very successful years at Hunstanton, Dorothy and Pauline opted to accept an invitation from Tom Campbell Black to tour with his British empire air display with Dorothy as senior engineer and Pauline the chief pilot. While on tour Dorothy learned that her father had died from injuries sustained from a bad fall, and later in the year Pauline's mother also died. As both wanted to be more available to support their surviving parents they established an aerial garage on Hayling Island where pilots could bring their aircraft for service and repair. However, the work was not satisfying and the business was wound up. The final task was to write an account of their flying days together, 'Women with Wings' (1938). 
Dorothy Spicer was well known and admired in the aviation world, so when it became known that she was available she was offered several jobs. She finally accepted a position with the Air Registration Board in London, thereby becoming the first woman in the British empire to receive a technical appointment in civil aviation. On 2 March 1938 she became engaged to Flight Lieutenant Richard Pearse (died 1946). They were married on 26 April 1938 at Holy Trinity, Brompton, with Pauline Gower as chief bridesmaid. The Pearses' only child, Patricia Mary, was born at Farnham Common, Surrey, on 15 May 1939. 
War broke out just months after the baby's birth. Richard first served in Coastal Command but was soon appointed as a test pilot to the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough. In late 1940 Dorothy joined him, took on flying work as an air observer and research assistant, and became involved in the development of a variety of new aircraft types and items of equipment. After the war Richard accepted the job of South American representative of British Aviation Services Ltd in Rio de Janeiro. In December 1946 they left their daughter with family and flew out as passengers in a British-built Avro York of the Argentinian airline Flota Aerea Mercante Argentina. The trip was uneventful until bad weather forced the plane to be diverted from a scheduled landing at Rio de Janeiro. On 23 December, ten miles from the airport, in thick fog, the plane flew into a mountainside, killing all on board. A memorial service for Dorothy and Richard Pearse was held at All Saints' Church, St John's Wood, London, on 8 January 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 67673


Garvey, Amy Ashwood (1895/1897-1969), pan-African organizer and feminist, is variously recorded as having been born on 18 January 1895 and on 10 January 1897, in Port Antonio, Jamaica. She was the only daughter among three children of Michael Delbert Ashwood, businessman, and his wife, Maudriana Thompson. She was taken to Panama as an infant but returned in 1904 to Jamaica, where she attended the Westwood High School for Girls. 
In 1914 Amy met Marcus Mosiah Garvey (1887-1940), who was just back from England, and within days she had become a member of his new Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), which was to become the largest pan-African mass movement. Marcus Garvey's dream was to unite the African race through his association. Amy Ashwood worked closely with him, first as friend and later as fiancee. He left for the United States in 1916 but was reunited with Amy in 1918 in New York, by which time he had re-established the UNIA in Harlem. Together they travelled around North America, and Amy became a director of the UNIA's Black Star Line Steamship Corporation. In October 1919 she helped to save Marcus Garvey's life from a would-be assassin, and on Christmas day of that year they married. The union was substantially over within three months, leaving the couple embroiled in divorce and related lawsuits. Marcus Garvey later married his former wife's chief bridesmaid, Amy Jacques. 
Amy visited England and Europe from 1921 to 1924. In London she founded the Nigerian Progress Union, a precursor to the important West African Students' Union. In 1924 she returned to New York, where she produced musical comedies in collaboration with Trinidad calypso musician and her lifelong companion, Sam Manning. Amy and Manning toured the Caribbean (1929-1931) with a musical show, on the heels of Marcus Garvey, who had been deported to Jamaica in 1927. 
From 1934 to 1938 Amy lived in England. She ran a restaurant and club in London's West End and was an active member of radical organizations led by C. L. R. James and George Padmore. She and Manning again collaborated on musical shows. Marcus Garvey was also in London at this time and the former lovers had a chance encounter in 1938. Amy spent some time in New York in 1939 before returning to Jamaica, where she remained until 1944; there she formed the short-lived J. A. G. Smith Political Party. 
Back in Harlem, Amy became a fixture at radical gatherings. She associated with the West Indies National Council and Paul Robeson's Council on African Affairs; she also campaigned for Adam Clayton Powell jun., African America's first congressman from Harlem. Because of these activities she was kept under FBI surveillance. She returned to England in 1945 in time for the fifth Pan-African Congress, and chaired its first session. Also at this time she thwarted, via a legal injunction, an initiative by Marcus Garvey's second wife to have his remains repatriated to Jamaica. 
In 1946 Amy travelled to west Africa, and in Liberia she began a long-lasting love affair with President William V. S. Tubman. In the Asante kingdom she was able to trace her roots to the village of Juaben, and she was welcomed home as a long-lost daughter by the Asantehene, King Prempeh II. In Nigeria she did extensive research into the condition of women and lectured to women's groups. 
In 1949 Amy was back in England and was able to welcome the post-war influx of Caribbean immigrants. In 1953 she toured the Caribbean for seven months, addressing women's groups. In the same year she established the Afro Peoples Centre at 1 Bassett Road, Ladbroke Grove, London. This building, which became a well-known community centre, was purchased for her by an English MP, Sir Hamilton Kerr. Following the Notting Hill riots of 1958 she worked to obtain justice for Caribbean immigrants. In another important initiative she helped to found the Association for the Advancement of Coloured People; this had influential support from Dr David Pitt and Fenner Brockway MP, who both served as vice-presidents. 
Amy returned to Africa in 1960 but was back in London four years later, when the Jamaican government renewed its efforts to repatriate Marcus Garvey's remains. This time she was persuaded to co-operate, and she spent the next three years mostly in Jamaica and Trinidad. In 1967-8 she was in the United States, where the black power generation rediscovered her. There she produced a gramophone record celebrating Marcus Garvey's work. 
Amy returned to Jamaica in 1968 with failing health, and died in Kingston on 3 May 1969. Though she had wished to be buried in Liberia this was beyond the slender resources of her few friends, and she was buried instead, on Sunday 11 May 1969, in Kingston's Calvary cemetery. Despite never attaining the historical prominence of her famous associates Amy Ashwood Garvey was an important figure during several decades of pan-African endeavour. 


@@@@@


doc= 67674


Chisholm, Mairi Lambert Gooden, of Chisholm (1896-1981), ambulance driver and first aider, was one of the two 'women of Pervyse'. Born on 26 February 1896 in Datchet, Buckinghamshire, she was the second child and elder daughter of Roderick Chisholm ('b'. 1864), chief of clan Chisholm, and his wife, Margaret Fraser, daughter of Colonel William Fraser of Colbokie and Guisachan. Privately educated, she spent her girlhood in Hampshire and Dorset, developing a lifelong interest in the new technology of motor vehicles. Encouraged by her father's gift of a motorcycle, she took part in trials and rallies in the south of England, where she encountered the redoubtable Mrs Elsie Knocker ['see 'T'Serclaes, Baroness Elizabeth Blackall de]. Mairi, eighteen in 1914, slender and attractive with brown hair and blue eyes in an oval face, was eleven years younger than Elsie Knocker but no less robust in character. When war was declared in August 1914 both headed immediately for London -- with motorcycles -- to volunteer their services for the war effort. Unsurprisingly Mairi's mother felt that this was most unsuitable for her young daughter and refused her even a suitcase. Her father was more supportive and Mairi, showing the boldness that would characterize her work at Pervyse, wrapped her belongings in a bandanna on the back of her bike and set off regardless. 
Once in London, Mairi volunteered as a dispatch rider for the Women's Emergency Corps (founded by the Women's Social and Political Union). Here she was noticed by Hector Munro, Scottish doctor and founder of the volunteer Flying Ambulance Column (FAC). Mairi's motoring skills recommended her, and on 25 September 1914 the FAC left for the war zone in Belgium. Unlike the British military authorities the Belgians gratefully accepted the services of the FAC and for the first few weeks on the Yser front they collected casualties to transport back to base hospitals. Mairi Chisholm, with characteristic understatement, recalled one incident of Belgian and German hand-to-hand bayonet fighting as 'a particularly unpleasant little battle' ('Mairi Chisholm', 'Yesterday's Witness'). At this early stage of the war Mairi and Elsie Knocker were sometimes allowed by the enemy to crawl out into no man's land and retrieve the bodies of English airmen. 
Mairi encouraged Elsie Knocker when, unhappy with Munro's leadership but not unwilling to accept his support, she persuaded the Belgian authorities to allow the two women to set up a first aid post actually on the front line between Nieuport and Ypres at Pervyse. First a cellar, then half a bombed-out house, it was 3 miles ahead of any other ambulance posts. Mairi Chisholm later wrote: 'Apart from the steady stream of wounded day and night (we slept in our clothes) we had a surgery. Many of the men in the trenches suffered from boils, sores, foot troubles &c. VD was prevalent and unattended to in the early stages of the war -- all these cases came to the dugout for our attention. (Chisholm)' With a Wolseley ambulance, donated by the people of Sutton Coldfield, Mairi would nightly undertake the terrible drive with the wounded from the front line at Pervyse to base hospital; between 1915 and 1917 she carried 1500 casualties. The only women permitted to work at the front line on the entire western front, Mairi and Elsie's importance was recognized by the appointment of each as chevalier of the order of Leopold on 31 January 1915 with a later investiture by King Albert of the Belgians himself. By 1917 their fame was acknowledged in Britain too -- encouraged by the fund-raising they had perforce to do on brief home-leave trips, which Elsie Knocker enjoyed but Mairi cared for less. On 10 October 1917 both women were awarded the Military Medal. On 17 March 1918 they were caught in a gas attack and had to be invalided home. Mairi returned to Pervyse alone for a brief spell but was gassed a second time while on the field telephone. She was twenty-two years old. 
Mairi continued her interest in motor vehicles, working for a time, immediately after 1918, in the London motor trade and, later, driving a Sunbeam sports car well into her eighties. She took an interest in the Chisholm family history and, with her nephew the clan chief, established the Clan Chisholm Society in 1952. But Mairi's health had been adversely affected by the war. She left London about 1921 and soon moved to Cantray, a highland estate, where she stayed to run a poultry farm with her lifelong friend May Davidson. From the 1930s they lived with a group of women friends in Connal, Argyll, until Mairi's death on 22 August 1981 at Perth Hospital. She was cremated at Perth crematorium on 26 August. 
After the war, in 1918, the two 'women of Pervyse' had gone their separate ways. Unlike Elsie Knocker, Mairi never published but, following her inclusion in the 1977 Imperial War Museum exhibition 'Women at war, 1914-18' and the BBC television series 'Yesterday's Witness', she left her diaries and a brief memoir to the museum. In the latter she refers generously to the work of Elsie Knocker and concludes: 'Unlike her I have found much happiness and sense of purpose in peace time. I have been blessed with friendships of both men and women, and although my health has not always been good it has never justified self-pity. What more can one say?' 



@@@@@


doc= 67675


T'Serclaes, Baroness Elizabeth Blackall de (1884-1978), ambulance driver and first aider, one of the two Women of Pervyse, was born on 29 July 1884 at 1 Barnfield Crescent, Exeter, Devon, the fifth child of Lewis Shapter, physician, and his wife, Charlotte Bayly. Orphaned at an early age, Elsie, as she was known, was cared for by a maternal uncle. Privately educated, she attended finishing school at Lausanne, Switzerland, and a cookery school at Trowbridge, Wiltshire. On 5 April 1906 in Wiltshire she married Leslie Duke Knocker ('b'. 1874/5), an accountant, and went out to Singapore; she returned to England for the birth in 1907 of her only child, Kenneth Duke Knocker. 
After parting from her husband, she trained as a nurse at the Children's Hip Hospital, Sevenoaks, Kent, and worked for a time in Java and Australia. She then trained in midwifery at Queen Charlotte's Hospital, London. About 1913 she went as housekeeper to a brother at Fordingbridge, Hampshire. With a legacy she purchased a Chater Lea motorcycle, and, nicknamed Gypsy after the club she founded, she became a leading light in the motorcycling fraternity. It was through this shared interest that she met Mairi Lambert Gooden Chisholm of Chisholm (1896-1981), with whom she was to work in Belgium. 
In August 1914 Elsie Knocker went to London as a dispatch rider with the Women's Emergency Corps, where she was noticed by Dr Hector Munro, founder of the Flying Ambulance Column, who invited her to join. The Flying Ambulance Column left for Belgium on 25 September. Unlike the British military authorities, the Belgians welcomed the volunteers who were based at the Belgian headquarters at La Panne. Equipped with a Wolseley ambulance, donated by the people of Sutton Coldfield, Elsie Knocker, followed shortly by Mairi Chisholm, went up to the Belgian front line at Pervyse. 
Elsie Knocker early realized that many of the wounded being transported were dying unnecessarily because the effects of clinical shock were not treated quickly. She was one of the first volunteers to recognize that giving the wounded basic first aid before moving them increased their chances of survival ('Mairi Chisholm', 'Yesterday's Witness'). With Dr Munro's support, she got Belgian agreement to set up a forward first-aid post in the partly ruined Cellar House of Pervyse on the front line. She left a graphic account of her work in the diaries she kept at the time (later deposited in the Imperial War Museum). 
The work of the Cellar House attracted considerable publicity. The enterprise was accorded celebrity status, which Elsie Knocker rather enjoyed, and this contributed to the rapid breakdown in relations with Dr Munro. Not a woman to mince her words, Knocker described him as an 'idiot', adding, for good measure, 'I simply loathe him' (diaries, 1 Nov 1914). Disgusted and disturbed by what she regarded as major failings of leadership and organization, she increasingly sought support from the Belgian authorities and from friends among senior British and Belgian officers. After spending Christmas 1914 in England, she returned to the Cellar House and on 31 January 1915 was appointed chevalier of the order of Leopold by King Albert of the Belgians. This award brought to a head the personality clash between Mrs Knocker and Dr Munro and effectively ended their association. Thereafter, the Cellar House distanced itself from the Flying Ambulance Column (ibid., 31 Jan 1915). 
In April 1916 Elsie Knocker married a Belgian pilot, Baron Harold de T'Serclaes (died 1919). The baroness continued her work until early 1918, when a gas attack during the final German offensive forced the evacuation of the Cellar House and her return to England. Contemporary photographs show her in the uniform of veil, long coat, breeches, and knee-length boots that she designed; she was a striking woman of above average height, with dark hair and strong, well-defined features. The two Women of Pervyse treated some 23,000 casualties in nearly four years at the front. The baroness finished the war as an officer in the newly formed Women's Royal Air Force. 
With the war ended, the baroness's life seemed to lose direction. Widowed in 1919, she tried several jobs, charity work with former servicemen, setting up a small business, driving, and housekeeping on country estates. During the general strike of 1926 she ran a medical post in Poplar in the East End of London. When war broke out in September 1939 she joined the reformed Women's Auxiliary Air Force, as an assistant section officer, but resigned shortly after her son, an RAF wing commander, was killed in action over Holland on 3 July 1942. She later worked for the RAF Association in Epsom, Surrey, and from 1949 to 1959 for the RAF Benevolent Fund. 
In 1964 Baroness de T'Serclaes emerged from obscurity with the publication of her memoirs, 'Flanders and Other Fields'. The book reveals little of her life before 1914 and is less than generous in its mention of the enormous contribution made by Mairi Chisholm at Pervyse. Ironically, given her strength of character and flair for publicity, T'Serclaes remains an enigma. Hers was a character brought sharply into focus in time of war, yet one that seems curiously diminished and lacking focus in time of peace. That she herself was aware of this contradiction is clear in her summing up of her life: 'I have always had to make my own way, I have been lonely, and I still am. But for all my feeling of deprivation, I do not despair. This life of mine has been a bungled affair. Only in time of war have I found any real sense of purpose and happiness. (T'Serclaes, 213)' In 1977 the baroness was featured in the Imperial War Museum's exhibition 'Women at War, 1914-1918', where her diaries and medals, including the Military Medal awarded on 10 October 1917, were shown. She also featured in an episode of the BBC television series 'Yesterday's Witness', broadcast that same year. She died aged ninety-four in a nursing home at 1 West Park Road, Epsom, from bronchopneumonia on 26 April 1978 and was cremated at Randalls Park crematorium, Leatherhead, Surrey, on 4 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 67676


Porter, (Ann) Agnes (c.1752-1814), governess and diarist, was born in Edinburgh, the eldest of the four children of the Revd Dr Francis Porter ('bap'. 1718, died 1782), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1724-1794). Her birthday fell on 18 June but the exact year of her birth is unknown. Her father was born in Great Yarmouth, where he was apprenticed to a woollen-draper in 1730. He was subsequently ordained and settled in Edinburgh, where he probably married. Nothing is known of Agnes Porter's early life and education but by 1763 the family had moved to Chelsea, where they lived for several years. Her father was presented to the vicarage of Wroughton, Wiltshire, in 1778 and remained there until his death in 1782. Lacking independent means the Porters were unable to support Agnes and her two younger sisters, Elizabeth and Fanny; a brother, whose name is unknown, died young. 
By 1777 Agnes Porter was living in Great Yarmouth as companion to the wife and daughters of a lawyer, John Ramey. In 1782 she moved to Swindon to be governess to the daughters of Ambrose Goddard of Swindon House, MP for Wiltshire from 1772 to 1806. From 1784 to 1797 she was governess to the children of the second earl and countess of Ilchester, living mainly at Redlynch House, near Bruton, Somerset, until 1792 and then at Melbury House, Melbury Sampford, Dorset. In 1797 she returned to Great Yarmouth to live as companion to Elizabeth Upcher, one of the Ramey daughters. Elizabeth Upcher died in 1799 and Agnes moved to south Wales to be governess to the children of her former pupil Lady Mary Fox Strangways, who had married Thomas Mansel Talbot of Penrice Castle, on the Gower peninsula, in 1794. 
Described by Sydney Smith as 'Infinitely vulgar' and 'a very ordinary article' (NL Wales, MS 11981E; 'Letters of Sydney Smith', 47-8) Agnes Porter thought herself 'plain, but chatty and tolerably agreeable in conversation' ('Governess', 166). Lacking both beauty and fortune, she never married, though she would have liked to have done so. Probably educated largely at home, she was highly intelligent and had a lively and enquiring mind, retaining her enthusiasm for learning throughout her adult life. Having spent some time in France, at Boulogne, during her youth, she could read and write French well. Her main interests were literature, history, religion, education, and languages; she tried to teach herself Italian, Latin, and German. Unlike some governesses she was an excellent teacher, who genuinely enjoyed the company of her pupils. Those pupils included Elizabeth Fox Strangways, mother of the photographic pioneer William Henry Fox Talbot, and, for several years at Penrice, Henry Fox Talbot himself and his first cousin Christopher Rice Mansel Talbot, later MP for Glamorgan. She is of particular interest because she worked in a period before governesses became an essential status symbol in every genteel household. Her wide circle of friends, with several of whom she corresponded for many years, included, in addition to her former pupils, Elizabeth Liege, wife of the artist and author Joseph Moser; the London print merchant and mezzotint engraver Valentine Green; and Dr Malcolm Macqueen, father of the politician and colonizer of New South Wales, Thomas Potter Macqueen. 
Agnes Porter wrote one book for children, entitled 'Triumphs of Reason Examplified in Seven Tales', which was published by her friend Valentine Green in 1791. Her surviving journals and letters, covering the period from 1788 to 1814, include her acute observations on the activities of the occupants of the great houses in which she lived, in addition to valuable insights into the ideas and thoughts of a late-Georgian gentlewoman forced by circumstances to make her own living. In 1806 she retired from full-time work as a governess and went to live with her younger sister Fanny ('c'.1764-1823), whose husband, the Revd Thomas Richards (1762-1852), was curate at Fairford, Gloucestershire. From 1812 she lived in Bruton, Somerset, where she died, aged 'about 60' (but probably a little older), and was buried in the churchyard there on 21 February 1814. 


@@@@@


doc= 67677


Women's section of the Air Transport Auxiliary (act. 1940-1945) was a civilian organization that came into existence, after several false starts, on 1 January 1940. Its members' male counterparts -- experienced pilots who were ineligible for service with the RAF -- had been employed very soon after the outbreak of war, initially using requisitioned Tiger Moths to transport mail, medical supplies, and civilian dignitaries, but before long ferrying the larger and more sophisticated aircraft being developed for the RAF from factory to airbase. But, while many women had participated in the flying craze of the 1930s or had in 1938 taken advantage of the government's Civil Air Guard scheme to learn to fly at subsidized rates, the question of whether they too should use this experience and knowledge in a wartime context was highly contentious. The editor of 'The Aeroplane' was not alone in believing that 'the menace is the woman who thinks that she ought to be flying a high-speed bomber when she really has not the intelligence to scrub the floor of a hospital properly' (Curtis, 12). 
That the women's section of the Air Transport Auxiliary (ATA) overcame this opposition so completely, growing to a strength of 166 pilots who between them flew every possible kind of aircraft except flying boats, under exactly the same conditions as their male counterparts, was due to the determination, skill, and persistence of some of the early members of the organization and in particular of their senior commander, Pauline Gower (1910-1947). A highly experienced professional pilot, her position as the only female member of the committee on the control of flying (established in 1938 to examine the regulations governing flight) had afforded her a potentially useful introduction to some of the men who would shortly oversee the use of aircraft in war. When war was declared, therefore, on 3 September 1939, she lost little time in proposing that women should be able to join the newly formed ATA, and held out against opposition from senior figures in the Air Ministry until in November she secured authorization to recruit the first all-woman ferry pool, to be based at Hatfield. If the scope and terms of this fledgeling women's section were a disappointment -- just eight women, who were restricted to flying Tiger Moths and were paid 20 per cent less than their male counterparts -- then Gower was prepared to bide her time. Acutely aware, as were all the first recruits, that the slightest mistake risked stalling the expansion of the organization, her tact and judgement were impeccable, and through a series of patiently anticipated and perfectly timed interventions she succeeded in securing for her ever-growing pool of pilots a degree of formal equality of terms and conditions unmatched by any other wartime organization. In May 1940 she negotiated a small increase in numbers and the opportunity for the most experienced to take conversion courses to fly all types of non-operational aircraft. It was to be another year, however, before the most significant breakthrough -- the agreement, in July 1941, that women should be allowed to fly operational planes -- and by the end of the war they had flown everything from fighter planes such as the Spitfire to the huge Halifax and Lancaster four-engined bombers. Not only that, but from May 1943 they also received equal pay for their trouble. 
All ATA pilots were required to fly without radio or other navigational aid bar visual contact with the ground, and ferry trips could routinely involve circumnavigating the balloon barrage around a heavily defended factory to deliver a plane hundreds of miles away to a new and often camouflaged airfield consisting of little more than a strip of grass. Furthermore, successful completion of a conversion course for a generic type of aircraft meant that they were required to fly, sight unseen, any model that came within that specification with no more introduction than that afforded by the ATA handling notes that every pilot carried and that listed the idiosyncrasies of the 140 different types of aircraft that they might be called upon to fly. In order to maximize time and available flying personnel each ferry pool's schedule of flights was drawn up and co-ordinated centrally by the operations officer and her team of ground crew, who sought to ensure not only that the maximum number of planes were successfully delivered to their destinations but that pilots were retrieved at the end of a day's ferrying by an ATA 'taxi' flight and delivered back to base. 
The celebrated 'first eight', who joined the ATA on 1 January 1940, were all extremely experienced pre-war pilots and qualified flying instructors, and most were to become the backbone of the women's section. Youngest of the group was Joan Hughes (1918-1993), who had become Britain's youngest qualified pilot at the age of seventeen and claimed that she would go without food and water rather than not fly. Having worked as an instructor for the Civil Air Guard she concentrated on instructing as the ATA expanded, but as well as being the only woman to instruct on all types of aircraft she clocked up an impressive ferrying tally and was one of only eleven women to convert to four-engined bombers. Winifred (Winnie) Crossley, dashing and convivial, had worked for five years towing advertising banners and performing stunts with an air circus. Once in the ATA she broke important new ground when she was given the onerous and hugely significant task of being the first woman to fly an operational aircraft, and she too went on to convert successfully to four-engined bombers. Another four-engined bomber pilot was Marion Wilberforce (1902-1995), who combined the flying necessary to complete that conversion with successful leadership as second in command and then commanding officer of the ferry pools at Hatfield and, later, Cosford. Rosemary Theresa Du Cros, nee Rees (1901-1994), a former ballet dancer, most closely resembled the stereotypical wealthy private pilot of the 1930s. She, too, successfully combined administrative authority, as second in command of Hamble ferry pool, with conversion to four-engined bombers. Margaret (Margie) Fairweather (1901-1944) had over 1000 hours' flying experience, mostly gained touring Europe in her own plane, and was also instructing for the Civil Air Guard before the war. Quiet and self-effacing but an exceptionally able pilot, she too was one of the first to fly operational planes and later to convert to four-engined bombers. Tragically she was also the only one of the first eight not to survive the war when, on 4 August 1944, her plane suffered engine failure and she crash-landed. 
Another early recruit was also one of the sixteen members of the ATA women's section who lost their lives during the war. This was Amy Johnson (1903-1941), arguably Britain's most famous and most experienced female pilot, killed on 5 January 1941 when her plane crashed into the Thames. Notable among the third wave of recruits, who joined in June and July 1940, was Margaret Wyndham Gore (1913-1993), who in 1938 had taken a part-time job in Smithfield market to finance flying lessons. Less experienced than most of the early arrivals, she was nevertheless a brilliant natural pilot who successfully converted to four-engined bombers, and as commanding officer of the women's pool at Hamble was a wise, calm, admirably efficient, and extremely popular leader. 
The ATA flag was lowered for the last time on 30 November 1945. The pilots of the women's section had proved themselves faithful to the ATA motto, 'Aetheris avidi' ('eager for the air'), but, as many were to find, neither their eagerness nor their experience was a passport to a career in aviation in the post-war climate. Pauline Gower, to whom the women's section of the ATA owed so much, tragically died giving birth to twin sons in 1947. That the members of the ATA women's section largely remain the forgotten pilots of the Second World War is no true reflection of her achievement or that of the remarkable organization that she led with such inspiration and force. 


@@@@@


doc= 67678


Omoniyi, Bandele (1884-1913), nationalist and writer on African politics, was born on 6 November 1884 in Lagos in the British colony of Nigeria, the son of Aina Omoniyi. Both his father, said to be headman of a gang of day labourers at the Lagos customs and his mother originated from the Yoruba town of Modakeke, near Ife, in south-western Nigeria. Bandele Omoniyi often styled himself Prince, especially in his political writings and activities in Britain, and claimed to be the nephew of King Lupono of Modakeke. He had also used the name John B. Samuel while in Lagos. Omoniyi was educated at Lagos CMS grammar school, where he also taught, at Edinburgh tutorial college (1906), and at Edinburgh University (1906-7). 
Omoniyi first visited Britain in 1905, the cost borne by his father who, despite his humble circumstances, had received sufficient funds for this purpose through the compulsory purchase of his land by the Lagos government. He arrived in Liverpool and may have intended to study in that city. It seems that while there he came into contact with the newly formed Ethiopian Progressive Society (EPA), an early student pan-African organization with members from west Africa and the Caribbean. It was from Liverpool that he wrote to the editor of the 'Lagos Standard', complaining about the lack of support the EPA received from west Africa, the undemocratic nature of British rule, and, unusually for this period, the condition and treatment of 'the working classes' in west Africa. 
In 1906 Omoniyi moved to Edinburgh and until 1907 was enrolled as a student in the faculty of medicine at Edinburgh University. He then decided to study law, but in the middle of the academic session he gave up his classes in order to concentrate on writing in support of the political demands of his compatriots. Throughout 1906 he continued his political activities, sending a series of letters to the British prime minister, Henry Campbell-Bannerman, and one to his compatriots, which were all published in the 'Lagos Standard'. He took up the case for colonial reform and political representation for Africans and opposed the military campaigns that were still being conducted in west Africa. He also called on his compatriots to organize themselves to petition parliament in support of their rights. In the same year he sent another twelve letters demanding an end to discrimination in employment in west Africa to the colonial secretary, Lord Elgin. 
In 1907 Omoniyi wrote a series of articles for the 'Edinburgh Magazine' criticizing colonial rule. In the same year he became the first African to write for the Independent Labour Party's 'Labour Leader'. He had already shown an interest in the working classes and with socialism, which he associated with 'the equality of freedom and opportunity to all coloured races' (Adi, 595 n. 40). There is even some evidence to suggest that he wrote a book, which has not yet come to light, entitled 'Socialism Examined'. An article in the 'Labour Leader', 'The regeneration of Africa', which was well received by the press in west Africa, showed his concern with pan-African issues. It defended the 1906 Zulu uprising in Natal as well as presenting an 'African Programme' of 'urgent reforms which we Africans demand' (Adi, 593). 
In March 1908, at the age of twenty-three, Omoniyi published in Edinburgh his major work, 'A Defence of the Ethiopian Movement', which was dedicated 'to The Right Honourable and Honourable Members of the British Parliament'. Here he again defended the Natal rebellion and Ethiopianism, an early form of pan-Africanism particularly evident in South Africa; criticized British colonial rule and 'brute force imperialism'; and devoted a chapter to 'inter-marriage' and 'a vindication of the Half-Castes or Coloured Men' (Adi, 595). His main concern was to urge colonial reforms, and he warned that without them a revolution might take place in Africa that would bring an end to British rule. His writing and correspondence with members of the government brought Omoniyi to the attention of the Colonial Office. In 1908 he began to correspond with the future Labour Party leader Ramsay MacDonald, requesting him to ask a parliamentary question concerning what he believed was an attack on the town of Modakeke by the colonial authorities. MacDonald contacted the Colonial Office, which had already begun to collect damaging but unsubstantiated information about Omoniyi. 
Little more is known of Omoniyi's life until in 1912 he again contacted the Colonial Office, this time from Para-Belem, Brazil. According to his own account he had been selling gold-mining concessions in Brazil for some eighteen months but was also involved in Brazilian politics. In addition he had written a manifesto, one of the first political documents written by an African in Nigeria's history, concerned with the 'elevation of the mass of the Nigerians to a position of respect and honour' (Langley, 181), the need for a political party to represent their interests, and the demand for a federal, semi-autonomous Nigeria. Omoniyi was in contact with the Colonial Office again following his arrest and temporary imprisonment for taking an active part in political disturbances. 
Omoniyi's intervention in Brazilian politics was his last political act. A few months later, on 2 January 1913, he died, at the age of twenty-eight, from acute beri-beri in the Hospital da Caridade in Para-Belem. It was reported that 'he left no estate, and his effects were seized in lieu of rent; his interment provided by the hospital authorities' (Adi, 604). 


@@@@@


doc= 67680


Buckle, (James) Desmond (1910-1964), political activist, was born on 29 March 1910 in Accra, capital of the British colony of the Gold Coast, in west Africa. He was the second of five children born to Vidal James Buckle, a prominent and wealthy lawyer, and his wife, Ellen Konadu Buckle, a member of the equally prominent Bannerman family. The Buckle family originated from Sierra Leone and Desmond Buckle's forebears were of African-American and Caribbean origin. Desmond first came to Britain as a child at the age of ten, shortly after the death of his father, and was educated at Truro College in Cornwall, and in 1928 began medical studies at University College, London. He failed to complete his medical studies and in the early 1930s became increasingly active in several student and black political organizations, including the League of Coloured Peoples, the Gold Coast Students' Association, of which he was secretary from 1936 to 1937 and president from 1937 to 1938, and the communist-led Negro Welfare Association. 
During the late 1930s Buckle became the first west African and almost certainly the first African to join the Communist Party of Great Britain, and by 1943 was a member of the party's colonial committee. He subsequently worked in the party's international affairs and Africa committees, and from 1950 to 1954 was editor of the latter committee's 'Africa Newsletter'. He was a regular contributor to such publications as 'World News and Views', the 'Daily Worker', and 'Labour Monthly'. It was Desmond Buckle who presented the report on Africa and the West Indies to the conference of communist parties of the British empire in London in 1947. 
Buckle was also involved with the work of the National Council for Civil Liberties and spoke at several of the organization's conferences both on the anti-colonial struggles in Africa and on the problem of racism and the colour bar in Britain. In 1945 he drafted 'Manifesto on Africa in the Post-War World', which British-based African and pan-African organizations sent to the newly formed United Nations and which among other things called for 'full self government within a definite time limit' for all the African colonies. 
After 1945 Buckle was active in the international peace and trade union movements. He represented the Transvaal Council of Non-European Trade Unions at the founding of the World Federation of Trade Unions in Paris in 1945. He was subsequently a member of the general council of the federation, and he played a leading role in the work of the preparatory committee of the All-African Trade Union Congress which met in Dakar, Senegal, in 1951. He was also a member of the permanent committee of the World Peace Congress, and was elected to the presidium of the Second World Peace Congress, held in Warsaw in 1950. 
During the post-war period Buckle was employed as a journalist by TASS, the Soviet news agency, reporting mainly on sport and African affairs. He also wrote for several European papers including the German publications 'Tagliche Rundschau', 'Neue Berliner Illustrierte', and 'Zeit im Bild'. A committed internationalist, he even acted as Paul Robeson's secretary during his four-month stay in Britain in 1949. Desmond Buckle was a regular speaker at meetings and conferences throughout Europe and one of the founders of the British-Hungarian Friendship Society. He died of stomach cancer at St George's Hospital in London on Sunday 25 October 1964, and his ashes were interred at Highgate cemetery, Middlesex, on 31 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 67681


Fadipe, Nathaniel Akinremi (1893-1944), writer and anti-colonialist, was born on 2 October 1893 at Oko-Saje, Abeokuta, Nigeria, the son of the Revd L. O. Fadipe of the Baptist mission at Abeokuta; his mother was a successful market trader. As a child he was educated at church missionary schools. Later, dissatisfied with his poorly paid job as a clerk in the government secretariat, he moved to become personal secretary to the manager of Barclays Bank in Lagos. 
In order to further his education Fadipe travelled to Britain. He gained a BA at the London School of Economics (LSE); on graduating in 1929 he was granted a fellowship for two terms at Woodbrooke, an international Quaker residential college in Birmingham. After further study of history and international relations there he was awarded a 'testamur' certificate 'cum laude'. In 1930, on a two-year fellowship from the Phelps Stokes Fund, he travelled to the United States; he spent a year at Columbia University, New York, and was awarded an MA. His dissertation, 'A Yoruba town: a sociological study of Abeokuta', was the first academic study of a Nigerian city by an African. 
The offer of a teaching post at Achimota College, Legon, Gold Coast, drew Fadipe back to West Africa. Achimota, opened in 1926, was the first government-funded educational establishment to offer co-education from kindergarten to lower-level university. Apparently Fadipe met considerable hostility from the European staff, so that his contract was not renewed when it expired in 1934. His name is omitted from the histories of Achimota. 
On returning to London, Fadipe enrolled at the LSE in 1934 for postgraduate study under professors Bronislaw Malinowski and Morris Ginsberg. Though in receipt of a fellowship only in his final year, he researched aspects of the political, social, and economic situation in some countries in Africa. It took him five years to gain his PhD. His was the first major sociological study by a Nigerian of the Yoruba; however, 'The Sociology of the Yoruba' was not published until 1970. 
Fadipe felt that the 'British public [was] most inadequately informed of Africa... [and] of the unjust conditions the Natives laboured under in many parts of Africa' ('West African Pilot'), and his writings, published in a number of British journals, aimed to address this ignorance. These included essays on Abyssinia and a six-part series on traditional and modern education. He also wrote about South Africa, discussed the evolution and effects of indirect rule, and considered plans for white settlement in post-war Africa. In addition he researched and wrote two papers for the West African Students' Union (WASU): a report on Nigerian land tenure ('c'.1939), written for distribution to the members of the unofficial parliamentary committee on west African economic conditions, and a thirty-six-page memorandum, 'Price control and living standards in West Africa' (13 April 1940), which was sent to the government. The Colonial Office sent an amended version to the west African governments as a secret document (TNA: PRO, CO 852/341/1). A work on the economic situation in Kenya, which he withdrew from the publishers for unstated reasons, had been commissioned by the Fabian Colonial Bureau. 
Involved in anti-imperialist politics in London, Fadipe worked with WASU, the League of Coloured Peoples, and with militants such as George Padmore and Jomo Kenyatta. Naturally, he was also concerned with racism in Britain; his complaints in 1941 about harassment in air raid shelters and racial discrimination in employment exchanges invigorated previous discussions between the Colonial Office and the Ministry of Labour on the issue (TNA: PRO, CO 859/80/9; TNA: PRO, CO 859/40/15; TNA: PRO, CO 859/40/4). He also wrote for, and collaborated with, such white-run political organizations as the National Council for Civil Liberties, and worked with campaigners such as Dr Norman Leys, and Horace Alexander of the peace movement. His work was used by the Independent Labour Party, the Fabian Colonial Bureau, and the Labour Research Department. He was in contact with activists such as the African-American Ralph Bunche (later a Nobel laureate) and Nnamdi Azikiwe, a future president of independent Nigeria. 
As there were no university research or teaching posts in London for which an African applicant would have received serious consideration, Fadipe was forced to earn his living as an examiner of students of the Yoruba language, as a marker of school examination papers, as a translator for the Ministry of Information, and as a clerk with Unilever. Inappropriate employment combined with total devotion to the cause of Africa led to gross overwork and resulted in a brain haemorrhage. Fadipe died on 1 June 1944 at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London; he was buried at Hendon Park cemetery. 
As the editor of the journal 'West Africa' noted, Fadipe was 'one of the ablest and most balanced thinkers Nigeria has produced' (10 June 1944). He was held in 'great admiration for his intellectual powers and the fairness and justice of his opinions'. His 'true place was a responsible one in the administration of his country [but] it is not really an inveterate habit of the Colonial Governments to seek out and prefer men of his independent, critical cast of mind' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 67682


Butler, Lois (1897-1970), aviator and skier, was born on 3 November 1897 at 275 Drummond Street, Montreal, Canada, the only daughter and second of the five children of Sir William Duff Reid (1866-1924) and his wife, Minnie Cormack (died 1949). Taken to Canada in 1873, when his father undertook railway projects, William Duff Reid later joined him on the Canadian Pacific Railway. On the death of Reid senior in 1908 he became president of the Reid Newfoundland Co. Ltd, based at St John's. 
Lois Reid was sent to England to be educated at Abbots Langley School, and returned in 1913 to complete her education at Havergal College, Toronto. She met her future husband, Lieutenant-Colonel Hugh William Knox-Niven (died 1923), when he arrived as aide-de-camp to the governor of Newfoundland. They married in 1918; there was one daughter of this marriage, which ended in 1923 with Knox-Niven's death. In 1925 Lois married Alan Samuel Butler (1898-1987), chairman of the De Havilland Aircraft Company. He ran an air-survey firm in Newfoundland and had been involved in carrying the first airmails there. They had a daughter and a son. Alan Butler owned a succession of De Havilland aircraft in which he toured and raced. In 1928, with Lois as passenger, he set a world speed record for two-seater light aeroplanes, of 119.77 m.p.h. In 1929 Lois gained a private pilot's licence (no. 1963), and in the following year acted as second pilot to her husband, flying a twin-engined Gloster Survey biplane (G-AADO) from London to Cape Town. Designed for aerial survey and photo-mapping by De Havilland for the Aircraft Operating Company, Cape Town, the AS31 was a unique aircraft required for an urgent four months' contract to cover 63,000 square miles in Northern Rhodesia. The Butlers left Heston Aerodrome on 20 March 1930, accompanied by an engineer, the plane laden with spare parts. Lois kept a diary and photographic record of the 8000-mile trip, which involved twenty-three stops for refuelling and repairs and took twenty-seven days. They arrived in Cape Town on 15 April, Lois having undertaken approximately one quarter of the flying each day. On her return she competed in the king's cup air race and the Europa 'Rundflug', a 7000 mile race around Europe. 
The years between the wars were truly golden for those with means, leisure, and a sense of adventure; the Butlers possessed all these. Lois Butler joined the Kandahar Ski Club in 1930 and, already a first-class skier, was awarded her gold K in 1931 and an alpha for downhill racing in 1933. The UK was largely responsible for starting downhill and slalom racing, and Lois was a member of the British ladies' team, taking part in European ski championship meetings that later became world cup events. When Canada sent a team to these international ski meetings she naturally transferred her affections and ski prowess to the Canadian team, representing Canada at the 1936 winter Olympics at Garmische Partenkirchen, and many other important international meetings, until all sports came to a full stop with the advent of the Second World War. 
By 1939 Lois Butler had accrued over 300 hours as a pilot and was among the first eight women asked to join the Air Transport Auxiliary (ATA), formed in September to ferry aircraft from the manufacturers' airfields to RAF bases. A reluctant Air Ministry had finally agreed that women pilots could be allowed to fly small trainer aircraft, and by the bitter January of 1940 they were ferrying open Tiger Moths from the factories. The weather and visibility was always bad, but spring found them adept at flights from the south of England to the north of Scotland. The group having proved itself, Lois Butler was among the first to be selected later that year for conversion to light operational aircraft at the Central Flying School of the RAF. As the pressures of war increased so did the intake of women to the ATA, and eventually they were flying all types of operational aircraft. By VE-day (8 May 1945), Lois Butler had flown more than 1000 hours, handling 36 types of Royal Navy and RAF aircraft, including the Mosquito, the fastest of them all. This was a range of experience obtained by very few service pilots. 
After the war the Butlers sold their home in London and the family moved to Salisbury, Rhodesia. They also acquired tobacco farms near Bulawayo, but Lois did not settle, and they returned to Studham Hall, in Bedfordshire, leaving their son, David, in Rhodesia. Lois Butler returned to skiing at the Kandahar Club, renewing her friendships in Europe. The summers were spent sharing her husband's passion for boats; they would go down the French canals to the Mediterranean each summer and visit the Greek islands. It was during one of these holidays that Lois Butler died, of a heart attack, in Piraeus, Greece, on 17 August 1970. She was buried in St Mary's Church, Studham. 


@@@@@


doc= 67686


Patterson, Gabrielle Ruth Millicent (1905-1968), aviator, was born on 6 July 1905 at 23 Blomfield Court, Maida Vale, London, the eldest of four daughters of Malcolm Burr and his wife, Clara Millicent Goode. A mining engineer by profession but an entomologist by inclination, her father followed an explorer's life of prospecting and researching. His wife travelled with him, and Gabrielle and her sisters were educated in various European cities, including Paris, Berlin, Budapest, and Vienna. Having completed her education she was employed by her mother's family firm, Thos Goode & Sons, of South Audley Street, London, purveyors of china and glass to five generations of the royal family, and eventually became its company secretary. But a Mayfair showroom, however grand, was not exciting enough for her, and she took up the new sport of flying. At this time -- the 1920s -- flying clubs were being established and staffed in the main by ex-RAF pilots flying First World War aircraft. 
Having gained a pilot's licence Gabrielle went on to become, in 1931, the first woman to hold an instructor's certificate. About this time she met her future husband, Arthur (Pat) Patterson (died 1986), and was instrumental in teaching him to fly. They married on 26 June 1931 and their only child, Ian, was born in 1932. Pat qualified as an aviation engineer, and the couple moved around airfields as work opportunities arose. By 1933 they owned a Miles Hawk aircraft and Gabrielle Patterson had gained a B licence at the Cinque Ports Flying Club. This allowed her to fly as a commercial pilot for Silvertown Lubricants Ltd while continuing to instruct for the club. For a short time she was sales manager for the Miles Aircraft Company. The most prestigious aerial sporting event at this time was the king's cup air race, and competition between the early aircraft builders to design an aeroplane capable of winning the cup became intense. Gabrielle entered in 1934, flying a Miles Hawk G-ACTZ designed by 'Blossom' Miles, wife of Fred Miles. 
In the late 1930s Gabrielle Patterson was a leading figure in women's aviation and gained a lot of publicity. She started her own small flying school at Romford, Kent, in a barn with one Puss Moth. With the formation of the Civil Air Guard in 1938 she became chief instructor (and head of the women's corps of the Civil Air Guard) at Romford. She was joined there by other qualified women instructors who built up their flying hours in the months before the Second World War by training the influx of volunteers keen to take advantage of the cheap subsidized flying in the Civil Air Guard. 
In 1939 the Pattersons' marriage failed, and they subsequently divorced. Pat was called up into the Fleet Air Arm and Gabrielle eventually joined the Air Transport Auxiliary (ATA). Created only in 1939, the ATA was composed mainly of pilots too old or unfit for the RAF. Referred to as the 'ancient and tattered airmen' they released RAF pilots from ferrying duties into active service. Initially there was official disapproval of women pilots, but after ceaseless lobbying Pauline Gower was allowed to form a women's section of the ATA. With 1530 flying hours Gabrielle Patterson was one of the first eight chosen to report for duty at Hatfield on 1 January 1940. At first the women were allowed to fly only training aircraft from the factories to the maintenance units but by the summer they were cleared to fly light operational aircraft. Patterson served as a first officer until the spring of 1943, when after contracting bronchitis she was grounded and subsequently left the ATA. 
Gabrielle Patterson was a gifted teacher, always ready to encourage young flyers. Involved from the outset with the Women's Junior Air Corps, from 1946 to 1950 she served as commandant, and as chairman of its aviation committee she wrote the syllabus for the course work. Her outstanding ability was recognized when she became the first woman to be appointed to the Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators' panel of examiners. With the resumption of civilian flying after the war she moved to Barton in 1950 to become chief flying instructor of the Lancashire Aero Club, and shortly afterwards went to Ringway airport, Manchester, as chief flying instructor of the British European Airways staff flying club. After several years in this role she was forced to give up aviation for medical reasons, and subsequently read for a degree at Manchester University from 1954 to 1956. 
Having won a scholarship in 1956 to the Sorbonne (University of Paris), Patterson, who was a lifelong Francophile, thereafter made her home in France. She taught English for the Otis Elevator Company. In later years she became concerned with the difficulty faced by pilots of non-British nationality in expressing themselves intelligibly in English over the radio-telephone, and gave time and effort to teaching them. After falling ill in 1968 she went to live with her sister Elizabeth at Little Missenden, in Buckinghamshire. She died, of cancer, in Wycombe General Hospital, High Wycombe, on 31 October 1968, and was cremated at Amersham. Her ashes were scattered from the air over White Waltham airfield in March 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 67691


Women agents on active service in France (act. 1942-1944) were trained in secrecy from the spring of 1942 to work abroad as agents of the Special Operations Executive (SOE), F section, despite much opposition to the use of women in this field, because of a shortage of suitable men available for the work. Some women were already expert wireless operators, a skill essential for field agents who had to transmit regular requests for supplies from Britain. They also made unobtrusive couriers, although many were young and often very attractive. SOE agents were not spies. Instead they were sent to conquered countries, where their task was to enable their 'organizer' and local resistance groups to carry out sabotage and later armed resistance to the German, Italian, or Japanese forces of occupation. 
Shortly after SOE's inception in July 1940 a chance encounter between the head of SOE and the commandant of the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry (FANY), later known as the Women's Transport Service, brought in over a third of FANY's numbers to join other civilians, servicemen, and servicewomen on SOE's many staffs, whose work embraced numerous countries. FANY now gave cover to, and produced, most of the fifty or so women agents sent to France by SOE, fifteen of whom came from the Women's Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF). Although FANY was a uniformed service, those in it were classed as civilians and could thus both travel abroad and carry arms, which were forbidden at that time to members of the women's forces. As General de Gaulle's own secret service, the Bureau Central de Renseignements et d'Action, was hostile to SOE, eleven or more Frenchwomen (a few from the French Women's Army), most trained by SOE, worked in liaison with de Gaulle in what was known as the Republique Francaise (RF) section. The mainly British remainder were employed by F section, the French service independent of de Gaulle, which had its early headquarters in Baker Street, London. Of the nearly four hundred F section agents working in France, around forty were women, although about ninety were trained for service there. A few other SOE sections also worked in France, mostly dealing with escape lines. The secret services of many other powers, both friendly and hostile, were also active in France. 
SOE women agents came from all walks of society, from a princess born in the Kremlin to a shopgirl; their ages and characters were also highly various. However, they all had in common immense courage and intense patriotism. Usually their patriotism was for both Britain and France, as many had at least one French parent, spoke French fluently, or were familiar with France. The risks of their work were clearly explained in early selection interviews: they would have to work hard both by day and by night; life would be strenuous, lonely, and precarious, and they would always have to be alert to danger; if captured, they could face brutal interrogation, imprisonment, and probably death. Nevertheless, these women were willing to make this sacrifice and, secretly, few expected to return alive. 
Chillingly, for the women of F section this expectation was all too often fulfilled. The figures tell their own story. All the women of RF section survived the war. Perhaps it was because they were more truly French, better protected in their own land, or perhaps because they arrived in 1944 only months before (or even after) the allied landings on D-day: even so, Alix D'Unienville was captured but escaped, and Marguerite Petitjean got away only by a whisker, the enemy hot on her heels, as she fled over the Pyrenees. The story of the F section women was very different. Of their number, at least twenty were imprisoned (one for only a day) and thirteen never returned. Of two others, working for SOE but not trained by it, Madame Wimille made an audacious escape, but Sonia Olschanesky ['see below'] ended in the crematorium at Natzweiler. 
It is believed that it took between five and ten years to train a Russian agent. SOE could not afford to be so generous, and the longest training period given to a woman appears to have been about nine months for the training of a very few as wireless operators from scratch; the average was five to six months and, when agents were urgently needed, even less. Training usually took place at large, requisitioned country mansions, well away from prying eyes. Agents used to joke that SOE stood for 'Stately 'Omes of England'. For F section weaker entrants were sifted out at Wanborough Manor, where training in security, exercise, and methods was given. Then came survival and weapons training in Scotland, parachuting at Tatton Park, and various undercover courses in forgery, burglary, and other necessary activities at the finishing school in Beaulieu Abbey. Here new identities were created, and the women also faced gruelling evasion and interrogation tests. Wireless operators additionally were trained at Thame Park. The success of the training can be measured by the fact that, of all the women agents captured in action, none appear to have given away to the Germans any sensitive information. 
Their training complete, the women agents were ready to be sent to France by felucca or submarine, to be landed by Lysander or Hudson aircraft, or to be dropped by parachute often from a Halifax (with other supplies), hoping that they would not be injured on arrival, met by a reception party of Germans (as once happened), or find themselves stranded, lost, and alone in the dark with no contacts. In this, as in the skill and courage that they displayed throughout the difficulties and traumas of their careers in France, it is little wonder that many of these women agents won high awards. Three gained the George Cross (two posthumously). 
The fiery Violette Reine Elizabeth Szabo, nee Bushell (1921-1945), reputed to be the best shot in SOE, a beautiful widow of twenty-three, parachuted twice into France as a courier. The first visit was short, to a network around Rouen which could not be revived. Three days after arriving in France for the second time in 1944, to assist the maquis in sabotage around Limoges, she and her two companions were caught in a German ambush. Her colleagues managed to get away, but, injuring her ankle, Szabo could not, and was captured. When interrogation could extract nothing from her, she was later imprisoned and eventually shot at the concentration camp at Ravensbruck on 5 February 1945. In addition to being appointed MBE and awarded the Croix de Guerre, she also received a posthumous George Cross. 
Perhaps the best-known of the agents was a spirited thirty-year-old brunette, Odette Marie Celine Sansom, 'nee' Brailly (1912-1995) ['see 'Hallowes, Odette Marie Celine], the French-born wife of an Englishman. She landed near Cassis in November 1942 and became a courier to Peter Morland Churchill (1909-1972). Later they were arrested by a German posing as a friend. Under torture Odette tried to exonerate Churchill. Finally, after a period of solitary confinement in Ravensbruck, she was released by the commandant, who believed her story that Churchill was the prime minister's relation and that she was Peter's wife (which she became in reality in 1947). She was awarded the George Cross and was appointed MBE and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, the only one of the three George Cross recipients to survive the war. 

Princess Noor Inayat Khan (1914-1944) was the third female SOE agent awarded the George Cross (she was also appointed MBE and awarded the Croix de Guerre). The least likely of British agents, of Indian and American parentage, at twenty-eight she was shy and unworldly. She had trained as a wireless operator in the WAAF, and in the autumn of 1942 was approached by SOE, which was desperate for operators, whose survival rate was then only about six weeks before capture. Rushed through SOE training Khan found herself the only operator left in Paris following the destruction of the Prosper network in 1943. Refusing to save herself, she kept in constant touch with Britain. Finally betrayed, she was arrested, unfortunately with her wireless, messages, and codes intact. Twice she tried to escape; but she was imprisoned in chains in solitary confinement, and was finally shot at Dachau on 12 or 13 September 1944 with the word 'liberte' on her lips. 
Two agents gained the George Medal. Both were couriers, and something more. Nancy Grace Augusta Wake was an energetic New Zealand-born Australian with a strong personality. She twice worked in France, initially from her home in Marseilles, where she was known to the resistance as White Mouse. After being captured and interrogated she was rescued from prison by her friends. Then, aged thirty-two, she parachuted back into France in April 1944, and became virtually the head of 7000 maquisards in the Correze, whom she led with verve and by example; she returned safely to Britain in September 1944. Known by her English name, 29-year-old Christine Granville was a Polish countess both by birth and marriage ['see 'Gizycka, Countess Krystyna (1915-1952)], and was exceedingly beautiful, attractive, and tempestuous. Constantly on the move in the Vercors and elsewhere, she was an accomplished subversive agent who had many adventures. Finally, by a trick, she rescued her organizer from prison at Digne just before the allies arrived. She was also appointed MBE and chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and was awarded the Croix de Guerre. She was murdered in London in 1952. 
Given the American Distinguished Service Cross and created MBE, 


@@@@@


doc= 67693


Yolande Elsa Maria Beekman (1911-1944), sent as a wireless operator to St Quentin in 1943, a cheerful, reliable woman, was betrayed in her lodgings at a cafe. She had landed by Lysander, like the dreamy Noor Inayat Khan, whom she met at Dachau. Their companions at dawn on 12 or 13 September 1944 were the ebullient 


@@@@@


doc= 67695


Muriel Tamara Byck (1918-1944), of Jewish family, who died suddenly of meningitis at Romorantin on 23 May 1944, six weeks after landing. 
Most notable among those who survived was the redoubtable Pearl Witherington (1914-2008). Originally a courier in the Auvergne, she revived her ailing network after her organizer's capture, and eventually commanded an active maquis of over 3500 men. So effective were her 'modest capabilities' that a German army of 18,000 preferred to surrender to the Americans rather than fall into the hands of her maquis. In addition to appointment as MBE and chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, she received the Croix de Guerre. Another survivor was the unobtrusive, rock-steady 


@@@@@


doc= 67696


(Beatrice) Yvonne Cormeau (1909-1997), who at thirty-three joined a network in Gascony as a wireless operator. Always on the move, she sent a record of 400 transmissions or more in thirteen months without a single miscode, and was always very careful of security. She was appointed MBE and chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and was also awarded the Croix de Guerre. Marguerite Knight (1920-2004) was a keen and competent courier in the Yonne at a confused and dangerous time in her network, who managed to survive unharmed, as did Sonya Esmee Florence Butt (1924-2014), one of the youngest couriers; Butt's looks belied her talents, as she also became the weapons training officer for the maquis around Le Mans. Knight received the Croix de Guerre and was appointed MBE; Butt was also appointed MBE. The elusive 27-year-old Jacqueline Nearne, elder sister of Eileen (whose employment by SOE she opposed), went as courier to a huge south-western network in 1943 and had to be recalled fifteen months later, worn out by her constant travels. She received the Croix de Guerre, and was appointed MBE. Grey-haired 


@@@@@


doc= 67698


Mary Katherine Herbert (1903-1983) was a courier in the Gironde and also spent some time in a French prison, where her quick wits and knowledge of Arabic talked her out of Gestapo suspicions. Afterwards she remained in hiding until the end of the war, and married Claude de Baissac. 
Four other SOE agents were in post when the allies swept over their areas: Yvonne Fontaine (1913-1996), a careful courier, twice in France, latterly close to Paris; Madeleine Lavigne (1912-1945), a short-lived courier in Limoges; Ginette Jullian (1917-1962), a courier at Chartres; and Patricia Maureen (Paddy) O'Sullivan (1918-1994), a part-trained wireless operator in Limoges to a pair of Mauritian brothers, all careful of security. O'Sullivan was appointed MBE and received the Croix de Guerre. There may have been other agents, but they disappeared, unrecognized. 
When the war was over, SOE was ordered to close down on 15 January 1946 (some records give 30 June 1946), and many accounts were destroyed or lost. After the organization's hasty demise, many questions remained unanswered. How had decoders dangerously ignored missing security checks on captured agents' wireless transmissions? Why had lives been put at risk by trusting known or suspected double agents? By what right had the Secret Intelligence Service withheld intelligence gained from Ultra, thus needlessly sacrificing many agents' lives? And there were other controversies. SOE's success in France is in dispute. Measured by the impact of battles in the field, it probably had infinitesimal success. Some of its sabotage work was ineffective and provoked much savage reprisal against French civilians. On the other hand, its handful of agents caused major disruption to the German occupying forces, tying down or diverting much-needed police and soldiers, particularly directly before and after the north and south landings by the allies. It also gave hope, support, guidance, and supplies to the maquis and anti-German forces. Even General Eisenhower, the supreme allied commander, in a tribute to its efforts, stated that it 'played a very considerable part in our complete and final victory'. 
For its individuals, when hostilities ceased, it was left to Vera Atkins, the briefing and conducting officer of F section, to take a year travelling through Europe to discover the fates of those agents who did not come back -- most of whom she had known personally. It was through her efforts that the tragic details became known of those courageous ones who died. Both Britain and France owe a lasting debt of gratitude to the brave work of the SOE agents, and especially this small band of women, who hardened themselves to work and endure for between one and four years of German occupation, placing the freedom of their countries above their own, and whose survivors carried their nightmares with them for the rest of their lives. 


@@@@@


doc= 67700


Chapman, Livewell (fl. 1643-1665), bookseller and Fifth Monarchist, was the son of Edward Chapman, a London scrivener. His father had died by the time he was apprenticed in the London Stationers' Company, on 6 November 1643, to Benjamin Allen, bookseller. After Allen's death in 1646 he continued his apprenticeship in Allen's shop, The Crown in Pope's Head Alley, and was freed on 13 November 1650 by Hannah Allen (fl. 1632-1664), Benjamin's widow, 'nee' Howse. By September 1651 he and Hannah were married; their children, Livewell ('b'. 1652) and Patience ('b'. 1653), were baptized at St Mary Abchurch. From 1651, when his name first appeared in imprints, Chapman continued the radical direction of the business established by his wife, maintaining her associations with printers (notably the Simmons family and Robert Ibbitson) and authors (such as Henry Jessey, Manasseh Ben Israel, and Vavasour Powell) to become the leading publisher of Fifth Monarchist works. 
Chapman's adherence to the Fifth Monarchist cause brought him into frequent conflict with the authorities. In October 1654 he was arrested in connection with John Spittlehouse's 'An Answer to One Part of the Lord Protector's Speech' and was released on security on 2 November 1654. In 1655 he was again arrested, possibly in connection with the reading of an anti-Cromwellian petition at a meeting at Allhallows on 3 December. His responsibility for the petition's publication (as 'A Word for God') was later suspected: 'mr. Chapman... was trusted with the printing of it, and is the owner or at least a sharer in the private presse, that hath and doth so much mischeife' (Thurloe, 4.379, 3 Jan 1656). His most notable publication of 1656 was James Harrington's 'The Commonwealth of Oceana'. Some time before 11 January 1657 he began to dissociate himself from Fifth Monarchist militancy: with Christopher Feake and a Mr Hudson he was excluded from the Coleman Street meeting and on 5 April he warned Venner that to pursue insurrection would 'serve the common enemy, give them advantage, and bury the cause' (Burrage, 734). On 22 October 1657 the council of state ordered the examination of 'an erroneous book' printed by him and on 23 March 1658 he was called before the council concerning 'a book reflecting on the Government', probably John Eliot's 'The Christian Commonwealth' ('CSP dom.', '1657-8', pp. 134, 339). 
Thus far Chapman had published fewer than twenty titles per year, but in 1659 he produced more than fifty, the majority being topical: addresses to parliament, short polemics, and petitions. In 1660 he was implicated in a plot headed by Sir Henry Vane, though the second of two letters (4 and 8 April) naming the conspirators may have been a forgery, designed to incriminate anti-government activists. A warrant for his arrest was issued on 27 March; on the next day the council of state issued a proclamation that 'from a wicked Design to engage the nation in Blood, and Confusion' Chapman had 'caused several Seditious and Treasonable Books, to be Printed and Published' ('Council of State: a Proclamation'). These possibly included Milton's 'Readie and Easie Way' and the anonymous 'Plain English', both published in March. Chapman avoided arrest, despite more warrants of 3 and 28 April. 
In the early years of the Restoration the surveyor of the press, Roger L'Estrange, established that Chapman was involved with Thomas Brewster, Francis Smith, and Giles Calvert in publishing opposition literature such as 'The Phoenix of the Solemn League and Covenant' and the 'Annus mirabilis' pamphlets. This led to Chapman's imprisonment in Ludgate in May 1661, although works continued to appear under his name. In 1662 he fled abroad, returning under the protection of Secretary Morice. Warrants were issued in March and April 1663 for the arrest of Chapman and his landlord, Mr Leonard, and for the seizure of his printing instruments and materials. By November 1663 he was in prison for seditious practices. Hannah petitioned in January and March 1664 to be allowed access to him in the Gatehouse where, despite an order of 31 March that he be moved to Scarborough Castle, he remained until May when he was released on a bond of $300 for his and his wife's good behaviour. 
By 1664, perhaps for financial reasons, the Chapmans had moved to an address in Exchange Alley in Cornhill and new publications were few. Chapman's last publication, Henry Jessey's 'Miscellanea sacra', was in 1665. With his career as a publisher ended, he continued as a retailer, selling translations of the classics and patent medicines. Francis Smith later remarked that 'by continued imprisonments, he and his family [were] ruined' ('State trials', 7.958). The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 67701


Cecily Margot Lefort (1900-1945), landed by Lysander in June 1943 and was employed as a courier in south-eastern France. Captured and later imprisoned in Ravensbruck, she probably died in the nearby Judenlager extermination camp in February 1945. She received the Croix de Guerre. Eileen Nearne (1921-2010), at twenty-two an energetic and resourceful wireless operator, already experienced in work at one of the SOE listening stations in Britain (where messages to and from agents were sent and received), went by Lysander to work in Paris. She was caught at her set and amazingly, even after torture, persuaded the Gestapo that she was just a little shopgirl who knew nothing. Nevertheless, she was sent to Ravensbruck and afterwards, while being moved, effected a miraculous escape and was rescued by the advancing Americans. She was appointed MBE and received the Croix de Guerre. 
Three Lysander passengers survived without being captured. Two landed in early 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 67702


Ponder, Nathaniel (1640-1699), bookseller, was born at Rothwell, Northamptonshire, the son of John Ponder (died 1665), and his wife, May Dorothy (died 1665). His professional commitment to the publication of primarily (though not exclusively) nonconformist works reflects a solidly dissenting upbringing. His father, a businessman, probably a chandler, was arrested and tried by the court of high commission in 1634 for holding conventicles and denouncing the practices of the Church of England; in 1656, he became a founder and first elder of the Rothwell Independent Church. His son Nathaniel's religious affiliation remained broadly Independent throughout his life. 
On 2 June 1656 Nathaniel Ponder was apprenticed by the Stationers' Company to Robert Gibbs, a bookseller specializing in political tracts, at the sign of the Golden Ball in Chancery Lane, London; Ponder was made free of the Stationers' Company on 4 July 1663. His precise occupation over the next five years is not fully documented, although he does appear to have been working as a stationer. On 15 October 1666 he married Mary Guy ('b'. 1645), daughter of a Kettering gentleman, in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, where Ponder was still living in 1675. They had at least four children, including one son, Robert ('b'. 1671), who was to join his father briefly as a bookseller in the early 1690s. 
By 1668 Ponder was established as a bookseller at the sign of the Peacock in Chancery Lane: his first publication, 'Exercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews... with an Exposition on the Two First Chapters', by the congregationalist divine John Owen, was entered in the 'Register' of the Stationers' Company on 22 April of that year. For the next three decades Ponder oversaw the publication of the nonconformist works of divinity and political pamphlets on which his reputation rests -- and against which his 1680 edition of the 'Biblia sacra', a Latin 'Bible', stands out as an anomaly. He also, however, published a number of mathematical, grammatical, and catechetical textbooks, as well as medical treatises. In view of the Restoration government's stringent censorship laws, a large proportion of Ponder's work was necessarily published without licence; until the fall of James II in 1688 he thus worked under the constant threat of investigation and prosecution. From 1668 Ponder became John Owen's principal publisher and continued as such until 1684, the year after Owen's death. However, it is through his association with two other writers -- the MP, poet, and satirist, Andrew Marvell, and the Baptist preacher and writer John Bunyan -- that Ponder achieved, respectively, notoriety and fame. 
In 1672 Ponder was in a sufficiently respectable position to negotiate the licensing of certain nonconformist ministers to preach at private houses in Northamptonshire. In the same year, however, he organized the publication, anonymously and without licence, of Andrew Marvell's 'The Rehearsal Transpros'd', a satirical animadversion on the reactionary Anglicanism of Samuel Parker, future bishop of Oxford. Attempts by the Stationers' Company and Sir Roger L'Estrange, surveyor of the presses, to proceed against Ponder were thwarted by intervention of the earl of Anglesey, who insisted that the king approved of the libel. L'Estrange agreed to license the work subject to excisions, though the clerk of the Stationers' Company refused to register it. Nevertheless, despite a modified title-page, the second issue was published unexpurgated. At L'Estrange's insistence, the second edition incorporated the modifications previously stipulated. In this censored edition, moreover, Ponder positively identified himself as the pamphlet's bookseller and warned its readers against a pirated edition in circulation; the problem of print piracy was to trouble him for the remainder of his career. 
No further action appears to have been taken against Ponder over 'The Rehearsal Transpros'd'. Nevertheless, the bookseller was imprisoned for a fortnight in May 1676 for organizing the printing of a certain unlicensed and seditious pamphlet long believed to be 'The Rehearsal Transpros'd' (Harrison, 262). It is now clear, however, that the anonymous pamphlet in question was another work by Marvell, 'Mr Smirke, or, The Divine in Mode... together with a Short Historical Essay', printed in 1676. This pamphlet was a particularly dangerous work to publish: counterattacking another Anglican animadverter and future bishop, Francis Turner, it is furthermore a savage expose of intolerance within church and state, and appears to have struck a particularly raw nerve within the establishment. 
About 1676 Ponder opened a second shop (also styled at the sign of the Peacock) in The Poultry and for some time ran it concurrently with that in Chancery Lane. In 1678, following an apparent introduction by John Owen, he published 'The Pilgrim's Progress' for John Bunyan. This licensed and hugely influential best-seller, which ran to at least nine editions within five years, sealed the reputation not only of its author but also of its publisher, who, according to his fellow bookseller John Dunton, consequently became known as Bunyan Ponder (Dunton, 437). The success of 'The Pilgrim's Progress', however, soon raised copyright problems: in 1679, Ponder filed a common lawsuit against a printer, Thomas Braddyll, for printing a pirated edition of this text. While the case did not proceed, Ponder reiterated his grievance, and his copyright, in an 'advertisement' to the fourth edition (1680). 
Ponder proceeded to publish many other of Bunyan's works, including 'The Life and Death of Mr Badman' (1680), the second part of 'The Pilgrim's Progress' (1684), and a small number of sermon treatises; he also undertook later editions of Bunyan's spiritual autobiography, 'Grace Abounding', and his major narrative, 'The Holy War'. In the 1680s, however, Ponder's life became dominated increasingly by lawsuits in which he was generally the plaintiff -- with the exception of an undocumented action for assault which Bartholomew Sprint, a London bookseller, brought in 1681 against Ponder and a number of other booksellers and printers. In 1688 Ponder was imprisoned for debt in the king's bench prison. Between 1691 and 1696 he filed a series of actions seeking redress from debtors, creditors, and indeed defrauders. In 1697 he again initiated proceedings against Braddyll, who, commissioned by Ponder to print a number of Bunyan's works, allegedly produced -- and profited from -- unauthorized surplus copies. 
While Ponder's later years were dominated by almost continual litigation, the outcome of individual cases is uncertain. It is clear, however, that despite the phenomenal success of 'The Pilgrim's Progress' Ponder was frequently in debt, and that the cases which he initiated -- a costly business in itself -- invariably concerned allegations of financial wrongdoing. The removal of his business to premises in London-Yard, St Paul's, about 1695, coincides with this apparent decline into hardship. By the time of his death in June 1699 Ponder appears to have had few means, apparently dying intestate. He was buried at the church of St Gregory by Paul in London on 22 June of that year. Despite his responsibility for some of the most salient and controversial publications of his time, Bunyan Ponder remains an enigmatic figure. In the absence of personal information there is only the noncommittal testimony by his fellow bookseller John Dunton that 'He has sweetness and enterprize in his air, which plead and anticipate in his favour' (Dunton, 437). 


@@@@@


doc= 67704


Diana Hope Rowden (1915-1944), formerly in the WAAF, who was a courier in the Dijon area and was arrested at almost the same time. Leigh and Rowden went through the usual interrogation by Gestapo at the notorious Avenue Foch, and eventually in July 1944 they were moved to Natzweiler concentration camp. There they were joined by the gallant 24-year-old 


@@@@@


doc= 67705


Tomlinson, William (fl. 1650-1696), religious writer, was probably from the North Riding of Yorkshire, and may have been the person of this name who matriculated as a sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, in Michaelmas term 1632 and graduated BA in 1637. According to George Fox, Tomlinson was a priest (by which he meant an Anglican clergyman) before becoming a Quaker. Tomlinson served as a lieutenant in Colonel Thomas Saunders's regiment of horse, but he claimed that he was dismissed in 1650 for opposing Saunders's views when the regiment was at Derby. However, when Tomlinson unsuccessfully sought reinstatement in June 1659, Saunders insisted he had voluntarily relinquished his commission, claiming to be lame and unable to participate in the campaign against the Scots. 
In or before 1653 Tomlinson became a Quaker. In the first of his many tracts, 'A Word of Reproof to the Priests or Ministers' (1653; 3rd edn., 1656), he castigated the Church of England's clergy as deceivers who boast of their ministry and sacraments while disdaining and persecuting others. The kings of the earth, he averred, commit fornication with the clergy because of their close relationship. Three years later, in a broadside entitled 'A Bosome Opened to the Jews', he added his voice to those urging the readmission of Jews to England. When James Nayler was tried by parliament in December 1656, Tomlinson, Fox, and Robert Rich submitted statements pertaining to the case. Tomlinson challenged parliament to define and prove the alleged blasphemy, for embracing Christ was not such an offence. In seeking to kill God's enemies, he warned, the MPs were in reality slaying his children. The statements were published as 'Copies of some few of the papers given unto the house of parliament in the time of James Naylers tryal there' (1656). The following year Tomlinson published 'Seven Particulars', which opened with a powerful condemnation of those who oppress the poor, not least by charging exorbitant rents. Such oppressors, he proclaimed, are the pharaohs and taskmasters of the earth. He also denounced capital punishment for theft, the importance attributed to one's ancestry, compulsory tithes, and the persecution of Quakers who proclaimed their message of the inner light in traditional churches. 
At the Restoration Tomlinson was imprisoned in the North Riding for refusing to take an oath. In 'A Word of Information to them that Need it' (1660) he denounced episcopacy as unscriptural and the 'Book of Common Prayer' as replete with evil. ''A Cup of Fornication'', by which he meant 'a Pack of mens Inventions and Traditions', is spreading through the nations, intoxicating them (pp. 18-19). About the same time he wrote 'A Position Concerning Persecution' (1660?), arguing that any religion which persecutes those who follow their consciences is an abomination. From Beaudesert, Warwickshire, on 30 August 1669, Sir Bryan Broughton reported to Joseph Williamson that Tomlinson, whom he described as a former eminent officer, had warned that civil war would ensue if people were not free to attend conventicles. In 'An Awakening Voice to the Papists' (1673) Tomlinson accused the Catholic church of espousing doctrines and practices from the bottomless pit and labelled the pope 'that Man of Sin' (p. 27). His next work, 'An Epistle to the Flock' (1674), reminded fellow Friends of the need to expel those whose religion was only formal; Quakers must walk in the light, not merely talk about it. In May 1675 Fox wanted Tomlinson to found a school to teach languages and botany, apparently in conjunction with the schoolmaster and botanist Thomas Lawson, but nothing came of this. Tomlinson renewed his attack on the Catholics in 1679, when he published 'The principles of the papists... plainly demonstrated by the scriptures to be most erroneous and wicked'. He followed this in 1684 with 'A Synopsis, or Short View of Essential Christianity in Part', which reflects the Quakers' interest in the primitive church. The Catholics again occupied his attention, this time in 'Innovations of Popery' (1689). The Finch manuscripts contain a letter dated 10 June 1690 from William III to the earl of Nottingham, directing him to do as he saw fit with a petition from Tomlinson to the countess of Derby. Tomlinson's final tract (and the last that is known of him), 'A Short Work, but of the Greatest Concern', was published in 1696. In his later years Tomlinson continued to manifest the stridency that characterized some of the earliest Friends, as reflected by the fact that in the 1670s and 1680s six of his tracts were edited or rejected by his colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 67710


Alsop, Benjamin (b. c.1658, d. in or before 1703), bookseller, was the only son of Vincent Alsop (bap. 1630, d. 1703), presbyterian minister, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Benjamin King of Oakham, Rutland. His father, who was married on 1 May 1657, lived and preached at Geddington and Wellingborough in Northamptonshire. On 27 November 1672 Alsop was apprenticed to the well-known nonconformist bookseller Nathaniel Ponder; he gained the freedom of the Stationers' Company on 6 October 1679. He then set up in business on his own with a bookshop under the sign of the Angel and Bible in the Poultry in London, and between 1679 and 1684 was involved in the publication of over twenty books. His wife's name is not known, but they had at least three children -- Martha, Elizabeth, and Benjamin. 
Many of the authors published by Alsop were nonconformists, the most celebrated being John Bunyan. In 1682, together with Dorman Newman, Alsop published Bunyan's allegory 'The Holy War'. He subsequently went on to publish four other works by Bunyan: 'The Greatness of the Soul' (1682 and 1683), 'A Case of Conscience Resolved' (1683), 'A Holy Life, the Beauty of Christianity' (1684), and 'Seasonable Counsel' (1684). Among other notable authors with whom he was associated as sole or joint publisher were John Owen, Richard Baxter, Nehemiah Coxe, Thomas Gouge, and Stephen Lobb. He was also involved in the innovative practice of publishing by subscription, in 1680 undertaking with booksellers Thomas Parkhurst, Jonathan Robinson, and Brabazon Aylmer to publish the sermons of the celebrated presbyterian preacher Thomas Manton. He was also joint publisher with the same men, as well as Thomas Cockerill and Dorman Newman, of Matthew Poole's 'Annotations upon the Holy Bible' (1683-5), a two-volume work which Alsop's father helped to complete after Poole's death in 1679. In 1683, along with Thomas Malthus, he published a work by an anonymous woman, 'Fifteen Real Comforts of Matrimony', and in the same year they also published 'The Compleat Statesman', a flattering account of the whig leader Anthony Ashley Cooper, earl of Shaftesbury. 
In 1685 Alsop gave up his business to become a captain in the army raised by the duke of Monmouth to overthrow the Catholic James II. Monmouth's revolt failed, but Alsop escaped and went into exile in the Netherlands. John Dunton, who later took over Alsop's shop in the Poultry, described him as 'a first-rate bookseller', but also as 'a wild sort of a spark' who had joined Monmouth in hopes of being 'made an earl, or a baron at least' (Dunton, 290-91). Alsop's background, however, strongly suggests that religious and political beliefs also motivated him to take this radical step. In 1687 his father was a prominent supporter of James II's declaration of indulgence and, perhaps as a result, on 31 May 1687 obtained a pardon for his son. It is unclear whether Alsop returned to England and nothing is known of his later years except that his father, who died on 8 May 1703, outlived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 67711


Aylmer, Brabazon (bap. 1645, d. in or after 1719), bookseller, was baptized on 7 December 1645 at St Mary's, Stoke Newington, Middlesex, the son of Anthony Aylmer (died in or after 1661). His father was described as a gentleman of London in the apprentice records of the Stationers' Company when Brabazon was bound to Luke Fawne on 21 January 1661. He gained his freedom after the customary seven years' service in 1668, but only in 1671 did the first book with his imprint appear -- Isaac Barrow's 'The Duty and Reward of Bounty' -- suggesting that he initially worked as a journeyman before setting himself up in his trade. Throughout his career Aylmer worked from a London address at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. According to his colleague and fellow bookseller John Dunton, he was: 'a very just and religious man... He is nicely exact in all his accompts, and is well acquainted with the mysteries of his Trade. [He] has been as often engaged in very honest and very useful designs as any other that can be named through the whole Trade. (Dunton, 1.206)' Aylmer's distinctive publishing programme saw his involvement with a number of prestigious authors and titles in the latitudinarian and episcopal traditions. He became the regular publisher of Isaac Barrow and John Tillotson (archbishop of Canterbury, 1691-4), and works by Edward Fowler, including 'A Defence of the Resolution of this Case' (1684), appeared with his imprint. At the same time he handled numerous titles in the moderate nonconformist tradition, including William Bates's 'The Danger of Prosperity' (1685), Thomas Manton's 'Sermons' (1698), and works by John Howe. The usual publisher of George Keith's attacks upon the Quakers, Aylmer obtained the copyright for Milton's 'Paradise Lost' in the early 1680s, though he soon sold on the right without publishing an edition. However, he published both Milton's 'Epistolarum familiarum liber' (1674) and 'Brief History of Muscovia' (1682), though he was refused a licence for Milton's letters of state. The fact that he confined himself to such works suggests a religious commitment of a recognizable type, encompassing the middle ground between moderate Anglicanism and moderate nonconformity. Moreover, his role as the publisher of major, large-scale titles, including three editions of Barrow's 'Works', and his work in partnership with William Rogers, Jonathan Robinson, and Thomas Parkhurst indicate a successful business operation and a secure place in the late seventeenth-century world of publishing. 
Aylmer married his wife, Temperance ('fl'. 1682-1695), probably in 1682, but nothing more is known of her. The couple had at least six children. Aylmer's date of death is unknown. He was last heard of in July 1719 when he signed a deposition, referring to himself as the former apprentice of Luke Fawne and instructing Fawne's heirs in America that most of his former master's assets had been lost in the great fire. 
Aylmer's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 67712


Brabazon Aylmer (bap. 1683), bookseller, was baptized on 24 May 1683 at St Faith's under St Paul's, London. He was bound as an apprentice to his father on 7 February 1698 and received his freedom from the Stationers' Company seven years later. From that date it becomes impossible to say whether titles were published by father or son. The term catalogues for 1707 contain some entries for Brabazon Aylmer senior and junior together, but later entries and imprints fail to distinguish between the two. No imprints with the name occur after 1714, suggesting the termination of the publishing business in that year. The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 67713


Marsin, M. (fl. 1696-1701), theologian, is somebody about whose life absolutely nothing is known beyond the very scanty personal information contained in her published works. Internal evidence confirms that she was female, and that during the mid-1690s she travelled some hundred miles to London in order to publish her views. Beyond this, her life is a closed book. She is generally credited with having written a guide to marriage for women in 1683, but it was in the period 1696-1701 that she published the vast majority of her fifteen pamphlets and books, and during which she developed her unique method of biblical exegesis and a powerful critique of male authority in both religion and society as a whole. 
Marsin was first encouraged to develop her own analysis of the 'Bible' in 1696 when, in response to what she perceived as sure signs of the second coming of Christ, she was struck by 'a fervent longing desire for the coming of the Lord... whereupon I took to the Lord's direction, resolving to search the scriptures with more diligence than ever I had done; the which I no sooner had performed, but I found the certainty of the coming of the Lord, and that it was very nigh at hand; but still I was to seek how, and in what manner; for I could then no ways make the 'Old' and 'New Testament' agree. ('Near Approach of Christ's Kingdom', Preface)' Her first pamphlet after this conversion experience is dedicated to simply recounting the signs of the second coming as they appeared to her. Earthquakes, comets, and the European wars of the period were all important indicators, and to this extent she conforms to a relatively common form of millenarian thinking at the end of the seventeenth century. But she also points to the 'miraculous cure of four women' in the city of London, and to Christ's 'working of miracles on women' in general, prefiguring the substantive critique of gender and women's role in Christianity which she was to develop over the next five years. 
In the second half of the 1690s Marsin published a series of pamphlets in rapid succession unfolding her method of distinguishing the metaphorical, or 'figurative', elements of the Old and New Testaments from those passages she counts as literal description. Throughout, she sets herself in opposition to a scholastic tradition of biblical scholarship and suggests that the failures of that tradition were essentially the failures of men in general and of patriarchal authority in particular. More than this, she claims that the new insights and growing knowledge of the 'Bible' which her new method allowed was published through her as a woman precisely because of the previous failure of men to understand God's word and, by extension, their failure to fulfil God's design. 
Marsin's last two pamphlets, 'Good News to the Good Women' and 'Two Remarkable Females of Womankind', both published in 1701, contain her most explicit and consistent critique of Christian patriarchy. In 'Good News to the Good Women' she essentially claims that although Eve acted in ignorance when she succumbed to the blandishments of the serpent in the Garden of Eden, God had visited patriarchy and the pain of childbirth on women as a temporary punishment for Eve's actions. She also suggests that men and women had been equal partners in the Garden of Eden, and that they would be so again after the resurrection; that 'then the punishment that sin brought into the world will be excluded from all God's people, so as then the husband will not be above the wife nor the wife above the husband... women will be delivered from that bondage which some has found intolerable. (Marsin, 'Good News', 4)' More than this, in these two pamphlets of 1701 Marsin expresses a firm belief that she has been appointed by God to publish his word, and that her sex is consistent with a broader pattern of revelation in which women would have a greater part than men. These later pamphlets are largely taken up with a rendition of the roles of women in the 'Old Testament' and in the exercise of authority. She makes a great deal of the relationship of the Virgin Mary to the Holy Ghost, and the extent to which men were essentially excluded from the birth and creation of Christ, and were likewise largely responsible for his crucifixion. She also attacks St Paul's interdiction on women as teachers and preachers, and claims that the internal contradictions in St Paul's statements entirely negate his authority in this matter. 
By the publication of her final pamphlet, 'Two Remarkable Females of Womankind', Marsin had created an essentially female-centred story of biblical history, in which the Virgin Mary and a latter-day prophetess (presumably M. Marsin) are the key figures in the transitions between the various stages of Christian eschatology. 
Simply in terms of her statement of a radical adherence to gender equality, Marsin is a unique figure in the history of late seventeenth-century Britain. She is more directly concerned with issues of gender than are the many Quaker prophetesses of the second half of the century, and develops a more sharply focused and coherent analysis of the role of women in the 'Bible' and in Christianity than do any of her radical protestant contemporaries. Several of her pamphlets are dedicated to William III and parliament, and she makes positive reference to the prophetic writings of George Wither, but she gives no clear indication of any sectarian allegiance. While she is clearly a protestant, her views do not conform to any of the plethora of theological positions which characterize British and European protestantism at the end of the seventeenth century. She is a unique figure with a unique theological perspective and methodology, and can only be described as the first and only 'Marsinite'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67714


Richard Anthony Thompson (1819-1908), art administrator, was baptized on 15 September 1819 at St Giles's, Camberwell, London, the son of John Thompson and his wife, Harriott. He was employed at the Great Exhibition of 1851, in the English section of the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1855, and at subsequent international exhibitions. He was one of the first curators at the South Kensington Museum, having joined on 12 January 1857 to set up its educational collection, of which he was keeper until promoted in 1863 to be in charge of the general arrangement of the museum. He was an assistant director from 1866 until his retirement at the end of 1891, and acting director from 1876 to 1878 and in 1886. He died on 25 March 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 67715


Drake, Nicholas Rodney (1948-1974), singer and songwriter, was born on 19 June 1948 in Rangoon, Burma, the only son of Rodney Drake (1908-1988), an engineer, and his wife, Molly, 'nee' Lloyd (1915-1993). An elder sister, Gabrielle ('b'. 1944), became well known as an actress. The Drake family returned to Britain from Burma when Nick was four, and at eight he was sent to Eagle House School, a preparatory school at Sandhurst, Berkshire. After following his father and grandfather to Marlborough College (1962-6) -- where he learned to play the piano, clarinet, saxophone, and, latterly, the guitar -- he went up to Cambridge to read English at Fitzwilliam College (1967-9). He left before taking his degree to pursue a career in the music business. As a musician he was influenced by the Scottish singer-songwriter Bert Jansch and the Americans Bob Dylan and Jackson C. Frank, and it is songs by these artists that feature on the earliest known recording of him singing, taped on a schoolfriend's machine in Aix-en-Provence in the south of France during the spring of 1967. It was also during this four-month period he spent studying French in Aix that Nick Drake first began to write his own songs, accompanied by his own guitar-playing. 
In the following year at The Roundhouse in London, during one of his earliest professional performances, Drake was spotted by Ashley Hutchings, then bass player with the folk-rock group Fairport Convention, who recommended him to Fairport's producer and manager, Joe Boyd. Impressed by the demo tape he was sent, Boyd soon signed him to Island Records, the leading independent record label of the time. Drake's debut album, 'Five Leaves Left' (1969), featured esteemed musicians such as guitarist Richard Thompson and double bass player Danny Thompson and lavish string arrangements by Drake's Cambridge contemporary Robert Kirby. The album attracted favourable reviews on its release, but sold few copies. 
Drake was strikingly good-looking and charismatic, with trademark shoulder-length hair. He had been happy enough to play live in public while in groups at Marlborough College but the concerts he gave to promote his debut recording showed him as a reluctant solo performer. Contemporary accounts speak of a shy figure, clearly uncomfortable in front of an audience; and in that pre-video age when live shows were the only way for new artists to be seen, his continued reluctance to perform inevitably restricted his audience. No live footage of Drake's few performances survives. 
For his second album, 'Bryter Layter' (1970), Drake was accompanied by Fairport Convention's Dave Pegg and Dave Mattacks, and the Velvet Underground's John Cale. The record was a musical triumph which on its release drew favourable comparisons with Van Morrison's 'Astral Weeks' (1968), and nearly thirty years later was hailed by 'The Guardian' as the greatest cult album ever made. Drake himself was convinced that this was the record that would help him achieve the success he longed for. But he faced tough competition from the many other singer-songwriters: Leonard Cohen, Joni Mitchell, Neil Young, Cat Stevens, Elton John, Carole King, James Taylor. They were reaching their peak at the same time, and this, together with a lack of radio airplay, sparse press interest, and his growing distaste for live performance, resulted once again in low sales. 
Disillusioned by the commercial failure of his first two records and the decision of his manager, Joe Boyd, to relocate to America, Drake became more silent and withdrawn and friends began to notice the first signs of the depression which eventually killed him. Despite his increasingly fragile state, he found the inner strength to make one last album, 'Pink Moon' (1972). Recorded totally solo and in just two brief sessions, this stark and haunting collection has been praised posthumously as the best of Drake's three albums, but at the time it suffered the same commercial ignominy as its predecessors. 
In 1972, with his depression deepening and his career effectively over, Drake left London in despair and returned to the family home in Warwickshire, where he spent the rest of his life. Shocked by their son's condition, his parents sought medical help and soon after his return home Drake spent five weeks in a local psychiatric hospital. But on his release the depression persisted and he was forced, reluctantly, to rely on the drugs prescribed by his psychiatrist. 
In 1974 Drake went into the studio for one last time. He spent a day recording, hoping that this would be the start of his fourth album, but what emerged from that session were the four final tracks of his life: 'Rider on the Wheel', 'Black Eyed Dog', 'Hanging on a Star', and 'Voice from the Mountain'. That autumn his parents were delighted when he announced he was going to Paris to visit some friends and to see the chanteuse Francoise Hardy, who had earlier expressed interest in recording some of his work. However, any improvement was short-lived and within weeks of returning home he was dead. It was in his childhood bedroom at Far Leys, Bates Lane, in Tanworth in Arden, Warwickshire, that Drake's mother found the body of her only son on the morning of 25 November 1974. He had overdosed on Tryptizol, one of the powerful anti-depressants he had been prescribed to help fight his illness. The coroner's verdict was suicide, although many who knew him remain convinced that the overdose was accidental. He was buried in St Mary Magdelene churchyard, Tanworth in Arden. He was unmarried. 
Thereafter Drake's parents received a steady stream of visitors to Far Leys. The cult burgeoned in 1979 with the release of the box-set 'Fruit Tree', which included the final four tracks recorded in 1974, which had previously remained unreleased. A subsequent posthumous collection, 'Time of No Reply' (1987), and the compilations 'Heaven in a Wild Flower' (1990) and 'Way to Blue' (1994) have all further enhanced Drake's musical legacy. 
Nick Drake has been called the first singer-songwriter whose career began after he died; while other fatalities such as Jimi Hendrix, Jim Morrison, and John Lennon enjoyed a posthumous resurgence of interest in their work, they had all achieved a considerable degree of fame prior to their deaths, whereas during his lifetime Drake's music was known only to a select few. In later years he was cited as an influence by such major talents as REM, Blur, Radiohead, Paul Weller, and Lucinda Williams; to this day guitarists remain mesmerized by his inimitable technique and listeners are drawn in by his intimate, essentially English style of singing. In 2000 a prize-winning short documentary film, 'A Skin too Few', was made about his life and music, and his songs are increasingly heard on film soundtracks. But his biggest commercial breakthrough came during 1998, when Volkswagen used the song 'Pink Moon' in an American television commercial. In the weeks following its first airing American sales of the eponymous album outstripped those for Drake's entire output during his lifetime. A quarter of a century after his death Nick Drake had achieved the success and recognition which had eluded him during his short life. 


@@@@@


doc= 67716


Leigh, John (1812-1888), medical officer of health, was born on 8 June 1812, reputedly at Foxdenton Hall, Chadderton, near Oldham, but possibly in Liverpool, the son of Thomas Leigh ('c'.1778-1847), druggist and tea dealer of Ashton under Lyne, and his wife, Hannah ('b'. 'c'.1778), daughter of Hugh Shaw of Saddleworth. He later claimed affinity with the Leighs of West Hall, High Leigh, Cheshire, and the earls of Bridgewater (Ormerod, 1.456-7), but Stancliffe doubts the validity of this claim (Stancliffe, 277), and Egerton Leigh of High Leigh refers to him only as 'my talented young friend Mr John Leigh' without attributing kinship (E. Leigh, x). He was educated at the Moravian school at Fairfield and apprenticed in 1827 to William Dyson, surgeon, of Ashbourne. In 1831 Leigh went to Manchester for further training at the infirmary and associated medical schools, and he subsequently lectured in two schools in chemistry and forensic medicine. From 1834 to 1837, holding the licence of the Society of Apothecaries of London, Leigh was physicians' clerk (resident medical officer) at the Manchester Infirmary. Following additional surgical training at Guy's Hospital, London, he proceeded to membership of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1837. 
Thereafter Leigh practised from 26 St John Street, Deansgate, Manchester, and became registrar of births and deaths of the Deansgate sub-district, analyst to Manchester gasworks, and consultant to chemical manufacturers. A fellow of the Chemical Society, while experimenting with coal-tar he resolved the basic chemistry of aniline dyes, which he reported to the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1842 and in subsequent papers. However, he failed to patent his discoveries, and others profited commercially from them. He published various papers on public health, that with Ner Gardiner, the superintendent registrar, being the definitive description of Manchester's 1849 cholera outbreak. In 1844 he lectured to the Manchester Royal Institution on the sanitary condition of Manchester, and the next year he published a pamphlet praising Alderman Alexander Kay for his long-standing interest in the condition of the inhabitants of Manchester. 
In 1868, after intense pressure from the Manchester and Salford Sanitary Association for the appointment of a medical man to spearhead a reversal of the city's notoriously poor status in public health, Leigh was appointed Manchester's first medical officer of health by a majority vote of the council, at a salary of $500 per annum, while retaining his private practice. He made strenuous efforts, detailed in his annual reports, to improve the health of the population. He worked to overcome the prevalent infectious diseases, including smallpox and typhus, through district inspections, the notification of infectious disease, disinfestation of clothing and houses, and the provision of baths, wash-houses, open spaces, parks, and hospital beds; and he campaigned for the total abolition of cellar dwellings. Leigh's report of 1868 to the corporation suggesting the need for more isolation hospitals led to the opening in 1871 of a new fever hospital at Monsall to the north of the city. 
Leigh also urged the council not to pursue wholesale clearance of slum housing, but to upgrade 'back to back' houses by opening the wall between each pair, so as to create 'through-houses'. When he took office, the majority of dwellings in the centre of Manchester were in courts, with privy-middens and cesspools for excreta, classically described earlier by James Kay and Friedrich Engels. Leigh introduced a general pail-closet system with cinder sifters to replace the middens. He did not favour water systems, partly because of distrust about the sustainability of Manchester's water supply, but also because his pail system yielded saleable manure, potentially benefiting the council. By the end of the century Leigh's system had failed because Manchester's householders did not maintain the closets adequately, and evidence emerged that council workers secretly discharged raw sewage in volume into the River Medlock. At Leigh's death, though the health of Manchester residents had improved substantially, it still remained the worst of the large cities of the country. 
Leigh had many interests. He assisted E. W. Binney in pioneering geological surveys in and around Manchester. During one, at Newtown, near Collyhurst, they discovered a number of fossil shells not previously described. One was named in Leigh's honour 'Rissoa leighi'. Leigh also published several poetic works, including 'Lays and Legends of Cheshire' (1880), and was president of the Spenser Society and poet laureate of John Shaw's Club. His large library contained a fine reference collection of English plants, and many rare books, including a celebrated collection of Bewick's works, reflecting an ornithological interest. He was a founder of the local Rosicrucians: twelve gentlemen who dined monthly and made antiquarian field visits. John Harland, another founder, recorded each meeting in his newspaper, the 'Manchester Guardian'. At the inaugural meeting at Leigh's home, Leigh himself presented a paper on a bronze statue of Jupiter Stator, excavated at Campfield, Manchester. 
Leigh married, on 29 August 1840, Marianne ('c'.1809-1847), daughter of Robert Goodwin of Ashbourne, Derbyshire, and they had a daughter, Marianne, and a son, Francis; on 11 October 1848 he married Elizabeth ('c'.1820-1891), daughter of William Collier of Weaste, Salford, with whom he had two daughters, Gertrude and Beatrice, and three sons, Arthur, Piers Henry, and Egerton. On becoming medical officer of health, Leigh moved to a new home, Sandiway, in the emerging Manchester suburb of Whalley Range. In 1879 he erected a large mansion in the Tudor style, in Hale Barns, Cheshire, which he called the Manor House, moving again to become one of Hale Barns's first commuters. He died there, from cardiac disease, on 11 November 1888, still in office. His will gave a life interest in his estate to his widow, and the residue to his three daughters, seemingly excluding his three surviving sons. Leigh was buried on 15 November 1888 in the nearby churchyard at Timperley. 


@@@@@


doc= 67718


Marche, Jean de la (1585-1651), Reformed minister, was born on 6 August 1585, the elder son of Hellier de la Marche ('c'.1558-1643) of St Peter Port, Guernsey, and his wife, Michelle, daughter of Thomas Verin. Thomas Cartwright, minister at Castle Cornet (1595-1601), may have been an early influence. He attended the universities of Cambridge, from 1604 to 'c'.1608, and Saumur, from 'c'.1608 to 1610, graduating MA on 10 September 1610. He was ordained on 6 August 1613 and became minister in Guernsey of both St Andrew and La Foret in the following month, of Castle Cornet from 23 May 1623, and of St Peter Port from 15 February 1625. 
On 25 January 1616 de la Marche married Esther De Beauvoir, heir to La Ville au Roi, St Peter Port. Of their children, Bertranne and Thomas died in 1622, and Charles (1618-1695), minister of the Castel parish, Guernsey, until 1662, was chaplain to Whitlocke's Swedish embassy in 1653. Jean junior was probably another son, about whom little is known, save his becoming Castle Cornet's gaoler in 1660, suggesting royalist sympathies and familial estrangement. 
De la Marche was active in Guernsey's parliament, the 'etats' or states, in which the clergy sat 'ex officio'. In November 1616 James I personally assured him of the continuation of Guernsey's presbyterian regime. From 1626 de la Marche challenged the secular power's claims to certain tithes. Consequently accused of treason and false doctrine, he was imprisoned in Castle Cornet for seven months in 1633. After appealing to the privy council without result he returned in July 1634 and was ejected from the living of St Peter Port, reassuming the rectorship of St Andrew in August. 
Following their release from Channel Island prisons, Henry Burton and William Prynne banqueted at de la Marche's home on 19 November 1640. In March 1641 de la Marche was sent to draw parliament's attention to Guernsey church affairs, presumably in support of a national presbyterian settlement. His 'Complaint of the False Prophets Mariners' was presented to the Commons on 28 July 1641, at the height of the root and branch debates. Dedicated to Burton, and supposedly based upon Guernsey 'prophesyings' on 'Revelation', through calendar calculations and allegorical exegesis it looked to episcopacy's fall and the rise of presbyterianism. In April 1642 parliament appointed de la Marche one of two Guernsey ministers in the Westminster assembly of divines. 
On 6 February 1642 de la Marche preached at the French church, Threadneedle Street, London, against hierarchy. This provoked a rebuke from its administration, as did a millenarian sermon he delivered a little later. On 6 June 1642 he preached there on the apocalyptic fate of earthly monarchies, a subject to which he was to return, to the point of encouraging regicide. His precocious and ardent opinions did not prevent his appointment to the French church in May 1643, a position made official that September. He presided over the colloquy of the French churches in England in 1644. 
De la Marche is not known ever to have returned to Guernsey, although he remained in touch with the island, and in June 1643 there were moves there to dismiss him from St Andrew. Nor did he lack opposition in England. The royalist Louis Herault, appointed a minister of the French church in 1643, soon returned to France. Between 1645 and 1648 Christopher Cisner complained of de la Marche's radicalism, his dictatorial behaviour, and his own exclusion from the church's ministry. Although this divided the congregation, de la Marche remained in office. His commitment to the presbyterian cause, though radical, was not in doubt. The 'Complaint' was reissued in 1645 as 'A Revelation of the Time, and Fall of the English Hierarchy of Prelates', a year before episcopacy was abolished and limited presbyterianism introduced. In a table the book anticipated in 1650 the 'last great period of the... journey, and the end of it' (2-3); de la Marche died in London on 14 October 1651. 


@@@@@


doc= 67719


Coombe, Thomas (1747-1822), Church of England clergyman and American loyalist, was born on 21 October 1747 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the son of Thomas Coombe ('c'.1720-1799) and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Rutter. His father was health officer of the port of Philadelphia, a friend of Benjamin Franklin, and actively interested in natural philosophy. Coombe was baptized in Christ Church, Philadelphia, on 14 November 1747. He attended the College of Philadelphia (subsequently the University of Pennsylvania), where he received an AB in 1766 and an AM in 1768. Valedictorian of his college class, Coombe demonstrated literary ability as an undergraduate by translating some of the Latin poems of his master John Beveridge, which appeared in the latter's 'Epistolae familiares', published in Philadelphia in 1765. Coombe travelled to England in 1768, seeking ordination, as there was no bishop in the colonies to perform the rite, and stayed temporarily at the lodgings of his father's friend Benjamin Franklin, at 36 Craven Street, Strand. He was ordained deacon on 11 February 1769, and priest on 21 December 1771 at the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace, by Richard Terrick, bishop of London. In 1771 Coombe was appointed chaplain to Charles Watson-Wentworth, second marquess of Rockingham, whom he served until his return to America the following year to be an assistant minister at Christ Church and at St Peter's, Philadelphia. He was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society on 15 January 1773. 
Coombe married, first, Sarah (Sally) Ann Leake (1752?-1778), daughter of Bernard Badger and Susannah Riche of Hempstead, Long Island, New York, on 13 May 1773. On 21 May 1774 Sally bore twins, a son, John Riche Coombe (died 12 May 1855), and a daughter. A further son, Henry Coombe, died on 3 October 1776, aged one year; two years later Sally died, on 17 October 1778. Coombe married his second wife, Elizabeth Chassereau (1758-1829), on 8 September 1784 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London; she was the daughter of Francois Chassereau and his wife, Honor, 'nee' Williams, of London. Three children of this second marriage are identified in Coombe's will: Thomas (1796-1876), Charlotte, and Elizabeth. 
Early in his career Coombe distinguished himself as an eloquent preacher. In a sermon delivered on 20 July 1775, a general fast day appointed by the continental congress, he advocated the cause of the colonies. His sermon, which aroused much attention, was printed and received wide circulation in editions published in Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Newport. Like many of his Anglican colleagues Coombe conscientiously believed that his oath of allegiance to king and parliament required at ordination did not permit him to swear to uphold the 'Declaration of Independence'. At the outbreak of the American War of Independence Coombe and forty other rich and prominent persons were arrested by the executive council of Philadelphia on the charge of having 'uniformly evinced a disposition inimical to the cause of America' (Bronson, 554-7). He was held in the masons' lodge in Philadelphia and sentenced to imprisonment at Staunton, Augusta county, Virginia, in 1777. Many prominent Philadelphians came to his defence and protested the harshness of the decree. Coombe pleaded ill health, which rendered his removal impracticable. After the arrival of the British army in Philadelphia in 1777 he was granted permission to go to New York. Three of the English commissioners who had arrived in New York in 1778 with the intention of settling the dispute between the colonists and England -- Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle, William Eden, later first Baron Auckland, and George W. Johnstone, governor of West Florida -- granted Coombe authorization to sail for England in 1779, where he passed the remainder of his life. 
Both in Philadelphia and in London, Coombe was recognized as a scholarly, persuasive, and powerful preacher. Josiah Quincy jun. said that one of Coombe's extemporary prayers, 'in point of sentiment, propriety of expression, and true sublimity', excelled anything of that kind that he had ever heard (J. Quincy, 'Memoir of the Life of Josiah Quincy, Junior', 1825, 121). Several of his sermons and addresses were published. He enjoyed the company of many distinguished friends, including Benjamin Franklin, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Samuel Johnson, Oliver Goldsmith, John Jortin, and James Beattie. 
After a period of service as chaplain (from 1780) to Lord Carlisle, Coombe accompanied Carlisle upon his appointment as lord lieutenant of Ireland (1780-82) and was soon made his private secretary. Under the eye of his patron Coombe obtained in 1781 the rectory of Donagh-Henry, co. Tyrone, which he later resigned. In the same year he was admitted to the degree of doctor of divinity from Trinity College, Dublin. At the dissolution of the government of Lord North in 1782 he returned to England with Lord Carlisle. 
In 1789 Lord Auckland asked Coombe to accompany him to The Hague as chaplain to his embassy, a post which he declined. For many years he served as preacher at the Mayfair Chapel in Curzon Street. In 1794 he was appointed a chaplain to George III. Under the continuing auspices of Carlisle he was preferred to a prebendal stall at Canterbury in 1800. A year later he was presented by the dean and chapter of the cathedral to the vicarage of St Mildred, Tenterden, Kent, a post which he was permitted to resign to his son John in 1806. In 1808 the dean and chapter of Canterbury appointed Coombe rector of the united parishes of St Michael Queenhithe and Trinity the Less, in London, which he served for fourteen years, until his death. 
Coombe's claim to the title of poet rests on his publication 'The Peasant of Auburn, or, The Emigrant: a Poem' (1783). Dedicated to Oliver Goldsmith the work is an imitation of Goldsmith's 'Deserted Village'; it recounts the unhappy fortunes of the emigrant from 'sweet Auburn' when later, on the banks of the Ohio River, his bright hopes darkened to desolation, war, and death. The volume includes a number of shorter poems. 
Coombe easily adapted his career and life to London. To his contemporaries he was more of an Englishman than an American, and a clergyman of character and talent rather than a poet. He was an active and outspoken member of the committee for the abolition of the slave trade. Coombe died a wealthy man on 15 August 1822 at his home in Hereford Street, London. His will, proved on 22 August 1822, indicates an estate valued at more than $30,000. He granted to his wife $14,500, the leasehold for the house and stable in Hereford Street, his plate, and his household furniture. To each of his four surviving children he bequeathed $4500; his library of about 300 volumes he divided between his sons John and Thomas. To his son from his first marriage, the Revd John Riche Coombe, he bequeathed a gold snuffbox. 


@@@@@


doc= 67723


Thurston, Frederick John (1901-1953), clarinettist, was born on 21 September 1901 at the barracks in Lichfield Road, Whittington, Staffordshire, the younger of the two children (he had an elder sister) of Sergeant Frederick Thurston, military bandsman, of the 3rd South Staffordshire regiment, and his wife, Emma Goodman ('b'. 1866x9). He spent his childhood in Oxford, where he attended St Mary and St John School, and his father, when not away on band engagements, taught him the clarinet. At the age of ten he was noticed by Adrian Boult, then an undergraduate at Christ Church, and it was thanks to Boult's encouragement that in 1920, by now a member of the Cheltenham Municipal Orchestra, Thurston entered for, and won, an open scholarship to study with Charles Draper at the Royal College of Music, where Boult was teaching. After hearing Thurston play his clarinet concerto with the college orchestra in March 1922, Sir Charles Stanford wrote a letter of congratulation on his excellent performance. During his time at the college, and for some time afterwards, Thurston was able to survive financially through the generosity of Oscar Street, an amateur clarinettist. On 30 July 1927 he married Eileen (1901/2-1947), a violinist, daughter of Dr A. C. King-Turner of Fairford, Gloucestershire; they had one daughter. 
In December 1922 Thurston joined the first BBC music ensemble, which went on the air on 23 December with eight players, broadcasting from the 2LO studio in Marconi House. After the BBC's move to Savoy Hill the studio orchestra grew, becoming known as the 2LO Wireless Orchestra in 1924. Thurston, the principal clarinettist, signed a contract in August 1924 agreeing to play in at least six performances a week. Although this was not a full-time contract, and he appeared with other London orchestras in the years that followed, it was his main employment. When the BBC Symphony Orchestra was founded in 1930, Thurston was one of those asked to join, as principal clarinettist. The BBC Symphony Orchestra became the leading British orchestra, with Boult as chief conductor from 1931, but was directed also by conductors such as Bruno Walter and Arturo Toscanini; the latter, who first visited in 1935, became Thurston's idol. Although members of the orchestra were not allowed to accept outside engagements without permission from the BBC, making it difficult to pursue a solo career, Thurston began to attract the attention of contemporary British composers, who were inspired by his playing to write for the clarinet. He was largely responsible for the acceptance of the clarinet as a solo instrument by British composers, as British audiences had rarely heard anything written for the clarinet other than Victorian salon pieces until he began performing such early twentieth-century masterpieces as Debussy's 'Rhapsody', Berg's 'Four Pieces', and Stravinsky's 'Three Pieces'. On 17 February 1933 he made his Wigmore Hall debut in the first performance of Arthur Bliss's quintet for clarinet and strings, with the Kutcher Quartet, and he went on to give the first performances of Arnold Bax's sonata with Harriet Cohen in 1935, Gordon Jacob's quintet for clarinet and strings with the Griller Quartet in 1943, and John Ireland's 'Fantasy-Sonata' with Kendall Taylor in 1944: these last two works were dedicated to him. 
Thurston left the BBC Symphony Orchestra in 1946, and in the next seven years gave the first performances of works by most of the leading British composers, many of them dedicated to him: these included Phyllis Tate's sonata for clarinet and cello (1947), Alan Rawsthorne's quartet for clarinet and strings (1948), Herbert Howells's clarinet sonata (1948), and the clarinet concertos by Malcolm Arnold (1949) and Gerald Finzi (1949). He also introduced British audiences to the clarinet concertos by Darius Milhaud (in 1947), Aaron Copland and Paul Hindemith (both in 1951), and Carl Nielsen (in 1952), and to the 'Pastorale variee' by the Israeli composer Paul Ben-Haim in 1952. With the bassoonist Archie Camden he gave the first London performance of Richard Strauss's 'Duet concertino' in July 1949 in a Promenade Concert conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent at the Royal Albert Hall. Although most of the music he performed was modern, he played the Mozart clarinet concerto many times, including an annual performance of the work at the Proms. He became principal clarinettist of the Philharmonia Orchestra in 1949, but this did not prevent him from touring abroad: in 1949 he went on a British Council tour of Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, and in 1950 toured Germany as soloist with the Jacques Orchestra. 
An inspiring and much loved teacher, Thurston taught at the Royal College of Music from 1934 until his death, this period including the war years when the BBC Symphony Orchestra was evacuated first to Bristol and then to Bedford; when Ruth Railton founded the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain in 1948 she invited him to coach the woodwind section. The only recording with which he was satisfied was one of the Bliss quintet which he recorded with the Griller Quartet in 1935; he preferred the excitement and spontaneity of live performances. His clarinet playing was distinguished by his firm, clear tone, without vibrato, a style very different from that of the other leading clarinettist of his generation, Reginald Kell. After Toscanini had conducted his first rehearsal with the Philharmonia Orchestra in September 1952 he told Walter Legge, its founder, 'That first clarinet -- 'that' is a great artist! He plays with the accents of a human voice' (Pettitt, 66). With his former pupil Alan Frank, Thurston published a clarinet tutor in 1939, and he brought out three books of passage studies (1947); his book 'Clarinet Technique' was completed after his death by Thea King and John Warrack and published in 1956. 
Thurston was made a CBE in 1952. On 22 January 1953 he remarried: his second wife was a former pupil, the clarinettist Thea King (1925-2007), later Dame Thea King, daughter of Henry Walter Mayer King, manufacturer of agricultural machinery, of Hitchin, Hertfordshire. A keen golfer, a member of the Savage Club, and a bon viveur, Thurston was also a heavy smoker, and developed lung cancer. Although he returned to the concert platform after having one lung removed in 1952, he died of cancer on 12 December 1953 in the London Hospital, Whitechapel, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 67724


Torch, Sidney (1908-1990), organist, conductor, and composer, was born on 5 June 1908 at 27 Tottenham Court Road, London, the son of Morris Torchinsky and his wife, Annie Hoppen. His father, an orchestral trombonist, sent him to study piano at the Blackheath Conservatoire. Clearly Torch must have been a talented pianist because his first professional engagement was as accompanist to the celebrated violinist Albert Sandler. He then moved into several cinema orchestras playing for silent films, but the arrival of talking pictures towards the end of the 1920s meant that full orchestras were no longer needed, and even prestigious ensembles such as Emanuel Starkey's orchestra at the Regal, Marble Arch (in which Torch also played piano), were disbanded. At the Regal a Christie organ was built in 1928, and Torch was full-time organist there from 1932 to 1934. 
Despite the popularity of his jazzy arrangements with cinema-goers who heard him in person, and the thousands of record buyers who purchased his 78s, the BBC did not invite Torch to broadcast regularly until late in 1934. Microphones of the period had great difficulty coping with the wide dynamics and timbral range of modern organs. In 1936 he joined Union Cinemas and recorded at their flagship theatre, the Regal in Kingston upon Thames. The following year he opened the magnificent Wurlitzer organ at the Gaumont State, Kilburn, then the largest cinema organ in England. 
The Second World War affected, but did not curtail, Torch's promising career; in 1940 he joined the Royal Air Force, initially being stationed near Blackpool, Lancashire, where he continued to record at the opera house. After training as an air gunner he was commissioned and attained the rank of squadron leader. He became conductor of the RAF Concert Orchestra, thus allowing him to study more closely the intricacies of orchestral scoring. This proved invaluable when he resumed civilian life after the war. He turned to light orchestral composing, arranging, and conducting, in which he quickly established himself through his BBC radio broadcasts and commercial recordings for Parlophone and Columbia. 
Torch's composing talents were ideally suited to the requirements of the production music (mood music) publishers, who were rapidly establishing libraries of recorded orchestral music in London. Chappells had already started recording light music on 78 r.p.m. discs for the use of radio, film, newsreel, and eventually television companies as early as 1942, and from 1946 onwards Torch contributed more than a hundred varied works to the Chappell catalogue, both under his own name and as Denis Rycoth (an anagram). He also conducted the Queen's Hall Light Orchestra on these special recordings, and was similarly engaged by rival publishers Francis, Day, and Hunter. 
The climax of Torch's career came in 1953, when he helped the BBC devise 'Friday Night is Music Night'. The BBC Concert Orchestra had been formed the previous year, and Torch conducted them for almost twenty years in this radio series on the Light Programme (and later Radio 2), until his retirement in 1972. His inventive arrangements continued to be heard long after his departure from the programme. During this period he became one of the most popular and respected conductors of light music in Britain. His countless broadcasts included many celebrity concerts, often at London's Royal Festival Hall as part of the BBC's regular light music festivals. 
Torch had a reputation as something of a martinet, according to the musicians and singers who performed under his baton. One described the crackle that emanated from his starched shirt-cuffs on some of his rapier-like downbeats. Singers dreaded 'the glare of the Torch' if they failed to please the maestro. Yet he was also remembered for various acts of kindness, seldom made public, but nevertheless appreciated by some of his musicians who needed temporary financial assistance. He demanded smartness in the dress sense from his musicians, and always had in reserve an extra pair of gloves or black socks in case of need. His music was also often entertaining to watch as well as to hear: his 'London Transport Suite' and 'Duel for Drummers' are ideal examples requiring athletic participation from the percussion section. Among his best-known compositions were 'Shooting Star', 'Samba sud', 'Going for a Ride', 'On a Spring Note', and 'The Trapeze Waltz'. Torch was married to Eva Elizabeth Tyson (1915-1990), a BBC producer. 
Following his retirement Torch seemed to lose interest in his previous musical activities. He rarely wanted to talk about his pre-war stardom as a cinema organist, and similarly dismissed most attempts to get him to recall his great moments in light music. In a rare radio interview in 1983 he admitted that he had been cruel to most of his producers, although he felt that many of them probably benefited from the experience. He was appointed MBE in 1985. Torch died at his Sussex home, Flat 3, The Moorings, St Johns Road, Eastbourne, on 16 July 1990 at the age of eighty-two, having taken an overdose. His wife had died on 1 March 1990. 


@@@@@


doc= 67729


Vyvyan, Jennifer Brigit (1925-1974), singer, was born on 13 March 1925 at St Ives, Granville Road, Broadstairs, Kent, the daughter of Captain Cecil Albert Vyvyan, formerly of the Royal Engineers, and his wife, Brigit Maria Stokes. She was educated at St Paul's Girls' School and at Talbot Heath, Bournemouth, before training at the Royal Academy; there she took piano as her first study, gained an LRAM in performance, and was also awarded a teaching diploma in singing. She went on to have singing lessons with Roy Henderson, and after winning a Boise Foundation travelling scholarship she was able to study with Fernando Carpi and to travel to Milan and Rome. When she won first prize at the Concours International in Geneva in 1951 she was the first British singer to do so. In the same year she created the role of the Matron in Brian Easdale's opera 'The Sleeping Children' at Cheltenham. Her first big success in the opera house was as Constanze in Mozart's 'Die Entfuhrung aus dem Serail' at Sadler's Wells in 1952, followed by the role of Donna Anna in 'Don Giovanni' in the same season. 
Jennifer Vyvyan had already made her operatic debut in 1948, as Jenny Diver in Benjamin Britten's version of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', performed by the English Opera Group in Cambridge, and she was to appear in many more Britten operas. At Covent Garden on 8 June 1953 she sang the part of Lady Penelope Rich in the first performance of Britten's 'Gloriana', written to celebrate the coronation, and did so again in many future productions. Britten was so attracted by her voice and her dramatic gifts that he created three more parts for her: the governess in 'The Turn of the Screw', first performed at La Fenice as part of the Venice Festival in 1954; Tytania in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' at Aldeburgh in 1960; and Mrs Julian in 'Owen Wingrave', commissioned for television and first broadcast in May 1971. She also appeared as Female Chorus in 'The Rape of Lucretia', and at various different times as Nancy, Miss Wordsworth, and Lady Billows in 'Albert Herring', in performances by the English Opera Group. She created roles in three operas by Malcolm Williamson: the countess de Serindan in 'The Violins of Saint-Jacques' (1966) at Sadler's Wells, Agnes in 'The Growing Castle' (1968) at Dinefwr Castle, and a series of comedy roles in 'Lucky-Peter's Journey' (1969) at the Coliseum, London. She sang at Glyndebourne, where she took the role of Electra in 'Idomeneo' in 1953, and made frequent appearances with the Handel Opera Society. She sang again at the Aldeburgh Festival in 1972 in Schumann's 'Scenes from Goethe's Faust', conducted by Britten. 
But Jennifer Vyvyan did not confine herself to opera. She sang in choral works, including Britten's 'Spring Symphony' and 'War Requiem', Beethoven's ninth symphony, and Bach's 'St Matthew passion' and 'St John passion'. She took part in the first performance of 'The Beatitudes', the cantata written by Sir Arthur Bliss for the opening of the new Coventry Cathedral in 1962 but first performed in Coventry Theatre. She gave song recitals, and broadcast frequently. 
Vyvyan was well known internationally. She went on a concert tour of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia in 1958, and made her first visit to the United States in 1963, when she sang in four performances of Britten's 'Spring Symphony' with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra. She was also one of the group of British musicians led by Sir Arthur Bliss on a British Council tour of the Soviet Union in April 1956. Her recordings included 'The Turn of the Screw' and Purcell's 'The Fairy Queen'. 
On 2 March 1962 Jennifer Vyvyan married Leon Crown ('b'. 1920/21), a chartered accountant, with whom she had one son. She died, suddenly, on 5 April 1974 at her home, 59 Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 67730


Stirling, Emma Maitland (1838/9-1907), activist in child welfare and emigration to Canada, was born in Edinburgh, youngest of the eleven children of John Stirling (1786-1853), financier and landed gentleman, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Willing (1798/9-1874) of Philadelphia. A tradition of intermarriage, born of transatlantic trade connections, linked the Stirling and Willing families through several generations. In 1827 the family moved to Cathedral Place, St Andrews, where Emma was raised. 
Stirling's youth was punctuated by the deaths of six of her siblings, two of whom were killed in the Crimean War. The family were devout members of the Scottish Episcopal church, and Stirling's intense religious convictions motivated her later philanthropic work. Nothing is known of her own schooling, but she became keenly interested in children and education during the many years she spent caring for her blind mother. As E. M. S. she published a work of children's literature, 'The History of a Pin' (1861), which adumbrated her later career in child welfare. 
A substantial inheritance permitted Stirling to move to Edinburgh and pursue her own interests. In early 1877 she founded the Stockbridge Day Nursery and Infant Home, which offered childminding for working mothers and residential care for motherless children. Soon the day nursery and the home accommodated fifty children each. Parents paid a small daily fee, but Stirling subsidized both operations and took in some motherless children for no fee. In 1878 she appointed a board of directors to advise her, and adopted the name Edinburgh and Leith Children's Aid and Refuge Society. 
In 1884 Stirling opened the first Shelter from Cruelty for abused children in Edinburgh at 150 High Street. A rival Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (SPCC) sputtered along until its patrons were obliged to join Stirling's institution. The following year the earl of Aberdeen agreed to act as patron of her organization, and Stirling was at the zenith of her career in Scotland, with some 300 children under her care in eight homes. She next plunged into child emigration with the purchase of a farm at Aylesford, Nova Scotia, to which she sent 200 or more Scottish children over the next decade. 
Nova Scotia was not a major centre for child emigration, and why Stirling chose it is uncertain. Her account of the venture in 'Our Children in Old Scotland and Nova Scotia' (1892, republished with sequel, 1898) suggests a rather romanticized view of the Canadian province as a new and purer Scotland. Emigrant children would be acclimatized at Hillfoot Farm, picturesquely situated in the fertile Annapolis valley, before being sent to farmers or into domestic service in eastern Canada. Once the children left the farm about the age of twelve, Stirling seems to have taken little interest in them, and she displayed no compunction about sending siblings to widely separated employers. 
Relations between Stirling and her board of directors had chilled when she announced her departure for Nova Scotia and her withdrawal of financial support. They reached their nadir after Stirling's rash actions embroiled the board in litigation on both sides of the Atlantic: in several cases she illegally sent motherless children in her care to Nova Scotia without paternal consent. Ultimately Stirling agreed to pay all legal costs if her name were featured on the title page of the annual report of the Scottish National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, formed in 1894 by a merger of her institution and the Glasgow SPCC. When the society ceased to display her name after her death, her descent into obscurity began. 
In 1895 Stirling's farmhouse was destroyed by arsonists. She had alienated local opinion by laying charges against a physician who had allegedly performed an abortion on one of her former charges. The man's acquittal and the subsequent fire caused Stirling to abandon not only her idealistic view of Nova Scotia but the province itself. She moved to a small town near Philadelphia, where she devoted herself principally to the cause of animal welfare until her death on 2 September 1907 at her home, Drumpellier, Coatesville, Caln township, Chester county, Pennsylvania. She never married, and her will directed her $35,000 estate to be divided among certain charities and a few friends. 
Stirling's gender and her permanent departure from Britain allowed her pioneering role in British child welfare to be forgotten: the official history of the Royal Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children virtually ignores her (Ashley, 30). A prickly and imperious nature alienated contemporaries, but gender stereotypes contributed to these perceptions. Stirling's wealth allowed her a freedom which was not accepted by the men around her. A social conservative, she saw no future for her waifs in Scotland, but did not believe that the state should play a significant role in ameliorating their lot. Emma Stirling forcefully brought to public attention the plight of poor and abused children and acted on her convictions, even if her solutions were ultimately untenable. 


@@@@@


doc= 67731


Lowther, Katherine, Viscountess Lonsdale (1653-1713), electoral patron, was born on 21 September 1653 at Caus Castle, Shropshire, the daughter of Sir Henry Frederick Thynne, first baronet (1614-1680), landowner, of Kempsford, Gloucestershire, and his wife, the Hon. Mary ('b'. 1618), daughter of Thomas Coventry, first Baron Coventry of Aylesborough. 
On 3 December 1674 Katherine married John Lowther (1655-1700), of Lowther, Westmorland. They had five sons (two of whom died young), and nine daughters (four of whom survived her). Their first child, Mary, was born at Drayton, Staffordshire, a residence of Katherine's brother, Thomas Thynne, created Viscount Weymouth in 1682. On 30 November 1675 John Lowther succeeded his grandfather as second baronet. There followed several years of living in London, where several more children were born. However, after 1680, all but two of her children were born at Lowther. 
The Lowthers had much political influence in the north-west: Lady Lowther's husband served as MP for Westmorland, with a break of only one short parliament, from 1677 until his elevation to the peerage as Viscount Lonsdale on 28 May 1696. He also served in high office from 1689 to 1694. His retirement in 1694 was interrupted by the illness of his wife following the birth of his son, Henry, and the death of a daughter, Dorothy, which necessitated a trip to Bath and an extended stay in London to aid her recovery. Lonsdale returned to high office in 1699 and was still in office when he died on 10 July 1700. 
Lady Lonsdale's most immediate problem was her husband's will, Lord Weymouth fearing 'a good deal of trouble in the execution' of it (Weymouth to Lady Lonsdale, 21 July 1700, Lonsdale MSS, D/Lons/L1/1/44). She certainly sought advice from Weymouth and her husband's cousin Sir John Lowther, second baronet (bap. 1642, d. 1706), of Whitehaven, on estate matters, and on the education of her son Henry. Lady Lonsdale, however, made it a guiding rule of her conduct to act as her late husband would have done, which included scrupulously following the instructions left in his will. She also became the head of the Lonsdale political interest during her eldest son's minority. By late August 1700 she was living in Chelsea, seeing no one but her 'brothers and sisters and some particular relations' (James Lowther to Sir John Lowther, 29 Aug 1700, Lonsdale MSS, D/Lons/W2/2/3). Initially she was advised by her brother Weymouth to stand neutral in the impending by-election for Westmorland, but she seems to have realized that this would weaken her interest. She then seems to have taken advice from Sir John Lowther, who was keen for the Lowther/Howard (earl of Carlisle) interest to thwart the Musgraves, even though Musgrave was a political ally of her brother Weymouth. In the general election of January 1701 she was 'resolute to do as my Lord would have done had he been alive' (James Lowther to Sir John Lowther, 5 April 1701, Lonsdale MSS, D/Lons/W2/2/4). In December 1702 James Lowther reported to his father Sir John that 'my Lady Lonsd[ale] calls herself a Whig' (James Lowther to Sir John Lowther, 1 Dec 1702, Lonsdale MSS, D/Lons/W2/2/5). 
In June 1705 a family crisis erupted when Lady Lonsdale's daughter Barbara was 'clandestinely married' to the Catholic Thomas Howard of Corby, Cumberland. This necessitated a series of delicate negotiations covering the security of the bride's portion and the children, not completed until September 1706. The viscountess's political sympathies were shown again in November 1705 when, according to Bishop Nicolson of Carlisle, the young Viscount Lonsdale was 'brought into' the house of Lords by the whig Lord Wharton without the tory Lord Weymouth's being given notice, even though Lady Lonsdale had dined with her brother the evening before. 
Lady Lonsdale was vital in establishing James Lowther as knight of the shire for Cumberland in the 1708 election, now that his father had died. He was confident in expecting that the interest of Lonsdale and Carlisle would carry the election for him, but he was careful to approach her before taking any action. Again, in 1710, she promised to send orders to her bailiffs to campaign for James Lowther once anybody stirred in the county. 
Katherine Lonsdale died in London on 7 January 1713, and was buried in Lowther on the 28th, 'none invited formally... yet great crowds' ('Nicolson's diaries', pt 5, 61). Her will left tokens to her three sons, to three of her daughters, and to her sons-in-law, including Sir John Wentworth, whose wife (Lady Lonsdale's daughter Mary), had died in 1706. Her daughter Barbara was not mentioned. 


@@@@@


doc= 67733


Primrose, William (1904-1982), viola player, was born on 23 August 1904 at 18 Wilton Drive, Glasgow, the elder son and the first of the three children of John Primrose, an orchestral violinist, and his wife, Margaret McInnis Whiteside (1872/3-1962). His parents, lowland Scots of modest means, sent him to local council schools, but the focus of his education was musical. Given a quarter-sized violin when he was four, the boy had promptly played a melody at perfect pitch. For ten years Willie Primrose took violin lessons from Camillo Ritter, an expatriate Austrian who had studied with Otakar Sevcik and Joseph Joachim. He appeared in a few Congregational church concerts, but nobody let him know that his talent was prodigious (though Ritter did persuade him to give up boxing for the sake of his hands). 
In 1919 Primrose performed before Landon Ronald, who helped him to a scholarship at the Guildhall School of Music in London. Max Mossel's tuition left him cold, but he emulated violinists heard at concerts: Fritz Kreisler inspired the sweetness of tone for which Primrose was later famous. These years saw him polishing his manners too. Sharp-nosed, straight-backed, and well-groomed, the young Scot assumed a gentlemanly persona (and wore a pencil moustache when fashionable). Following his debut at Queen's Hall in 1923, he left the Guildhall with a gold medal in 1924. 
Despite fair success as a soloist, Primrose grew worried that his playing had ceased to improve. He consulted Eugene Ysaye in 1926 and spent many months at Le Zoute-sur-Mer during the next three years, deriving fresh motivation and technical refinement from the ageing Belgian virtuoso, to whom he admitted that he really preferred the sound of the viola to that of the violin. Chamber-music performance gave him most pleasure, he explained, and the weakest member of the ensemble was usually the viola player. By 1928 he was contemplating a change: instead of being one fine violinist among very many, might he not become a uniquely fine violist? Ysaye told him to follow his inclination; others said that to switch would be professional suicide, as the viola was a secondary instrument without prestige. 
Primrose joined the London String Quartet on viola in March 1930 -- to the furious despair of his father. John Primrose, rather an Anglophobe, had already taken exception to William's marriage on 2 October 1928 to Dorothy Fanny Friend (1899/1900-1951), an Englishwoman, and he found this musical apostasy unforgivable. The estrangement lasted many years, despite the high reputation of the London String Quartet, which toured Europe and America until it disbanded in 1935. 
For a while Primrose struggled to find employment. Orchestras hired him for major viola works, but only Berlioz's 'Harold in Italy' and Mozart's 'Sinfonia concertante' (K364) were programmed with any frequency. Regardless of the efforts of Lionel Tertis (1876-1975), the viola was not recognized as a solo instrument. In 1937 Primrose went to the USA to join the new NBC Symphony Orchestra under Arturo Toscanini, and NBC had him head the subsidiary Primrose Quartet (1939-41). He condemned diffidence in chamber music: a virtuoso quartet should mean four virtuosos. Later he recorded with Jascha Heifetz and Gregor Piatigorsky and performed with the Festival Piano Quartet (1954-62). 
Colleagues found Bill Primrose a no-nonsense character of equable temperament who did not romanticize his calling. His mode of life was methodical, and he relaxed by watching soccer and boxing and playing golf and chess. Yet he had his sensitivities, such as an aversion to performing in casual surroundings and a preference that an orchestra should never engage him rather than do so just the once (lest people wonder why he was not asked back). His recordings for Columbia and RCA Victor rarely satisfied him. 
On the mistaken assumption that Toscanini was retiring, Primrose resigned from the NBC Symphony Orchestra in 1941 and relaunched his career as a soloist. Concert promoters remained disappointingly sceptical of the viola's appeal until a chance encounter on 57th Street, New York, provided a breakthrough. The popular tenor Richard Crooks asked Primrose to tour the USA as his supporting act, and they ended up working together for four years. Once the big-name singer had drawn the audiences, the violist used his outstanding technique to win them over to his instrument (even if this meant resorting to hackneyed crowd-pleasers such as Ethelbert Nevin's 'The Rosary'). He played Amati, Stradivari, and Guarneri violas without a shoulder rest and eschewed heavy vibrato. By 1945 Primrose had become a star in his own right: 'The world's greatest violist'. 
Although he made many arrangements and transcriptions of pieces written for other instruments, Primrose insisted that the viola had a distinct 'personality': it was not just a low-tuned violin. He commissioned viola concertos from Quincy Porter (1948), Bela Bartok (1949), Edmund Rubbra (1952), Peter Fricker (1952), and Darius Milhaud (1955), and performed the Bartok over a hundred times once he had overcome the phobia of flying which threatened his international career around 1950. 
Widowed in 1951, Primrose married Alice Virginia French from Iowa in 1952, in which year he was appointed CBE and took US citizenship. He had two daughters from his first marriage and one son from the second. World-class orchestras competed to book him, but he began to suffer from whistling in his ears. Chronic tinnitus curtailed his recording career in 1958 and a heart attack precipitated his retirement from the platform in 1963. 
Primrose latterly devoted his time to teaching, basing himself first at the University of Southern California (1961-5) and then at Indiana University (1965-72), while making visits to New York and Tokyo. Three books outline his approach. His last decade was transformed by Hiroko Sawa, a Japanese violin teacher, whom he married in 1978 during two years spent in Australia. Although ailing, he was guest lecturer at Brigham Young University from 1979 until his death from cancer at Provo, Utah, USA, on 1 May 1982. 
William Primrose was the foremost viola player of the twentieth century. His influence on the technique, repertoire, and status of the instrument seemed certain to endure. 


@@@@@


doc= 67734


Rosenthal, Harold David (1917-1987), music critic, was born at 67 Knights Hill, West Norwood, London, on 30 September 1917, the son of Israel Victor Rosenthal, schoolmaster, and his wife, Leah Samuel. After attending the City of London School, he went on to University College, London, where he gained his BA in 1940 before continuing his studies at the London Institute of Education. He served as a private in the army during the Second World War, and on 7 August 1944 he married Lillah Phyllis Weiner ('b'. 1922/3), an elementary school teacher, with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
After initially pursuing his career as a teacher, Rosenthal became increasingly drawn towards music, appearing frequently as critic and lecturer. From his earliest days he was particularly attracted to opera, from 1947 to 1952 being a correspondent for the American journal 'Opera News'. The turning point in his life, however, arose as a result of his meetings with the seventh earl of Harewood, with whom he shared an enthusiasm for opera and with whom he worked on the journal 'Ballet and Opera' during the years 1948-9. When in 1950 the journal 'Opera' was founded by Harewood, Rosenthal was invited to take up the post of assistant editor. He was editor from 1953 until 1986, and thereafter editor emeritus. From 1950 to 1956 he was archivist of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, which gave him the opportunity to produce his most substantial work, 'Two Centuries of Opera at Covent Garden' (1958). From 1955 to 1960 he was a correspondent for the journal 'Musical America'. 
Rosenthal played an increasingly important part in the musical and intellectual life of Britain, being a member of the Arts Council Patrons of Music Fund (1960-70) and serving as chairman of the music section of the Critics' Circle of Great Britain (1965-7). From 1962 he was on the council of the Friends of Covent Garden. In recognition of his services to music, in 1977 he was made a 'cavaliere ufficiale' (a member of the Order of Merit of the republic of Italy), and he later became an OBE. He was an excellent speaker, being renowned as a lecturer in both Great Britain and the United States. He played an important administrative role in international festivals, particularly that of Edinburgh, and broadcast regularly for much of his life. Acquainted with many outstanding singers, conductors, and administrators, many of whom were his personal friends, he was always supportive of the younger generation to whom he gave encouragement and support. His constant enthusiasm for the world of opera manifested itself in 'Sopranos of Today' (1956), 'The Opera Bedside Book' (1965), 'Great Singers of Today' (1966), 'Covent Garden: a Short History' (1967), and his autobiography, 'My Mad World of Opera' (1982). He also edited the recollections of the nineteenth-century opera manager James Henry Mapleson as 'The Mapleson Memoirs' (1966), and the third edition of 'Loewenberg's Annals of Opera' (1979). He collaborated with John Warrack in the writing of 'A Concise Oxford Dictionary of Opera', first published in 1964. 
However, it was as the editor of 'Opera' that Rosenthal made his greatest and most lasting contribution. He combined good business sense with unflagging energy and enthusiasm, and was keenly aware of the tastes of the average opera-lover; during his period as editor the journal assumed ever-increasing importance, not only covering the British scene but also serving as a mirror of operatic events worldwide. Indeed, its coverage was remarkable, its excellent local reports embracing operatic events not only in Europe and America but in South Africa, the Soviet Union, Australia, and New Zealand. Probably no other journal played so formative a role in stimulating the interests of the public and in helping in the creation of a new operatic audience. Invariably good-natured and urbane, Rosenthal was a lover of travel and 'haute cuisine' and a lifetime collector of programmes, prints, and playbills. He died in the Whittington Hospital, Islington, London, on 19 March 1987; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 67735


Rainier, (Ivy) Priaulx (1903-1986), composer, was born on 3 February 1903 at Howick, South Africa, a hamlet in the Natal midlands, the population of which was predominately Zulu. In 1913 she entered the South African College of Music, Cape Town, and studied violin. Her progress was quick and in 1920 she won a scholarship to attend the Royal Academy of Music, London, where she studied harmony and counterpoint with J. B. McEwen and violin with Rowsby Woof. She then worked as a violinist, chamber musician, and teacher until a grant from an anonymous benefactor in 1935 enabled her to concentrate on composing. But her interest in performance continued, and she later coached chamber music groups at the summer school of music at Bryanston. 
By the late 1930s Rainier's potential as a composer was obvious and, after impressing Sir Arnold Bax with her talent, she spent three months in Paris with the renowned teacher Nadia Boulanger in 1937. But by the end of her studies her portfolio was small, as she had written only a handful of works: an early string quartet in 1924, 'Two Archaic Songs' for unaccompanied chorus in 1927, a duo for violin and piano in 1932, the 'Incantation' for clarinet and orchestra in 1933, and the 'Three Greek Epigrams' for soprano and piano in 1937. With the completion of her string quartet no. 1 in 1939, her career reached a watershed, and her reputation was secured. In the quartet she juxtaposed European techniques with an interest in African music; utilized a traditional four-movement plan; employed adventurous rhythmic repetition and alteration; limited her harmonic range; and emphasized the tritone, an interval that was common to many of her compositions. The Amadeus Quartet recorded the work with the support of the British Council in 1951 and later it was used as the basis for a ballet. 
In 1943 Rainier was appointed professor of composition at the Royal Academy of Music and composed a suite for clarinet and piano. The suite elicited a poor critical response: some commentators argued that the work relied too heavily on rhythm and lacked melodic invention, while others suggested that the piano writing lacked skill. She responded quickly to these criticisms and tried to address some of them in her viola sonata of 1945. By employing extended melodic lines and by drawing upon her experiences as a string player, she produced a work of strength and beauty. But she never abandoned her interest in rhythm and the last movement of the sonata employs vital, dance-like structures. Rhythmic drive, small melodic units, and triadic harmony continued to dominate her style in the late 1940s, and these techniques can be found in 'Sinfonia da camera', broadcast by the BBC on 21 November 1947, and in the 'Barbaric Dance Suite' for piano, written in 1949. The suite draws upon her early experiences in Natal, evoking the rhythms and melodies of the Zulu nation. Rainier claimed that her evocation of African music was subconscious and not the result of formal studies. But her assertion should be treated with caution, as her song 'Ubunzima' (1948), a setting of Zulu words for voice and guitar, suggests a deeper understanding of the cultural practices of her homeland than that to which she admitted. 
In the early 1950s Rainier moved to St Ives, Cornwall, and became friends with the artists Barbara Hepworth and Ben Nicholson. Her relationship with Hepworth and Nicholson affected her style, and their influence is apparent in the suite 'Aequora lunae'. Dedicated to Hepworth, the piece is written for large orchestra and is divided into seven movements, each of which is named after a sea of the moon. The Cheltenham festival commissioned the work, and there it received its premiere on 18 July 1967. In 1952 Rainier was elected a fellow of the Royal Academy of Music and in 1953 she helped establish the St Ives festival of arts and composed 'Cycle for Declamation', a setting of words by John Donne for solo voice. The cycle was commissioned by Peter Pears, who also gave the first performance of 'Requiem' for tenor and chorus at the Aldeburgh festival in 1956 and commissioned 'The Bee Oracles' in 1969. Rainier was made a freeman of the Worshipful Company of Musicians in 1955, and in 1960 she wrote 'Phalaphala' for the tenth anniversary of Sir Adrian Boult's appointment as music director of the London Philharmonic Orchestra. Boult conducted the premiere on 17 January 1961 but was baffled by Rainier's style. In a letter to the author and violist Bernard Shore, he wrote: 'I'm afraid I have no opinion of Miss Rainier's effort -- I can't make head or tail of it. It was rather good as we had been rehearsing some time, and went on and on with the stuff, when someone said 'When is the soloist coming?' A beautifully orchestral remark. (Kennedy, 250)' Rainier retired from the Royal Academy of Music in 1961 but remained active as a composer. In the following year she composed the oboe quartet 'Quanta', which was recorded by Argo, and in 1963 she was commissioned by the BBC to compose her cello concerto. Performed by Jacqueline Du Pre at a Prom in September 1964, the work failed to excite the interest of other performers and promoters and it was soon moribund. But the reception of the concerto did not affect her relationship with the BBC and, with the support of her friend William Glock, the controller of music, her position was unassailable. It is unsurprising, therefore, that the BBC commissioned her 'Ploermel' for the 1973 Proms. In that year, 'Vision and Prayer' was written with funds from the Arts Council of Great Britain, and four years later she completed 'Due canti e finale' for violin and orchestra. Yehudi Menuhin commissioned the work and gave its first performance at the Edinburgh festival in September 1977. In 1981 Rainier's 'Concertante duo' for oboe, clarinet, and chamber orchestra was given its premiere, and in June 1982 the University of Cape Town awarded her an honorary DMus. In that year she composed the 'Grand Duo' for cello and piano, and in 1983 she became the first lady liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Musicians. 
Rainier composed approximately thirty works. Though a relatively small 'oeuvre' for a career spanning six decades, some of her music was performed by leading musicians. Her works benefited from her originality and her strong musical personality. She did not excel when writing for the orchestra, but her chamber music is of a high standard. The Priaulx Rainier fund for young composers was established by the Royal Academy of Music and the University of Cape Town after her death, and many of her manuscripts and papers are held at those institutions. Priaulx Rainier died at Besse-en-Chandesse, Auvergne, France, on 10 October 1986. 


@@@@@


doc= 67736


Steinitz, (Charles) Paul Joseph (1909-1988), conductor and musicologist, was born on 25 August 1909 in Chichester, Sussex, the son of the Revd Charles Steinitz, a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Sarah Jessie Prior. He was educated privately, and in the late 1920s entered the Royal Academy of Music, where he studied the organ with Stanley Marchant. At the academy he was a contemporary of Walter Emery, whose work in establishing authentic texts of the music of J. S. Bach and their interpretation, including his 'The Matthew Passion: its Preparation and Performance' (1949), was to be an important influence on Steinitz. He also had private lessons from the composer George Oldroyd, organist and choirmaster of St Michael's, West Croydon. On 19 April 1933 he married Joan Mary ('b'. 1911/12), daughter of Charles Henry Paxton, civil engineer; they had two sons. While holding the post of director of music at the parish church in Ashford, Kent, from 1933 to 1942, he graduated BMus from London University in 1935, and was awarded the degree of DMus in 1940 for a symphony in D. His first marriage ended in divorce, and on 28 June 1946 he married Margery Hope ('b'. 1917/18), daughter of Sydney Howard Still, schoolmaster; they had one daughter. From 1949 to 1961 he was organist and choirmaster at the priory church of St Bartholomew-the-Great, West Smithfield, London. 
In 1947 Steinitz founded a choir, the South London Bach Society, and in 1952 at St Bartholomew-the-Great he conducted the choir, by then known as the London Bach Society, in the first complete performance in Great Britain of Bach's 'St Matthew passion' sung in the original German, an event which soon gave rise to the tradition of annual performances of Bach's 'St Matthew' and 'St John' passions. Always concerned to perform the music authentically, for the next thirty-five years he applied the latest ideas about performance practice. He founded the Steinitz Bach Players in 1969, although at first they did not use 'period' instruments because his choir was too large to be accompanied by a small period-instrument ensemble. But in the early 1970s he began to use smaller groups of voices with period instruments, using the full choir only when appropriate. 
While his greatest commitment was to the music of J. S. Bach, and he became one of the leading British authorities on the composer, Steinitz also performed the works of Bach's predecessors, especially Heinrich Schutz, and Bach's contemporaries, including Handel. His repertory was, however, not confined to the baroque period, and he conducted many performances of twentieth-century music, including works by Geoffrey Burgon, Anthony Milner, and Stanley Glasser. The London Bach Society commissioned Edmund Rubbra's 'Song of the Soul' (1952) and new works from Nicholas Maw (a former pupil) and John Tavener, who wrote 'Introit for March 27: the Feast of St Damascene' (1968) to celebrate the society's twenty-first anniversary. The society gave the first performances of Tavener's 'Three Holy Sonnets of John Donne' (1964) and 'Cain and Abel' (1966), Milner's 'Benedic, anima mea, Dominum' (1954), and works by Bruno Maderna and Peter Maxwell Davies. In 1963 Steinitz conducted the British premiere of Luigi Dallapiccola's 'Canti di prigionia' (1938-41), and in 1967 he gave a notable performance of Schoenberg's 'Friede auf Erden'. Steinitz and the London Bach Society toured widely in Europe and North America, and he was also a guest conductor in New Zealand in 1970 and Australia in 1971. The works he recorded include the complete 'Cantiones sacrae' of 1625 by Schutz, and he made many BBC broadcasts from 1949 onwards. 
Steinitz was professor of harmony and composition at the Royal Academy of Music from 1945 to 1984, and from 1984 he was a consultant professor. He was also a lecturer at Goldsmiths' College, London, from 1948 to 1976, and published several books on harmony, including 'Harmony and Counterpoint with the Masters' (1963), 'Commonsense Harmony' (1967), and 'Harmony in Context' (1976). His approach to the teaching of harmony was to get his students to study the music of great composers, rather than to write exercises, and to this end he published 'One Hundred Tunes for Harmonisation from the Great Masters' (1963). He also wrote the chapter on German church music in 'Opera and Church Music, 1630-1750' (1975), published as volume 5 of the 'New Oxford History of Music'. His other publications include 'Bach's Passions' (1979), with a chapter on performance style, 'Bach for Choirs' (1980), and 'Performing Bach's Vocal Music' (1980). 
Steinitz's second marriage, like the first, ended in divorce, and in 1976 he married Margaret Johnson. A Quaker, despite his Anglican upbringing, Steinitz believed that music could heal political divisions, and he made two visits to East Germany, in 1964 and 1983. In December 1987, four months before his death, he completed the project that he had begun with the London Bach Society in 1958, the performance of all the cantatas of J. S. Bach. Steinitz was appointed OBE in 1985, the tercentenary of Bach's birth. He died on 21 April 1988 at his home, 73 High Street, Old Oxted, Surrey, and was buried on 3 May after a funeral in Chichester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 67737


Magdalene Aston, Lady Aston (d. 1635), was the daughter of Sir John Poultney of Misterton in Leicestershire and married Aston in 1627; they had four children, all of whom died very young. She died, to Aston's great distress, in 1635 and was buried in the newly renovated Aston chapel. Sir Thomas commissioned a portrait by John Souch now entitled 'Sir Thomas Aston at the Deathbed of his Wife'. The picture, which is one of the finest examples of the 'memento mori' of the era, currently hangs in the Manchester City Galleries. A memorial in the Aston chapel, probably written by Sir Thomas himself, reads 'Heere, reader, in this sad but glorious cell, Of death lyes shrind a double miracle, Of woman and of wyfe, and each soe best, Shee may be fame's fayre copy to the rest'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67738


Darton, Frederick Joseph Harvey (1878-1936), publisher and writer, was born on 22 September 1878, the eldest of the two sons and one daughter of Joseph William Darton (1843-1916), partner in the publishing firm of Wells Gardner, Darton & Co., and his wife, Mary (died 1934), eldest daughter of Dr Charles Schooling of Milton, Kent. Darton was educated at Sutton Valence School and Dover College, and won a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, taking a second class in classical moderations in 1899 and in 'literae humaniores' in 1901. He then joined the family firm, which had been established in the eighteenth century by William Darton (1755-1819). He remained until 1928 when it was sold to Love and Malcomson. During his time at the firm, Darton brought a more scholarly approach to its general editorial policy, as befitted the only member of the firm ever to have had a university education; at the same time he was closely involved with its two juvenile magazines, 'Chatterbox' and 'The Prize'. (He wrote an amusing account of his experiences with these in the 'Cornhill Magazine', May 1932.) 
Darton was also engaged in his own literary work. From 1901 onwards he produced many retellings of stories from old legends and romances, published by his firm. He contributed book reviews to the 'Daily News', short monographs on Arnold Bennett and J. M. Barrie to the 'Writers of the Day' series, and in 1910 edited the life of Mary Martha Sherwood, some of whose later children's books had been published by the Darton firm. He also wrote two pseudonymous novels touching on his own life, 'My Father's Son' (under the name William W. Penn, 1913) and 'When: a Record of Transition' (under the name John L. Pole, 1929). He edited the 'Bankside Acting Edition' of Shakespeare from 1927 to 1929. On 2 October 1906 he married Emma Lucretia Bennett ('b'. 1876), daughter of George Lovett Bennett, headmaster of Sutton Valence School, but the marriage was annulled on grounds of non-consummation. At this period he was living in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, the centre of a convivial circle of friends, but after the death of his father he left London and lived variously in Kent and Dorset, writing several books about these localities. A gregarious and genial man, he loved the country and its people and, as 'The Times' obituary said of him, 'country sports and all recreations, from shove-halfpenny to cricket and fox-hunting: he knew a good deal of archaeology; and he was at home in any decent public house' ('The Times', 28 July 1936). (His last address was a Dorset pub, and he was to die of cirrhosis of the liver.) 
The work for which Darton is remembered is the ground-breaking and influential 'Children's Books in England' (1932), which remains a vital resource for historians and general readers. This survey of children's reading, from Caxton to the later Victorians, written as 'a minor chapter in the history of English social life' (Alderson, vii), stands out for the wealth of its material, its benign, Olympian viewpoint, and lightly carried learning -- the product of a cultivated, widely read but non-specialist bibliophile with a classical education. Darton had in 1914 contributed the chapter on children's books to volume 11 of the 'Cambridge History of English Literature', having already written on the same subject in the tenth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1902-3). He had also acquired an impressive collection of books, games, and illustration material from the Darton firm's publications. However, as he said in the preface to 'Children's Books', this had gone to America 'in the stress of the Peace' (ibid., viii) -- it is now housed at the teachers college of Columbia University -- and when he settled down to write in 1931 he was working from his catalogue of the collection, and from memory, augmented by research at the British Museum. 'With these facts to hand', said Brian Alderson, who revised the original for a third edition in 1982, 'he was able to write the book with concentrated energy, and it is this which gives it the homogeneity of style and viewpoint that are its personality' (ibid., xiii). Darton produced a handful more books after this, but died of alcoholism on 26 July 1936, in Dorchester County Hospital, and was buried on 28 July at Cerne Abbas, Dorset. 


@@@@@


doc= 67741


Gowdie, Isobel (fl. 1662), alleged witch, first appears as the wife of John Gilbert and an inhabitant of the farmstead at Loch Loy, near Auldearn, in highland Scotland. Although she was later supposed to have begun practising witchcraft in 1647, it was in spring 1662 that she was implicated in a plot to harm Henry Forbes ('fl'. 1655-1678), the minister of the kirk at Auldearn, and appears to have come forward -- on her own account -- to confess her guilt before the local authorities of having been 'over long' in the service of witchcraft ('Fasti Scot.', 4.436; Pitcairn, 3, part 2, 603, 614). She gave four separate confessions at Auldearn between 13 April and 17 May 1662 in which the list of her crimes and accomplices was constantly refined and clarified by her examiners. She described how, in 1647, she had met the devil while out walking and had entered into a covenant with him. That same night she went to the kirk at Auldearn, where she denied her Christian baptism before the devil and received his mark on her shoulder. While she was held fast by her neighbour, Margaret Brodie, the devil supposedly sucked the blood from out of the mark and sprinkled it upon her head, declaring: 'I baptise thee, Janet, in my own name!' (Pitcairn, 3, part 2, 603). Having given herself in spirit to the devil Gowdie proceeded to give him exhaustive use of her body, and in her second confession provided lurid details of their sexual relationship. 
Equipped with her new name and backed by a strong network of covens, Gowdie then supposedly began to wreak havoc upon her local community with the aid of her familiar spirit, known as the 'Read Reiver'. She claimed to have ruined crops and to have soured milk, to have transformed herself -- at will -- into jackdaws, hares, and crows, and to have stolen into the houses of the local gentry in order to 'eat and drink of the best' (Pitcairn, 604). Indeed, the procuring and consumption of rich foods is a constant theme in all her confessions and seems to have been one of the greatest benefits that she felt she had received during her service to her dark master. However, it is clear that Isobel, in 'professing [her] repentance' and her 'great grief and shame', was keen to please her interrogators and that her spoken testimony was heavily edited and led by them. Thus, her initial enthusiasm to tell of her meetings with the king and queen of the fairie, up in the 'Deunie-Hills', and to describe their appearances, together with the fearsome activities of the herds of 'elf-bulls' that milled about them, was brusquely cut short and went largely unrecorded in the official case notes (ibid., 604). 
Demonology and not folklore was what concerned and motivated the authorities, and consequently the cataloguing of Gowdie's murderous crimes as a witch was what was demanded of her, and was what was duly revealed in her subsequent depositions. She had raised an unbaptized child from its grave at Nairn, caused the heirs of John Hay, laird of Park, to sicken, wither, and die, and had killed many men by flying through the air above them upon straws and shooting them down with special 'elf arrows' that came to her straight from the hands of the devil himself (Pitcairn, 615). Minister Forbes seems to have been singled out by the coven for particular attention and an underlying antagonism between him and Gowdie appears to have existed. Gowdie claimed to have begged the devil to be allowed to shoot at him again, after another witch's arrow fell short of its intended target. Moreover, she maintained that in winter 1660 the coven had sought to make his illness fatal by uttering incantations over a bag containing the 'galls, flesh and guts of toads', together with barley grains and nail and hair clippings, before hacking it to pieces and throwing the remains into water (ibid., 610, 612). However, in repeatedly expressing her profound sorrow for killing her neighbour, William Brower of Milltown Moynes, Gowdie appears to have seen herself as having acted against her own will, and to have genuinely believed that she had been directly responsible for his death through her use of demonic magic. It is conceivable that this powerful sense of guilt was a major factor in prompting Gowdie to make her confessions and to demand that an exemplary sentence should be passed upon her, desiring that she should be riven upon iron harrows or 'worse, if it could be devised' (ibid., 613-14). 
Though Robert Pitcairn believed that Gowdie was probably convicted of witchcraft and subsequently burnt at the stake -- together with her accomplice, Janet Breadheid -- there is no record of her eventual fate. Her papers were forwarded to the Scottish privy council in summer 1662, and Sir Hew Campbell of Calder, together with eight others, was empowered to try the case, on 10 July 1662. However, it was recommended that the death sentence was to be passed only if a whole list of conditions regarding the prisoner's physical well-being and the state of her mental health was met in full. Not only was it important to prove beyond all doubt that Gowdie had confessed voluntarily and 'without any sort of torture', but, significantly, solid evidence was also required that 'at the tyme of their confessions... [Gowdie and Breadheid] were of sound judgment, nowayes distracted or under any earnest desyre to die'. Only if Gowdie insisted upon reiterating and renewing her former confessions before the judiciary, 'then and in that case and no otherwayes' should the death sentence be invoked ('Reg. PCS', 1.243). Given so many provisions for allowing an acquittal -- and no evidence of either a trial or an execution -- it would appear likely, though by no means certain, that Gowdie was eventually discharged and allowed to slip back into the quiet obscurity whence she came. Her husband had never been implicated in the witchcraft allegations. 
The case has been recognized by successive generations of writers, from Sir Walter Scott onwards, as being both sensational and atypical, bringing the term 'coven' -- to denote a group of witches -- into popular usage and attesting to a wealth of fairy lore in the highlands of Scotland that was far removed from the learned traditions of elite demonologists. Unfortunately, the desire to make this one, particularly detailed, account general and to apply it, uncritically, to the 'modus operandi' of English witches has been both misleading and unhelpful. In particular Margaret Murray's attempts to prove that Gowdie represented a powerful and enduring underground pagan tradition at work within the British Isles, by selectively quoting from her confessions, has been subjected to increasing scholarly criticism from the 1970s onwards and has largely been discredited. Rather than speaking for a prior folk culture Gowdie's wild imaginings can be more accurately viewed as articulating the concerns and frustrated desires of a poor and frequently hungry woman who wished for plentiful meat to feast upon, and a level of social and sexual freedom that was all too lacking in the hierarchical, and kirk dominated, Scotland of the mid-seventeenth century. 'The confession of Isobel Gowdie', an orchestral 'requiem' by the Scottish composer James MacMillan, was premiered at the BBC Proms in 1990 and has been performed many times since. 


@@@@@


doc= 67743


Worth, Edward (c.1620-1669), Church of Ireland bishop of Killaloe, was born in co. Cork of unknown parents and background. In 1638 he was elected to one of the scholarships reserved for natives of Ireland at Trinity College, Dublin. In 1645 he was appointed dean of Cork. As the protestants of the district divided between supporters of Charles I and of the Westminster parliament, Worth gravitated to the latter. Late in 1649, after Cromwell had landed in Ireland, he joined Broghill in negotiations which resulted in a section of the Munster protestants accepting the authority of the recently created English Commonwealth. 
Worth seems to have remained in south Munster during the early 1650s, at Ringrone outside Kinsale, the living of which he had held formerly and perhaps still served unofficially. In November 1654 Lord Cork heard him preach publicly. Shortly afterwards Worth attested that Cork did not clandestinely use the proscribed 'Book of Common Prayer'. He was also master of St Stephen's Hospital in Cork. He re-emerged in 1653 as a champion of doctrinal orthodoxy when he tried to refute, first by preaching and then in print, the ideas of the Baptists which had recently been introduced into Cork. A wish to check the spread of heterodox opinions (including those of the Quakers) drew Worth deeper into public activity. Under the government of Lord Deputy Fleetwood, religious novelties were tolerated and even promoted. However, the arrival of Henry Cromwell to replace Fleetwood in 1655 inaugurated a more conservative approach to religious questions: an approach congenial to Worth. Early in 1655 he had tried to hinder a petition circulating in co. Cork which requested that Fleetwood continue as Irish lord deputy. Within co. Cork he organized an association of ministers, modelled after that which Richard Baxter had created in England. The aim was to vet the learning and opinions of would-be ministers before they were ordained. By this device, it was hoped to impose better discipline on the church of the area and offer a model for the rest of Ireland. 
Winning Henry Cromwell's approval, Worth grew in importance. Already in the spring of 1655 he had been inserted into panels which were to decide on the competence and orthodoxy of various aspirant ministers. In 1656 he first accepted a modest salary ($60 p.a.) from the state as one of its authorized preachers, at Kinsale. In 1656 he joined with other 'classical Presbyterian ministers' around Cork to establish a weekly lecture from which the sectaries were excluded. By December 1657 he had been added to the panel in Dublin which adjudicated the qualifications of all aspiring preachers in Ireland. In 1658 Worth travelled to England where he met others -- notably at Oxford and Cambridge -- who shared his aims of reviving a parochial and tithe-supported ministry. Above all, he and his followers insisted on the need for ordination, and planned, through the association, to oversee the process by guaranteeing minimum standards. Only then, it was argued, would the conversion of the Irish Catholics proceed apace. 
Worth's influence reached its zenith while Henry Cromwell governed in Dublin. A convention of ministers, summoned to Dublin in 1658, attempted to hammer out a formula which would restore greater order to the fragmented protestant churches in Ireland. During the meeting, Worth preached at St Werburgh's Church in the shadow of Dublin Castle. His congregation included many of the governors of Ireland. No national agreement resulted from the gathering. Worth's schemes had been resisted by Samuel Winter, provost of Trinity College and leader of the religious Independents. Winter also advocated associations of the clergy, but with divergent emphases. After radicals replaced Cromwell in the summer of 1659, Worth lay low. However, he maintained contact with the like-minded in Scotland and England, such as Richard Baxter. Early in 1660, when a coup brought more conservative elements to the fore in Ireland, Worth went to London. There he enquired after suitable recruits to minister in Ireland. In addition, he may have positioned himself the better to secure his own and the Irish church's future in the impending restoration. Certainly he was among those consulted shortly after Charles II's return about how best to settle the church. Worth advocated, but fruitlessly, a version of the moderated episcopacy previously championed by Archbishop Ussher. 
Worth returned to Ireland where, early in 1661, he was consecrated bishop of Killaloe. This appointment testified to Worth's pliancy, happy enough to return to the church in which he had originally been ordained. But it also told of the need of the Church of Ireland to attract some of those who had collaborated with the Cromwellians. The diocese of Killaloe was impoverished by the extensive lay impropriation of livings. Worth strove to recover some of its alienated wealth, but antagonized the powerful, such as the O'Briens, earls of Thomond, who held much church property. During the 1660s Worth acted as a conduit between the Irish episcopate and Archbishop Sheldon of Canterbury. He died unmarried on 2 August 1669 while in Hackney in Middlesex, and was buried that month at St Mildred's, Bread Street, London. Worth had inherited modest property. During his career he amassed more. He bequeathed money to maintain poor scholars at St Stephen's Hospital in Cork and at Trinity College, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 67744


Beconsall, Thomas (1663/4-1709), philosopher and Church of England clergyman, was the son of John Beconsall of Lemster, Cheshire. He matriculated, aged sixteen, on 30 March 1680, at Brasenose College, Oxford. He graduated BA in 1683, MA in 1686 (in which year he became a fellow), and BD in 1697. He was vicar of Steeple Aston in Oxfordshire from 1706 until his death. 
Beconsall is significant as a critic of the philosopher John Locke, against whom he published a sermon and a treatise. 'The Doctrine of a General Resurrection', preached in the university church, Oxford, on Easter Monday 1697, assailed the theory of personal identity in Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding'. In Locke's location of personal identity 'purely in consciousness' he found a kind of Platonism that denied that the body is integral to the self. Beconsall quickly equated this with a Socinian rejection of the Christian doctrine of bodily resurrection. He concluded that heresy lurked in Locke. 
Much more important is Beconsall's 'The Grounds and Foundations of Natural Religion' (1698) which contains, in its eleventh chapter, the first published critique, indeed one of the earliest mentions, of Locke's 'Two Treatises of Government' (1689). Interestingly Beconsall analysed the 'Treatises' and the 'Essay' together, subsuming Locke's politics under his moral philosophy. Beconsall was conventional in his ethical sentiments and tory in his politics, but he provided a perceptive account of Locke. Thomas Hearne rightly described the book as 'a discourse about the law of nature' ('Remarks', 1.231). It defended natural law and innate moral knowledge against 'the modern scepticks and latitudinarians' (Beconsall, title-page). Beconsall charged Locke with destroying natural law by his attack on innatism; with reducing moral knowledge to opinion, fashion, and custom; with making 'consciousness and conscience the same' (ibid., 249), thereby destroying conscience properly understood; and with undermining revealed religion as being mere priestcraft. 
Beconsall next urged that parental and filial duties were cardinal branches of natural law. No moral obligations more certainly 'carry the appearance of being innate' (Beconsall, 126). Yet Locke destroyed these duties. Beconsall takes the 'Two Treatises' to be pre-eminently a critique of patriarchalism, and he correspondingly defends the 'empire' and 'dominion' which men have as fathers, husbands, and originally as kings and priests. He thinks Locke an incipient feminist for elevating 'the mother as an equal sharer in that power which accrues to the father as a parent' (ibid., 143). All this sounds like Sir Robert Filmer's divine right theory of monarchy, which had shored up the house of Stuart. But Beconsall flatly denied any 'disloyalty towards our present sovereign' (ibid., 181), and this seems ingenuous, for the Jacobite Hearne irritably called him 'an admirer of King William' ('Remains', 1.231). Beconsall shows the beginnings of the repositioning of post-revolution toryism, which made possible the persistence of patriarchal moral and political theory for another century, but by then no longer encumbered with the special claims of the Stuart cause. 
What is strikingly original in Beconsall's critique of Locke is that he identifies the Lockean state of nature and original contract not as a mythic history about primeval origins but as a juridical fact about present-day societies. On Beconsall's reading, for Locke political legitimacy is constantly re-created by every generation of citizens as it comes of age. Hence the crux of Locke's theory is taken to be the repudiation of filial obligation at the age of majority. He explores Locke's well-known paragraphs about what constitutes express and tacit consent, and shows how precarious Lockean political obligation is, since oaths of allegiance and inheritance of property apply to only a fraction of the population. It is a theory that quickly leads to the 'total dissolution' of government. Beconsall also dwells on Locke's passage about a person's right of withdrawal to other commonwealths or to empty places, ''vacuis locis'' (Beconsall, 171). Here he takes Locke seriously as a proponent of untrammelled emigration. Hence the Lockean dissolution of government is seen less as a theory of rebellion than as a theory about the right of withdrawal. This construal would be fundamental to American readings of the 'vacuis locis' passage in the 1760s, but Beconsall deprecates it in the light of mercantilist concerns about the nation's demographic, and hence economic and military, strength. By Locke's dangerous principle, 'a nation may be dispeopled at pleasure, and consequently drained of her riches and treasure' (ibid., 178), and exposed to her enemies. Beconsall rounds off with a personal attack on Locke, by then a member of the Board of Trade, as a hypocritical salaried functionary of a mercantilist state bureaucracy. 
On 23 June 1709 Hearne reported that Beconsall died 'last week at his parsonage suddenly, having been for a great while in a melancholy, hippish condition'; he had earlier described him as 'a strange hypochondriacal person' ('Remarks', 1.231, 2.213-14). By his will dated 2 May 1709 Beconsall left money to his wife, Anne, and his two sisters; there is no mention of children. An inventory valued his chattels and moneys at $297 11's'., the largest items of value being glebe corn, books in the study, and moneys owed by Brasenose. 


@@@@@


doc= 67746


Fetcham, Peter of (fl. 1267-1276), translator and poet, was probably born in Fetcham (or possibly Peckham), Surrey, a member of the d'Abernon or d'Abenon family of Fetcham and nearby Stoke d'Abernon, which led to his being also called Peter, or Piere, de Abernun. He may have been the illegitimate son of Master Peter, rector of Fetcham. He first occurs in or before 1267-8 as the author of 'La lum[in]ere as lais' ('The lamp for layfolk'), a massive catechetical poem that began as a translation of Honorius of Autun's 'Elucidarius', but ended as a patchwork of other authorities. In it he calls himself Pierre, a clerk of little fame ('petit renum'); rubrics in two manuscripts name him as Master Peter 'de Pecchame' or 'de Feccham'. A colophon in York Minster Library, MS xvi.N.3, says that it was begun at Easter 1267 at Newark Priory in Surrey, and completed on 2 February 1268 at Oxford. It is not clear whether this statement refers to the composition of the poem or, as seems more probable, to its copying. Newark Priory was an Augustinian house, and Peter, or his copyist, may have been an Austin canon. 
Of Fetcham's two remaining extant verse translations, his next probably was 'Le secre des secrez' ('The secret of secrets'). This combined portions of the pseudo-Aristotelian 'Secretum secretorum' (prologue, advice to kings, and dietary) with portions of one or more other dietaries and an epilogue written by Peter himself. Fetcham was one of the earliest western vernacular translators of the immensely popular 'Secretum secretorum'. In 'Le secre des secrez' he cites his 'Lumere as lais' and calls himself 'Piere... who springs from those of Abernun' (Legge, 'Anglo-Norman in the Cloisters', 64), suggesting that he was illegitimate. Peter's third known work is 'La vie Seint Richard evesques de Cycestre', a verse translation of Ralph Bocking's 'Life and Miracles' ('c'.1270) of St Richard of Wyche, bishop of Chichester. A canon of Chichester had sent a copy for 'Pieres de Fecham' to translate into French, for the benefit of lay people. In his translation Fetcham claims 'Johan de Abernun' (probably Sir John d'Abernon, who died in 1277) as his 'patrun'. Since Peter added at the end of his poem two miracles that he said had occurred after the translation of the saint's body to a new shrine (16 June 1276), its editor plausibly dates the poem to 1276-7. 
Fetcham's subsequent career is uncertain. A master and a clerk, perhaps illegitimate, he is possibly to be identified with a presumably illegitimate contemporary of the same name known as 'Peter the son of Peter the parson' (or rector) of 'Fechham', Surrey (BL, Additional charter 5549). Peter the parson, who occurs in charters dating from 1235 or earlier to the 1260s or 1270s, had at least one other son, called Hugh 'de Fecham', who gave some land to Newark Priory (BL, Additional charter 5543). This would seem to strengthen the identification of Peter the poet with Peter the parson's son; the latter does not, however, call himself 'Master' Peter in his surviving deed (BL, Additional charter 5549). It is also possible, but unlikely, that Peter of Fetcham (or Peckham) the poet is to be identified with another contemporary, Peter of Peckham (d. 1293), lawyer, known to have been illegitimate, who was probably born in or near West Peckham, Kent. When first recorded, in 1278/9, he held a tenancy in Wateringbury, Kent, near West Peckham, which he may have held since before 1264. He had at least one son, Simon, also presumably illegitimate, who was probably an adult by 1292. Since Peckham was unquestionably a university graduate, styled 'Master' by 1279, these dates suggest that he had been born no later than the mid-1250s, and perhaps before 1240. 
By 1282 Peckham was already a lawyer of standing. In that year Lewes Priory retained as its legal counsel 'our beloved clerk Master Peter of Peckam, professor of laws' (Beckerlegge, xiv, n. 3), with an annual pension of 10 marks. He was to be similarly retained by the priories of Christ Church, Canterbury, and Bermondsey, and by Bayham and Lesnes abbeys, though he sometimes had difficulty in obtaining payment of his pensions. In 1290/91, now described as the clerk of the king's treasurer, William March, he sued Lewes Priory for arrears, and settled for 50 marks. Peckham seems to have been a troublesome, perhaps a violent, man. In the Kent eyre of 1279 he was accused of having raped Matilda de Caldynge at Malling on 15 August 1270. Though acquitted, he subsequently found himself repeatedly at odds with his neighbours in Kent, against whom he brought a number of lawsuits, and by whom he was presented at the 1293 Kent eyre for having seized, fattened, and slaughtered for his own larder pigs which had strayed onto his land at Wateringbury. This time he was convicted, but as a clerk was handed over to the ordinary. 
Peter of Peckham died on 21 August 1293, intestate as well as illegitimate, so that his possessions escheated to the crown. They included $384 10's'. 3died in cash, found in Boxley Abbey, Kent; a collection of canon and civil law books and a dispensation (perhaps for illegitimacy) deposited in Southwark and Bermondsey priories; and a messuage in the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury, London. In 1295 Edward I gave the books to his clerk, Itier d'Angouleme, who had previously granted Peckham his London messuage and who recovered it after Peckham's death. Four religious books once belonging to 'P. Pecham' came into the library of Merton College, Oxford, but no connection has been traced between Peckham and the college. In 1294 Peckham's son Simon successfully sued to recover seisin of 2 acres of wood at Mereworth, near West Peckham, which had formerly been held by his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 67747


Charles Speke (d. 1685), political activist, was not as deeply involved in whig politics as his elder brothers, John and Hugh, but he did join the Green Ribbon Club and was a dissenter. He also read and spread whig propaganda. On 6 August 1677 Charles was admitted to Lincoln's Inn and although never called to the bar, in the early 1680s he had an office and chambers in Lincoln's Inn and purchased the office of filazer (filing writs) for several western counties for the hefty sum of $3000. In June 1685 Charles apparently shook hands with Monmouth as he passed through Ilminster although he did not join the rebellion. His obeisance to Monmouth was enough later to have him imprisoned and Judge Jeffreys sentenced him to death for treason at Wells in late September 1685. When Jeffreys was informed that there were two Spekes and that he had convicted the wrong Speke brother Jeffreys supposedly replied, 'His family owes a life and he shall die for his namesake' (Roberts, 2.222). Charles was hanged in September or October in the market place, Ilminster, from a large tree. His attainder was reversed after the revolution of 1688. He was remembered in the whig martyrologies of the post-revolution era as a young man who 'came from that good pious family which always have been opposers to popery and suffered deeply for their courage that way' (Tutchin, 34). 


@@@@@


doc= 67748


John Speke (1651/2-1728), politician and Monmouth rebel, matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, on 6 April 1666 aged fourteen, entered Lincoln's Inn in 1669, and travelled abroad in 1671. He married Katherine, daughter of Edmund Prideaux of Forde Abbey, Devon, a family with which the Spekes had close ties. They had no children. In 1679 John Speke was one of the deputy lieutenants for Somerset. He was returned for Ilchester in the first election of 1679, was listed as 'honest' by the earl of Shaftesbury, and voted for the bill to exclude the duke of York from the throne. John was friendly with the notorious informer Titus Oates and, along with his brother Hugh, he was probably involved in fomenting the Popish Plot. He was elected again for Ilchester in August 1679 but failed to be re-elected in 1681. In June 1685 John Speke joined Monmouth's rebellion, riding to Chard with a group of 'ordinary fellows' to link up with the duke's army (BL, Lansdowne MS 11, 52A, fol. 240). Monmouth made him a colonel with his own regiment. Other rebels later ridiculed John as a 'silly and insignificant man', who 'gave orders to his regiment from the top of a tree with his handkerchief' during battle (BL, Add. MS 41819, fol. 58). At Frome John learned that James II had issued a general pardon for all those who laid down their arms and so he stole away from Monmouth's camp at night and escaped to Amsterdam. In 1687, with the help of Trenchard, John secured a pardon and willingly co-operated with James's administration. On 25 June 1687 John, now a widower, married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Robert Pelham of Compton Valence, Dorset. They had one son. In 1688 he was deemed a suitable court candidate for Ilchester but following the prince of Orange's invasion he failed to win election to the Convention. He did sit as a whig in 1690 and 1695 and signed the Association in 1696. He died in 1728. His son George carried on the family's whig tradition in parliament in 1722 and 1747. 


@@@@@


doc= 67749


Philip Trenchard (1663/4-1743)], to John Trenchard (1649-1695), politician, fourth son of Thomas Trenchard of Wolverton, Dorset. She was eighteen; he was thirty-three. While the Spekes and the Trenchards had intermarried throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, George and Mary were particularly fond of John Trenchard, who lived at Lytchett Matravers, Dorset, but was often at White Lackington and an intimate with their sons. Trenchard was one of the pall bearers at the funeral of the Spekes' youngest daughter, Elizabeth, who died in 1681. John Trenchard's politics certainly matched those of the Spekes. He had acted as the chairman of the Green Ribbon Club and was deeply implicated in the Rye House plot. When Speke was questioned by a neighbour for marrying his daughter to Trenchard he exclaimed 'my son Trenchard is so brave and forward a man that I do not question but to see him Lord Chancellor in a little time' ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 430). Like her mother and sister Philip frequented conventicles. She also stayed as a close prisoner with her husband in the Tower when he was arrested in 1683 and later followed him to Amsterdam during his exile. 


@@@@@


doc= 67750


Speke, Mary (fl. 1641-1697), nonconformist patron and political activist, was the eldest daughter of Sir Robert Pye (bap. 1585, d. 1662) of Faringdon, Berkshire, and his wife, Mary Croker. She may be the Mary Pye who was baptized at Richmond, Surrey, on 10 November 1625. Her father, an auditor of the exchequer, was a client of the duke of Buckingham in the 1620s. In the 1640s he was a lukewarm parliamentarian suspected of royalist sympathies, presbyterian in his religion, and a victim of Pride's Purge. Her brother, Sir Robert Pye, married Anne Hampden, daughter of John Hampden. An active soldier during the civil war, he shared his father's political and religious presbyterianism, though not his lukewarmness. After the Restoration he retired to his father's Berkshire estate, where he was reportedly in league with other 'fanatics' families' ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 338). 
Mary Pye married George Speke (1623-1689) of White Lackington, Ilminster, Somerset, on 21 May 1641 at St Mary Abbots, Kensington: George had been the ward of her father (who had purchased the wardship for $1800). She was probably responsible for his conversion from civil war royalist to Restoration radical. Of their six children, Hugh Speke, John Speke, Charles Speke ['see under 'Speke, George], and their eldest daughter, Mary Speke ['see 'Jennings, Mary, 'under' Speke, George], were active whig supporters. Their youngest daughter, Philip Speke ['see 'Trenchard, Philip, 'under' Speke, George], married John Trenchard of Bloxworth, Dorset, chairman of the notorious Green Ribbon Club, pro-exclusion MP, and Rye House conspirator. 
Mary Speke was an ardent supporter of protestant dissenters and of whig politics in Somerset. She led conventicles at the Speke houses at White Lackington and Dillington, supported numerous presbyterian teachers, and frequented dissenting meetings throughout Somerset. She was indicted in 1663 for keeping conventicles, but fearlessly, and without protection from her husband, who was dismissed as a JP for refusing to disturb presbyterian meetings, pursued nonconformist devotion. She was widely known for her religious enthusiasm, and in 1675 the presbyterian preacher James Strong dedicated an edition of his sermons to her. She was obviously a strong-willed and influential woman, the force at the centre of her turbulent and notorious family. She strove to control her grown sons, scolding Hugh Speke so violently in 1682 that he declared he was unwell for weeks. Her movements were closely watched by Peter Mews, bishop of Bath and Wells. When Mary visited her sons in London in July 1683, the bishop warned Secretary Jenkins of her arrival, asserting that 'there is not a more dangerous woman in the west than she, and what her sons are I need not tell you' ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 8). Later the bishop wrote: 'I need give you no character of their family. I suppose it is sufficiently known how actively of late years they have all appeared against his Majesty's interest, especially the mother and the son, Hugh.... It is a wonder that Whitelackington House is not searched by particular order, not only for arms but papers for the lady keeps great correspondence, and her son-in-law, Trenchard, is her darling. (ibid., 178)' In August 1683 Mary was called before the privy council investigating her son Hugh's involvement in an effort to uncover the supposed murder of the earl of Essex in the Tower. The council was interested in Hugh's connection to the prominent whig lawyer Sir Robert Atkyns. Mary testified that her son had 'lost great sums' gambling and had borrowed money from Sir Robert Atkyns (ibid., 342). 
The Speke family were great supporters of the duke of Monmouth and entertained him lavishly during his 1680 progress through the west. Not surprisingly, Mary Speke and George, and their sons John and Charles, were all implicated in Monmouth's rebellion in 1685, and Charles was executed. Mary was excepted from James II's general pardon of March 1686, although her husband obtained a pardon for the entire family in 1687. Her family supported the prince of Orange's invasion in 1688. George Speke appointed Mary his executor in his will of 1689. She made her own will on 22 September 1697, in which (apart from some small bequests to her servants) she left all her estate to her youngest son, William. He proved the will on 9 November 1706. 


@@@@@


doc= 67751


Mary Jennings (bap. 1649?), Monmouth supporter, married a Quaker, Thomas Jennings, of Burton Pynsent in Curry Rivel, Somerset, son of Marmaduke Jennings and Elizabeth (formerly Trevilian). They had three children, Thomas, Mary, and Elizabeth. After her husband died in 1680 Mary as, 'the widow Jennings', remained in close contact with her family and was known as an outspoken critic of the government. When Monmouth's band marched through Taunton in 1685 she sent him four horses, and the Quaker John Whiting who visited her at the time, later wrote that she 'was all afloat about the Duke [of Monmouth], thinking the day was their own' (Whiting, 141). Mary was exempted from James II's general pardon of 1686 for supporting Monmouth. It is not known when she died. 


@@@@@


doc= 67752


Cooke, Edward (fl. 1680-1682), legal writer and lawyer, about whose early life nothing is known, studied law at the Middle Temple, London, and first surfaced in the late 1670s and early 1680s, when he joined the polemical battle to exclude the openly Catholic James, duke of York, from the throne. Cooke's career as a whig writer began in 1680 with the publication of an anti-papal harangue entitled 'A true and perfect narrative of the inhumane practices... of the Jesuits and papists toward protestants at home and abroad'. This work was dedicated to the earl of Shaftesbury, whose patronage he sought and on whom, Cooke believed, depended the 'advancement of the Protestant religion [and] the welfare of the kingdom' (Zook, 83). It was followed in 1682 by two tracts that aimed at strengthening the whig case for exclusion. One was a translation of 'Magna Carta' ('Magna Carta, made in the ninth year of King Henry the Third... faithfully translated for the benefit of those that do not understand the Latin') and the other an account of the royal succession down to the seventeenth century ('The History of Successions of the Kings of England'). 
In 1682 Cooke also published his most significant work, 'Argumentum antiNormanicum, or, An argument proving from ancient histories and records that William, duke of Normandy made no absolute conquest of England by the sword'. Written in defence of William Petyt's 'The Antient Right of the Commons of England Asserted' (1680) and against Dr Robert Brady's attack on Petyt in 'A Full and Clear Answer' (1681), it was printed anonymously and in the late seventeenth century often attributed to Petyt or his fellow whig William Atwood. Although later scholars have sometimes treated the work somewhat dismissively (see, for example, Pocock, and D. Douglas, 'English Scholars', 1939), other historians (such as Zook and Greenberg) have suggested that it enjoyed a high reputation among prominent whigs. Thus James Tyrrell, a close associate of the earl of Shaftesbury and John Locke, and in 1704 the first contemporary to identify Cooke publicly as the tract's author, quoted from it frequently. Moreover Brady, who counted among his sponsors Charles II and James II, deemed it worthy of rebuttal in his 'Introduction to Old English History' (1684). Equally telling, in 1689 'Argumentum antiNormanicum' was considered sufficiently persuasive to merit republication as the Convention Parliament deliberated the revolution settlement, this time under the title 'A seasonable treatise: wherein it is proved that King William, commonly called the conqueror did not get the imperial crown of England by the sword'. 
As for the political ideas which Cooke put forward to justify first exclusion and later the revolution the full titles of both versions of 'AntiNormanicum' tell much of the story. Like Atwood, Petyt, and Tyrrell, he found radical ancient constitutionalism perfectly suited to making the case against the late Stuart kingship. Constructed by parliamentarians such as William Prynne in the civil wars of the 1640s, this ideology rested primarily upon three medieval sources, the so-called laws of St Edward the Confessor, the 'Modus tenendi parliamentum', and the 'Mirror of Justices'. To late Stuart whigs such as Cooke these works, which claimed to predate the arrival of the Normans in 1066, supported the major tenets of their ideology, namely, that since at least as early as the Saxon period England had been governed by an elected king with whom the people had made an enforceable contract; that ancient parliaments, which included both the Lords and the Commons, possessed the power to make law and control over-mighty sovereigns; and that parliament, or the people, retained the right to resist, depose, and replace a ruler who broke the terms of his agreement with the kingdom. Finally whigs such as Cooke insisted that these Saxon institutions had survived Norman conquest intact and lived on in their own day. 
Scholars later discovered that St Edward's laws, the 'Modus', and the 'Mirror' dated not from the Saxon period but from the early twelfth and early fourteenth centuries. But throughout the Stuart period all three were widely accepted as authentic statements of how things used to be (though legal antiquaries such as John Selden raised doubts about the authenticity of the 'Modus' and 'Mirror'). Indeed, St Edward's laws enjoyed the imprimatur of the foremost lawyers and antiquaries of the seventeenth century, including Selden, Sir Henry Spelman, and Sir Roger Twysden. It was then perfectly understandable that Cooke and his fellow whigs looked to these sources and the version of history, law, and government that they spawned for ammunition in their struggle against the late Stuart kings. Cooke, for example, argued that medieval records, especially St Edward's laws, proved that William I governed not as a conqueror but rather as the heir and successor of his cousin St Edward. One need look no further than William's confirmation of the Confessor's laws -- 'his 'Magna Carta' and the groundwork of all that followed' -- as well as to the various confirmations of his successors (Cooke, 'Argumentum antiNormanicum', liv). First came Henry I's famous charter of liberties, followed by the confirmations of King Stephen, Henry II, and King John in 'Magna Carta'. Then there was the new coronation oath in which all rulers from 1308 down to Cooke's own day swore to abide by St Edward's laws. To Cooke this steady drumbeat of royal confirmations meant that the Norman kings, like their Saxon counterparts, had reigned by right and election and by consultation with a full parliament. And what was true of the Saxons and Normans was true of all monarchs, including Charles II and James II. From this reasoning a conclusion vital to the anti-Stuart cause ineluctably followed: the two houses of parliament, which held the lion's share of legislative sovereignty, possessed rights to change the king, alter the kingship, and settle the kingdom as they thought fit. 
The end of Cooke's life is as much a mystery as his early days. If he was the Edward Cooke to whom, along with Atwood, Petyt bequeathed $50 in his last will and testament, he was still alive in July 1705. 


@@@@@


doc= 67753


Matthews, Zachariah Keodirelang (1901-1968), university teacher and political leader in South Africa, was born on 20 October 1901 in his grandmother's home at Winter's Rush, near Kimberley, in the Barkly West district of Cape Colony, the second son of Motsielwa Peter (Rre-Dinku) Matthews, who had been a mine worker at Kimberley, and Martha Mooketsi (died 1959), a domestic worker. Always known as Z. K. or Zac, he grew up in the house which his father built in the Kimberley African location and first attended the United Mission School in Kimberley, then the Lyndhurst Road School, from where he won a scholarship to Lovedale in the eastern Cape. He entered South African Native College, Fort Hare in 1918, and in January 1924 became the first African to obtain a BA degree from the University of South Africa (UNISA). 
Matthews then taught at Adams College in Natal, where in 1925 he became the first African principal of the high school. He studied part-time for a law degree at UNISA and was the first African to obtain such a law degree, in 1930. He was pondering a law career when offered a scholarship to go to Yale. There in 1934 he presented a thesis entitled 'Bantu law and Western civilization in South Africa', for which he obtained an MA degree. Before returning to South Africa he attended B. Malinowski's famous anthropology seminar at the London School of Economics, and met Jomo Kenyatta and other future African leaders. In January 1936 he became a lecturer in social anthropology and native law at Fort Hare. Had the legislation of that year permitted black people to be members of parliament, he would probably have been elected. Instead, he stayed at Fort Hare, becoming professor and head of African studies in 1945. His varied activities included being a member of the royal commission which reported on higher education in east Africa in 1937. 
Matthews was not only an outstanding teacher; he also did much to build up Fort Hare and served as its acting principal from 1954. But he was increasingly drawn into political activity, both as a member of the natives representative council from 1942 and in the African National Congress (ANC), after brief initial involvement in the all-African convention. He chaired the committee which drew up the key document 'Africans' claims' which the ANC adopted in 1943, and in 1949 was elected its Cape leader. After resigning from the natives representative council in protest at government policy in 1950, he was involved in preparations for the defiance campaign, but then left to become a visiting professor at the Union Theological Seminary in New York. 
It was as Cape leader of the ANC that in August 1953 Matthews suggested a congress of the people be called, at which a charter of rights should be drawn up. After the congress was held in 1955, he was, though acting principal of Fort Hare, arrested with others and charged with high treason. He was a dominant figure at the trial in Pretoria until the charges against him were dropped. In 1959 he boldly resigned from Fort Hare, forfeiting his pension though he was close to retirement, in protest against legislation which downgraded the institution to the status of an ethnic college and brought it under state control. Rhodes University then gave him an honorary doctorate, but in 1961, after being detained in the 1960 state of emergency, he left the country of his birth, where his enormous talent had not been used. A staunch Anglican, he spent five years in Geneva, Switzerland, working for the World Council of Churches, before in 1966 becoming Botswana's first ambassador to the United States and representative at the United Nations. 
An urbane, affable man of great integrity and liberal views, who commanded widespread respect and exercised a moderating influence on more radical elements in the ANC in the early 1950s, Matthews remained committed to reconciliation despite all the adversities he suffered because of his colour. In 1928 he had married Frieda Bokwe (1905-1997), daughter of a leading Xhosa-speaking missionary, and they had five children. One became a nurse, another a teacher, two doctors, and one a lawyer, Joe, who in 1994 became a deputy minister in South Africa's first democratic government. 
Matthews died in Washington, DC, on 11 May 1968 and was buried in Gaborone, Botswana. His autobiography, 'Freedom for my People', completed by Monica Wilson, a fellow anthropologist, was published in 1981, and in 1996 his widow published her autobiography, 'Remembrances'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67754


Millar, Robert (1672-1752), Church of Scotland minister and historian, was the son of the Revd Andrew Millar of Neilston, Renfrewshire. He was educated at Glasgow University and was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Paisley on 3 February 1697. While the minister of Port Glasgow, where he had been ordained on 18 August 1697, he married, on 10 June 1702, Elizabeth Kelso (died 1759), daughter of John Kelso of Kelsoland in the borders. They had eight surviving children: Andrew Millar, a London bookseller; John (died 1738) and Henry (died 1771), who followed him into the ministry; Anna (died 1768) and Elizabeth (died 1798), who both married Paisley ministers, one of whom, James Hamilton, was his successor; Archibald (died 1766), a naval officer; Robert, a physician who went abroad; and William, who practised medicine in Antigua and later acquired the Walkinshaw estate near Paisley. On 28 December 1709 Millar moved to the first charge at Paisley where he ministered for the rest of his life. 
In 1723 Millar published at Edinburgh his major work, 'The History of the Propagation of Christianity, and Overthrow of Paganism', two large volumes dedicated to the earl of Dundonald, Lord Cochran of Paisley, and William, Lord Ross. The widespread support that Millar's book engendered among clergy and laymen in the Church of Scotland is indicated by the impressive list of nearly 500 subscribers prefixed to the first edition, including several university principals and many professors. From a foundation in Christian apologetics directed against the English deists, the work develops into a global history of evangelism that displays considerable learning and commitment. As stated in the preface the four components in the author's design are to stimulate thankfulness to God for delivering Christians from 'miserable Darkness and Idolatry'; to trace the history of the propagation of Christianity by divine providence 'down to the present time'; to move readers to pity the heathens 'who make up so great a Part of the World'; and to incite Christians with missionary 'Fervour and Zeal'. In sending a copy of the book to Cotton Mather of Boston, from whose work on American missions Millar is said to have borrowed 'almost verbatim' (De Jong, 114), the church historian Robert Wodrow asserted, in a letter of 29 July 1724, that Millar 'is a serious, diligent, and laborious minister, and his book will show his acquaintance with learning, in most of its valuable branches' ('Correspondence of the Rev. Robert Wodrow', 3.154). A second edition was published in London in 1726, and a third by the author's son Andrew in 1731, in addition to a Dutch translation. It was enormously influential among Scottish missionaries and has been called one of the formative influences in the eighteenth century by a leading historian of Scottish revivalism (Fawcett, 215). 
In 1730 Millar published in Edinburgh, also by subscription, his second major work, 'The history of the church under the Old Testament... to which is subjoined, a discourse to promote the conversion of the Jews to Christianity', which may be seen as an extension of his earlier history of Christian conversion among pagans. Although no publisher is named on the title page, an advertisement for the book that appears at the end of the third edition of 'The History of the Propagation of Christianity' states that it was 'Printed for A. Millar'. Robert Millar published nothing else before his death on 16 December 1752. In 1782 two pamphlets based on his 'History of the Church' appeared in Edinburgh under his name, one on the life of Herod and the other (which was reprinted in Glasgow in 1786) on the history of the Jews from the death of Herod to the destruction of Jerusalem. In 1789 'The Whole Works of the Reverend Robert Millar' was published in Paisley in eight octavo volumes. 


@@@@@


doc= 67755


Cunningham, Sir Hugh (1642/3-1710), local politician and merchant, was apparently a descendant of one of the Ayrshire Cunninghams. However, since there are no references to his birth, and because contemporary sources and his coat of arms as recorded in the Lyon court allude to both the Craigend and the Cunninghamhead families, it has not been possible to identify his lineage. Cunningham was known in the city of Edinburgh from at least 1674, when, upon payment of 'fourscore ten pund Scots' (Edinburgh Guild register, 1675), he became an Edinburgh dean of guild. Burgess Hugh Cunningham quickly established himself as a successful Edinburgh merchant who, in middle age, embarked upon what was to become a notable political career, culminating in his service as lord provost. It is plain from the numerous documents recorded in the registers of deeds that Hugh or Hew Cunningham, merchant -- not to be confused with his Edinburgh contemporary and associate Hugh Cunningham, lawyer (witness to the subject's son Alexander's baptism in 1685) -- was already a relatively wealthy man when he settled in the city. From the evidence of personal bonds issued to notables such as Sir David Dunbar, Sir Godfrey McIntosh, and Sir John Ramsay, from numerous transactions relating to the import, processing, and sale of tobacco, his interest in a Leith comb manufactory, and references to his partnership with Sir James and William Dick of Braid, woollen merchants, it is plain that Cunningham prospered during the last years of pre-union Scotland. 
Edinburgh merchants were the most influential local political figures in the community and it is hardly surprising that at the same time Cunningham was developing his business portfolio he also nurtured a political career. In November 1689 he was elected as one of the masters of Paul's Work (by this time the erstwhile pre-Reformation charitable institute had become a linen manufactory). In 1692 he was selected as one of two merchant councillors. By September of the following year he was not only a bailie of the city but also master of the Company of Merchants of the city of Edinburgh. A water bailie of Leith in 1694, his influential civic positions also involved him in perennial matters such as the appointment of two 'toune officers weekly for keeping the streits free from beggars' (Edinburgh town council minutes, 1 Nov 1693, Armet, 'Extracts... 1689-1701'). During this period the city's finances were none too healthy and to pay creditors the authority borrowed money from some of its more affluent citizens, Hugh Cunningham offering a bond of $4000 (Edinburgh town council minutes, 16 May 1694, Armet, 'Extracts... 1689-1701'). It was in this same year that the Canongate recorded his free entry as one of its burgesses 'for most generous and good deeds'. By 1698 he had risen to the significant position of first bailie of Edinburgh and, following his second year (1701) as master of the Merchant Company, he achieved the pinnacle of his political career when he became lord provost of Edinburgh on 6 October 1702. 
The period of his tenure as lord provost was not a momentous one for the city, then a 'dull deflated capital, burdened with debts and poor' (Armet, 'Extracts... 1701-1718', vii). However, his term did see several turbulent events. The successful resolution of a dispute with the professors of Edinburgh University was contrasted by riots in 1703 and again in 1704. The latter tumult arose from the legal decision to release the crew of the English vessel the 'Worcester' (convicted of piracy upon a Scottish ship), and resulted in the mob lynching of the ship's captain and his two mates. Although Scotland and Edinburgh were shortly to embark upon the adventure of the 'Act of Union' and then the Jacobite rising of 1715, there is nothing to indicate that Cunningham was other than a loyal Scottish merchant, keen to exploit commercial opportunity and happy to serve his fellow citizens. To that end, in addition to his public offices which also included service as baron of Easter and Wester Portsburgh and commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, he acted as treasurer to the Scottish Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge, was credited with the foundation of the Merchant Maiden Hospital which opened in 1707, and endowed the Kilmaurs parish school in Ayrshire with a tenement of land. 
On 15 December 1681 Cunningham married Anna Moncrieff ('c'.1660-1734) in Edinburgh. By 1697 the couple had five children (Alexander, Helen, Catherine, Hew, and Mathew). By the same year he had subscribed $500 to the ill-fated Darien scheme and was on his way to establishing the financial base that a decade later allowed him to purchase a six-room house in Lothians Land, off Edinburgh's High Street, and lend Edinburgh town council $24,000 Scots to service the authority's debt. In the light of these achievements it is little wonder that he received a knighthood, in 1702; the only curiosity is that he was installed as 'of Milcraig and Livingstone', was freely referred to as 'of Craigend', yet lived his last year or so and was finally interred as Sir Hugh Cunningham of Bonniton. 
In October 1704 Sir Hugh petitioned the town council 'ernestlie', desiring that he be the first to be granted a burial plot in a newly established section of Greyfriars burial-ground now known as the Covenanters' Prison. Upon his death at the age of sixty-seven on 16 December 1710, he was interred in the desired ground. The man and his passing are marked by a suitably ornate and substantial 30-foot stone monument that dominates the avenue and southern wall of the kirkyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 67756


Bird, Theophilus (bap. 1608, d. 1663), actor, was born into a theatrical family, if indeed he was the child baptized at St Leonard, Shoreditch, on 7 December 1608, the son of William Bird or Borne (died 1624), an actor with Prince Henry's Men, later Palsgrave's Men, at the Fortune playhouse, in the immediate vicinity of which the elder Bird was living by 1622. The first record of Theophilus Bird's acting comes in 1625, when he played Paulina in Massinger's 'The Renegado', performed by Queen Henrietta's Men at the Cockpit playhouse in Drury Lane. He remained a member of that company until 1636-7, and continued to play female roles into his twenties, including Toota in Heywood's 'The Fair Maid of the West'; by 1635 he had begun to take male roles: in that year he played Massanissa in Nabbes's 'Hannibal and Scipio'. During the prolonged plague of 1636-7 the manager of the Cockpit, Christopher Beeston, installed a new resident troupe, the King and Queen's Young Company (or Beeston's Boys), which Bird joined. About the same time he allied himself to the theatrical clan of the Beestons by marrying Christopher's daughter Anne, with whom he was to have seven children. The two eldest died young and were buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields, in which parish Bird seems to have lived for all his adult life in London; he was in turn buried at the church. 
Bird changed companies again in or after 1638, no doubt following his father-in-law's death in October of that year, becoming a member of the King's Men, with which group he retained associations until the foundation of the new King's Company in 1660. His position in the pre-war company later became a matter of some dispute with his fellows; in 1655 he sued them for not having received his share of money and goods when they disbanded, after the prohibition of playing in September 1642. Their reply was that he had not fully paid the $200 agreed upon when he first joined them. Notwithstanding this disagreement he was a sharer in the company organized in January 1648, with John Lowin, Richard Robinson, Robert Benfield, Thomas Pollard, Hugh Clarke, and Stephen Hammerton. It appears that the actors intended to reopen the Blackfriars playhouse, although there is no evidence that they succeeded. They probably performed 'ad hoc' in other places, but by July the company had reconstituted itself, and Bird apparently left it, perhaps because of the money quarrel he subsequently took to law. He then became involved in theatrical investment with his brother-in-law William Beeston: in 1652 he bought a share of the lease of the Salisbury Court playhouse, where a number of surreptitious performances were given in the interregnum period, and he may have acted in Killigrew's 'Claricilla', performed in March 1653 and interrupted by a raid by government soldiers. 
By 1659-60 public playing was resumed at three surviving playhouses: Salisbury Court, the Cockpit in Drury Lane, and the Red Bull. Bird perhaps performed at the theatre in which he held a stake, but by this date he was also related to a second leading actor, Michael Mohun, who had married his daughter Anne. The two men had known each other since the 1630s, when Mohun had been a member of Beeston's Boys at the Cockpit. In 1660 Mohun led the troupe at the Red Bull, and Bird may have performed with him there; he may also have followed Mohun in joining the King's Company in mid-1660, though Bird's presence was not officially registered until late in 1661. 
Bird's career with the King's Company accordingly lasted only two or three seasons, during which time he may have played the Duke of Missena in Flecknoe's 'Erminia' and Woolfort in Fletcher's 'Beggars' Bush'; he played Lord Audley in Heywood's 'The Royal King and the Loyal Subject', possibly the Second Lord in Shirley's 'The Cardinal', and he was injured in a stage accident during a performance of Suckling's 'Aglaura' in September 1662: Pepys noted that 'Bird hath lately broke his leg, while he was fencing' in the play (Pepys, 3.204). Bird held a full acting share in the company, but perhaps only during his active membership, since it is not mentioned in his will; yet he did leave jointly to his sons Theophilus (also an actor) and George 'all my right and title in all the playes and play books that are mine' (Guildhall Library, MS 9172/55). Bird also wrote occasional prologues: two survive in the 1639 edition of Ford's 'The Lady's Trial' and the 1658 edition of 'The Witch of Edmonton'. He signed the dedications to the Beaumont and Fletcher folio of 1647, and to Ford and Dekker's 'The Sun's Darling' (1656). 
Bird died in London. He made his will on 20 March 1663, and was buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields on 31 March. In the lengthy religious preamble to the will he beseeched God 'to receive mee into the number of his Elect and chosen company and according to the Full trust and beleife which I have reposed onely in his Ineffable mercy through the Shedding of his most precious Blood, and through the same Faith I have full hope I shall live againe and See my Lord and Redeemer' (Guildhall Library, MS 9172/55). He named his wife, Anne, as his executor and chief beneficiary; to each of his surviving children, Anne Mohun, Mary, Theophilus, George, and Elizabeth, he left 20 shillings, and a similar amount to the poor, in addition to the professional bequest to his sons noted above. The will says little of his entire worth, but the Bird family is likely to have been comfortably off; Anne Bird had inherited $300 from her father at his death in 1638. 


@@@@@


doc= 67757


Cane, Andrew (c.1589-1656x61), goldsmith and actor, was the son of Robert Cane of Windsor, butcher; he may be the otherwise unnamed 'Keane', son of Robert Kene and Lucresia Andrews, who was baptized at the parish church of St John, Windsor, on 2 March 1589. He was apprenticed to Richard Cane, his elder brother, for ten years beginning in August 1602, and took his oath as a freeman of the Goldsmiths' Company in January 1611. By January 1612 he had evidently established his own shop, and he took on the first of nine apprentices who bound themselves to him over the following forty-two years, at least two of whom worked as actors concurrently with their training as goldsmiths. 
Cane may have returned to his native district to marry: on 1 June 1612 an Andrew Keine married Mary Homses(?) at the church of St John, Eton; a son, Richard, was baptized there on 28 February 1613. Seven years later Thomas Cane, son of Andrew and Mary Cane, was baptized at St Leonard, Shoreditch. However, if any of these entries are indeed connected with Andrew Cane the goldsmith this first family would appear to have died out. At his death Cane's widow was called Anne ('nee' Spencer), and the only surviving child, called 'my son' by Anne in her will, was Edward, made free as a goldsmith by patrimony in 1649, and hence likely to have been born in the 1620s. By 1656 Edward had established a shop in Bishopsgate, and his own son Andrew in turn took up the trade of his grandfather. 
Quite when Cane began his theatrical career is unclear, but since by 1622 he was described as among 'the chief of them at the Phoenix' it was by then well developed. For the next twenty years he was a leading player with a number of companies, performing not only at the Phoenix or Cockpit in Drury Lane, but also at the Fortune, the Salisbury Court playhouse, and the Red Bull. Cane specialized in comic roles, and was renowned as a fool well after the theatres had closed (1642-60); as a fictional figure he appears as Quick in the pamphlet dialogue 'The Stage-Players' Complaint' (1641). In the tradition of Tarlton he performed jigs and extempore entertainments as well as formal dramatic parts, and was known for a spirited, rapid style of delivery. 
By early 1624 Cane had joined the troupe playing at the Fortune Playhouse, then known as the Palsgrave's Company. In January of that year he was named by his dying colleague Francis Grace to administer the payment of Grace's player's share to his creditors; in the same year Cane put his name, with other players, to a bond of agreement drawn up by the actor and manager Richard Gunnell, a document which thirty years later remained the subject of a dispute with Gunnell's heirs, his daughter Margaret and her husband, the actor William Wintersel. After 1625, when the Palsgrave's Company disbanded, little is known of Cane's theatrical activities for the following six years, although he may have joined the King and Queen of Bohemia's Company, which also played at the Fortune. 
Late in 1631 Cane emerged as the leading player of a new troupe in the service of the infant Prince Charles, established by special licence. By that date the company was already performing at the relatively new playhouse in Salisbury Court, featuring the play 'Holland's Leaguer' by Shakerley Marmion, in which Cane played Trimalchio, ''a humorous gallant'', and his two apprentices John Wright and Arthur Savill the female roles of Millicent and Quartilla. By 1633 the company had moved to the larger Red Bull Playhouse, and in 1640 they moved once again to the Fortune. Cane's only other known part, though it remains unnamed, was in a satirical play, 'The Whore New Vamped', which in 1639 led to Cane being accused of libelling two London aldermen, associated with the wine monopoly. 
Prince Charles's Company received royal patronage throughout the eleven years of its existence, playing relatively frequently at court, and accompanying the king and queen on progress as far as Nottinghamshire and southern Derbyshire in the summer of 1634. The company also toured independently: Cane was granted permission to play in Norwich, for example, in March 1636. 
Cane appears to have continued business as a goldsmith even during the years of his eminence on the stage. In September 1633 the company wardens fined him for defective wares: those named indicate that he dealt in domestic and decorative silver goods. His shop was in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, near to the theatres at which he followed his parallel career. He was still in London at the end of 1642 when he took part in a riotous demonstration at Guildhall designed to get petitions heard by the mayor and council, but thereafter he left for Oxford, where he enlisted in the army and worked in the royalist mint. Cane had returned to London by the later 1640s, resuming his trade as goldsmith as well as taking part in some surreptitious playing: he was arrested while performing at the Red Bull in January 1650. 
Cane's last formal activity as a goldsmith was probably to attend the court at which his apprentice Nathaniel Cooper was granted his freedom, in January 1656. He died within the next few years, in his later sixties or early seventies; his wife, Anne, describes herself as his widow in the will she made in May 1661. She left cash bequests of $200, and the will is framed in a way which suggests that Edward Cane had already received his patrimony. Andrew Cane appears to have died a man of moderate wealth. 


@@@@@


doc= 67758


Corey, Katherine (b. c.1635), actress, was born Katherine Mitchell to parents whose names are as yet unknown, and was already a widow when in 1662 she married John Cory or Corey ('b'. 'c'.1637); he was perhaps the dramatist John Corye whose 'The Generous Enemies' was performed by the King's Company about June 1671. It has been suggested that the John Corey baptized at St Clement Danes in 1668, probably their son, was John Corey, later an actor and playwright. She was one of the first actresses on the English stage, appearing for the first time in theatrical records in the roster of the King's Company in 1661-2. In a lawsuit of March 1689 she claimed that she was 'the first, and is the last of all the Actresses that were constituted by King Charles the Second at His Restauration', though cases have been made for awarding the title of 'first English actress' to others (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 3.495). Her first recorded role (as Mrs Coary) was Julia in John Ford's 'Love's Sacrifice' (before August 1664), though she may have been the Mrs Covey listed for the production of John Wilson's 'The Cheats' performed in 1663. 
Mrs Corey played mostly comic roles, specializing in older women and widows. One of her most famous was Widow Blackacre in William Wycherley's 'The Plain Dealer', a role she originated in 1676. She also played Margery Pinchwife's maid, Lucy, in 'The Country Wife' (1675), and in 1677 Sysigambis in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens' and Octavia, the scorned wife of Antony, in Dryden's 'All for Love'. With other actors from the King's Company she may have performed in Edinburgh in 1679, staying perhaps until 1682. After the union of the two London companies in that year she played Mopsophil in Behn's 'The Emperour of the Moon' (1687), Teresia in Thomas D'Urfey's adaptation of George Chapman's 'Bussy D'Ambois' (1691), and Mrs Teazall in Thomas Southerne's 'The Wives' Excuse' (1691). Her salary peaked at the good sum of 30's'. per week, as admitted by the 1694 'reply of the patentees' over the playhouse rebellion of that time. The reply notes that the actress Elinor Leigh receives that amount, 'being as much as ever Mrs Cory had who was Extraordinarily well received by the Audience' (Milhous, 'Thomas Betterton', 245). 
One interesting story about Corey may indicate her court connections as well as her brand of comedy. While performing Sempronia in Ben Jonson's 'Catiline's Conspiracy' in late 1668 or early 1669, she apparently impersonated the court intriguer Lady Harvey, which caused offence. Lady Harvey had her imprisoned, though one of the king's mistresses, Lady Castlemaine, as Samuel Pepys notes, 'made the King to release her, and to order her to act it again worse than ever the other day' while the king was in attendance. Results show the hazards of being an early performer: 'my Lady Harvy provided people to hiss her and fling oranges at her. But it seems the heat is come to a great heighth, and real troubles at Court about it' (Pepys, 9.415). 
The only other trouble relating to Corey and her career occurred in 1689: apparently Henry Killigrew had tried to set up a new company under the new monarchs William and Mary and had invited Corey to be a member, along with other popular comedians such as Anthony Leigh and James Nokes. Because of their insurrection, all the players involved were discharged from the company. All were subsequently readmitted, except for Corey, who petitioned to the lord chamberlain in March. He readmitted her, 'like the rest of the rebels', to the company on 11 March (Milhous, 'Thomas Betterton', 53). Her last performance seems to have been as Morossa in Anthony Rivers's 'The Traytor' (1692), and her disappearance from cast lists after that date indicates that she probably retired after the 1691/2 theatrical season. No death date is known, and very little information exists about Corey beyond these professional details. In sum her career seems to have been one of success. Never the tragedy heroine or the flirtatious ingenue, Corey built a solid, long, popular career in strong comic supporting roles. 


@@@@@


doc= 67759


Cox, Elizabeth (fl. 1671-1688), actress, was possibly the spinster of twenty-two who married John Bateman of St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 30 November 1661. Nothing is known of the early life of Betty Cox, whose first recorded performance was Lydia in William Wycherley's 'Love in a Wood', for the King's Company in March 1671. Early in her career she was popular as chaste, but witty heroines in roles such as Palmyra in Dryden's 'Marriage a la mode', Violetta in his 'The Assignation', as well as Constantia in Thomas Duffet's farce 'The Amorous Old Woman'. When the company moved into the larger Drury Lane Theatre, Cox appears to have broadened her range, playing Octavia in Nathaniel Lee's 'Nero' in 1674. She became a respected player of tragic heroines such as Desdemona, Indamore in Dryden's 'Aureng-Zebe', and probably the title role in Lee's 'Sophonisba', to which she spoke the epilogue in performances at London and Oxford. 
We have no record of Cox's London appearances between 1676 and October 1681, when the epilogue to Lee's 'Mithridates', which she spoke with Cardell Goodman, implies that this was her return to the stage and has her declare ''the Devil's in 't if I'me past my Prime''. The 'Satire to Julian' (1683) and other scandal verses identify Goodman and Cox as lovers. However, there are no further recorded performances from Cox. On 7 April 1683 Charles Killigrew, manager of the new United Company, was ordered by the lord chamberlain to answer her petition, possibly an unsuccessful bid for entry to the new company. The latest mention of her is in the satiric 'Session of the Ladies' as 'Lord Lumley's cast player the fam'd Mrs Cox' (1688). 


@@@@@


doc= 67760


Greene, Thomas (bap. 1573, d. 1612), actor, said on 16 June 1607 that he was thirty-four years old, that he was born at Romford, Essex, and that he had lived in Whitechapel for three years and, before that, in the Tower of London for six. He must therefore be the Thomas Grene, son of John Grene, who was baptized at Romford on 13 September 1573. He had a sister, Elizabeth Barrett, and brothers, John and Jeffrey Greene, alive in 1612, and he may be the Thomas Greene who wrote 'A Poets Vision' (1603) and a commendatory poem for Drayton's 'Barons Wars' (1605). On 15 March 1604, during the great plague of 1603-4, he appears next to last in a list of Queen Anne's Men, having succeeded, apparently, the company's famous clown Will Kemp ('fl'. 1585-1602). About the same time he married Susan ['see 'Baskervile, Susan (bap. 1573, d. 1649)], the widow of Robert Browne, an actor who held a lease on the Boar's Head playhouse in Whitechapel, where Queen Anne's (then called Worcester's) Men had recently played. Browne had died of plague in mid-October 1603, and Susan Browne acquired his property on 9 January 1604. She was thirty years old and the mother of five infants. 
While the plague continued, the company tried unsuccessfully to legitimate themselves by promoting a patent that gives Greene's name first among the members and provides that the company play 'Aswell wthin there now usuall Howsen, Called the Curtayne, And the Bores head,... as in any other play howse not used by others, by the said Thomas Greene, elected, or by hym hereafter to be builte' (Berry, 73). Evidently he owed sudden prominence to his wife and to access to capital. On 1 July 1611 he held, or had lately held, leases on the Curtain playhouse and other properties nearby. 
Greene was 'one of the principall and cheif persons of the said Companie' until his death (Greenstreet, 499). They were at the Boar's Head in the winter of 1606-7, then at the Red Bull playhouse in Clerkenwell. He is first among Queen Anne's Men in their patent of 1609 and received payments for their performances at court from 1609 to 1612. He lived in Clerkenwell from at least May 1608. 
Greene once played a baboon, and in 1611 in John Cooke's play 'Greene's Tu quoque' he played Bubble, an amiable ass whose tag line suitable for all occasions is 'Tu quoque'. Bubble apparently represented Greene's usual stage persona. When characters propose to go to a play, Bubble does not care 'whither, so the Clowne have a part: For I fayth I am no body without a Foole'. 'Why then', says another, 'wee'le goe to the Red Bull; they say 'Green's' a good Clowne'. Bubble replies ''Greene? Greene's' an Asse', and, when asked why, adds, 'Indeed I ha' no reason: for they say, hee is as like mee as ever he can looke' (Cooke, sig. G2'v'). A woodcut in all three early editions of the play shows a man, who should be Greene, saying 'Tu quoque, To you Sir'; and the frontispiece of Francis Kirkman's 'The Wits' (1673) shows a man saying 'Tue quo que' as he comes through curtains to join bits of old plays being performed on a stage. 
Greene's will, dated 25 July 1612, provides for Browne's children as well as Greene's daughter, Honor, baptized in Clerkenwell on 17 April 1609. He was a man of means, for he left bequests of $344, plus a residue (including his share in Queen Anne's Men) to provide for his widow. He was buried at St James's, Clerkenwell, on 7 August 1612. One of five admiring epigrams suggests that he had been overseas just before he died. Thomas Heywood, the company's playwright, wrote 'without flattery' that 'there was not an Actor of his nature in his time of better ability in performance of what he undertooke; more applaudent by the Audience, of greater grace at the Court, or of more general love in the Citty' (Cooke, sig. A2). Browne's son, William, asked in 1634 to be buried as near as possible 'to my father Greene' (Bentley, 2.636). 
In June 1613 Greene's widow married James Baskervile, who fled to Ireland in 1617 charged with debts and bigamy. She had protracted financial dealings with Queen Anne's Men that led to lawsuits in 1617 and from 1623 to 1626, when she prevailed. She also acquired an interest in the Fortune playhouse. She died in January 1648 and was buried at St James's, Clerkenwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 67761


Gunnell, Richard (d. 1634), actor and impresario, began his career as an actor in Prince Henry's company, playing at the Fortune Theatre under the management of Edward Alleyn. He was one of the fourteen names in the company's patent when it became the Lord Palsgrave's Men, in 1613. His fellows included Sam Rowley, a celebrated clown, and John Shank, a famous jig-dancer. Evidently a good friend of Alleyn, whose diary names him and his family dining with the Alleyns on a number of occasions, Gunnell moved gradually from acting into management with the Palsgrave's. When in 1618 Alleyn set up a deal with his tenants the Palsgrave's company at the Fortune, Gunnell was one of the four to take a part share. The deal was designed to imitate the King's Men's part ownership of their theatres, by which the company's leading players, the theatre's tenants, took out shares in the ownership of the building. Gunnell took a full one-eighth share. 
A Catholic, like his rival and model Christopher Beeston, Gunnell first appears in the London records on 27 March 1612, when he was accused by a haberdasher of a breach of the peace. He was bailed out by Thomas Downton and another fellow actor on an unusually high-priced bond. Actors commonly bought their fellows out of gaol, since their services were needed on stage every day. The conflict may have related to buying clothes for the company. He was married by this time, since two daughters were baptized in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate (in January 1614 and September 1615). His wife, Elizabeth (died 1641?), was later to have a legal struggle over his properties after he died intestate. Gunnell wrote verses for his 'verie good friend' John Smith's 'Description of New England' in 1616, and after a fire at the Fortune in 1621 he wrote at least two plays, 'The Hungarian Lion' (1623) and 'The Way to Content All Women, or, How a Man may Please his Wife' (1624). None of the plays that he and his fellows wrote for the company at this time got into print. Through this period -- certainly from 1618 when he bought his share in the Fortune -- he appears to have served as company manager. He appears as the Fortune's representative in the records of the master of the revels for the Palsgrave's and for payments for other performances (including a tightrope walker) at the Fortune. 
The years from 1621 were hard for Gunnell and the company. Unlike the burning of the Globe, which happened in an afternoon during a performance, the Fortune's fire happened at midnight, and in the absence of people to help rescue the company's valuables, as they did at the Globe, all of its plays and costumes were lost. Gunnell and the other leading players also lost their investment in the playhouse, and had to help pay for its reconstruction. The company in fact never recovered. On 30 April 1624 Gunnell had to take out a bond with six of the actors, including the clown Andrew Cane and William Cartwright, to hold them in the Palsgrave's. The company dissolved during the long closure of the playhouses through the dreadful plague epidemic that erupted shortly after James died in 1625. Gunnell then created a new company, merging elements from two former groups of James's time, his own Palsgrave's (now the King of Bohemia), with the Lady Elizabeth's (now the Queen of Bohemia). 
From 1626, when playing re-started, for the next three years the King and Queen of Bohemia's Men continued to use the Fortune, with Gunnell as their landlord, as their London base. But a new pattern was emerging in London playgoing, and soon Gunnell launched a copy of it by building a small indoor playhouse, the Salisbury Court, in association with William Blagrave of the revels office. Since 1609 the King's Men had used an amphitheatre for summer playing and a roofed hall for the winter. In 1616 Christopher Beeston built a second hall theatre, the Cockpit, and ran it along with the Red Bull amphitheatre, one company in each, to his considerable profit. In 1629 Gunnell followed suit, adding the smallest of London's three hall playhouses to his open-air Fortune. The Salisbury Court Theatre was built in Whitefriars, a London suburb south of Fleet Street, near the river and his customers from the inns of court. 
The hall playhouses catered to the gentry, especially to students and lawyers, rather than to the London citizenry, and charged higher prices accordingly. Gunnell set up a new company for it, chiefly of 'youths' -- boy players whose playing carried a better social cachet than the companies of adult players. Among the plays he commissioned and staged at the new playhouse were George Chapman's 'Sir Giles Goosecap', Henry Glapthorne's 'The Lady Mother', Nathanael Richards's 'Messallina', Thomas Rawlins's 'The Rebellion', a play which had an almost unprecedented initial nine-day run, and equally notably 'The Muses' Looking Glass', the promising Thomas Randolph's earliest attempt at theatre writing. His 'Amyntas' soon followed. With the young William Heminges's first play, in March 1633, 'The Madcap, or, The Coursing of the Hare' (now lost), these plays show how ready Gunnell was to try his hand and his new company's with young writers. Shakerley Marmion wrote two plays for Gunnell there. It was a smaller theatre than the other two halls, and King Charles intervened at one point to ban gallants from using stools to sit on its stage, as they usually did at the other two, the Blackfriars and the Cockpit. However, partly because of its smaller capacity, it never quite secured the status of the other two halls that dominated playwriting in the 1630s. One of Marmion's plays, his 'Holland's Leaguer', has a prologue where he claimed to be almost but not quite overawed by the 'two great Lawrels' that 'over-top us'. 
In July 1634, during another plague epidemic, an Oxford man, Samuel Crosfield, wrote a diary listing the playing companies then in the university town. His account names: 'The Company of Salisbury Court at the further end of fleet street against the Conduit: The cheife whereof are 1. Mr. Gunnell a Papist. 2. Mr. John Yongue. 3. Edward Gibbs a fencer. 4. Timothy Reed. 5. Christofer Goad. 6. Sam. Thompson. 7. Mr. Staffeild. 8. John Robinson. 9. Courteous Grevill. these are the cheife whereof 7 are called sharers i.e. such as pay wages to the servants & equally share in the overplus. (Crosfield, 72)' Reed was the Salisbury Court's star, a famous clown, Robinson was a promising young actor who later married Gunnell's widow, Elizabeth. Gunnell never became exclusively an impresario. 
Gunnell died early in October 1634, and was buried at St Bride's in Fleet Street on the 7th. The register described him as of Salisbury Court, where he had a dwelling house. He had been back there from July, when the King's Revels returned to perform at the hall playhouse. Some time before his death he appears to have passed on the management of the newer of his two playhouses, and its company, to a new man. The ambitions of the man who took over his role as impresario at Salisbury Court, Richard Heton, may have been a factor behind that. Heton, who was never an actor, proved less congenial as a theatre manager than Gunnell, both for the companies he managed and for the playwrights from whom he commissioned plays. 
In 1637 Thomas Jordan published an elegy written for ''his Inestimable friend, Mr.' Richard Gunnell, 'Gent.'', in which he writes of 'his neglected ashes' (Bentley, 2.457). 


@@@@@


doc= 67762


Gotherson, Dorothea (bap. 1611), Quaker preacher and writer, was baptized on 22 September 1611 at Godmersham, Kent, the youngest of five children of Thomas Scott (c.1566-1635), later MP for Canterbury, and his second wife, Mary Knatchbull (died 1616). According to her biographer, G. D. Scull, the Scotts could trace a lineage through the Scotts of Scot's Hall back to Edward I; Dorothea's great-grandfather was Thomas Wyatt the rebel. Although concerned about sin and mortality Dorothea remained aloof from any denomination during her early years. About 1635 she married Daniel Gotherson (died 1666), later a major in Cromwell's army, and inherited her father's estate at Egerton, Kent, which returned nearly $500 annually. Together they had five daughters and a son, Daniel. 
Some time during the 1650s the Gothersons joined the Society of Friends. In particular Dorothea was drawn by their unity and devotion; in 1661 she reflected on life after her convincement: 'then began I to be led by the Spirit of God out of darkness into his marvellous light' (Scull, 8). She ministered to Friends in Kent where Thomas Lovelace was among her auditors: in a later deposition he noted that 'this Mrs. Gotherson had long been a great Quaker, and she had a particular congregation... which went under her maiden name of 'Scott's congregation', where he has heard her himself preach' (Scull, 6). 
In 1661 Dorothea dedicated her Quaker tract, 'To All that are Unregenerated, a Call to Repentence', to the recently restored Charles II 'whom the Lord I believe hath set upon England's throne... that [he] mightst rule in righteousness' and to whom she probably presented a copy. The work recognized Charles's divine authority and hoped he would not 'think it below him to read that which many think above me to write, in respect to my sex' (Scull, 79). She exhorted him to 'rule and reign' in righteousness and pleaded with 'all people of England' to 'turn to the Lord' (Scull, 81, 88). A work written by her husband, 'An Alarm to All Priests' (1660), may well have been co-written by Dorothea. 
It was at Whitehall in the early 1660s that the Gothersons encountered the adventurer John Scott, who claimed to be a descendant of the same Scott family as Dorothea. She believed him 'because some of Anchestors pictures were very like him' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A.175, fol. 147'r'). Scott soon gained the confidence of both Dorothea and Daniel, convincing them that he had lived among the natives of Long Island from whom he had purchased large tracts of land. By 1663 Daniel had mortgaged the Egerton estate to pay Scott $2000 for land and houses on Long Island, and had entrusted the couple's son to Scott's care. When Daniel died about 1 September 1666 his will of the previous month left his Long Island holdings to family and friends, but Dorothea soon learned that neither Daniel nor Scott ever owned the Long Island land. In a petition to the king, probably written in 1668, she explained that she had been defrauded by Scott and that he had apparently 'exposed' her son 'to work for bread'; she asked that her case be referred to Francis Lovelace, the governor of New York (Scull, 11). For the next several years she sought legal redress, citing her illustrious ancestry in her appeals at court. Scott was never brought to justice, but in 1679 his activities both in the colonies and on the continent brought him to the attention of Samuel Pepys, who collected a number of depositions against Scott, including that from Dorothea. 
In 1670 Dorothea married Joseph Hogben of Kent, of whom very little is known. In 1680 she sold the Egerton estate to Sir James Rushout, and in the autumn she and her children sailed for an estate at Oyster Bay in Long Island which her first husband had bought in August 1633. Little is known of her life thereafter, though her daughter, also named Dorothea, married John Davis, a Quaker, shortly after they arrived, and moved to Salem county, New Jersey, about 1705. 


@@@@@


doc= 67763


Pendle witches (act. 1612) represented one of the larger groups of witches prosecuted in early modern England and one of the most famous. The mass of confessions and testimonies elicited before and during the trials at Lancaster in 1612 recalled events of up to eighteen years before and involved tensions between mothers and children, siblings, neighbours, and landlords and tenants. 
At least nineteen alleged witches were charged at Lancaster assizes on 17 August 1612. Of these at least ten came from the Forest of Pendle and its adjacent townships, while one had already died in prison and a second had been hanged at York two or three weeks earlier. At the centre of the Pendle accusations were two elderly women and their families. 


@@@@@


doc= 67764


Silvester, Sir John, first baronet (1745-1822), barrister and judge, was born in London on 7 September 1745, the son of Sir John Baptist Silvester (died 1789) of St Peter's, Cornhill, London, a doctor of medicine, and Alathea Catherine D'Aulnis, daughter of Colonel D'Aulnis of the Dutch service. Silvester was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School and from 1764 St John's College, Oxford; he took the degree of BCL in 1771 and was created DCL in 1818. Admitted to the Middle Temple on 19 April 1766, he was called to the bar on 8 February 1771. He was elected FRS in 1780 and FSA in 1804. 
As a barrister Silvester was unsuccessful in Westminster Hall, but he appeared regularly at the Old Bailey and in the City of London's customary courts where, by virtue of his purchase of a City common pleadership in 1774, he enjoyed with three other pleaders monopoly of practice in the lord mayor's and sheriffs' courts. During the Gordon riots of 1780 Silvester, a 'loyal subject' who would 'support the constitution of the country' (Silvester MS 7067), was made a justice of the peace for Middlesex, and on 23 April 1799 he was appointed deputy lieutenant of that county. 
Precisely when Silvester began to practise regularly in London's criminal courts is unclear. A criminal bar was only beginning to emerge in London in the 1780s and he was among its first members. By the early 1780s he had established a lead in business at the Old Bailey, although his career there was eclipsed by the arrival of William Garrow in 1783. Somewhat unusually, Silvester appeared most frequently for the prosecution. His reputation as a barrister was unenviable: one contemporary described him as 'vulgar and ineloquent' and commented 'The Prisoners Calendar he distinguishes by the elegant and humane appellation of a Bill of Fare. He is said to have made much money by his practice; if so, he has derived it from the groans of the gallows' ('City Biography', 116-17). 
In 1790 Silvester was elected common serjeant of London and he became recorder in 1803 (he was made a bencher of the Middle Temple in the same year). On 27 December 1814 he was created a baronet (described as of Yardley House, Chingford, Essex); the 'Morning Chronicle' noted that his politics had made him a favourite at court and that he 'presented the solitary instance of the Baronetage having been conferred on a possessor of the office of Recorder' ('Morning Chronicle', 1 April 1822). 
'Black Jack' Silvester quickly earned a reputation for severity as a judge. He clearly favoured law and order over the rights of individuals, and he is on record as opposing any amelioration of England's 'bloody code', a system of criminal justice which relied on the terror of capital punishment to deter criminals. Among the papers he left are notebooks recording details of London's criminal underworld and four weighty volumes of indictment precedents. His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' praised him for discharging his judicial duties 'in a faithful, zealous, and conscientious manner' ('GM', 371), but others held different opinions. Silvester was accused of demanding sexual favours from a woman who approached him to appeal for his assistance in obtaining a pardon for her husband and he was widely condemned for his severe summing up in the trial of Elizabeth Fenning, a servant-girl hanged for the attempted murder of her master and his family who was popularly believed to be innocent. A restrained assessment of Silvester's career indicated that his 'public character' was not 'peculiarly calculated to inspire respect for the judicial office' ('Morning Chronicle', 1 April 1822). 
Silvester was married twice: firstly, on 8 October 1772, to Susanne Hoissend (died 1785), widow of Daniel Hoissend; and secondly, on 11 December 1793, to Harriet Speed (died 1843), daughter of the Revd Owen Davies and widow of the Revd John Mylles Speed, vicar of Eling in Hampshire. There were no children from either marriage. Silvester died in his sleep at his home in Bloomsbury Square, London, on 30 March and was buried at Chingford church on 6 April 1822. The baronetcy passed to his nephew Sir Philip Carteret Silvester. 


@@@@@


doc= 67765


Knowlys, Newman (1758-1836), barrister and judge, was born in London, the fourth son of William Knowlys, merchant, of Harp Lane, Tower Street, London. Educated at Botesdale and Christ's College, Cambridge (he did not obtain a degree), Knowlys was admitted to the Middle Temple on 22 January 1774 and called to the bar on 8 February 1782. He was elected common serjeant of London in 1803 and became recorder in 1822. Knowlys was made a bencher of his inn in 1817, reader in 1819, and he was treasurer in 1826. 
As a barrister Knowlys's practice lay chiefly in the criminal courts of metropolitan London and the City's customary courts. In the 1780s barristers began to appear in Old Bailey trials with some regularity, although the majority of cases continued to be heard without the involvement of counsel for either the prosecution or the defence. Knowlys was one of the roughly dozen men who formed a nascent criminal bar in London; he began to practise at the Old Bailey immediately after his call to the bar and between 1783 and 1803 he was engaged in over 1300 cases heard in that court. During the 1790s Knowlys shared the leadership of Old Bailey practice with Jerome William Knapp. 
Although he enjoyed little success in Westminster Hall, Knowlys's purchase of a City common pleadership in 1787 made him one of four barristers who held the exclusive right to practise in the lord mayor's and sheriffs' courts of London. The majority of cases heard in these courts related to the recovery of small debts. The combination of a pleadership and Old Bailey practice was typical of the period. He was the second individual (the first being John Silvester) to hold successively the City offices of common pleader, common serjeant, and recorder of London. Advocates of what came to be known as the principle of rotation argued that practice in the City courts provided the best preparation for the subsequent positions, offering a solid grounding in London's municipal law. Critics pointed out that pleaderships were won not by talent but through purchase and that they were filled by an inferior grade of practitioner. City pleaderships provided a refuge for those barristers whose talents or connections were not such as to enable them to succeed in the superior courts. Yet the acquisition of a pleadership offered the recipient a ticket in the 'city lottery of law' ('The Times', 23 April 1822), granting him a one in four chance of ultimately obtaining the recordership. 
By the end of Knowlys's legal career both the system and its results were widely condemned. His recordership was bounded by negative publicity and did much to bring that office into disrepute. 'The Times' had opposed his election, dismissing him as 'a mere practitioner in the courts' (1 April 1822), entirely lacking in the requisite personal dignity and legal ability, while the 'Morning Chronicle' despised him for his reactionary opinions. Like his predecessor John Silvester, Knowlys was known to oppose reform of England's severe criminal law. 
As common serjeant and later recorder of London, Knowlys's duties included sitting as a judge at the Old Bailey. The 'Morning Chronicle' compared his common serjeantship with that of the notoriously brutal George Jeffreys. Shortly before his election as recorder that paper commented on his 'unparalleled severity' and 'bare-faced system of 'frightening' a jury into a verdict of conviction' in the trial for libel of Richard Carlile ('Morning Chronicle', 6 March 1822). One critic claimed that he had turned the Old Bailey into a 'bear garden' (TNA: PRO, HO 73/4, 'Rudolph's and Wilson's case', Aug 1827). Knowlys was forced to resign in disgrace in 1833 after issuing a warrant of execution for one Job Cox, who had received a royal pardon. He remained steward of the borough court of Southwark until his death. 
Little is known of Knowlys's family or personal life. He was married relatively late in life to Mrs Slope (died 1837), a widow of Bath, on 15 August 1807. They had no children. Knowlys died on 5 January 1836 at his house in James Street, Buckingham Gate, London, and was buried in the Middle Temple vault. His wife died on 19 November of the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 67766


Irving, James (1759-1791), naval surgeon and slave trader, was born at Langholm, Dumfriesshire, on 15 December 1759, the third and only surviving child of John Irving (1731?-1807), blacksmith and innkeeper, and his wife, Isobel, 'nee' Little (1725?-1791). As a surgeon and captain in the Liverpool slave trade Irving participated in the transportation of approximately 3000 Africans to slavery in the Americas. In July 1783, aged twenty-three, he undertook his first slave-trading voyage out of Liverpool, Europe's leading slave-trading port. By January 1789 he had completed five voyages, two of which were on board the 'Princess Royal', a ship which could carry 800 slaves. 
From May 1786 Irving wrote to his wife, Mary ('nee' Tunstall), at 9 College Lane, Liverpool, describing himself as surgeon. Official reference to his status is available in the examinations book of the Company of Surgeons, though there is no evidence to indicate where he was trained. Irving was passed as a surgeon to African ships on 2 April 1789. In this role he was involved in the physical examination of the slaves gathered for sale on the west coast of Africa, to which he made little reference in his letters written in Africa and the West Indies. However, in December 1786 Irving describes how he and the crew of the 'Jane' were awaiting the sale of their 'disagreeable cargo' at Barbados. Impatient with 'our black cattle' who are 'intolerably noisy', he commented, 'I am almost melted in the midst of five or six hundred of them' (Schwarz, 112-13). The letters reveal a family man of liberal education, able to reconcile his occupation with his Christian beliefs. 
In May 1789, at the comparatively young age of twenty-nine, Irving was promoted to his first captaincy of the 'Anna', a 'fine new vessell' (Schwarz, 140), capable of carrying eighty slaves. On 27 May 1789, twenty-four days after sailing from Liverpool, the 'Anna' was shipwrecked on the Atlantic coast of Morocco. Irving and his crew were captured the following day by 'Arabs and Moors' (ibid., 118-21) and sold into slavery. In captivity Irving established a correspondence with British consular officials at Mogador and Tangier. On 24 June 1789 he pleaded with vice-consul John Hutchinson to 'rescue us speedily from the most intollerable slavery' (ibid.); after lengthy negotiations the consular officials secured their release. On 9 August 1790 Irving informed his wife of 'the termination of my bondage, which I have weathered with ten thousand difficulties' (ibid., 141-2). 
Irving's journal indicates that enslavement did not prompt any reflection on his occupation. Nor did he recognize any irony in his situation; on the contrary he recorded that 'I could have died rather than devote my life to be spent in so abject a state, bereft of all Christian society, a slave to a savage race who despised and hated me for my belief' (Schwarz, 94-5). Irving's journal and letters offer a rare insight into the mindset of a participant in the Atlantic slave trade as he is one of the few slave-ship captains for whom personal papers survive. 
On his arrival in London in November 1790 Irving wrote of his eagerness to see his son, James, who had been born on 4 December 1789 and baptized fourteen days later in the congregation of protestant dissenters at Benns Garden Chapel, Liverpool. By 14 December 1790 he had agreed to command the 'Ellen', owned by John Dawson. Following the ship's arrival on the Gold Coast of Africa on 5 April 1791, Irving purchased 341 Africans, eighty-eight of whom were transferred to other ships. On 16 September 1791 the 'Ellen', with 253 slaves, sailed for Trinidad. Forty-six Africans died during this middle passage. Irving died on 24 December 1791, the sixth and final member of the crew of twenty-seven to perish. There is no evidence to indicate how he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 67767


Perkins, Richard (c.1579-1650), actor, gave his age in a legal deposition of 1623 as '44 yeares, or therabouts', so that he was about twenty-three when his name first was recorded in Henslowe's 'Diary' (September 1602) as a member of the theatrical company Worcester's Men. He remained with the same troupe when they became Queen Anne's Men in 1603, emerging as a leading player within the next decade, and acting principally at the Red Bull playhouse. He probably played the role of Flamineo in the first performance of Webster's 'The White Devil' in 1612. Webster's epigraph to the published play speaks of Perkins as 'my freind', and praises his acting. In the same year Perkins also claimed the dramatist and actor Thomas Heywood as ''my loving friend and fellow'' in prefatory verses he contributed to Heywood's 'An Apology for Actors'. Heywood was also a member of Queen Anne's Men, as was Christopher Beeston, with whom Perkins was to have a long professional relationship. Perkins was an overseer of and witness to the will of his senior colleague Thomas Greene in July 1612; with his fellows he received a pair of gloves as a memorial gift, as well as considerable problems ensuing from the share in the company inherited by Greene's widow. The troupe was already in some financial difficulty by the time of the queen's death in 1619, when it disbanded. Perkins and a number of other actors returned to the Red Bull from the Cockpit playhouse in Drury Lane, to which Queen Anne's Men had moved in the final two years of their existence, and performed there as the Players of the Revels. 
Perkins lived in Clerkenwell, near to the Red Bull in the parish of St James, until at least the 1620s -- in 1623 at the northern end of St John's Street -- and he was living there at the end of his life. By 1620 he was married to a woman named Elizabeth, who gave evidence in that year in a law case in which he was involved; in March of the following year she died, and Perkins may have remarried on 5 November 1621, if the Richard Perkins who married Philadelphia Kelly in All Hallows, Lombard Street, was the actor. 
In 1623 Perkins became a member of the King's Men, but for a brief period only: by late 1625 he had joined Queen Henrietta's Company, led by Christopher Beeston, at the Cockpit playhouse in Drury Lane. As a leading performer with this company for eleven years his roles included Barabas in a revival of Marlowe's 'The Jew of Malta', Sir John Belfare in Shirley's 'The Wedding', Fitzwater in Davenport's 'King John and Matilda', Captain Goodlack in Heywood's 'The Fair Maid of the West', and Hanno in Nabbes's 'Hannibal and Scipio'; he would have taken principal roles in other plays by Heywood, Shirley, and Ford, among other leading dramatists in the company's repertory. Perkins's playing of Barabas is praised by Heywood in a prologue and epilogue written for the revival of the play in 1633, in which the actor is favourably compared with his famous predecessor in the role, Edward Alleyn. Perkins was undoubtedly the star actor at the Cockpit, one of the two principal London theatres in the 1630s, and a rival to the player Joseph Taylor at the Blackfriars. During 1636-7 the company was disbanded, and Perkins was among a number of older actors who joined a new Queen Henrietta's Company, acting at the Salisbury Court playhouse from late 1637 until the cessation of playing five years later. With both generations of the company Perkins appeared frequently at court; he undoubtedly acted in the productions of Heywood's 'Love's Mistress', staged with scenery by Inigo Jones, presented before the king and queen at Somerset House in November 1634. 
There was at least one Richard Perkins (or Parkins) living in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields from the mid-1620s until the mid-1640s, and it has been suggested that the actor may have moved to the district near the Cockpit playhouse. He appears to have married again, and buried children at St Giles. His presence there until the latter half of 1645 is further indicated by the bequest of a former colleague, the third player who remembered Perkins at his death. (In 1634 he was willed a mourning ring by his old fellow from Queen Anne's Men, Thomas Basse.) Michael Bowyer made his will in September 1645, leaving 'to my loveing frend mr Richard Perkins of St Giles in the feild'e's London fyftie pound'e's of currant English money to be payed unto him by fyve shilling'e's a week, yf he shall soe long lyve' (Bentley, 'Jacobean and Caroline Stage', 2.635). Bowyer and Perkins had been chief actors with Queen Henrietta's Men from 1625 to 1636, and Perkins had stood surety for Bowyer when he joined the King's Men in 1637; he may indeed have lent Bowyer money, of which the bequest was a repayment rather than a gift. 
By the time of the outbreak of war in England, Perkins was sixty-three, and it seems unlikely that he would have joined the king's army, as so many of his professional colleagues did. According to James Wright in 'Historia histrionica' (1699) he spent his last years in Clerkenwell, sharing a house with his old acting colleague John Sumner, suggesting rather straitened circumstances, and that neither man had a family at the end of his life: 'Susan wife of Richard Parkins' had been buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields in August 1645; Perkins himself was buried at St James's, Clerkenwell, on 20 April 1650. 
Towards the end of his life Perkins's portrait was painted, an event which speaks of prosperity and a continuing position in the world rather than of hard times. The painting survives in the collection of the Dulwich Picture Gallery: it is a half-length on canvas (69.8cm x 61.9 cm), with the subject turned three-quarters to the left, his left hand resting on his breast. The painter belonged to the school of Gerard Soerst, who was active in London from the late 1640s, and who copied the style of Van Dyck. Perkins, in his late sixties, is shown in sober dress, with shoulder-length hair, and beard worn in a royalist style. He has a long, expressive face and commanding if rather mournful eyes. His hand is somewhat swollen with age, but is perhaps given prominence in the picture to demonstrate another chief medium of the sitter's art. 


@@@@@


doc= 67768


Quin, Anne (fl. 1660-1682), actress, was possibly the daughter of Mr Marshall, chaplain to Lord Gerard, and Elizabeth Dutton, illegitimate daughter of John Dutton of Cheshire. She was thought to have been 'educated by godly parents' (Fane, 352). Her sister Rebecca Marshall also became an actress. Anne was one of the first female performers on the London stage, with the King's Company on 26 March 1661 (TNA: PRO, LC 3/73, p. 113). Manuscript casts suggest that Richard Flecknoe intended her to play a breeches role, Aurindo, in his 'Erminia' in the 1660-61 season, and she was possibly cast, with her younger sister Rebecca, in Thomas Heywood's 'The Royall King' the following year. 
Anne was a flexible performer, playing comedic roles such as Margareta in Fletcher's 'Rule a Wife and have a Wife', Celia in his 'The Humorous Lieutenant' (which opened the Bridges Street theatre), and Mrs Diligence in John Wilson's 'The Cheats'. She was also popular in John Dryden's and Robert Howard's 'The Indian Queen', when Pepys thought 'the eldest Marshall did do her part most excellently well as ever I heard woman in my life; but her voice is not so sweet as Ianthe's [Mrs Betterton]' (Pepys, 25 Jan 1664). She had several supporting tragic roles, such as Almeria in Dryden's 'The Indian Emperor', and another breeches role as the battling Florio in William Killigrew's 'The Siege of Urbin'. 
Anne Marshall became Mrs Quin or Guin in 1666/7 (causing much confusion with Nell Gwyn), when she married, probably, the actor Peter Quyn, who only appears in records when arrested for acting without a warrant on 28 January 1668 (TNA: PRO, LC 5/186, p. 193; Wilson, 169). Anne seems to have suffered a setback in 1667, recorded only in the minor role of Candiope in Dryden's 'Secret Love' in February. In May of that year she used the lord chamberlain to order the King's Company to return her larger roles to her, and to allot her 'a dressing roome with a chymney in it to be only for her use & whome she shall admit' (TNA: PRO, LC 5/138, p. 376). This indicates her significance to the company, and although Pepys thought less of her acting by 1668, he acknowledged that she was increasingly popular. Of her performance as Zempoalla in 'The Indian Queen', he muses 'do not doat upon Nan Marshal's acting therein, as the world talks of her excellence therein' (Pepys, 27 June 1668). 
After 1668 Mrs Quin disappeared from the London stage until 27 November 1675, when she was listed again at the King's Company. However, no named roles are recorded for her until 24 March 1677, by which time she is acting for the rival, more successful, Duke's Company at Dorset Garden. Although we have no record of her earnings, financial considerations may well have played a part in her movement between companies. At Dorset Garden she excelled in comedy, playing the feisty Angelica in Aphra Behn's 'The Rover', Lady Knowell in her 'Sir Patient Fancy', to which she also spoke the epilogue, Lady Squeamish in Otway's 'Friendship in Fashion', as well as an unrecorded part and the epilogue to John Banks's 'The Destruction of Troy' (1679). In these troubled years records of Anne's performances are patchy and she does not appear again until May 1681 when she has returned to the King's Company to perform Queen Elizabeth in Banks's 'The Unhappy Favourite'. She stayed with the troupe, creating one final role as Sunamire in Thomas Southerne's 'The Loyal Brother' in February 1682. It seems that Anne did not perform with the United Company after its formation in 1682. 
Anne's celebrity as a performer, in part linked to her attractive figure and dark-haired beauty, is suggested by the commercial representations of her, such as an engraving of her delivering the epilogue to 'Sir Patient Fancy'. There is also a record of a remarkable miniature portrait on copper, misidentified as Nell Gwyn, with 'some thirty mica covers... upon which various head-dresses and costumes are painted', which can be overlaid to show Quin in a variety of her roles (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 


