@@@@@


doc= 7311


Davy, Edmund (1785-1857), chemist, was born at Penzance, the second son of William Davy and his wife, M[ary?] Ann. He obtained his early education in Penzance, where he stayed until moving to London in 1804. With the help of his cousin Humphry Davy, professor of chemistry at the Royal Institution, he was appointed operator and assistant in the laboratory of the institution in 1807. He was also made responsible for the mineralogical collection in addition to his duties of keeping the laboratory in order. Gaining valuable experience, he held the post until 1813 when, through Humphry Davy's influence, he moved to Ireland, becoming professor of chemistry and secretary at the Royal Cork Institution, founded in 1802, an organization modelled on the Royal Institution. There he obtained a good reputation as a lecturer and research worker. 
In 1826 Davy succeeded William Higgins as professor of chemistry at the Royal Dublin Society, where he established a school of practical chemistry and arranged popular courses of lectures in Dublin and in other parts of the country. The lectures were wide-ranging in scope and included agricultural and vegetable chemistry, evening courses on chemistry and, from 1850, lectures on the chemistry of colour pigments. Davy was an excellent teacher and students appreciated the courses, which were well attended. In 1856 he became professor of agricultural chemistry at the Royal Dublin Society, shortly before his retirement from a career spent in teaching, the promotion of scientific education and knowledge, and a great deal of useful, but purely empirical, research. 
While at the Royal Institution, Davy published several studies of platinum and its salts. Humphry Davy's research on the miner's safety lamp revealed that a pre-heated platinum wire continued to glow when held in an inflammable gaseous mixture. This puzzling phenomenon was investigated by Edmund Davy in Dublin. In 1820 he described a finely divided platinum ('platinum black') produced by reducing a solution of platinum sulphate with alcohol. Although he noted its surprising ability to oxidize alcohol at room temperature, Davy failed to grasp the significance of his discovery and it was left to others such as J. W. Dobereiner to exploit the catalytic powers of platinum and other finely divided metals. In 1836 Davy made another important discovery. By the action of water on potassium carbide he obtained an inflammable gas he identified as 'a new bicarburet of hydrogen'. In 1860 it was rediscovered and thoroughly investigated by M. Berthelot, who named it acetylene. 
Davy's other researches covered a wide range of subjects. Besides platinum his metallurgical topics included fulminating silver, the detection of metallic poisons using electrochemistry, and tests for manganese. Other publications of agricultural or horticultural interest dealt with the improvement of wheat flour and the detection and prevention of fraud in the sale of skimmed milk, for which Davy designed a lactometer. He also analysed soils and manures. Much of Davy's work at the Royal Dublin Society entailed investigating and solving problems such as the study of bog butter (a tallow-like substance from peat bogs); the state of the Irish soap industry; the use of chloride of lime for fumigation; the comparison of Irish and Virginian tobacco; and a solution to the problem of iron corrosion at Dun Laoghaire harbour. He also published details of experiments on the relative deodorizing powers of peat charcoal, peat, and lime. 
Barker's memoir describes Davy as having 'a warm heart and affectionate disposition, ever ready to advise or encourage, tolerant of ignorance, humble even to his inferiors' (Barker, 424). His marriage to Phillis Emma Barry, only daughter of David Barry of Dundulrick, co. Cork, resulted in a family of several children. Their eldest son, Edmund William (1826- 'c'.1900), who assisted his father at the Royal Dublin Society, eventually succeeded him there as professor. 
Davy was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1826 and was an original member of the Chemical Society of London. He also became a member of the Royal Irish Academy and honorary member of the Societe Francaise Statistique Universelle. In the last year of his life he suffered ill health, and died on 5 November 1857 at his home, Kimmage Lodge, Kimmage, Dublin. He was probably buried in St Mary's churchyard, Crumlin. 


@@@@@


doc= 7312


Davy, Edward (1806-1885), chemist and promoter of the telegraph, was born on 16 June 1806 at Ottery St Mary, Devon, the eldest son of Thomas Davy, a surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Boutflower. He was educated at the Revd Richard Houlditch's school at Ottery St Mary and at the school of his maternal uncle in Tower Street, London. At the age of sixteen he was articled to Charles Wheeler, a house surgeon at St Bartholomew's Hospital, with whom he lived for three years. In 1825 he won the prize for botany, in 1827 gained his licence from the Society of Apothecaries, and in 1828 secured his membership of the Royal College of Surgeons. In 1830 his father bought him a practice at 390 Strand, London, under the impression that it was a medical practice. It was not, and Davy practised as a dispensing and operative chemist under the name of Davy & Co. His interests lay in the general sciences, particularly chemistry and electricity, and a catalogue of instruments, appended to his 'Experimental Guide to Chemistry', published in 1836, includes several devices invented by him in the list of goods and instruments for sale. In 1836 he patented Davy's diamond cement, an adhesive for mending china and glass, from which he gained a small annual income until he sold the rights to the process. 
Also in 1836, Davy published 'Outline of a New Plan of Telegraphic Communication', and in 1837 he carried out telegraphic experiments in Regent's Park. He laid down a mile of copper wire in the park and developed his 'electric renewer' or relay system, which renewed the signal with the aid of a local battery to compensate for attenuation of the original signal. He demonstrated a working model of his telegraph that year and a needle telegraph in the Exeter Hall in central London for several months in 1838. He applied for a patent for his telegraph, which was granted on 4 July 1838 after the solicitor-general asked Michael Faraday's advice as to whether it constituted a different mechanism from that of Cooke and Wheatstone, patented on 12 June 1837. Davy managed to interest two railway companies, the Birmingham Railway and the Southampton Railway, in his telegraph, but left England for Australia before developing a practical system or completing negotiations, which he left in the hands of his father and a friend, Thomas Watson, a London dentist. Eventually his patent was bought by the Electric Telegraph Company in 1847 for $600. Although his telegraph was never developed, Davy was important for popularizing to the general public the concept of telegraphy, and was the first to develop a relay system. Without Davy's demonstrations, public awareness of the telegraph would perhaps have been much slower. Moreover, his correspondence with public figures and engineers, such as I. K. Brunel, did much to hasten the adoption of the telegraph. He also devised a block system for recording train movements between stations by means of an electrically operated dial, which would advance when the train passed a milestone, but he never patented this idea. In 1883 J. J. Fahie, a historian of the telegraph, initiated a campaign to have Davy's contribution recognized, and in November 1884 the Society of Telegraph Engineers and Electricians (later the Institution of Electrical Engineers) made him an honorary member. 
While in London, Davy married Mary Minshull; they had one son, George Boutflower Davy, who was born before 1837. By 1838 their marriage had irretrievably broken down, and Mary Davy tried unsuccessfully to divorce her husband. Her extravagance and Davy's lack of business sense led to mounting debts, which he settled with help from his father. To free himself from his wife Davy decided to emigrate. He left his son in the care of his family, and in April 1839 set sail for Australia intending to take up a smallholding. He soon abandoned farming to settle in Adelaide, South Australia, where he engaged in various pursuits. He edited the 'Adelaide Examiner' from 1843 to 1845, built up a small medical practice, and for a time managed the Yatala copper-smelting works, where he developed a process for copper refining. He patented the process in Australia, and an English patent was granted in 1847 under his brother's name. He also undertook some assay work. In 1852 he was appointed head of the government assay office in Adelaide which he ran very successfully. The following year he was invited to set up the assay office in Melbourne, Victoria, which he also ran very well until a change of government in 1854 led to its abolition. Davy again took up farming near Malmsbury, Victoria, but soon settled in the town itself, where he engaged in local politics, serving for twenty years as a justice of the peace and for three terms as mayor. He developed his medical practice, and acted for twenty years as the first honorary health officer of the borough. When he retired from that position in August 1882, the Malmsbury borough council presented an address of thanks to him at a special evening 'conversazione'. He had become a much loved figure in the Malmsbury area. 
Davy married twice while in Australia; it is not clear whether his first marriage had ended (by divorce or his wife's death) or whether these marriages were bigamous. By 1845 he had married Rebecca Soper, with whom he had five sons and two daughters. After her death in 1877 he married Arabella Cecil, the daughter of Stephen Tunbridge Hardinge, postmaster-general of Tasmania. They had four children, two of whom, a son and a daughter, survived him. Davy died on 26 January 1885, at Mollison Street East, Malmsbury, and was buried on 27 January in Malmsbury. Efforts to secure a government pension in Australia and England for his widow were unsuccessful, but the Royal Society of Victoria, which had elected Davy an honorary member in March 1883, raised $150 by a subscription among its members for her and her children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7313


Davy, Henry (1793-1865), artist, was born at The Poplars (later Birketts Farm), Westhall, Suffolk, on 30 May 1793, the fifth son and youngest child of Thomas Davy (1747-1813), farmer, and his second wife, Sarah (1751-1831), eldest daughter of William Gibson, physician, of Willingham Hall, near Beccles. He was apprenticed without prospects to a Halesworth grocer, but with aspirations to art he went instead to John Sell Cotman, then at Great Yarmouth. Within two years of modest beginnings in 1813 he was confidently etching his own drawings: in 1818 he published ten prints of Beccles and its environs, 'A Set of Etchings Illustrative of Beccles Church and other Suffolk Antiquities'. This was very much in the style he absorbed by helping to etch Cotman's plates of Norfolk antiquities and brasses published in the latter's 'A Series of Etchings Illustrative of the Architectural Antiquities of Norfolk' (1818) and 'Engravings of the most Remarkable of the Sepulchral Brasses in Norfolk' (1819). With Joseph Lambert's assistance instead of Davy's, the plates illustrative of Cotman's 'The Architectural Antiquities of Normandy' (1822) are comparatively dull. 
In 1819 Davy continued his training under George Cooke in London, but soon returned to Bury St Edmunds to draw in the area and to seek new patrons. Though not a member, he exhibited twenty-three pictures in all at the Norwich Society of Artists between 1817 and 1823. Back in Southwold in the early 1820s he met Sarah (1801-1854), daughter of James Bardwell, master mariner and stationer, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Critten, whom he married at St Peter's, Ipswich, on 30 November 1824. To boost his income from teaching he opened a public library and reading-room. Davy could now add sixty etchings to the Beccles set for his 'Series of Etchings Illustrative of the Architectural Antiquities of Suffolk' (1827), and dedicated one to Cotman. The Suffolk antiquary and genealogist David Elisha Davy of Rumburgh wrote, anonymously, descriptions of the churches, houses, and castles in the three collections Henry published; despite long subscribers' lists (Cotman always included), the books made a loss, and his 'Views of the Seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen in Suffolk' (1827) was abandoned after only twenty houses had been engraved by Lambert after Davy's exquisite sepia drawings. 
After further offers of 'Instructions in Drawing and Sketching from Nature' (Denney, 29) in Southwold, Davy moved the family in 1829 first to Whitton Road and then to 16 Globe Street, Ipswich. That year he exhibited at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists, Suffolk Street, London, three small watercolours or prints of Southwold landscapes. On 16 April 1833 Robert Deck, the printer of his two main works, auctioned some of the family's furniture and books to pay himself and other creditors. In Ipswich the Davys always struggled for survival, and of their sixteen children only six survived infancy. Two were artists: Frederick, of Ipswich and later Chesterfield, and Henry George, of Halifax. Still taking pupils (notably the daughters of the poet Elizabeth Cobbold), Davy decided to print his own plates and sell them singly for a few shillings each. The influence of Cotman is no longer apparent in the 200 prints etched between 1835 and 1849 and forty-four lithographs executed between 1850 and 1864. Small editions and the destruction of plates on his death make them all rare. The meticulous detail in 134 prints of east Suffolk churches assists architects still. Davy made journalistic illustrations of local events, such as fetes, bazaars, railway and dock openings, a lifeboat launching, and the laying of the foundation-stone of the new Ipswich grammar school by Prince Albert. When in 1844 Lord William Hill rode head first into an oak, the etched scene was on sale in days. In 1849, for D. E. Davy's Suffolk collections, Davy provided 1300 of his own drawings, and organized the engraved views and portraits of others. 
Davy's wife, Sarah, died in 1854, aged fifty-two, leaving him still with two young children to bring up. Slight, unassuming, of few words, but a great walker, he worked on through failing health until he suffered a fatal heart attack on 8 February 1865. After an inquest at The Globe inn, almost next door, he was buried at Ipswich cemetery on the 14th. Sarah's grave in St Matthew's churchyard was unmarked, but Henry Davy's stone has a joint inscription. His later work, always careful, lacked the flair he displayed while Cotman's influence lasted, but the record he made of his half-county over four decades combines charm and delicacy with admirable accuracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 7314


Davy, Sir Humphry, baronet (1778-1829), chemist and inventor, was born on 17 December 1778 at 4 The Terrace, Market Jew Street, Penzance, Cornwall, the eldest of five children of Robert Davy, a woodcarver, and his wife, Grace Millett. His father was descended from a line of yeomen, or even gentlemen, but the only property he owned was a small farm at Varfell in Ludgvan, overlooking St Michael's Mount. His mother also came from an old Cornish family. When he was nine, the family moved from Penzance to Varfell, and during school terms Humphry boarded with his godfather John Tonkin, an apothecary-surgeon. After learning to read and write from 'old Mr Bushell', he was sent at the age of six to the grammar school at Penzance, where the schoolmaster, the Revd Mr Coryton, made learning a pain (notably by twisting the boys' ears). Here Davy enjoyed much idleness, which he later felt was fortunate for him, the source indeed of his talents and their application. He became intellectually self-propelled. 
While at school Davy discovered a talent for writing verses and as a story-teller, and took up fishing and shooting. His first experience of chemistry was when he made fireworks with his sister. Then, at the beginning of 1793, he went at Tonkin's expense to the grammar school in Truro, the county town of Cornwall. There the headmaster was Dr Cardew, whom Davy considered far better than Mr Coryton, but who failed to discover any extraordinary abilities or even any propensity to scientific pursuits. Davy left school in December 1793, just before his sixteenth birthday, and lived with Tonkin, following an informal course of self-education. His father suffered from heart disease and in December 1794, at the age of forty-eight, he died, leaving his widow an income of $150 a year and debts of $1500. 
Mrs Davy moved back to Penzance and, with a French refugee, opened a milliner's shop; by 1799 the debts were paid, she had received an unexpected legacy of $300, and she gave up the shop. Davy had told her not to grieve, for he would do all in his power for his brother and sisters, and on 10 February 1795 he was apprenticed to Bingham Borlase, like Tonkin an apothecary-surgeon and prominent citizen of Penzance. He continued with his programme of self-education, which, as well as the chemistry, botany, and anatomy needed for part of his profession, included physics and mechanics. 
Davy was a satisfactory apprentice, and clearly also a rather dreamy young man, declaiming poetry in the wild outdoors but also reading Locke, Berkeley, David Hartley, and other philosophical authors. In 1799 his first poems were published by Robert Southey in the 'Annual Anthology'; the best-known of these, 'The sons of genius', was written in 1795-6 and is suffused with both the sublime and the beautiful. Delighting in the rough precipice, in ancient Greece, and in science (then called natural philosophy), Davy saw himself as a son of both nature and genius, hoping: '
To scan the laws of nature, to explore 

The tranquil reign of mild Philosophy; 

Or on Newtonian wings to soar 

Through the bright regions of the starry sky. 
('Collected Works', 1.26)' M. Dugast, a French refugee priest from La Vendee, taught him French, but Davy, who had no ear for music, never learned to speak the language without a strong accent. 
Davy was, nevertheless, equipped by 1797 to read Lavoisier's 'Traite elementaire de chimie' in French. This book appeared in 1789, and its author and his contemporaries saw it as revolutionary. Its beautifully clear exposition of the idea that oxygen from the air is the crucial agent in combustion, and its new and logical nomenclature, seemed to make chemistry a coherent, and also a French, science. Davy was to make two important amendments to Lavoisier's scheme, and indeed much of his work can be seen as directed against Lavoisier and French hegemony. Sulphuric, nitric, and other acids contain oxygen and it seemed a reasonable inference that this element was the cause of acidity: accordingly, its name (from ancient Greek) means 'acid-generator'. In addition, Lavoisier saw definite quantities of heat being involved in chemical reactions and in changes of state, and for him heat was a weightless chemical element, 'caloric'. Liquids and gases were thought to be compounds of solid elements with caloric: oxygen and hydrogen were thus for Lavoisier not yet known in elementary form. 
Davy began his chemical career by propounding a different idea of heat, and crowned it with a different view of acidity. He aspired to be the Newton of chemistry, and he was attracted to the older view of Bacon, Locke, and Newton that heat was the motion of the particles of matter. Perhaps with adapted instruments from a shipwrecked French surgeon, and certainly with help from Robert Dunkin (a Quaker saddler turned instrument maker), Davy began experiments, notably melting lumps of ice by friction in rubbing them together to prove his theory of heat against Lavoisier's. Swinging one day on Borlase's gate, he caught the attention of Davies Giddy (who changed his name to Gilbert in 1817), a member of parliament with scientific interests, who became his patron and was later his successor as president of the Royal Society. He offered Davy the use of his library and introduced him to Dr Edwards, who later lectured on chemistry at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London. Davy was transported with delight to see Edwards's laboratory, which contained apparatus he knew about only from descriptions and engravings. 
As an undergraduate in Oxford, Giddy had attended lectures on chemistry given by Thomas Beddoes, politically a radical whose Oxford career was brought to an end in the reaction against the French revolution. Beddoes visited Cornwall to study its minerals with Giddy at a time when he was proposing to set up in Bristol, with backing from Josiah Wedgwood and help from James Watt, a clinic where the new 'factitious airs', gases discovered by Joseph Priestley, would be administered to the sick. Wedgwood's son Thomas and Watt's son Gregory both suffered from tuberculosis. In the winter of 1797-8 Gregory Watt was sent to Cornwall for its mild climate, and boarded with the Davys, where he was excited by Humphry's offer to demolish the French theory of heat. In April 1798 Beddoes received through the young Watt, and with Giddy's support, Davy's essay on heat and light, and in 1799 published it. 
Davy later repudiated this essay, as 'infant chemical speculations', but it helped make his name. While he thought heat was motion, he believed that light was a substance entering into chemical union -- Lavoisier's oxygen gas should thus be called 'phosoxygen'. His essay included work on what is now called photosynthesis, and he was the first to establish that pondweeds release oxygen in sunlight; he also connected light with electricity, and with life. The essay ended with the hope that 'chemistry, in its connection with the laws of life, [will] become the most sublime and important of all sciences' ('Collected Works', 2.86). 
Beddoes needed an assistant and with Giddy persuaded Borlase to release Davy from his indentures; Tonkin was furious that a safe career as a medical practitioner should be abandoned for such quackery, but on 2 October 1798 Davy set out from Penzance for Clifton on his great journey into science and social mobility. Two days later Giddy met him for breakfast at Okehampton, where the mail coach arrived beribboned, bearing news of Nelson's victory over the French on the Nile. 
Bristol was a wealthy city of merchants, much more sophisticated than Cornwall with its mines and fisheries. Beddoes's Pneumatic Institution was eventually set up at Hotwells, in Dowry Square. Finance came from Wedgwood, and also from the coal-owning MP William Henry Lambton, whose sons boarded with Beddoes and got to know Davy; John, the elder, later became earl of Durham. Beddoes's wife was sister to Maria Edgeworth, and they moved in literary circles. Davy soon met Joseph Cottle, who was publishing his essay and also work by William Wordsworth, S. T. Coleridge, and Southey. By early 1799 Davy was doing experiments on gases, following up Priestley's researches, in the well-equipped laboratory. 
Davy took up the implausible published claims of a prominent American, Samuel Mitchill, that combinations of oxygen and nitrogen must be poisonous, and that nitrous oxide must be the worst of them, a veritable 'septon' or principle of contagion. Davy tried some experiments with it, and by April could prepare it in sufficient quantity, and pure enough, to breathe it -- and thus discovered its effects as laughing gas. The experiment was one of a series of risky trials: with nitric oxide the effects were very painful, and with carbon monoxide nearly fatal, but here was pure pleasure. Davy wrote excellent first-hand accounts of the anaesthetic action of the gas and of its exhilarating effect as he awoke from semi-delirium: 'My emotions were enthusiastic and sublime; and for a minute I walked about the room perfectly regardless of what was said to me. As I recovered my former state of mind, I felt an inclination to communicate the discoveries I had made during the experiment. I endeavoured to recall the ideas, they were feeble and indistinct; one collection of terms, however, presented itself: and with the most intense belief and prophetic manner, I exclaimed... 'Nothing exists but thoughts! -- the universe is composed of impressions, ideas, pleasures and pains!' ('Collected Works', 3.390)' Coleridge became an enthusiastic friend of Davy and collaborated in these experiments; impressive testimony from him and many others on the effects of the gas, with careful chemical analyses of the oxides of nitrogen, were collected into Davy's first book, 'Researches, Chemical and Philosophical, Chiefly Concerning Nitrous Oxide', published in 1800. He recommended the gas as an anaesthetic in minor surgery, but neither he nor anybody else pursued this idea at the time. 
Other work Davy did in Bristol included the discovery of silica in grasses, and some researches in electricity. Alessandro Volta had found that when dissimilar metals are piled up with damp pasteboard between them an electric current flows, and his 'pile' is the ancestor of today's electric batteries. This discovery Davy later referred to as an alarm bell: it set him, and many other men of science, off in a new direction. He found that acid in the pile makes it more effective, and believed that its action (which Volta attributed to mere contact) must depend upon a chemical reaction. He made piles with charcoal replacing one metal, and with two fluids and one metal. These were described in the first of his papers to be published in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions', in 1801. 
Meanwhile, Davy also kept up other interests, pursuing his science in bursts of creative activity. He recorded a mystical experience of sympathy with nature, when he would have felt pain in tearing a leaf from a tree. His notebooks, begun from both ends, are full of fragments of verse and prose, doodles, good resolutions, and scientific experiments and jottings. He was asked by Wordsworth to oversee the printing of the second edition of 'Lyrical Ballads' and to correct the punctuation; later he visited the Wordsworths at Dove Cottage. He also saw through the press Southey's epic, 'Thalaba'. His work on the oxides of nitrogen, where different compounds of the same two elements have very different properties, and on the electric battery, convinced him that nature was no clockwork, but dynamical -- based upon polar forces in equilibrium -- and not to be explained in material terms alone. He passed through a brief period of religious scepticism to a settled dualism, and a pantheism expressed in a rhapsody of uncertain date: '
Oh, most magnificent and noble nature! 

Have I not worshipped thee with such a love 

As never mortal man before displayed? 

Adored thee in thy majesty of visible creation, 

And searched into thy hidden and mysterious ways 

As Poet, as Philosopher, as Sage? 
('Fragmentary Remains', 14)' The Davy family was Anglican, but he seems to have preferred to worship God outdoors rather than belonging to a particular congregation. 
In September 1800 Davy wrote to his mother about brilliant prospects, and in January 1801 was formally invited by Count von Rumford to a post at the Royal Institution, recently founded in London. Beddoes put no obstacles in his way, and after visiting London in February, Davy moved there to start his new duties in March. Rumford had persuaded landed gentlemen, seeking more efficient ways of raising crops in times of blockade and near famine, to set up this institution where lectures would be given and research carried on. This was a new pattern for London and practical use was expected of it. Rumford had hoped that artisans would come to lectures on mechanics and that new inventions would be displayed there; the lecture theatre, like other theatres, had a separate entrance to the gallery so that the artisans would be segregated from the ladies and gentlemen occupying the best seats. In the event, manufacturers did not want to share their trade secrets but the lectures to the nobility and gentry became a great success during the winters and springs of the London season, while in the laboratory some of the most important experiments of the century were to be performed. 
The professor of chemistry was Thomas Garnett, a well-known analyst of mineral waters who disliked London, but he soon died. The managers of the Royal Institution resolved on 28 June 1801 that Davy should in November give a course of lectures on the chemistry of tanning. He spent the summer learning about it, notably with Thomas Poole of Nether Stowey, a lifelong friend, whose tannery embodied the current best practices. Tanning was a disagreeable business which involved much capital because the hides underwent prolonged immersions in various solutions; however, leather, flexible and strong, was a crucial material, and the oak bark and galls necessary to tan it seemed to be becoming scarce. Davy's lectures were supplemented by a major paper, published by the Royal Society in 1803 and largely responsible for his being elected a fellow later that year and awarded its highest honour, the Copley medal, in 1805. 
Davy's main conclusion was that the workmen in the best tanneries had arrived at a degree of perfection which could not be very far extended by chemical theory: he provided in essence a rationale for the best practice, which had been arrived at by lengthy trial and error. Poole found tannin in port wine, and Davy in tea, and more promisingly, in catechu from India. Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society from 1778-1820, who became in effect Davy's patron, supplied samples of the latter, used as an astringent when chewing betel nut, and Davy had a pair of shoes made, one tanned with oak bark and the other with catechu. Here was a promise of replacing oak bark with a cheaper alternative. 
Davy gave a general account of the chemistry of tanning which was not significantly improved upon in the next fifty years, and again he moved on. This time it was to agriculture, at the suggestion of his employers and the board of agriculture -- again two overlapping groups. He gave a series of lectures year after year, which promised increased production, bringing relief from the wartime food shortages and the pressures of an expanding population (Thomas Malthus's 'Essay on Population' had appeared in 1798). If all farms could be brought up to the standard of the best, there would be no problem. Davy urged good practice, beginning with soil analysis: he undertook to do analyses himself, and became a close friend of Thomas Andrew Knight, an eminent plant physiologist and horticulturist on whose estate he went fishing. Davy also supervised a series of experiments at Woburn, under the patronage of the duke of Bedford, on grasses, and on one occasion at the festivities associated with the annual sheep shearing at Woburn, Davy was toasted. 
Davy's suggestions were conservative, often providing a scientific basis for practices that had been found empirically to work. Thus he recommended using manure fresh rather than rotted, because it would then still contain much ammonia, and illustrated this with what must have been a rather smelly experiment, in which the fumes rising from dung were conducted beneath a piece of turf, which grew splendidly. He also suggested insecticides, one of which seems to have killed off Lord Egremont's turnip crop, but which generally appear to have been helpful. The lectures were eventually published, first in a handsome quarto and then in octavo, in 1813, and remained a standard work for a generation. This was essentially science as 'nothing more than the refinement of common sense making use of facts already known to acquire new facts' ('Collected Works', 9.355), as Davy put it in a phrase later echoed by T. H. Huxley. 
It turned out that Davy was a brilliant lecturer and in January 1802 he gave an introductory lecture to a course on chemistry, which created a sensation and led to his being appointed the institution's professor of chemistry in May of that year. He presented a dazzling picture of scientific and technical progress, and this vision of the power of applied science remained with him and his successors at the institution. He became much sought after as a dinner party guest. He spent the time between ten or eleven o'clock in the mornings and three or four in the afternoon in the laboratory, and then dressed for dinner -- there were stories of his rushing from the laboratory and putting a clean shirt on top of his dirty one -- but on evenings before lectures he dined at home on fish and rehearsed with his assistants. There are messy manuscripts of the lectures, difficult to read; he must have delivered them from memory, maintaining eye-contact with the audience -- his eyes were said to be very bright and striking. He was about 5 ft 7 in. in height, but seemed shorter; he soon lost any traces of Cornish accent, and while some found his voice affected, most seem to have delighted in hearing him. The traffic bringing hearers to his lectures was so heavy that Albemarle Street had to be one-way on those nights. He had perfected the art of high-level popularization, and made science attractive and interesting to both men and women. 
In 1804 Gregory Watt died, and Davy was desolate, writing about his belief in the individual immortality of the better part of man. In the same year, Coleridge, unhappy in his marriage and addicted to opium, set off for Malta in a desperate bid to regain his health. He was cheered on his way by a splendid letter from Davy, who on his return arranged for him to lecture at the Royal Institution. In 1808 Beddoes died, after writing a melancholy letter to Davy deploring his own lack of definite scientific achievement. By then Davy had moved far beyond his earlier sphere. In 1807 he was elected one of the two secretaries of the Royal Society, with the responsibility of editing its journal, and he had made new friends among the medical and scientific community in London, where he was one of the first to make a living by the practice, or profession, of science. On holidays he studied geology and fished energetically; autumns were his best time for undisturbed research, and in 1806 his work took a new turn, which brought international fame. 
Davy believed that electricity was a force or power, not a substance, and that it would simply decompose substances like water. But the experiments of others revealed acids and alkalis that were apparently generated electrically, so perhaps there were compounds of electricity -- 'galvanates'. In October 1806, using apparatus of gold, silver, and agate, and excluding air, Davy verified his conjecture in an excellent example of a goal-directed rather than open-ended experiment: pure water, decomposed by electrical action, yielded nothing but hydrogen and oxygen, in the right proportions. He concluded that electricity and chemical affinity were manifestations of one power. This insight (though not quantitative) seemed appropriate to the would-be Newton of chemistry, and it won him a prize from the Paris Academie des Sciences. 
On 19 October 1807 Davy used electricity to decompose caustic potash, in a capital experiment after which he danced about the laboratory in ecstatic delight. The application of electric current to an aqueous solution of the alkali resulted in the water's being decomposed into hydrogen and oxygen. The resulting residue of solid potash did not conduct electricity and so Davy melted it. When he did so, globules of the substance formed at the negative pole and, bursting into flames, threw off bright coruscations. He managed to collect some, and found that they floated on water, catching fire as they decomposed it; he compared his 'potagen' to the alkahest sought by alchemists, but after consultation with other chemists decided that this anomalous substance was in fact a metal, and named it 'potasium', later potassium. Soon he isolated sodium too, and then, using a mercury cathode, calcium and other 'alkaline earth' metals. 
Davy's papers describing these researches were chosen as the Bakerian lectures of the Royal Society and marked him as one of the greatest men of science of the day. British science was provincial compared to that in Paris, but now patriots and upholders of freedom could rejoice that a Briton had given chemistry a new direction, making it seem the fundamental science. Davy meanwhile had been consulted about the ventilation of Newgate prison, had visited it, and had then gone down with gaol fever in the hour of his triumph. Medical bulletins were posted at the Royal Institution, but for the first few months of 1808 he was unable to do research or to lecture. 
Davy had been a founder of the Geological Society of London, but had promptly resigned under pressure from Banks, who was determined that men of science must hang together in these difficult years in one learned empire and resist anything which looked like fragmentation. Davy was, however, prominent in the Animal Chemistry Club, a subset of the Royal Society where physiology was discussed amid worries about French materialism. He now turned his attention to acidity. It was known that the bad-eggs acid, hydrogen sulphide, contained no oxygen; in research with his friend J. G. Children, Davy proved that the even worse-smelling hydrogen telluride contained none either. Eventually on 12 July 1810 he announced his conclusion that the strong acid from sea salt also contained none: that there was no material basis for acidity. In November of that year, he declared that the green gas contained in this acid was an element, and named it chlorine. For him and his contemporaries, muriatic acid and sulphuric acid had no element in common -- Lavoisier had been wrong both about heat and acidity. In triumphant lectures Davy emphasized how the French had been dogmatic about what was in fact the baseless fabric of a vision. He stood at the apex of the scientific world. 
Davy's income at this point was about $1000 a year, making him a not especially eligible bachelor, but on 2 March 1812 Jane Apreece, 'nee' Kerr (1780-1855) ['see 'Davy, Jane, Lady Davy], a wealthy widow whom he had been pursuing, accepted his proposal of marriage. She had held a salon in Edinburgh and was sophisticated, well-connected, and intellectual. On 8 April 1812 Davy was knighted by the prince regent, and on the 11th he and Jane were married by the bishop of Carlisle at Jane's mother's house in Portland Place. They spent their honeymoon in Scotland, staying with eminent people; Davy took his little apparatus with him, and conducted some researches on gunpowder. He gave up his courses of lectures, and wrote up his 'Elements of Chemical Philosophy' the same year. This, dedicated to Jane, dealt with his own work, and was meant to be the first of a multi-volume set, but it did not sell well, for it was not a satisfactory textbook and his researches were accessible in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
Investigating the first high explosive, nitrogen trichloride (which cost its French discoverer an eye and a finger), Davy was disabled in an explosion. As amanuensis he employed Michael Faraday, who had just finished his time as a bookbinder's apprentice. Faraday had read some of the books, and had been given a ticket for what turned out to be Davy's last lecture course, on chlorine. He aspired to a career in science and made a fair copy of his notes, which he presented to Davy. Davy advised him to stick with his trade and smiled at his notion of the nobility of natural philosophers, but nevertheless, on 1 March 1813, on Davy's recommendation, Faraday was given a job at the institution. 
On 13 October 1813, the Davys set out for France; passports then came from the country visited, and he had been given one in order to collect his prize. With them, as assistant and sometimes valet, went Faraday. In the enemy capital, Paris, Davy behaved like a Coriolanus fighting alone in science for his country. He refused to be impressed by a tour of the Louvre, which was full of Napoleon's loot, stalked out of an anti-British play, and competed with the leading French chemist, J. L. Gay-Lussac, to elucidate the nature of a curious new substance: recognizing its analogy with chlorine, he called it iodine. 
From Paris they went to Italy, which was less of an intellectual hothouse but more congenial, where Davy investigated petrifying springs and carried out some of the first analyses of pigments used in ancient paintings. In Naples, where they observed Vesuvius in eruption, they were planning to go on to Constantinople when they heard of Napoleon's return from Elba; they left on 21 March 1815 and arrived home via the Rhineland on 23 April. On holiday in Scotland in August, Davy received a letter from the Revd Robert Gray of Bishopwearmouth asking him, as Britain's leading man of science, to do something about explosions in coalmines. On 14 August, Davy stopped in Newcastle and met John Buddle, the leading colliery manager or 'viewer', and another clergyman, the Revd John Hodgson of Jarrow. 
Davy went straight to London, declining an invitation to visit Banks, and Buddle sent him samples of the gas, 'firedamp', which issued from the coal and caused the explosions. It was often supposed to be hydrogen, but Davy, working with Faraday as his assistant, proved that it was methane. He found that a mixture of air and methane will explode only at a high temperature, and by 30 October had devised a lamp where the gases entered and left through narrow tubes to cool them down. He went on to enclose the flame in a cylinder of wire gauze in the definitive form of the Davy lamp, which would explode only if white-hot, and which also functioned as a detector of firedamp. Banks wrote Davy a magnificent letter declaring that his work would place the Royal Society higher in popular opinion than all the abstruse discoveries beyond the understanding of ordinary people. 
A device developed in the laboratory worked down the mine -- this was one of the very first examples of technology as applied science. George Stephenson had developed a similar lamp at the same time, in the older trial-and-error fashion, and there were priority disputes. Davy refused to patent his lamp, and so the matter was never tested in court; understanding the principle, he indignantly rejected Stephenson's claims to have invented a safe lamp, which were pressed sometimes scurrilously by his partisans. Davy was awarded the Royal Society's Rumford medal, a set of plate presented at a public meeting by his old friend Lambton, and a baronetcy: though this was the highest honour yet accorded to a man of science it was an empty honour for a childless man, and was in contrast with the honours showered upon military men for destroying their fellow creatures. 
In the course of his work, Davy found that, in the presence of a coil of platinum wire, firedamp and air will combine without explosion, the first example of what came to be known as heterogeneous catalysis. The Davys went for another continental tour, during which they received recognition for the miner's lamp (and tried to unroll papyri from Herculaneum). Then, in 1820, Banks died; he had been president of the Royal Society since a few days before Davy was born, and as the gentleman with the lamp, Davy was the unstoppable candidate to succeed him. The shy W. H. Wollaston, Banks's preferred successor, declined a contest, and on 30 November 1820 Davy was elected to what was then a position of lonely eminence in the world of British science. 
In the event, Davy's reputation was tarnished by his taking this responsibility: had he died in 1819 it would have been glittering. The society was teetering between remaining a gentlemen's club and becoming an academy of sciences. Davy favoured judicious modernizing and was tolerant of specialisms, and during his presidency the council of the society came to include a majority of men with one or more scientific publications. He made publication an important factor in election, but, lacking the social status of Banks, he was unable to force his will upon the fellows, and found himself between hostile camps, pleasing nobody. Social mobility was recognized then and now as the key to his life, but it had its limits. His patronage secured Children a post at the British Museum, though this weakened confidence in that institution. With Stamford Raffles he set up the London Zoo, as a kind of response to the Museum of Natural History in Paris. He was one of the founders of the Athenaeum, as a real club for intellectual gentlemen. 
Davy's relationship with Faraday was a casualty of his elevation. He had in 1816 tactfully propelled Faraday into publication, and eased him through what was in effect an apprenticeship; Faraday's status changed from laboratory assistant, to research student, to junior colleague, and he devotedly preserved and bound Davy's scribbled experimental notes and drafts. There was then no clear point to mark academic coming-of-age, but Faraday by 1821 no longer needed a fatherly supervisor to make helpful suggestions about his papers, for example on the liquefaction of gases; he began independent research, and took up work in electromagnetism which looked a bit like trespassing on Wollaston's territory. Faraday was not good at flattering distinguished elders, and he felt that Davy (whose relationship with Wollaston was respectful but not very close) failed to support him. In 1823, without consulting Davy, he allowed his name to go forward for fellowship of the Royal Society; Davy felt indignant and offended, told him to withdraw, and sulked when he refused. Faraday was elected, and he and Davy were now distanced in a kind of family row which they never really resolved. Two masters of scientific rhetoric found themselves inarticulate, and it was not until after Davy's death that Faraday was able to break fully from his shadow and embark on his own fundamental electrical researches. 
In 1823 Davy took upon himself research into the corrosion of the copper bottoms of warships. He showed that this ceased if 'protectors' of a more reactive metal were attached, and these were tried, with Davy going on one of the experimental voyages, to Scandinavia. The protector gave a negative charge to the copper but unfortunately this proved attractive to marine organisms, and protected ships sailed badly. In this case scaling up from the laboratory did not work in the more complex conditions of the outside world and Davy was much mortified. 
At the anniversary meeting of the Royal Society on 30 November 1826 Davy was re-elected unopposed, but his speech was made with such effort that drops of sweat flowed down his countenance and he was unable to attend the dinner which followed. In December he had a stroke; he was forty-eight. His adoring younger brother, John Davy, who had trained as a doctor at his expense in Edinburgh and was serving with the army, hurried to his bedside, and on 22 January 1827 they set out for Italy. Rides in the woods around Ravenna and a low diet restored Davy's health somewhat but he brooded upon the transience of things. On 30 June he wrote from Salzburg to his wife, and also to his friend Davies Gilbert, that he would resign his presidency at the next anniversary. His favoured candidate was Robert Peel, whose wealth, influence, and lack of any specific scientific reputation would be very valuable: through Peel, Davy had earlier induced the king to found royal medals for science. He invited Jane to join him for the winter in Italy, but when this proved impossible he resolved unhappily in September to return to England. His love of natural history had not deserted him, and he decided to write a series of dialogues on the subject, entitled 'Salmonia, or, Days of Fly-Fishing'. 
By the time the book appeared Davy was back on the continent, never to return home. He had set out on 29 March 1828 accompanied by James Tobin, a German-speaking medical student -- the son of an old friend of Bristol days -- whose long trip in the company of an invalid curmudgeon does not seem to have been much fun. Tobin read endlessly to him, and he fished and shot in solitude. In Slovenia he was consoled by Josephine Detela, whose nickname was Papina, the daughter of an innkeeper in Ljubljana. He loved the Julian alps, fishing and seeking the sources of rivers; a house he took at Podkoren on the Wurzen pass, among beech woods, bears a plaque in his memory. He was delighted about Roman Catholic emancipation, being sympathetic to that church because of his experiences in Italy and Austria, and earlier in his beloved Ireland where he had lectured, and where Trinity College, Dublin, gave him a doctorate in 1811. 
Davy's 'Salmonia' was a success, and had an enthusiastic review from his friend Walter Scott. He resolved to extend it with general reflections upon life and science. Coming to terms with his prematurely worn-out body, he also began dictating to Tobin a series of dialogues on life, immortality, the pursuit of science, and the nature of time. These were just completed (though had he lived longer he might have added more) on his deathbed, and published posthumously in 1830 as 'Consolations in Travel, or, The Last Days of a Philosopher'. The book represents his legacy, and although all the characters clearly represent the author (with some features of Wollaston and other friends), it is a good read and takes us to some extent into his mind, and into the science of his time. We see again the lecturer who had disclosed nature's coyest secrets to those audiences at the Royal Institution, and the participant in the Animal Chemistry Club. Georges Cuvier, in his eulogy of Davy for the Paris Academie des Sciences, described the book as the work of a dying Plato. 
Davy wintered in Rome, and there spent his fiftieth birthday hunting in the Campagna, but on 20 February 1829 he had another stroke. He thanked God he had been able to finish all his philosophical labours, and was like to die. His wife and brother were summoned, but he rallied. One day Tobin read Shakespeare to him for nine hours. The party set off for England, but at Geneva, after Tobin had read 'Humphry Clinker' until 10 p.m. Davy died peacefully in the early hours of 29 May 1829. Fearful of being buried alive, and squeamish about post-mortems, he had requested that interment be delayed but the laws of Geneva did not permit it. He was given a civic funeral the following Monday, 1 June 1829, and buried at the cemetery of Plain-Palais. His wife had a memorial tablet put up in Westminster Abbey, for which she was charged $142. 
Despite the success of his last works, and his brother's efforts, Davy's reputation was soon eclipsed by that of Faraday. Historians of science concentrating upon positive contributions found little to remark after 1815, but Davy can be seen as one of the first professional men of science, which brought him a high if not always comfortable social position, and tremendous fame. His dialogues, written when he was given time for reflection, moving from science to wisdom, help the reader to enter a world that existed before there were 'two cultures', where the discoverer was becoming a sage. 


@@@@@


doc= 7315


Davy, Jane, Lady Davy (1780-1855), society figure, was born on 5 February 1780, the only daughter and heir of Charles Kerr (1748-1796) of Kelso and sometime merchant of Antigua, and his wife, Jane Tweedie. Little is known of Jane Kerr's early life. On 3 October 1799 she married Shuckburgh Ashley Apreece, elder son of Sir Thomas Hussey Apreece, bt, of Washingley, Huntingdonshire, but he died (before his father) on 6 October 1807 at Malvern. It was not a happy marriage and in 1802 Jane undertook the first of many journeys abroad, visiting France soon after the peace of Amiens when that country was briefly open to British visitors. 
After Apreece died his widow made her mark in society, as her distant cousin Walter Scott said, by taking 'the 'blue' line, and by great tact and management actually established herself as a leader of literary fashion' ('Journal', 1.107). A petite and vivacious brunette, she moved to Edinburgh where her house was soon frequented by many literary and scientific celebrities. According to Sir Henry Holland she was young, wealthy, with 'the reputation and fashion of a continental traveller, at a time when few had travelled at all, acquainted with Madame de Stael, and vaguely reported to be the original of 'Corinne'', the beautiful poetess and mysterious genius of de Stael's recently published novel (Holland, 'Recollections', 87). The elderly mathematician and geologist John Playfair even proposed marriage, and there was no lack of other suitors. She accompanied Scott on his tour of the Western Isles in 1810. 
In 1811 she returned to London and entered society there with vigorous determination, soon meeting Humphry Davy (1778-1829), who hotly pursued her. They were married on 11 April 1812 by the bishop of Carlisle, three days after Davy had received his knighthood. He dedicated 'Elements of Chemical Philosophy' (1812) to his wife. Her wealth enabled Davy to retire from routine work (in 1813 he resigned his Royal Institution professorship) and devote himself, as he hoped, to chemical researches. The marriage, however, was not a happy or comfortable union, each party having been rather too accustomed to adulation. In October 1813 they set out on a continental tour, accompanied by the young Michael Faraday in the anomalous position of both assistant and valet to Davy. This created considerable friction with Jane, and Faraday left a memorable portrait of her bad temper and haughtiness in his letters at this time. They returned in April 1815 and Jane resumed energetic social life in London, interspersed with tours to various parts of Britain. Together with Davy she entertained widely, her guests including Byron, Tom Moore, and Maria Edgeworth, but was more successful with literary or aristocratic guests than with Davy's scientific friends. She accompanied Davy on his second continental tour (1818-20), but from this time travelled more frequently without him, on occasion accompanied by literary minded friends, such as the lords Dudley and Colchester, with whom she visited Nice in 1822. Two years later she set out for the continent again, travelling to Germany, where she called on the aged Goethe, as well as Italy and Switzerland. She remained none the less on good terms with Davy, looking after his literary interests and dealing with his publisher, but did not accompany him on his last travels on the continent. When Davy suffered his final illness she travelled rapidly to Rome to join him in a slow progress northwards until his death in Geneva on 29 May 1829. 
Jane continued to travel widely, returning frequently to Italy where she was a well-known figure in Roman society. Nothing pleased her more than to act as guide to the city's ancient monuments, and she had an accomplished knowledge of classical and modern European literature, attested to by Mary Somerville. Her grasp of spoken language was less sure, and her mistakes when speaking Italian were often recounted. While her reputation has suffered at the hands of Davy's brother John and Davy's biographers, who felt that his scientific career suffered after his marriage, she was nevertheless liked by many and carried on a vivacious correspondence with Scott and Sydney Smith among others. Smith indeed implored her not to marry: 'you will be annihilated the moment you do, and, instead of an alkali or an acid, become a neutral salt' (Holland, 'Memoir', 2.91-2). Scott thought that 'though clever and even witty, she had no peculiar accomplishment, and certainly no good taste either for science or letters naturally' ('Journal', 1.108) yet he remained fond of her and admired her determination. She had little understanding of Davy's scientific work, but was alive to his literary merits and the utility of his invention of the miners' safety lamp, and ensured that his name continued to be remembered. He appointed her his sole executor. She was much appreciated as a hostess, and her conversation was admired for its elegance as well as for amusing anecdotes of her wide acquaintance and foreign travel. Scott wrote of her, 'As a lion-catcher, I would pit her against the world' (ibid.). She also contributed anonymously to charity through her local vicar. She continued to travel and to be seen at every notable social occasion until her death at her home, 26 Park Street, Grosvenor Square, London, on 8 May 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 7316


Davy, John (1763-1824), composer, was born at Creedy Bridge, Upton Hellions, near Crediton, Devon, the illegitimate son of Sarah Davie or Davy, on 23 December 1763. He was brought up by his maternal uncle, a blacksmith of Upton Hellions, who played the cello in the church band. When under the age of five Davy could play simple tunes on the fife after one or two hearings. Before he was six, he stole some horseshoes from a neighbouring smith and devised a set of chimes on which he imitated the bells of Crediton church. On hearing of this, the rector, James Carrington, showed him a harpsichord, which he soon learned to play, and he also began the violin. Carrington recommended him to the Revd Richard Eastcott, of Exeter, who gave him piano lessons and persuaded his friends to article him, by the age of twelve, to William Jackson, organist of Exeter Cathedral. Davy's progress in composition was rapid, and he soon became a competent performer on the organ, violin, viola, and cello. After completing his articles he lived for some years in Exeter as an organist and teacher. 
A passion for the stage, which led him to act with William Dowton at the local theatre, caused Davy to move to London, where he played the violin at Covent Garden. About 1790 he had published a set of glees as his op. 1, but theatres were slow to encourage his real gift, which was for instrumental music. He wrote two stage pieces for Sadler's Wells, though success did not come until 1800 with 'What a Blunder!' for the Little Theatre, Haymarket. He spent most of his career collaborating with various indifferent theatre composers and contributing songs and numbers to their works and to pasticcios for Covent Garden. A number of his songs were very popular in their day, and he also wrote some successful harp music. But he became depressed, his work deteriorated, and he took to drink. He died, impoverished, in May's Buildings, St Martin's Lane, London, on 22 February 1824, and was buried in the churchyard of St Martin-in-the-Fields on the 28th at the expense of two London tradesmen, one a native of Crediton. 


@@@@@


doc= 7317


Davy, John (1790-1868), physiologist and anatomist, was one of the five children of Robert Davy (died 1794), woodcarver, and Grace Millett. He was the younger brother of Sir Humphry Davy. John Davy was born at Penzance, Cornwall, on 24 May 1790. In his childhood he appears to have been helped by his brother, and both boys acknowledged the great assistance they received from their mother. Davy was chiefly educated at the preparatory schools of Penzance. About 1810 he went on to study medicine at Edinburgh University, where he took his MD degree in 1814. When Humphry Davy advanced theories as to the constitution of muriatic acid which were opposed to the teaching of Berthollet, and attacked by Dr Murray, John Davy supported his brother's views. He carried out experiments in the laboratory of Edinburgh University and obtained results which entirely confirmed Humphry Davy's theory. 
Davy entered the army as a surgeon, saw a great deal of foreign service, and eventually became inspector of hospitals. He usually made careful notes, and studied especially the characters of the local people who came under his notice, and who were often under his medical care. In 1821 he published 'An Account of the Interior of Ceylon and of its Inhabitants, with Travels in that Island'. In 1830 Davy married Margaret, daughter of Archibald Fletcher. A daughter, Grace, married George Rolleston, Linacre professor of anatomy and physiology at Oxford. 
Davy visited his brother Humphry during his convalescence at Ravenna in 1827, and was present at his brother's death in 1829. In 1836 he edited the 'Memoirs of Sir Humphry Davy', and in 1839, his collected works. In the same year Davy published 'Researches, Physiological and Anatomical', and in 1842 his 'Notes and Observations on the Ionian Islands' (2 vols.). In 1849 he published his 'Lectures on Chemistry', and 'Discourses on Agriculture'. He lived in the West Indies for about three years before 1854, and in that year he published a volume entitled 'The West Indies before and since Slave Emancipation, Comprising the Windward and Leeward Islands Military Command'. As inspector-general of army hospitals, in 1862 he published 'On some of the More Important Diseases of the Army, with Contributions to Pathology', and in the following year 'Physiological Researches'. Up to 1863 Davy had published 152 memoirs and papers in various medical journals and in the 'Transactions of the Royal Society'. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1834. He was a great lover of fishing, and in his 'The Angler and his Friends, or, Piscatory Colloquies and Fishing Excursions' (1855) he described the deep delight he took in angling in the Lake District. 
Davy died at his home at Lesketh How, near Ambleside, Westmorland, on 24 January 1868. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7318


Davy, Martin (1763-1839), physician and college head, was the son of William Davy, a country gentleman of moderate estate at Ingoldisthorpe, Norfolk. He was educated first at Lynn School, and was afterwards a pupil of a Yarmouth surgeon. Later he studied medicine at Edinburgh, and adopted the Brunonian system of medicine promoted by John Brown (1735-1788). His taste for classical scholarship had earlier gained him an introduction to Samuel Parr, and through Parr's influence he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, at the age of twenty-three. There he held a scholarship, 1787-91, and Dr Caius's medical fellowship, 1791-1803; he returned to Edinburgh to complete his medical studies, graduating MB in 1792 and MD in 1797. He was an unsuccessful candidate for the mastership of Caius in 1795, and then spent two years in Europe, travelling for a period as tutor to Lord Ossulston (later the sixth earl of Tankerville), and visiting the antiquities of Rome and Naples. In Cambridge he practised medicine with considerable success, and continued to do so after his election as master of Caius in 1803. During 1803-4 he was vice-chancellor of the university and became involved in a controversy touching his professional interests when he confirmed a restrictive interpretation placed upon the statute relating to medical study, in order to exclude a capable local practitioner, Frederick Thackeray (1774-1852), from taking a medical degree. He was a strong whig, and on the occasion of Pitt's death he vetoed in the 'caput' (21 March 1806) a scheme to erect a statue of him in the Senate House. 
Davy's marriage at St George's, Hanover Square, on 16 May 1811, to an heiress, Anne, daughter of William Stevenson of Eccleshall, Staffordshire, coincided with a change in his profession. Having, it was said, been a religious sceptic, he took holy orders in 1810 and was admitted DD in 1811. After his wife's early death, on 9 October 1811, aged thirty-three, he devoted himself to private study in his library, which was well stocked with editions of classical authors. Their sale after his death realized $1130. Elected to the Royal Society in 1801, he was a member of the Linnean Society, and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1812). His only published work was a pamphlet, 'Observations upon Mr Fox's Letter to Mr Grey' (1809), which exhaustively discussed C. J. Fox's usage of the word 'merry' in the preface to his 'History of the Early Part of the Reign of James the Second'. 
Davy served for a second period as vice-chancellor in 1827-8. In 1827 the tory ministry gave him the rectory of Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, and in 1832 he received a non-residentiary canonry at Chichester, but he retained a reputation for religious liberalism, vetoing in the 'caput' a petition opposing the bill to admit dissenters to the university (15 May 1834). 
Davy was credited with having made his college more open by abolishing restrictions and making academic merit the avenue to college preferment; and the college certainly increased in repute during his time. His own subsequent reputation suffered, however, as a result of the unfavourable accounts of him given in the reminiscences of Henry Gunning, and in the diaries of Joseph Romilly. He died at Cambridge on 18 May 1839, and was buried on 25 May in the antechapel of his college. By his own request his papers were destroyed, which was done by boiling them in the large copper vessel of the college kitchen. He bequeathed his country retreat, an estate of 200 acres at Heacham, Norfolk, to his successors as master of Caius. In 1934 the trust was made over to the college. 


@@@@@


doc= 7319


Davy, Robert (d. 1793), portrait painter and draughtsman, was born at Cullompton, Devon, and travelled to Rome in 1755. He appears to have made two trips to Italy, in 1755 (remaining until 1760) and again in 1765. As well as painting portraits he seems to have acted as a dealer or agent for British collectors. Ingamells notes that a 'Robert Devy' was exporting marbles from Rome in 1759 (Ingamells, 283). By 1760 he had returned to England and settled in London as a drawing-master at a ladies' school in Queen Square; from 1762 to 1793 he worked as a drawing-master at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. 
Davy exhibited portrait miniatures at the exhibitions of the Free Society of Artists from 1762 to 1768 and the Royal Academy from 1771 to 1782. His academic 'oeuvre' also included mythological subjects in paintings such as 'Diana Sleeping and Nymphs Bathing' (exh. RA, 1781). He also worked as a professional copyist: a small picture made by him after Benjamin West's 'Death of General Wolfe' (1771) attracted attention. Some of his works were engraved, including a portrait of the watchmaker John Arnold, mezzotinted by Susan Esther Reid. In September 1793 he was knocked down and robbed near his home in John Street, Tottenham Court Road, London, and died a few days later on 28 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 7320


Davy, William (d. 1780), serjeant-at-law, was the son and heir of William Davy (died before 1741), druggist, of Exeter. Admitted to the Inner Temple on 16 October 1741, he was called to the bar in 1745. According to Lord Eldon's anecdotes he had originally begun in trade and had been made bankrupt, though it is possible that legend had confused the son with the father. Davy was one of a new breed of counsel who made his name at 'nisi prius' and in the criminal courts, both on the western circuit and at the Old Bailey, where professional advocacy had once been virtually unknown; and his skill lay in the cut and thrust of trial practice rather than in legal argument. Nevertheless, some manuscript law reports taken by him between 1742 and 1755 survive in Lincoln's Inn, together with some notebooks on legal subjects and one on Latin grammar. His first important cases came in January 1753, when he defended a forger, who was found guilty, confessed, and was executed at Tyburn. In the same year he was engaged in the famous case of Elizabeth Canning (1734-1773); Davy defended Mary Squires in this trial and afterwards conducted the prosecution of Canning. 
Such was Davy's reputation as an advocate that he was created a serjeant-at-law only ten years after call, in 1755, his patrons at the ceremony being the duke of Somerset and the earl of Suffolk. After his appointment as one of the king's serjeants in 1762 he was less involved in defence work, though he was one of the counsel for Elizabeth Chudleigh, duchess of Kingston (1720-1788) in the case against her for bigamy in 1776. He represented the black slave James Somerset in the great slavery case heard by Lord Mansfield in 1772. In his concluding speech Davy reiterated the view that 'this air is too pure for a slave to breathe in. I trust I shall not quit this court without certain conviction of that assertion' ('DNB'). Nevertheless, Davy's efforts were overshadowed by the brilliance of his junior Francis Hargrave. In other prominent cases he found himself supporting arbitrary powers of government against Serjeant Glynn, and in that of the radical politician John Wilkes he was criticized for citing precedents from the time of Charles I. Davy was renowned for his quirky humour and quick repartee, and numerous stories about him circulated at the bar. Two illustrations of his wit may serve. When Lord Mansfield interrupted him in argument, saying, 'If this be law I must burn all my books, I see', Davy instantly replied: 'Your lordship had better read them first' (Woolrych, 2.625-6). On another occasion, when Mansfield proposed to sit on Good Friday, Davy is said to have reminded him that he would be the first judge to do so since Pontius Pilate. For the last three years of his life, by dint of seniority after the death of Mr Serjeant Whitaker in 1777, Davy was leader of the English bar as king's prime serjeant. He died at Hammersmith on 13 December 1780 after a short illness, and was buried at Newington Butts. 


@@@@@


doc= 7321


Davy, William (1744-1826), theologian, son of Francis and Mary Davy, was born at Downhouse in the parish of Tavistock, Devon, on 4 March 1744. He was baptized on 27 April 1744 at the Presbyterian Abbey Chapel in Tavistock. He was educated at the Exeter Free Grammar School and, from 1762, at Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 28 May 1766. After leaving the university he was ordained on the curacy of Moretonhampstead, Devon, where he married Sarah Gilbert, daughter of Mr W. Gilbert of Longbrooke, near Kingsbridge, on 15 June 1768. They had two daughters and one son. He next became curate of Drewsteignton, and in 1786 was appointed curate of Lustleigh, with a yearly stipend of $40. 
In 1785-6 he published a 'System of divinity, in a course of sermons, on the being, nature, and attributes of God; on some of the most important articles of the Christian religion; and on the virtues and vices of mankind', which was printed by R. Trewman of Exeter in six volumes. His systematic compilation of sermons by many different authors was judged to be a practical and acceptable collection by the 'Monthly Review'. He had been encouraged to bring out this work by a long list of subscribers, but because many of them neglected to pay their subscriptions, the actual receipts were far less than the expenses, and the author found himself owing the printer more than $100. He none the less determined to extend the work to twenty-six volumes, and being unable to risk a second loss he resolved to print the book himself. 
Davy was a skilled mechanic. After the sinking of the 'Royal George' in Portsmouth harbour in 1782 he had travelled there with the plan of a diving bell to recover the property sunk in her; but although the plan was afterwards acted upon with considerable success, he received no remuneration. He used his mechanical skills to construct a press of an unusual design; then he bought some old types at a cheap rate from the printer R. Trewman, and in five months, by his own manual labour, produced forty copies of a specimen volume, consisting of 328 pages, besides prefatory matter. He sent twenty-six of these specimen volumes to the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, the Royal Society, the editors of several reviews, and to others who he thought might help him publish the whole work. He was bitterly disappointed. The 'British Critic' gave a very favourable notice of the book, but this praise produced no other encouragement. William Enfield, writing in the 'Monthly Review', acknowledged that the project was a laudable undertaking but advised Davy to abandon it because, without financial support, 'his type is too bad, and his skill in the art of printing too defective, to leave him any hope of sending out the work with credit from his own press' ('Monthly Review', 2nd ser., 18.268-9). Few of those to whom he presented the specimen volume even acknowledged its receipt. He sought in vain the patronage of three successive bishops of Exeter -- Ross, Buller, and Courtenay -- and of Archbishop Moore and Bishop Porteus, but these prelates sent no financial assistance and declined to accept a dedication from him. Bishop Buller would not look at the specimen volume. 
In spite of these discouragements Davy, having fourteen copies remaining, recommenced his labours and taught his servant Mary Hole to compose the types; he patiently proceeded, with her assistance, to print fourteen copies of the other twenty-five volumes, each containing about 500 pages, completing the herculean task in 1807. Copies of this extremely curious 'System of Divinity' are preserved in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, the Cambridge University Library, the London Institution, and the cathedral library, Exeter. The West Country Studies Library in Exeter has three sets, including Davy's own copy, as well as a three-volume manuscript list of contents (1816) and twelve volumes of 'Sermons on Various Subjects', also in manuscript. At first Davy could only afford sufficient type to print one page at a time. Numerous notes and amendments were accommodated on printed or manuscript slips carefully pasted in and folded. Sir Robert Harry Inglis, who presented a copy of the work to the British Library, considered it to be 'perhaps unparalleled in any age or country, as an effort of the combined skill, industry, and perseverance of one man, undaunted by age, poverty, and forty years of neglect' (R. H. Inglis to A. Panizzi, bound into the British Library copy of 'A System of Divinity', vol. 1, 1795, Cup.408.g.1). From 1818 Davy resided at Willmead, a small farm belonging to his son, but he continued to hold the curacy of Lustleigh. 
Besides his great work Davy printed in the same way a volume of extracts from it under the title 'Divinity, or, Discourses on the being of God, the divinity of Christ, the personality and divinity of the Holy Ghost, and on the sacred Trinity' (1825). After considerable additions had been made to these discourses, a neat edition of them was published in 1825 at Exeter by Featherstone and Sparke in two volumes. Dr Pelham, bishop of Exeter, now tardily recognized the author's merits, and in December 1825 he presented Davy, then aged eighty-one, to the vicarage of Winkleigh, Devon. He held the benefice only about five months, and died in Winkleigh on 15 June 1826; he was buried in the chancel of Winkleigh church on 17 June. Despite his modest wealth he had presented a set of communion plate to Lustleigh church in 1822 and endowed a school in the parish, which opened in 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 7322


Dafydd ab Owain Gwynedd (d. 1203), king of Gwynedd, was Hywel's half-brother and the elder of the two sons of Owain Gwynedd and his cousin Cristin. In 1157 Dafydd and his brother Cynan ambushed Henry II in the forest near Hawarden during the king's invasion of north Wales; by 1165 he appears to have been holding Dyffryn Clwyd when he raided and plundered the adjacent cantref of Tegeingl. In 1170 he seized power in Gwynedd after killing Hywel at Pentraeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 7323


Dafydd ap Llywelyn (c.1215-1246), prince of Gwynedd, was the son of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240) and Joan (d. 1237), illegitimate daughter of King John. Llywelyn was promised Joan's hand in 1204 and the marriage probably took place the next year. Dafydd had not been born in August 1211 when Llywelyn submitted to King John and was forced to concede that, if he were to have no son with Joan, his lands would be ceded to the king who would provide for Llywelyn's bastard son Gruffudd ap Llywelyn (d. 1244) as he wished. 
Dafydd may have been born 'c'.1215. He is first mentioned in May 1220 when, at a meeting at Shrewsbury with the justiciar, Hubert de Burgh, Archbishop Stephen Langton, and the papal legate, Pandulf, royal approval was given to Llywelyn's decision that he should be succeeded by Dafydd rather than by Gruffudd. Two years later Llywelyn secured papal approval for an ordinance declaring his wish to set aside the custom of his country by which, he said, in words with a clear reference to 'Galatians' 4: 30, 'the son of the handmaiden should be heir with the son of a freewoman and illegitimate sons possess the inheritance like the legitimate' ('CEPR letters', 1.87). He provided that Dafydd, his son with his wedded wife, should succeed him by hereditary right. He secured the consent of the magnates of Wales in 1226, a year in which Dafydd and his parents met the king at Shrewsbury. Llywelyn had had no success in his efforts to secure royal recognition of the supremacy over Powys and Deheubarth that he had established during the conflicts of the reign of John, but he evidently hoped that his son would be able to succeed not only to Gwynedd but to his wider dominion. When, however, Dafydd did homage to the king in 1229 (possibly upon his coming of age at fourteen years), he did so for the 'rights and privileges' to which he would succeed upon his father's death ('CPR', '1225-32', 269). This was a form of words which would be interpreted in accordance with the king's wishes in due course. During William (V) de Briouze's imprisonment following his capture in 1228 Llywelyn secured a promise of the marcher lord's daughter, Isabella, as Dafydd's wife, with the lordship of Builth as her marriage portion. In May 1230, following his affair with Joan, Briouze was hanged by Llywelyn, but the prince immediately wrote to the marcher's widow, Eva, conveying his wish that the marriage should still take place. Dafydd and Isabella were probably married before the end of 1232 when arrangements were made for the assignment of a portion of the Briouze inheritance. Llywelyn had already secured possession of the lordship of Builth. 
From 1231 onwards, sometimes in association with his mother or his father's seneschal Ednyfed Fychan (died 1246), Dafydd was engaged on diplomatic missions to the king. Adversely affected by Llywelyn's offensives in the march between 1231 and 1234, undertaken on the prince's sole initiative or in association with Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke, Henry III repeatedly intimated his readiness to discuss not only a truce but the treaty of peace by which Llywelyn sought formal acknowledgement of his broad supremacy. Successive attempts at negotiation produced no more than a truce and by 1237, when Llywelyn endured a paralytic stroke, Dafydd's role in the quest for a permanent settlement was greatly enhanced. There is probably some substance in Matthew Paris's account, that the two princes' search for a permanent peace was made urgent by the recalcitrance shown by Gruffudd ap Llywelyn. Gruffudd had suffered two periods of imprisonment but was now at liberty and represented a challenge to his brother's succession. Anxieties in Gwynedd may explain Llywelyn's decision early in 1238 to summon the princes of Wales to an assembly at which they would do homage to Dafydd. Henry III reacted with a firm order to Llywelyn and Dafydd, and to the princes of Powys and Deheubarth, forbidding the homages. The marchers were alerted and summoned to a meeting at Oxford. No more was heard of the issue of homage and the Welsh chronicle 'Brut y tywysogyon' is probably correct in recording that, at a gathering at the Cistercian abbey of Strata Florida in the autumn of 1238, the Welsh princes swore fealty to Dafydd, making no mention of homage. 
The chronicle states that in 1239, before the death of Llywelyn, Dafydd ap Llywelyn seized Gruffudd and his eldest son, Owain, and imprisoned them in the castle of Cricieth. Matthew Paris, however, in an informed account of the course of events following the death of Llywelyn on 11 April 1240, offers a different interpretation according to which Gruffudd was at liberty at that time. Acting swiftly Dafydd came to Henry at Gloucester on 15 May and did homage for his right in Gwynedd. Lands which other barons claimed against him were made subject to arbitration and it was clearly stated that the homages of all the princes of Wales should remain with the king of England. The Tewkesbury chronicler, who states that Dafydd came before Henry wearing the coronet of Gwynedd and that he was knighted by the king, conveys that Dafydd was allowed to do homage only for the lands that Llywelyn had held by right ('de jure'), revealing the humiliating extent to which he had surrendered to the king. Fortified none the less by Henry's endorsement of his succession to Gwynedd, Dafydd was able to return to his patrimony to confront the challenge presented by his half-brother. Gruffudd was probably seized, as Paris indicates, in the early autumn of 1240. The capture was alleged to have been accomplished by treachery and on this account, possibly among others, Dafydd incurred the unrelenting wrath of Richard, bishop of Bangor. Dafydd's support in lay society in Gwynedd was less than complete, but, with the adherence of Ednyfed Fychan and a number of key lineages, he strengthened his position in the patrimony. A new confidence came to be reflected during the following months in a marked intransigence in his relations with the crown over the arbitration procedures to which he was bound by the treaty of Gloucester. 
By the summer of 1241 Henry was resolved upon a military campaign as a means of imposing discipline upon the prince of Gwynedd. Dafydd was already bereft of adherents among the Welsh princes who, promptly upon Llywelyn's death, had done as they were bidden and returned to the king's fealty. His position was undermined by Henry's decision, contrary to his endorsement of Dafydd's succession in 1240, to take up the cause of Gruffudd. Prompted by an initiative on the part of Gruffudd's wife, Senana, who sought his release from imprisonment, Henry undertook to secure his release and make a judgment of his court, according to Welsh law, concerning the portion of his father's patrimony which belonged to him but which Dafydd denied him. The list of Welsh princes and marcher lords who pledged the agreement between Henry and Senana on 12 August provides a graphic indication of the powerful influences that converged to bring Dafydd to submission. Confronting the king's army in the four cantrefs of Perfeddwlad (the lands between the Conwy and the Dee) Dafydd could not offer effective resistance and found withdrawal beyond the Conwy to Snowdonia impossible. On 29 August, at Gwerneigron on the banks of the Elwy near St Asaph, he accepted terms that reflected his dire plight. He was required to hand over Gruffudd to the king and agree to accept the judgment of the king's court concerning the portion of the patrimony due to Gruffudd. The agreement raised the prospect that Gwynedd would be divided into two parts, to be held by the two brothers as tenants-in-chief of the crown. Dafydd yielded Englefield (north-east Wales from the River Clwyd to the Dee) and accepted that the lands that Llywelyn had possessed by might, and that should have been subject to arbitration, be restored to their lords. It was emphasized again that the homage of the Welsh lords of Wales ought by right to belong to King Henry. At Rhuddlan two days later he agreed to place himself under ecclesiastical jurisdiction if he were ever to renounce his fealty to the crown and acknowledged that breach of faith would incur the forfeiture of his entire inheritance. In another document executed in London in the autumn, when the essential features of his submission were rehearsed once more, he made a further concession that if he were to die without heir his patrimony would be ceded to the king. 
Gruffudd was transferred to the Tower of London in September 1241 but Henry made no attempt to divide the patrimony. In 1243-4 the brothers brought actions in the king's court alleging breach of the king's peace but Dafydd did not appear, excusing himself because he suffered an illness that caused him to lose the hair of his head and the nails of his toes and fingers. The issue of Gruffudd's share of the inheritance is not known to have been broached in legal action. While Gruffudd remained in his custody Henry had the means of keeping Dafydd under restraint. The king may also have been prepared to tolerate the fact that Gruffudd's second son, Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (d. 1282), had established lordship in Dyffryn Clwyd, one of the three of the four cantrefs which formed part of Dafydd's dominion. However, Gruffudd's death on 1 March 1244, in an attempt to escape from captivity, released Dafydd from the constraints placed upon him. Presenting himself as the avenger of his brother, Dafydd quickly summoned the princes of Wales to a new alliance in resistance to the English king and won a good measure of support. Henry sent Gruffudd's eldest son, Owain ap Gruffudd, to Chester with a view to releasing him so that he could draw support away from Dafydd when opportunity arose. But, though he won complete freedom before the end of 1244, Owain did not enter Gwynedd while Dafydd lived. By then Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, setting aside the animosities that had riven the lineage, had joined forces with Dafydd. Henry was confronted with a broad Welsh alliance founded upon a new-found unity in Gwynedd. 
During this period of armed resistance Dafydd endeavoured to break free from his subjection to Henry III by making an appeal to Innocent IV. The enterprise was designed to enable Dafydd to hold his dominion as a papal fief. Innocent's first response shows that Dafydd had argued that his parents had given him as a ward ('alumnus') to the Church of Rome, and that on this account he sought to be absolved from the pledges exacted from him upon his submission to King Henry. The pope's letter raised the prospect that the king of England would be summoned to Caerwys and examined on the prince's behalf by the abbots of Aberconwy and Cymer. Nine months later, reflecting both Henry's rebuttal and his alacrity in meeting his financial obligations to the Holy See, Innocent repudiated his previous response and accepted that Dafydd's ancestors had long been vassals of the king. 
It appears that during the period when he negotiated with the papal court, excommunicated by the archbishop of Canterbury and his land under interdict, Dafydd styled himself 'prince of Wales'. His decision to use the style reflected the broad, though not universal, support that he won among the princes of Wales. After prolonged delay an army was summoned to Chester for a campaign on which the king embarked in August 1245. He advanced to the Conwy and encamped for two months in the fortifications of Deganwy. A force from Ireland ravaged Anglesey, but the king was unable to breach the defences of Snowdonia. The soldiers at Deganwy suffered deprivation and by early October, conceding the need to make a truce with Dafydd, Henry withdrew. Before conflict was renewed Dafydd was dead. He died at Aber on 25 February 1246 and was buried at the abbey of Aberconwy. There were already signs of fissure among the prince's adherents in Deheubarth but it was only after his death that the alliance fell apart. 
Historians' judgements upon the prince who failed to maintain the supremacy established by his father have tended to be somewhat harsh. Dafydd had come to an unenviable inheritance, his patrimonial dominion wracked by Gruffudd ap Llywelyn's challenge for the succession and his father's broader supremacy necessarily impermanent in the absence of recognition by the crown in a formal peace treaty. Dafydd's strenuous and sustained resistance in 1244-6 undoubtedly won him respect in his time. Two years before he died the poet Dafydd Benfras had commemorated Gruffudd ap Llywelyn in vibrant terms which suggest firm adherence, but in his elegy to Dafydd, in which he proclaimed him to be the rightful ruler of Gwynedd, he composed a deeply moving tribute to a steadfast defender of his land who yielded nothing to the crown of London. He was deemed to be one who had proved entirely worthy of his lineage. 
According to the terms of his submission in 1241 Gwynedd would now fall to the king for either of two reasons: Dafydd had rebelled against the crown and he had died without heir. Even so, royal appropriation of Snowdonia was not politically feasible. After the two eldest sons of Gruffudd ap Llywelyn, Owain and Llywelyn, had agreed to share the patrimony between them, Henry, by the treaty of Woodstock in April 1247, endorsed the arrangement, but he confined the brothers to the land west of the Conwy. A year later Henry allowed Owain and Llywelyn to remove the body of their father, Gruffudd ap Llywelyn, from London to Aberconwy to be laid beside Llywelyn ab Iorwerth and Dafydd ap Llywelyn. Dafydd Benfras composed an elegy which, commemorating the three princes together, accorded each one a place of honour in the annals of their dynasty. 


@@@@@


doc= 7324


Dafydd ap Gruffudd (d. 1283), prince of Gwynedd, was the third of four sons of Gruffudd ap Llywelyn (d. 1244) and his wife, Senana, and grandson of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240). 
Dafydd first appears in the historical record on 12 August 1241 when he and his younger brother Rhodri, both still under age, were placed in the custody of Henry III. They were given as sureties for their mother's good faith in an agreement with the king by which she endeavoured to secure the release of her husband from imprisonment by his half-brother, Dafydd ap Llywelyn (d. 1246). After his elder brothers Owain and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (d. 1282) shared the patrimony of Gwynedd in 1246, and secured the king's endorsement of their position a year later, Dafydd may have associated himself with Llywelyn, whose charter to the priory of Penmon in 1247 he witnessed. The Welsh chronicle 'Cronica de Wallia' states, however, that he became captain of the household troops ('dux familie') in Owain's service, and by 1252 he is found exercising lordship over the commote of Cymydmaen in the cantref of Llyn. The cantref formed part of Owain's portion of Gwynedd and he may have ceded the commote in response to his younger brother's demands for a share of the patrimony. Dafydd pressed his claims upon the king and in September 1253 Henry took his fealty for whatever portion of Gwynedd he could secure for himself. The two elder brothers were required to provide the portion due to Dafydd 'according to the custom of Wales' ('Close Rolls', 7.419), but, although Owain may have been prepared to accommodate him, Llywelyn was resolutely opposed to any further partition of Gwynedd. The proposals put to the king 'concerning Llywelyn's brothers' (ibid., 10.104) may have urged that Dafydd be given an estate in Perfeddwlad or the Four Cantrefs, the land east of the River Conwy then in the king's possession. Negotiations were of no avail, and in June 1255 Owain and Dafydd brought an army against Llywelyn to resolve the issue by force. They were defeated at Bryn Derwin on the borders of the commotes of Arfon Uwch Gwyrfai and Eifionydd and imprisoned, but whereas Owain was held for twenty-two years Dafydd was released before Llywelyn advanced into Perfeddwlad in November 1256. The lands given him by Llywelyn were mainly located in that area. 
Dafydd is found in Llywelyn's service in the next years, participating in a campaign in south-west Wales in 1258 when he is described as 'a young man most splendid in arms' ('Annales Cambriae', 96). In the same year he appears second to Llywelyn in a record of an agreement between the princes of Wales and a group of Scottish magnates, and in 1260 he and Llywelyn put their seals to an agreement for the prolongation of the truce with Henry III. Dafydd may have been formally recognized as second to Llywelyn in the prince's councils. When, in the summer of 1262, Henry III heard a rumour that Llywelyn was dead he was anxious to ensure that Dafydd, who in the king's estimation was no 'true heir to Wales' ('Close Rolls', 12.142-3), should not succeed to the supremacy that Llywelyn had by then established in Wales. 
Henry evidently made an attempt to entice Dafydd from Llywelyn's allegiance shortly before he set out from Chester on his Welsh campaign in 1257, holding forth a prospect that upon the defeat of Llywelyn the king would retain Anglesey and Perfeddwlad and divide the remainder of Gwynedd between Owain and Dafydd. Henry's efforts were of no avail, but the Lord Edward, in the course of his intervention in the march of Wales in April 1263, received Dafydd into his allegiance. Although he was in no position to make his will effective, Edward granted him the cantref of Dyffryn Clwyd and the commote of Ceinmeirch, a provision extended three months later so as to convey the cantrefs of Dyffryn Clwyd and Rhufoniog. The grants were made until such time as Dafydd, by his efforts and Edward's aid, could secure his inheritance in Gwynedd Uwch Conwy, that is in the land west of the Conwy centred on Snowdonia. This was to remain Dafydd's principal ambition throughout his life, and dissatisfaction with the territorial provision made for him by his brother was probably an important reason for his defection. Under the terms of the treaty of Montgomery in September 1267 it was 'specially ordained' that he be given the lands which he held before his departure. If Dafydd were not satisfied, further provision should be made by five named members of the prince's council and, if he were still not content, justice would be done to him according to the law and custom of Wales in the presence of two persons who would inform the king of the decision. The matter was required to be resolved by Christmas but agreement is not known to have been reached before 1269, when a compact was made that gave Dafydd no more than he possessed upon his secession to the king. Dafydd was married, after 1265, to Elizabeth, sister of Robert Ferrers, earl of Derby (died 1279), and widow of William Marshal (died 1265). Through his wife he held the manor of Folesham, Norfolk, then exchanged with John Marshal for the manor of Norton, Northamptonshire. 
Although Dafydd served in Llywelyn's forces in Glamorgan in 1271 and is mentioned as one of his councillors two years later, relations between the brothers remained difficult. The surviving evidence indicates that in 1274 Dafydd ap Gruffudd and Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn (died 1286) conspired to kill Llywelyn. At a session of the prince's council in April 1274 Gruffudd and his son Owain were convicted of infidelity, but action against Dafydd was taken only later in the year following a confession by Owain ap Gruffudd, who was held in custody as a surety for his father's good faith. Dafydd was summoned to appear before the prince's council at Rhuddlan to answer charges against him. Told to appear again at Llanfor in Penllyn, Dafydd fled to England with an armed following. Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn did likewise and Edward I received them into his realm. Dafydd asked for Edward's guidance as to how he could do most to damage Llywelyn, and sought the king's aid in doing so. Refusing to do homage to Edward at Chester in August 1275, Llywelyn gave as his main reason the king's decision to receive the two vassals who had conspired to kill him. 
In the war of 1277 Dafydd served alongside William Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, in a force based at Chester which advanced into Powys Fadog. Reporting during April that Dafydd was making demands concerning the payment of his men and insisting that he retain booty taken by them, Warwick feared that he might withdraw from the king's service. Dafydd was also said to be angry that certain men, probably magnates engaged in the campaign, were asking the king for land in Wales. Dafydd's continued concern for his interests, and perhaps anxiety over his continued fidelity, may have prompted Edward's charter of 23 August, which indicated that, upon securing Gwynedd Uwch Conwy, he would divide the land between Dafydd ap Gruffudd, Owain ap Gruffudd, and himself. The two Welsh lords would be summoned to the king's parliaments in England like the other earls and barons of the realm. Dafydd was also granted the lordship of Hope, where, with Edward's help, he began to build the castle of Caergwrle. By the autumn Edward had other intentions. On 10 October he issued a charter granting Dafydd the two cantrefs of Dyffryn Clwyd and Rhufoniog in Perfeddwlad, thereby affirming the grant which he had made upon Dafydd's defection in 1263. Once more the grant was made so as to provide for Dafydd until he could secure his share of the patrimony in Gwynedd Uwch Conwy, but on this occasion Edward was able to put his will into effect immediately. Edward may have been reluctant to see Dafydd established in Snowdonia, and a negotiated settlement with Llywelyn was secured by the treaty of Aberconwy on 9 November. A week earlier, in a document which points to a key issue in the negotiations, Edward granted Llywelyn a life-interest in Gwynedd Uwch Conwy in return for his acknowledgement of Dafydd's hereditary right there. The substance of this agreement was then embodied in a treaty which, creating only a life-interest for Dafydd in Dyffryn Clwyd and Rhufoniog, and leaving his aspiration for a share of Snowdonia still unrequited, provided no permanent solution to the problems that Dafydd had posed. 
Dafydd was at Rhuddlan in September 1278 when, in Edward's presence, Llywelyn agreed to fulfil the terms of an earlier financial settlement with Rhodri ap Gruffudd. Dafydd gave a security that the money pledged by Llywelyn to Rhodri could be raised on his English estates. At the same time the king issued to Dafydd a grant for life of the manor of Frodsham, Cheshire, previously held at will. There is no certain evidence of discord between Dafydd and the crown until late 1281. He had previously been summoned to the county court of Chester to answer a claim by William de Venables to lands in Hope and, according to Dafydd's account, an inquisition had shown that the lands in question were in Wales and were subject to Welsh, not English, law. The decision appears to have been reversed following Reynold de Grey's appointment as justice of Chester in November 1281. Dafydd went to court and, in a loud voice, declared that the land was in Wales and that he had no need to answer in the county court. He pleaded that the laws of Wales be respected like the laws of other nations. He subsequently complained of interference by royal officers in his lordships of Dyffryn Clwyd and Rhufoniog, and he was particularly aggrieved at the actions of Reynold de Grey. He shared his aversion to Grey with the communities under the justice's authority in Rhos and Tegeingl and this common experience was a major cause of renewed conflict in 1282 when Dafydd played the main initiating role. On Palm Sunday (22 March) 1282 Dafydd launched an attack on the castle of Hawarden, capturing its custodian, Roger Clifford (died 1285), and Rhuddlan was put under siege. Dafydd was probably the inspiration behind the almost simultaneous rising on the part of several of the princes of south-west Wales. Llywelyn may have tarried before committing himself to war, and Dafydd was certainly the main object of Edward's anger during the conflict. 
Dafydd's castle of Caergwrle fell to forces advancing from Chester on 16 June, three months after hostilities began. The main royal advance began in early August and Grey was able to reach Ruthin, the centre of Dafydd's lordship of Dyffryn Clwyd, by the third week of the month. There is, however, no indication that the king's army reached the vicinity of Denbigh until mid-October, and this suggests that strong resistance was encountered in Dafydd's lordship of Rhufoniog. Along with Rhos, Rhufoniog was granted to Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, on 16 October, and Dyffryn Clwyd was conveyed to Grey on 23 October. 
Conflict was stayed upon intervention by John Pecham (died 1292), archbishop of Canterbury. Dafydd's grievances were included among the materials sent to Pecham before he entered Snowdonia for discussions with Llywelyn and probably with Dafydd. Upon his return to Rhuddlan, finding the king still bent upon the princes' unconditional surrender, Pecham secured the magnates' consent to proposals that they would be prepared to recommend to the king if Llywelyn and Dafydd were to submit. Llywelyn was offered sanctuary in England, Dafydd was given only an opportunity to leave for the Holy Land, never to return unless recalled by the king. In a trenchant reply Dafydd said that, when he went to the Holy Land, he would do so of his free will, for God and not for man. He, and others with him, had gone to war to defend their patrimony and their liberties. He insisted that he was fighting a just war, and that he was prepared to answer before God for what he had done in the name of justice. 
When Llywelyn subsequently departed for the march Dafydd was left to defend Gwynedd Uwch Conwy and, after his brother's death on 11 December 1282, assuming the style 'prince of Wales and lord of Snowdon', he maintained resistance for several months. However, the English assault forced Dafydd's withdrawal to his innermost fastnesses. Castell y Bere fell on 25 April and thereafter Dafydd was a fugitive, searches being made for him by contingents of soldiers far and wide in Snowdonia and further afield. The Hagnaby chronicle states that he sent his wife and Roger Clifford to the king to plead for mercy but to no avail. Dafydd was captured on 22 June 1283 and six days later Edward announced that he had been taken by men of his own nation. He was imprisoned at Rhuddlan. The magnates of the realm and representatives of the shires were summoned to Shrewsbury by the morrow of Michaelmas for the trial of 'the last survivor of a family of traitors' ('Calendar of Various Chancery Rolls', '1277-1326', 281). Edward expressed his anger at the perfidy of one whom the king had received as an exile, nourished as an orphan, and endowed with lands and placed among the great ones at court. Dafydd was tried and sentenced to death for treason. He was dragged to the scaffold as a traitor, he was hanged for homicide and, because he had committed the murders during the Lord's passion, he was disembowelled and his entrails burnt. For plotting the king's death his body was quartered and sent to four English cities. Geoffrey of Shrewsbury was paid 20's'. for executing the judgment on Saturday 2 October. Dafydd's head was placed beside that of his brother at the Tower of London. 
Dafydd had two sons, Llywelyn and Owain, who, after their capture, were taken under escort through Acton Burnell to Bristol Castle. Llywelyn died there in 1287 and was buried in the Dominican church; Owain was still at Bristol in 1325. Dafydd was said to have had seven daughters, one of whom was named Gwladus (died 1328); they were sent to the Gilbertine house of Sixle, Lincolnshire, and other nunneries. The poet Bleddyn Fardd composed Dafydd's elegy and another poem to commemorate Owain, Llywelyn, and Dafydd together. 


@@@@@


doc= 7325


Davys, George (1780-1864), bishop of Peterborough, son of John Davys of Rempstone, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Sophia, daughter of the Revd B. Wigley of Sawley, Derbyshire, was born at Loughborough, Leicestershire, on 1 October 1780. In 1799 he entered as a sizar at Christ's College, Cambridge, and came out tenth wrangler in 1803. He was elected a fellow of his college in 1806, and in the same year proceeded MA, and became curate, first of Littlebury, Essex, then of Chesterford to 1817, and afterwards of Swaffham Priory. He vacated his fellowship in 1814 on his marriage to Marianne (1789-1858), daughter of the Revd Edmund Mapletoft, rector of Anstye, Hertfordshire. In 1811 he was presented on his own petition to the small vicarage of Willoughby on the Wolds, Lincolnshire, which he held until 1829. 
Davys produced a number of theological works for the instruction of a rustic readership in the principal tenets of the established church. A ninth edition of his 'Village Conversations on the Liturgy of the Church of England' (1820) was called for in 1831, while his 'Village Conversations on the Principal Offices of the Church' (1824) reached a second edition in 1849. His exposition of the virtues of thrift, 'On Savings' Banks' (1824), also adopted the didactic conversational form, in which the prudent Will Wise urged upon his feckless friend Ralph Ragged the benefits of temperance and regular saving. 
Davys's simple piety commended him to the duchess of Kent, who in 1827 appointed him tutor to the Princess Victoria, the future queen. Resident at Kensington Palace, he remained the princess's principal master until her accession in 1837, charged particularly with her religious education within the Church of England. She found him a rather monotonous and soporific preacher. In April 1829 he was presented by the crown to the rectory of Allhallows-on-the-Wall, London, which he continued to hold until his elevation to the episcopal bench. He was appointed dean of Chester on 10 January 1831, and at the following commencement at Cambridge was created DD. 
On 7 May 1839 Davys was advanced to the bishopric of Peterborough on the recommendation of Lord Melbourne, who was tardy in honouring the custom that the tutor to the reigning sovereign should be raised to the episcopate. Davys's lack of distinction and likely tory sympathies told against him, and Melbourne's reluctance to prefer him was overcome only by pressure from the press and the reflection that the queen would thereby be saved the necessity of paying him a pension. As a bishop he took no active part either in politics or religious controversy, though he was identified as a member of the evangelical wing of the church. He was considered to be fair and liberal towards all religious creeds in his diocese, but was noticed to show a preference towards his relations when making appointments to canonries. Publications of an instructive kind continued to flow from his pen, including 'Letters between a Father and his Son on the Roman History' (1848) and 'A Plain and Short History of England, for Children' (13th edn, 1859) which also used the epistolary device. He contributed anonymously to the 'Cottagers' Monthly Visitor' and the 'National School Magazine'. Davys died of bronchitis at the palace, Peterborough, on 18 April 1864, and was buried in the graveyard of the cathedral on 23 April. He was survived by two sons, both clergymen, his eldest son and heir having died in 1836 from the effects of an accident while playing cricket. Davys's career received an ambiguous tribute in 'The Times' (19 April 1864, 14): 'His ambition through life was rather to be good than great. Higher praise it is impossible to bestow.' 


@@@@@


doc= 7326


Davis, John (c.1550-1605), explorer, was apparently a Devon man living at Sandridge in the parish of Stoke Gabriel near Dartmouth. He may indeed have been born there, but his baptism is not recorded in the parish register. Almost all the details of his early life -- his parentage, date and place of birth, and upbringing -- are unknown; it is unfortunate that his name can be spelt in different ways and that there are records of others of the same name, of equivalent or higher rank, in the same vicinity. His evident education, indicated by his journals, other publications, and navigational skills, is wholly unrecorded. It was at Stoke Gabriel on 29 September 1582 that he married Faith Fulford, who had been baptized there on 29 May 1561; her local origins make it highly unlikely (as alleged by J. Prince in his 'Worthies of Devon', 1701, 286) that she was from a county family, the daughter of Sir John Fulford, sheriff of Devon in 1535. Their first recorded child, Gilbert, baptized at Stoke Gabriel on 8 June 1589, almost certainly took his name from the Gilbert family of seamen and explorers, who were Davis's closest and earliest recorded maritime associates. His other two sons, Arthur and Philip Davis, were apparently born in the next two years; Faith's adultery effectively ended his marriage in 1593. 
The location of Stoke Gabriel on the Dart estuary was conducive to a naval career. John Davis reputedly spent his youth in maritime pursuits, the necessary training for a professional seaman, almost certainly in subordinate and unrecorded capacities on the Gilberts' major voyages. He was never one of the gentlemen so prominent in Elizabethan seafaring -- unlike his associates and near neighbours, the Gilberts and Raleghs, with whom his connections certainly antedate by some years the first formal references in 1579 and 1580. By that time he was described as a friend of Adrian Gilbert, brother of the more famous Sir Humphrey Gilbert (died 1583). Both were visited at their homes in Devon by the astrologer Dr John Dee (1527-1609). On 24 January 1583 all three met with Sir Francis Walsingham at the house of Robert Beale, then acting secretary of state, where they floated their proposal to search for the north-west passage, supporting it with detailed reference to charts. Several further meetings followed up to 18 March, when Davis returned to Devon. At two years' remove these conferences were the gestation of the three Arctic voyages in search of the north-west passage on which Davis's reputation principally depends. 
The three voyages seem to have been funded principally by the London merchant William Sanderson (1547-1638), to whom Davis reported by letter and in person, but also by Adrian Gilbert, Walsingham, and some other London merchants; only once did the merchants of Exeter make a significant contribution. Though small in scale and comprising only the smallest of ships, which had the shallow draughts most suitable for unknown shoal waters, such expeditions were expensive. Although they were ambitious in their long-term aims, it appears that the immediate objectives of each voyage were actually quite limited, to discover routes that could be exploited more fully later. 
Davis's first expedition consisted of two barks, the 'Sunshine' of London, of 50 tons and 23 crew, and the 'Moonshine' of Dartmouth, of 35 tons. After departing from Dartmouth on 7 June 1585, they were delayed for twelve days at the Isles of Scilly, an opportunity that Davis characteristically used to chart the archipelago for navigation, and arrived on 20 July at the east coast of Greenland. Blocked by ice to the north, he sailed first southwards down the eastern coast and then northwards up the west coast as far as 66 degree of latitude, whence he sailed across the open sea to the north-west until he reached Cumberland Gulf, a broad strait which he pursued for 100 miles or so, finding only open waters filled with islands. At this point, late in August 1585, he abandoned exploration for the summer and returned home, arriving safely at Dartmouth on 30 September. 'Sunshine' and 'Moonshine' were also involved in Davis's second voyage in 1586, together with the 'Mermaid' of 120 tons and the pinnace 'North Star' of 10 tons. After departing on 7 May 1586, he made his landfall at 60 degree on 15 June and departed on 11 September. This second voyage was more difficult, relations with the native inhabitants being more troubled and violent, his crew more easily daunted, and the weather not merely foggy but stormy. Never proceeding as far north as on the previous voyage, he investigated the inlets and islands of the east coast of Canada, without either definitely finding a passage to the west or discrediting the notion -- hence his third voyage 'for the discovery of a passage to the Isles of the Molucca or the coast of China' ('Voyages and Works', 39), for which he had the barks 'Sunshine' again and the 'Elizabeth' of London, and the clincher-built 'Helen' of London. After departing from Dartmouth on 19 May 1587, Davis left two ships at the cod fishery, while he pressed northwards through the Davis Strait into Baffin Bay as far northwards as latitude 73 degree and then westwards to the pack ice, whence high winds forced him to retire southwards. He intended to join his other vessels, on which he depended for supplies. Not finding them, 'having in our ship but litle wood and halfe a hogshead of fresh water' (ibid., 48), he tackled the Atlantic unaccompanied and returned successfully to Dartmouth on 15 September. His brief initial report states that he had proceeded 60 leagues further than he had originally intended and that, at 73 degree, there were no obstacles, 'the sea all open... The passage is most probable [and] the execution easier' (ibid., 59). The sequel that he evidently planned, a fourth voyage, did not happen. 
The three voyages are recorded respectively by journals of the merchant John Janes, Davis himself, and Janes again. Janes's first journal is full of the wonders of unknown lands and seas, of such unfamiliar creatures as the porpoises, whales, seals, and polar bears that they saw and generally slew and ate, the Inuit they encountered and traded with, and the floating wood, tides, soundings, sea colour, and seabed that Davis employed as navigational aids. The latter journals are more balanced, the result of greater familiarity with both the phenomena and the actual locations and people who were encountered. For the second voyage Davis's own journal records a genuine interest in the native population, whose language, diet, and customs he recorded and with whom he dealt -- at times they actually outnumbered the explorers and proved extremely acquisitive of iron -- and in the local flora and fauna, and reveals his own diplomatic skills and strong sense of divine providence. 
These voyages carried Davis to locations in north-east Canada and west of Greenland, where no known Europeans had been before, and to which Davis gave names reminiscent of his west-country origins and of his backers: some, such as Gilbert Sound, Cumberland Sound, Exeter Sound, Totness Road, Cape Dyer, Cape Walsingham, and Sanderson his Hope, still endure. Conditions were inhospitable, foggy, icy, and stormy; water and victuals were several times in short supply. Crewmen died both naturally and by violence. It was an enormous achievement to penetrate as far as Davis did and to return safely, not once but three times, with almost all his ships and men. Apart from the discoveries (which were not the long-term objective), the voyages were unsuccessful. Davis did not reach the spice islands or East Indies by this route. The north-west passage was not discovered, although Davis remained convinced that it existed. He wrongly supposed that the seas were everywhere navigable and did not freeze, and that the north pole itself must have a delightful climate. Moreover he found none of the treasure sought by Elizabethan investors. 
These voyages are nevertheless the foundation for Davis's enduring distinction. The Elizabethan poet Michael Drayton wrote in his 'Polyolbion': '
And Davies, three times forth for the North west made, 

Still striving by that course, t'inrich the English Trade: 

And as he well deserv'd, to his eternall fame, 

There, by a mightie sea, Immortalliz'd his name. 
(Drayton, XIX.291-302)' 

The 'mightie sea' remains the Davis Strait. Davis was never to resume his search as he had intended in 1587 and may have continued to hope a decade later. In 1595, on the latest geographical information, he argued that 'Virginia' -- the main North American land mass -- extended less far west than was supposed and that an approach from the Pacific end near California was feasible. Obviously it would have been much more expensive. Davis then claimed, somewhat improbably, such an investigation to have been the intended sequel of his voyage with Thomas Cavendish (bap. 1560, d. 1592) in 1591-3. If so, circumstances ensured that it did not happen. Davis's three voyages, with hindsight, fall early in a maritime career, which had another eighteen very different years to run until its premature end. Never again was Davis to return to the Arctic, whatever he may have professed. Never again was he in command: he features instead as a subordinate, not always a captain, on larger expeditions. After trying his hand at privateering, he was instead to involve himself on larger enterprises to the south and east, generally as a pilot. To contemporaries it was his navigational skills that marked him out: Davis was 'very well grounded in the principles of the art of navigation', William Sanderson declared in 1585 ('Voyages and Works', 205). The ancient astrolabe was further developed by him into the Davis backstaff or English double quadrant, which enabled navigators to measure the height of the sun more precisely. His 'Seaman's Secrets' (1594), virtually a treatise on practical navigation, ran through eight editions, the last in 1657. His 'World Hydrographical Survey' was published in 1595. So, too, with modern historians: if understandably to his biographer Davis was 'the foremost English navigator' (ibid., 23), to Professor Kenneth Andrews he was also 'perhaps the finest navigator of his day' (Andrews, 'Drake's Voyages', 154). 
An intended further expedition was delayed by the Spanish Armada and then permanently thwarted the following year by the death in 1590 of Davis's key patron, Secretary of State Walsingham. However important from the perspective of exploration, Davis's voyages were financially unsuccessful, and were no incentive for anyone else to invest in any more. For the Armada campaign Davis may have captained the 'Black Dog', a tender of Admiral Howard of Effingham, and the next year he briefly tried his hand at privateering, with fair success, joining George, earl of Cumberland, off the Azores with the 'Drake' of Plymouth (60 tons), a pinnace, and a boat in August 1589, but parting company in November ahead of the disastrous end to the expedition. In 1590 he was part of a squadron that took a Spanish vessel supposedly called the 'Urcha Salvagina', a capture the legitimacy of which was still being contested in 1593. It is not clear how these events relate to the capture by the 'Advantage' of Lyme Regis of a prize cargo of sugar and cotton wool worth $700 that he and John Hazard were recorded as selling. Hence perhaps the $1100 of his money that Davis alleged that he had invested in his next expedition, logically not for altruistic exploration, but for his own further profit. 
Such a substantial investment renders improbable Davis's later claim that he had to be persuaded to join in the next voyage of Thomas Cavendish (or Candish, as Davis usually spells it), whose highly profitable circumnavigation of 1586-8, when he was unable to carry away all the treasure that he had captured, was the inspiration for the further expedition to China and Japan via Cape Horn. Davis needed to make his own fortune. It is significant that the bark 'Delight' or 'Dainty', which Davis owned jointly with Adrian Gilbert, returned home prematurely: just possibly Davis did not share in the losses that others suffered. There were five vessels in all, three tall ships and two smaller ones; Davis was rear-admiral commanding the 'Desire', Cavendish's former flagship of 140 tons. After sailing from Plymouth on 26 August 1591, they were first becalmed and then diverted at Santos in Brazil and thus missed the southern summer, the optimum time to clear the Magellan Strait, where they arrived only on 8 April 1592. Beset by storms, frost, and high mortality on the biggest ships, Cavendish was unable to pass the strait, was confined to harbour, and then gave up, planning instead to take the Good Hope route to the East Indies. Davis, more accustomed to Arctic conditions, was not deterred. He disagreed. The atrocious conditions, he considered, could not last and the squadron was not equipped for the alternative route. When Cavendish withdrew northwards to Santos, Davis remained at Port Desire, perhaps because of a misunderstanding, perhaps (as the paranoiac and dying Cavendish supposed) from self-interested betrayal. Contrary to Davis's later testimony, Cavendish did specify a rendezvous. Bereft of all kind of stores, Davis was not in an enviable situation; he nevertheless made three further efforts to pass the strait, but storms beat him back each time. He is praised by Andrews as 'faithful to the point of disaster to his general's instructions' (Andrews, 'Privateering', 70), which was Davis's own version as set out by Janes, but a recent commentator has found some justification in Cavendish's charge against him that 'onely [his] treacherie hath beene the utter ruine of all' (Hitchcock, 'Charges against Davis', 264). As Davis was well aware, Cavendish desperately needed the smaller vessels, which alone were able to enter shallow waters; without them he was predestined for disaster. Evidently this was appreciated also by Davis's own crew, only a little over half of whom backed him when he sought their approval for his actions, while others mutinied and perhaps tried to kill him. Nine later deserted and were slain by the natives: among them were the principal mutineers. After returning to Port Desire on 27 October 1592 from his fruitless attempts to reach the Pacific, Davis provisioned the ship with no fewer than 14,000 dried penguins for the journey home. Despite losses to Patagonian Indians, the Portuguese, and privations, Davis himself was among the fourteen survivors of an original seventy-six who arrived home on 11 June 1593. Arrested, apparently at the instance of the disreputable lover of his adulterous wife, and subjected to an inquiry ordered by the privy council into his conduct on the evidence of Cavendish's last letter, Davis successfully defended himself against the charges -- 'were I faulty of so foul a crime, I were worthy of ten thousand torments' (ibid., 268) -- and was released at the intercession of his friend Sir Walter Ralegh. His reputation may nevertheless have suffered. 
That little is known of Davis over the next two years may be accounted for by the two books that he published in 1594-5. He was at sea again in 1596-7, most probably at Cadiz and the Azores as master of Ralegh's own ship, and was then recommended by the earl of Essex to the Dutch for the first of three voyages to the East Indies that took up the rest of his life. The first such voyage was as pilot of the Dutch ship 'Leeuw', or 'Lion', captained by Cornelius Houtman, which sailed with the 'Lioness' from Flushing on 15 March 1598 and arrived on 21 June 1599 at Acheen in Sumatra, where it remained for three months lading with pepper and other spices. Davis himself had traded on his own account, building up stock for sale in Europe and other 'things which I had provided to show my dutie and love to my best friends' ('Voyages and Works', 146), all of which were lost with the main cargo in the ensuing disaster. The local potentate launched a treacherous attack on both ships, capturing the 'Lioness' and killing Houtman and many others, but Davis, in his own account, with a handful of others successfully defended the 'Lion', cleared it of attackers, and then recaptured the 'Lioness'. So many of the assailants were slain that most of the Dutchmen on shore were put to death. 'We lost in this misfortune', wrote Davis, 'three-score and eight persons, of which we are not certain how many are captived; only of eight wee have knowledge' (ibid., 145). After a further clash with the Portuguese, the crew determined to return home, arriving at Middelburg on 29 July 1600. Much more commercially successful, if with similar loss of life, was his next voyage as pilot-major of the first East Indies Company fleet on board the 'Red Dragon' (600 tons) of Captain James Lancaster (died 1618), which sailed from Woolwich on 13 February 1601 and returned on 11 September 1603. 
At this point in his career Davis's considerable estate comprised leases, merchandise, money, and debts due. He contracted as pilot for a further voyage to China on the 'Tiger' of London (240 tons, captained by Edward Michelbourne) by 12 October 1604. In the meantime he had betrothed himself to Judith Havard, 'my espoused love' -- evidently a love match -- 'unto whom I have given my faith in matrimony to be solemnised on my return': his wife Faith was presumably dead. 'Uncertain of my return' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/109 sig. 4), Davis sensibly made his will, bequeathing his possessions equally to Judith and his three sons, with remainder in the event of all their deaths to the poor and to the children of his brother Edward. The 'Tiger' actually sailed from Cowes on 5 December 1604 and arrived at Bantam in Sumatra in October 1605, whence they set off on 2 November for Patany, making but poor progress. The Japanese pirates on board a captured junk, which they encountered peacefully near Bintang, treacherously attacked the 'Tiger' off the coast of Borneo on 29 or 30 December 1605 and were repulsed only after a desperate struggle, in which Davis was slain in hand-to-hand combat. Soon afterwards the voyage was abandoned, the 'Tiger' returning to Portsmouth on 9 July 1606. Although Davis's will was technically invalid, since no executor was named, it was nevertheless proved on 10 January 1607, when administration was granted to his eldest son, Gilbert. 


@@@@@


doc= 7327


Davys, Mary (1674-1732), novelist and playwright, was almost certainly born in Ireland, where she became the wife of the Revd Peter Davys, master of the free school of St Patrick's, Dublin, and was widowed on 4 November 1698. The couple had two daughters: Ann, who died in 1695, and Mary, who died in the same year as her birth, 1699. Davys emigrated to London in 1700, in Jonathan Swift's words 'for mere want'. She wrote 'The False Friend, or, The Treacherous Portugueze' (published as 'The Cousins' in her collected works of 1725) and 'The Amours of Alcippus and Lucippe', published in 1704, the year she moved to York. Sawbridge published 'The Fugitive', an embroidered autobiographical narrative, in 1705 -- the year he also published Daniel Defoe's 'The Storm'. 'The Fugitive' was dedicated to Esther Johnson, the woman best known today as Jonathan Swift's Stella. Publication with two different, second-order publishers suggests the difficulties Davys experienced in establishing herself as a writer in London, and it was not until 1716 that she had another publication: a play, 'The Northern Heiress'. She moved back to London for its production and by 1718 had earned enough to open a coffee house in Cambridge, where she lived until her death. 
York had a lively theatrical culture and was the only provincial theatre to produce its own dramatists. Davys's 'The Northern Heiress, or, The Humours of York' was performed in 1715 at the Market House there and in London at Lincoln's Inn Fields in April 1716. The play attacks materialistic marriage and has a familiar but audience-pleasing plot in which the heiress Isabella tests her suitors by pretending to lose her fortune. The play benefits from the contemporary delight in ethnic characters, humour, songs, and dances, and some of Davys's characters, such as Lady Greasy and Sir Loobily Joddrel, are still amusing. 
It is as a novelist, however, that Davys is remembered. In 1724 her 'The Reform'd Coquet' was published by subscription and carries the names of John Gay and Alexander Pope, a few London actors, and several friends from Cambridge. This delightful novel about a young, independent, somewhat vain, fashionable young lady and the disguised guardian who tries to protect her is filled with comic scenes, lively adventures, adept satire, and well-drawn, popular character types. This novel, rather than Eliza Haywood's 'The History of Miss Betsy Thoughtless', is the true paradigm of the central female tradition in the eighteenth-century novel and contains the key character type: 'the mistaken heroine who reforms' and learns to appreciate a worthy, if sober, man. 
The success of this novel led to the publication of Davys's collected works (1725), which includes eight texts. The previously unpublished ones include: 'The Modern Poet', an ironic picture of a poverty-stricken, professionally jealous poet; 'The Self-Rival', a play she labelled as 'should have been acted' at Drury Lane; and 'Familiar Letters betwixt a Gentleman and a Lady'. Some critics have called 'Familiar Letters' one of four examples of the highest development of letter fiction before Richardson. In addition to tales of love emphasizing that friendship between a man and a woman should precede marriage, it includes notable political and religious commentary, ranging from gory detail about the Irish uprising to a comic debate between a husband and wife who are fanatically attached to rival political parties. Several pieces are revised, as is 'The Merry Wanderer', an expanded and substantially revised 'Fugitive', and 'The Lady's Tale' from her 'Amours'. Her final original novel, 'The Accomplish'd Rake' (1727), satirizes the fashionable pastimes of the London leisure class and, implicitly, the plots of contemporary novels more harshly than any of her other work. The novel has a number of unpleasant, debauched characters of both sexes and is blunt about consequences; at one point the narrator says of the protagonist, Sir John Galliard, 'His Drinking made him sick, his Gaming made him poor, his Mistresses made him unsound; and his other Faults gave him sometimes, Remorse.' He seduces his best friend's sister, but the brother replaces her with a woman who has venereal disease. In this frank tale, Gaylove repents and proposes to Nancy, whom he has raped, but she makes it clear that her only reason for accepting 'an inferior rascal' is her child's well-being. 
Davys was one of a group of novelists that included Daniel Defoe, Eliza Haywood, and Penelope Aubin, who set the direction of the development of the English novel; her ability to construct skilful plots may be the strongest of all. Her sense of humour, her Horatian satire, her lively, sometimes deliberately colloquial, dialogue, and her portrayal of middle- and upper-class life feature in all her writings. At the end of her life, perhaps again experiencing financial distress, she published 'The False Friend, or, The Treacherous Portugueze'; it now appeared under the title she had first given it. In that year, 1732, she described herself as in declining health, including being almost blind and having symptoms of palsy. She gave $5 to St Patrick's in Dublin for a large Oxford 'Bible' and died a few months later. She was buried on 3 July 1732 at the church of the Holy Sepulchre, her home parish in Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 7328


Dawe, George (1781-1829), history and portrait painter, was born on 6 February 1781 in Brewer Street, Golden Square, London, the son of Philip Dawe (1745?-1809?), a mezzotint engraver, and his wife, Jane ('c'.1752-1832). He was brought up in a creative family: his two younger brothers Henry Edward Dawe (1790-1848) and James Philip Dawe (1794-1879), and their sister, Mary Margaret Dawe (1785-1871), were all professional artists. Dawe, who was named after his godfather, the genre painter George Morland, started his career as a mezzotint engraver. He practised as an engraver for at least twenty-four years -- his first plates after John Graham's originals were published in 1795 and one of his latest engravings, after his portrait of the duke of Wellington, was made in London in April 1818. In 1794 at the age of thirteen he entered the Royal Academy Schools, and in 1803 received the gold medal for 'Achilles, Frantic for the Loss of Patroclus, Rejecting the Consolation of Thetis' (Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, Wellington), which was regarded by contemporaries as 'the best ever offered to the Academy on a similar occasion' ('Arnold's Library of the Fine Arts', 1831, 1, 10). In 1804 he sent to the Royal Academy 'Naomi and her Daughters' (Tate collection); five years later he was elected an associate and in 1814 he was elected Royal Academician, submitting 'Demoniac' (RA, London) as his diploma work. Dawe had also had strong professional links with the British Institution for the Promotion of the Fine Arts in the United Kingdom since its foundation in 1806. In 1807, for example, he was depicted by A. E. Chalon in a group portrait of artists in one of the rooms of the British Institution (British Museum), and exhibited there regularly until 1813. Dawe's reputation as a history and subject painter began to increase significantly. His 'Scene from Cymbeline' (exhibited with the title 'Imogen Found at the Cave of Belarius' (1808; Tate collection; a version in the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, Wellington) was awarded a special premium at the British Institution and was praised by S. T. Coleridge in a letter to Sir George Beaumont of 7 December 1811 ('Collected Letters of Samuel Taylor Coleridge', ed. F. L. Griggs, 1959, 3.844-5). Both this painting and 'Andromache Imploring Ulysses to Spare the Life of her Son' (1810; sketches in a priv. coll., London, and the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, Wellington) were bought by the collector Thomas Hope. Dawe's 'A Negro Overpowering a Buffalo' also obtained a premium at the British Institution in 1811. The following year his large picture 'Genevieve' (now known as 'Lady and the Harper'), signed and dated 1812 (Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, Wellington), based on (in the view of Charles James Fox) 'the most pleasing poem in the English language' by Coleridge entitled 'Love', was exhibited at the Royal Academy (Coburn, ed., 'Coleridge', 3, n. 4142). Paintings exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1811 and 1813 enhanced his reputation. These included: 'Philip Howorth as the Infant Hercules Strangling the Serpent' (known through an engraving by Henry Dawe, 1812; impression, V&A), inspired by a work on the same subject by Sir Joshua Reynolds, 'Hercules Strangling the Serpent', painted for Catherine the Great of Russia and delivered to St Petersburg in 1789, where it remains, and 'Mother Rescuing her Child from an Eagle's Nest', based on a Scottish legendary story. A further noteworthy subject picture by Dawe is a huge allegorical panorama or illuminated transparency for Vauxhall (1814), a critical account of which was included by Charles Lamb in his recollections. 
One of Dawe's earliest portraits is of Sir Samuel Romilly ('c'.1806), and as a portrait painter Dawe soon acquired a respectable clientele. Following the appearance of his wonderful portrait of Mrs White (1809; sold by Christies in 1994 at a high price), which was compared by contemporaries with the best works of Sir Thomas Lawrence and Jacques-Louis David, he received commissions for several family portraits from Thomas Hope, and attained wide recognition. His full-length portrait of the actress Eliza O'Neill as Juliet was a great public success. In the summer of 1815 Dawe had briefly employed John Constable, with whom he had been acquainted since 1806, to paint in the background, and this theatrical scene, full of romantic atmosphere achieved by the effect of glittering lamplight, stirred public opinion when exhibited both in London (1816) and later in St Petersburg (1827), where it was taken by Dawe with other good examples of his professional skill. With the execution of portraits of members of the royal family -- Princess Charlotte and Prince Leopold, later king of the Belgians, who married in 1816 -- which became quite popular throughout Europe in engravings, Dawe achieved the status of court painter. Under the patronage of Edward, duke of Kent, Dawe travelled on the continent as part of his retinue visiting Paris, Cambrai, Brussels, and Aix-la-Chapelle, where a congress of representatives of the member states of the grand alliance against France took place. In the autumn of 1818 while working at Aix on a portrait of Prince Volkonsky, Dawe was noticed by Alexander I and invited to go to St Petersburg to paint, on very profitable terms, more than 300 portraits of Russian generals who had distinguished themselves in the war against the emperor Napoleon I. The circumstances of such a flattering invitation were described in a first-hand account in the memoirs of a military historian, Aleksandr Mikhailovsky-Danilevsky, published in Russia in 1897. 
Dawe travelled to the Russian capital via Germany, where in Weimar he had portrayed Goethe (Goethe Museum, Weimar) and discussed with him his essay on the theory of colour then in preparation for publication. Staying in Russia for about ten years (from spring 1819 to May 1828, and again briefly in spring 1829) Dawe founded a 'portrait factory', confirming his reputation as an international painter who was prolific and rapid in production. For five years, until the completion of most of the 'Military Gallery' (opened in the Winter Palace in December 1826 and now part of the Hermitage collection), Dawe's studio, including his brother Henry and brother-in-law Thomas Wright (who married Mary Margaret Dawe in St Petersburg in 1825), issued many engravings after the originals which were painted by Dawe himself with the assistance of two Russian apprentices, A. Polyakov and V.-A. Golicke. The engravings were protected by copyright, granted to Dawe by the emperor. About 400 military and not less than 100 high-society portraits associated with the name of Dawe while he was working out of England have been traced through different sources. Many can be identified in J. Bennet and T. Wright's engraving of 1826 of 'The Visit of Emperor Alexander I to the Studio of Dawe'. The artist had an unparalleled success in Russia: in the winter of 1826 he held a solo exhibition in Moscow; Nicholas I chose him as court painter for the coronation ceremony of the same year; in 1820 Dawe was elected an honorary member of the Academy of Fine Arts in St Petersburg, where in 1827 he was allowed to exhibit 150 portraits. The next year he was appointed the first portrait painter at court and in 1829 accompanied Grand Duke Constantine to Warsaw. Among his admirers was the poet Aleksandr Pushkin, who wrote a poem entitled 'To Dawe Esq.' ('The Complete Works of Alexander Pushkin', 1999-; in English). Dawe's work was widely discussed by the Russian press and public; a reviewer praised 'the effectiveness of his pictorial approach' and capacity 'to seize a likeness' ([N. Gretch], 'Syn Otechestva', 34-40, 1820, 299-300, 302) and criticized for a superficial attitude to the sitter, rough manner, and readiness to paint 'fashionable little portraits for big money' (N. Gogol, 'Portret' 1835; N. Gogol, 'The Portrait', in 'Selected Works', 1984, 536). In practice Dawe varied the compositional formulas of military and society portraits employed by contemporary Russian artists such as V. Tropinin, O. Kiprensky, and K. Bryullov. Under the influence of his painting 'Mother Rescuing her Child from an Eagle's Nest', which Dawe brought with him to St Petersburg, A. Orlovsky (in 1828) and M. Markov (in 1833) painted versions of the same subject. 
Among the best portraits painted by Dawe in Russia are those of Barclay de Tolly and Admiral Shishkov (both in the State Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg); the young Countess Stroganov (Alupka Palace, Alupka, Crimea), and the Mezhakov family (Vologda Art Gallery, Vologda). Known for his remarkable industry and diverse interests, Dawe studied anatomy, psychology, and languages. He had a fine collection of old masters; studied the theory of colours and the technique of famous artists, and wrote a lively book about George Morland ('The Life of George Morland, with Remarks on his Works', 1807). While living in Russia, he travelled throughout the country and tried to use the Russian language. 
On his first return to England, Dawe brought with him several Russian portraits and in November 1828 showed them at Windsor Castle. From November 1828 to February 1829, during his journey back to Russia, Dawe visited, and was kindly received at, the courts of Germany and France. In August 1829 the artist returned permanently to London, and died, unmarried, a few months later on 15 October at his home, 22 Fortess Terrace, Kentish Town, London. On 27 October he was buried with honours in St Paul's Cathedral. The works of Dawe can be found in many public and private collections in different countries of Europe, as well as in Russia, the United States of America, and New Zealand (where his sister, Caroline Dawe, emigrated with her family following her marriage to Michael Prendergast). 


@@@@@


doc= 7329


Dawe, Henry Edward (1790-1848), painter and printmaker, was born on 24 September 1790 in Kentish Town, London, the second son of Philip Dawe (1745?-1809?), an engraver and caricaturist. Initially he was taught by his father, and then, like his elder brother George Dawe (1781-1829) and his younger brother, James Philip (1794-1879), he studied in the Royal Academy Schools. As one of the jobbing engravers employed by Turner in the production of his 'Liber Studiorum' he created four prints: 'Rievaulx Abbey' (1812), 'Mill Near the Grand Chartreuse' (1815), 'Twickenham -- Pope's Villa' (1819), and 'Bonneville, Savoy' (1819). 
In 1824 Dawe exhibited two engraved portraits at the newly founded Society of British Artists. These were probably mezzotints of Russian military leaders from a number which were being advertised for sale in London and St Petersburg from 1822 onwards. They were after originals by George Dawe and drawn from the numerous portraits of Russian military men which he was painting for the war gallery in the Winter Palace at St Petersburg. In 1824, when his engravings were exhibited at the Imperial Academy of Arts in that city, Henry Dawe was awarded the title of naznachennyi (associate). The St Petersburg journal 'Otechestvenniye Zapiski' ('Home Notes', no. 206, p. 413) said that such was the strength of his engravings that they seemed to have been drawn in ink with a bold hand. 
Keen to maximize his earnings and to establish the copyright monopoly granted him for prints made after his portraits for the war gallery, George Dawe intended to publish a folio of the complete set. To this end, he invited his younger brothers Henry and James Philip and his sister Mary Margaret to settle in the Russian capital, where he had established a large workshop in a house near the palace square and where his collaborator, Thomas Wright, Margaret's husband-to-be, was already in residence. They arrived in 1824. George Dawe's health began to give way and he never finished his commission, so that when the gallery was inaugurated on 25 December 1826 it lacked fourteen portraits. Henry made about twenty-four prints after his brother's depictions of these military men before the project came to an end. 
After his return to London in 1827, Henry Dawe continued engraving both in line and mezzotint, producing works after a wide range of artists both past and contemporary. These were mostly shown at the annual exhibitions in Suffolk Street, to which he also contributed several paintings. In 1828, at the British Institution, he showed 'The Coronation of George IV'; and in 1832 at the Society of British Artists, of which he had been elected a member two years previously, he exhibited a portrait of the new king, William IV, whom he had previously painted as duke of Clarence. He issued prints of both works. The majority of Dawe's later paintings were genre paintings typical of their time, with subject matter ranging from 'The Wreck of George the Fourth, Convict Ship' (1836) to 'The Holiday, or, Granny in a Rage' (1845), completed three years before his death. None are preserved in major galleries. He did not use his full name when signing his works, using instead 'Henry Dawe' or 'Heny Dawe'. 
Dawe was a skilful worker in mezzotint, but unfortunately for him at a time when the laborious and time-consuming medium had been superseded by steel-engraving and lithography. The varied subject matter of his paintings, some of which were engraved by himself or other artists, ensured them a degree of brief popularity among the public at large. Apparently an amiable man, happily married to Mary with whom he had surviving daughters, he lived for many years in Bartholomew Place, Kentish Town. In 1842 he retired to Windsor, where he died six years later, at 13 High Street, on 28 December 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 7330


Dawe, Philip (1745?-1809?), painter and mezzotint engraver, has been confusingly entangled with an older P. Dawes, painter ('fl'. 1753-1774), who may have been a relation. The earlier figure was a pupil of William Hogarth and exhibited theatrical and historical paintings as well as Hogarthian contemporary satire with the Society of Artists and the Free Society of Artists between 1760 and 1774. Some theatrical pieces signed P. Dawes were published between 1753 and 1764, one of them, 'Captain Bobadil Disgraced' (1753), by the painter from his house on the corner of Orange Court, Orange Street, Leicester Fields, London. Later Dawes lived at Mr Brisbayne's in Green Street, Leicester Fields. The younger Philip Dawe might have been the son of William Dawe and his wife, Mary, baptized in London at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 25 August 1745. About 1770, having previously learned to engrave in mezzotint, he was a pupil of the genre painter Henry Morland and he befriended Morland's young son George. He was Henry Morland's principal engraver and scraped a number of his paintings in mezzotint, exhibiting ten with the Free Society from London addresses between 1769 and 1775, at first as 'pupil to Mr Morland' (who lived in Woodstock Street near Bond Street) and later from Goodge Street and Greek Street. These, and other early works such as 'Female Lucubration' (1772), are intriguing studies of servant maids and children in artificial light. Dawe also scraped a few portraits, notably of Methodist ministers and of actors, but most of his prints were genre, fancy, and historical subjects after a variety of artists including Richard Cosway, Richard Morton Paye, and George Morland. 
Dawe's earliest prints were published first by Morland or by John and Carington Bowles, then by Robert Sayer. As well as scraping mezzotints for the Bowleses and Sayer, Dawe also designed a number of 'droll' satires of current fashion, such as 'The Macaroni Courtship Rejected' (1772), 'A Hint to the Ladies to Take Care of their Heads' ('c'.1775), and 'A New Fashion'd Head Dress for Young Misses of Three Score and Ten' (1777). Once again there is confusion with the older P. Dawes. 'Courtship for Money' is listed in the 1769 catalogue as by Mr Dawes of Green Street but was published by Bowles in 1771 as invented and engraved by Philip Dawe. Later plates included a pair of 'The Battle of Chevy Chace' (1791) after John Graham and Sawrey Gilpin, published by the Northumbrian Robert Pollard, and six plates after George Morland, among them 'Children Fishing' and 'Children Gathering Blackberries' (1788), published by William Dickinson. Dawe's marriage to Jane ('c'.1752-1832) produced an artistic family: George Dawe (1781-1829), Henry Edward Dawe (1790-1848), James Philip Dawe (1794-1879), and a daughter, Mary Margaret Dawe (1785-1871). He was still engraving in 1808 but is said to have died in 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 7331


Dawes, Lancelot (1579/80-1655), Church of England clergyman, was born at Barton Kirk, Westmorland. He attended Queen's College, Oxford, first as a poor serving child, then as a taberdar; he matriculated on 14 October 1597, aged seventeen. Despite parental penury, Wood tells us, through 'studious retiredness and a severe discipline' he became an 'ornament' of the college (Wood, 3.349-50). He graduated BA on 30 June 1602 and MA on 6 June 1605; he became a fellow of Queen's in 1605. 
In 1608, on the death of John Hudson, Dawes was nominated by John Fetherston to the vicarage of Barton Kirk, and though a second candidate for the living, George Hudson, was presented, it was Dawes who was instituted. He also bought land in the nearby parish of Crosby Ravensworth, including Regill Grange and half the demesne in the manor of Regill. On 25 June 1609 he preached a sermon at Paul's Cross in London. His discourse later appeared as 'Gods Mercies and Jerusalems Miseries' (1609) with an epistle, dated 27 June, dedicated to Henry Robinson, bishop of Carlisle. Following his collation to the rectory of Great Asby, Westmorland, in 1617 a complaint led to his being charged with simony and this may have been connected in some way with the contest for the vicarage of Barton. The charge being rejected, he was instituted on 3 July 1619 to the third prebendial stall of Carlisle Cathedral, an appointment widely approved among the clergy of the diocese. At about this time, Wood reports, he was awarded the degree of doctor of divinity at St Andrews University. 
Nothing is known of Dawes's life in the 1620s and 1630s. He represented Carlisle at the convocation of April-May 1640 as procurator of the clergy and for the chapter. On 21 April 1642 he was approved by the House of Commons as a representative in the Westminster assembly. His 'Sermons Preached upon Severall Occasions' was published in 1653. When, on 23 February 1647, the committee for plundered ministers offered him a choice between the two livings then in his possession he opted to keep the vicarage of Barton. Here, it is thought, he remained until about 1655, when he died, having served there for more than forty-five years. 
Walker conceded that Dawes was 'a person of a comprehensive and orthodox judgement, adorned with all variety of learning', recording sadly that he 'submitted to the men of the times; and by that means continued in the possessions of his livings until the time of his death' (Walker, 'Sufferings', 2.10). The date of his death has been the subject of some confusion, understandably since his son of the same name also died about this time and is also known to have had a brother, William, who survived him. A William, brother of Lancelot Dawes, was granted the administration of the latter's estate in March 1654. The deceased was not therefore the vicar of Barton, as Wood assumed, but his son. The father, however, did not live long after, and Le Neve's date of 18 May 1655 is likely to be right either for his death, or burial at Barton Kirk; his will, drawn up in 1650, and unquestionably that of Lancelot senior, was proved on 14 July 1655. 


@@@@@


doc= 7332


Dawes, Manasseh (d. 1829), barrister and writer on political and legal subjects, was admitted to the Inner Temple on 30 May 1776, when he was described as 'of Chapel Street in the Parish of St George Hanover Square, gent' (admission register, Inner Temple). He was called to the bar rather later, on 13 May 1789. The Inner Temple proposed him for the readership of Lyon's Inn on 3 June 1791, but it is not known whether he was selected for the post nor whether he carried out the duties, which would have entailed delivering lectures on the common law in the Easter term. Indeed, little is known of his personal or professional life. 
Dawes evidently did not practise long at the bar, for he was said by an obituarist in 1829 to have left it 'long since' and to have lived 'in a very retired manner' for the past thirty-six years in Clifford's Inn ('GM', 1829). The window tax return of 1796 shows him liable for five windows at 12 Clifford's Inn (Inner Temple records, CLI/4/11). The obituarist went on to say: 'He was a gentleman of a very strong mind, and combined with a great knowledge of the law, much general information; and of this he left behind proofs, in several works, published at different periods of his life, of which some bear his name; others were anonymous.' Writing in 1789 a reviewer drily commented of one of his articles: 'This long title explains the writer's design, and his execution displays equal pains and judgement' ('GM', 1789). The full title was 'A vindication of the proceedings of the Lords and Commons on the regency; in which the right is explained according to the constitution as deduced from the times of the Saxons down to the present. With proofs that the protests are founded in error and that an address to any person to accept the regency would have defeated the end intended to be obtained, be an infringement on the rights of the people, an offence to majesty and an indignity in the Lords and Commons'. 
Dawes took the whig side in the war in the American colonies and in 1777 published 'Letter to Lord Chatham on American Affairs' in which he claimed to be author of 'several anonymous pieces'. He also sided with the whigs on the law of libels, publishing in 1785 two articles commenting on the Shipley case: 'England's alarm, or, The prevailing doctrine of libels and deformity of the doctrine of libels'. His 'Essay on Intellectual Liberty and Tolerance' (1780) criticized Jeremy Bentham's 'A Fragment on Government', and he defended the legal writer Sir William Blackstone against Bentham. He also intervened (1780) in the polemic between Joseph Priestley and Richard Price. His 'Essay on Crimes and Punishment' (1782) was a wide-ranging commentary on writings by Beccaria, Rousseau, Voltaire, Montesquieu, Fielding, and Blackstone, while 'The Nature and Extent of Supreme Power' commented on John Locke's social compact theory. In 1814 came 'Introduction to a Knowledge of the Law on Real Estates', followed in 1818 by 'Epitome of Landed Property'. 
Dawes also wrote poetry, notably: 'An Elegy by a Son on the Loss of his Mother; with a Discourse on Selfishness in Sorrow'. A contrasting title was 'The Dying Prostitute'. In 1784 he edited John Stuckey's 'Vanity of All Human Knowledge' which, with typical thoroughness, was 'now corrected, enlarged and arranged with an account of the life of the author'. He died on 2 April 1829 at his home in Clifford's Inn. It appears that he was unmarried: in his will he mentioned a sister, Ann Evans, and two nieces, but no closer relatives. He directed that his library be sold, but left his papers to his 'esteemed acquaintance', the writer Vicesimus Knox. It was his desire to be buried in the Grosvenor chapel, Hyde Park (PROB 11/1754/212). 


@@@@@


doc= 7333


Dawes, Richard (bap. 1709, d. 1766), classical scholar and schoolmaster, was baptized on 27 June 1709 at Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, the son of Richard Dawes, a maltster. He was educated at Market Bosworth grammar school, where the classicist Anthony Blackwell became headmaster in 1722. He matriculated from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, as sizar, in 1726 and took his BA, as twelfth wrangler, in 1730; he proceeded MA in 1733. Elected fellow in 1731, he resided in his college and built up a reputation as a formidable scholar. His quick temper and eccentricity also gained him a reputation, which may have cost him the election in 1734 for the office of esquire bedell, when he was defeated by Burrowes, of Trinity College. He spent his free time ringing the bells at Great St Mary's and drinking with his fellow bell-ringers. During his time in Cambridge he published two Greek poems on royal subjects: the first on the death of George I, in 1727, and the second on the marriage of Frederick, prince of Wales, in 1734. In 1736 he issued proposals for a translation of Milton's 'Paradise Lost' into Greek verse, with a specimen from book 1, but never completed the project. 
As Dawes was reluctant to take holy orders he faced losing his fellowship. On 10 July 1738 he accepted the post of master at the grammar school in Newcastle upon Tyne; three months later the corporation appointed him master of the neighbouring St Mary's Hospital. The school had not prospered under the previous headmaster, Edmund Lodge, and pupil numbers initially rose on news of Dawes's appointment. It was not long, however, before Dawes's failings as a teacher and his belligerence towards the corporation affected the school. Though a ready flogger he was unable to maintain discipline; the boys rioted in 1740, and the disorder worsened at the time of the Jacobite rising of 1745. He quarrelled with the corporation when they meddled in school affairs and the two parties traded many insults. Dawes published an extraordinary diatribe against the aldermen in the pamphlet 'Extracts from a MS Pamphlet Entitled The Tittle-Tattle Mongers' (1746), in which he attacked his principal foe, the wealthy physician Adam Askew, and his son Anthony Askew, a former pupil. Dawes tendered his resignation on 22 September 1746, but when offered a pension of $80 p.a. he returned to his duties and did not relinquish his post until June 1749, when there were scarcely any pupils left in the school. He accepted the pension of $80 on condition that he was also paid other fees that he was owed, and retired to Heworth Shore, on the south bank of the Tyne. 
Despite the failure of his career as headmaster Dawes made his mark as a Greek scholar by the publication in Cambridge of 'Miscellanea critica' (1745; new edn, 1781). Although this book contains regrettable, yet characteristic, polemic against Richard Bentley its positive contribution derives from his uncommonly good understanding of the grammar, syntax, and metre of classical Greek, which enabled him to make a number of convincing improvements to the texts of ancient authors. His scholarly labours on this work doubtless had caused him to neglect his school duties. The 'Miscellanea critica' earned him a place in Charles Burney's pantheon of seven 'Magnanimi heroes', and he was admired by A. E. Housman for his 'preternatural alertness and insight in the two fields of metre and grammar' (FitzPatrick, 207). 
Dawes published nothing more in his retirement and contented himself with rowing on the Tyne, brewing ale, and drinking with the local blacksmith. He may have suffered from mental illness in his last years. He died, unmarried, at his house in Heworth Shore on 21 March 1766, aged fifty-seven, and was buried in the churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 7334


Dawes, Richard (bap. 1793, d. 1867), dean of Hereford and educationist, was baptized on 13 April 1793 at Hawes in Yorkshire, the son of James Dawes, who farmed an estate at Hawes, and his wife, Isabella. He had at least three younger brothers. He was educated at the school of the blind Quaker mathematician John Gough at Kendal and proceeded to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a sizar in 1813. He was made a scholar in 1816 and graduated BA as fourth wrangler in 1817, proceeding MA in 1820. From 1818 to 1836 Dawes was mathematical tutor, fellow, and bursar of the newly founded Downing College, Cambridge. He was ordained in 1818 and also held the college living of Tadlow, Cambridgeshire, from 1820 to 1840. At this time Dawes was strongly influenced by the contemporary circle of notable Cambridge scientists, including William Whewell, John Henslow, and Adam Sedgwick. 
Dawes was a whig in politics. He believed strongly in religious toleration and supported the conscience clause to withdraw children from denominational religious instruction. In 1834 he signed the petition to parliament in favour of the admission of dissenters to the university, destroying his chances of election to the mastership of Downing, which became vacant in 1836. Despite Dawes's personal popularity as vice-master and meticulous financial management as bursar, the master of Clare College, one of the electors, protested that he would not have supported his candidature for the headship even if Dawes had been his brother (Henry, 10). 
Dawes left Cambridge in 1837 to accept the living of the poor rural parish of King's Somborne in Hampshire, to which he was presented by Sir John Barker Mill, bt, a former pupil. In the following year he married Mary Helen, daughter of Alexander Gordon of Logie, Aberdeenshire, and stepdaughter of the surgeon George James Guthrie. In October 1842 Dawes established the King's Somborne school which soon became an exemplar of nineteenth-century elementary education. Acclaimed by inspectors of schools, notably John Allen, Henry Moseley, and Matthew Arnold, for its efficient management and radical curriculum, the school drew visits from Lord Lansdowne, president of the committee of council on education, and the prime minister, Lord John Russell. Dawes educated children from different social classes and, by charging fees according to means, the school soon became financially self-sufficient. 
Dawes should be remembered for his seminal contribution to the development of applied science in elementary education: traditional teaching was replaced with heuristic learning and a rudimentary laboratory was established to promote the use of technical apparatus and simple scientific experiments. Priority was also given to pupils' language development through the use of secular reading material, including the increasingly popular textbooks published by the Irish national board of education. Dawes taught regularly at King's Somborne, as did Edward Frankland, from the nearby Queenwood College, who gave a course of lectures on agricultural chemistry. 
In 1849-50 Dawes published two influential pamphlets supporting Kay-Shuttleworth and the committee of council in their struggle with the established church over the management of state schooling. Dawes's other publications included his pioneering manual 'Suggestive Hints towards Improved Secular Instruction, Making it Bear upon Practical Life' (1849), which became a prescribed text for teacher training and ran to seven editions. His contribution to elementary education was acknowledged by election to the council of the Society of Arts in 1851. During the next nine years he was the major figure, with Henry Moseley, in the promotion of science in education and participated in the organization of the 1854 Educational Exhibition. He was also a propagandist for competitive examinations for civil service appointments. However, the Newcastle commission on popular education (1859-61) failed to call Dawes as an expert witness. 
In 1850, for his work at King's Somborne and his support for the committee of council, Russell nominated Dawes as dean of Hereford. The architect Sir Gilbert Scott was appointed by Dawes to restore the dilapidated cathedral which, under the new dean's financial management, was successfully re-opened in 1863. During this time Dawes remained actively involved in education and science, taking a close interest in the Blue Coat and Foundation schools in Hereford, and in Ledbury's national schools. He was also master of St Catherine's Hospital, Ledbury, and a local magistrate. In 1864 he was vice-president of the Bath meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Popular and approachable throughout his life, Dawes was noted at Downing for his generosity towards younger colleagues. George Eliot described his face as 'so intelligent and benignant that children might grow good by looking at it' (Cross, 1.281). Dawes died of paralysis at the deanery, Hereford, on 10 March 1867, and was buried in the Ladye Arbour of the cathedral. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7335


Dawes, Sophie, Baroness de Feucheres in the French nobility (1792-1840), adventuress and courtesan, was the daughter of Richard Daw or Dawes, a drunken fisherman and smuggler of St Helens, Isle of Wight, and Jane Callaway. Her parents were probably not married, her mother being recorded as a spinster on her death certificate. Sophie (or Sophia as her name was often given) was one of ten children, of whom only four grew up, and who were taken into 'public charity' in the house of industry (or workhouse) in Newport, Isle of Wight. As a child she helped her father by picking winkles on the beach. Nine years later she was servant to a local farmer and then seems to have gone to Portsmouth as a chambermaid at the George Hotel. Next she went to London, where she became a milliner's assistant, but was dismissed when she became involved with a water carrier. Like Nell Gwyn, she sold oranges at Covent Garden and is reputed to have appeared briefly on the boards there. Later she became the mistress of an army officer who set her up in a house in Turnham Green, giving her an income of $50 a year when the liaison ended. She sold this annuity to pay for an education at a school in Chelsea. Falling on hard times, she became a servant at a house of ill-repute in Piccadilly, where the servant of Louis Henri Joseph, the duke of Bourbon, pointed her out to his master, who subsequently 'won' her in a bet on a card game with the earl of Winchilsea and the duke of Kent. The liaison with Bourbon began in 1810, and by 1811 he had taken a house for her and her mother, to whom she always remained close, in Gloucester Street, Queen Square, in London. She studied with the Abbe Briant, her lifelong mentor, to make herself acceptable to the society in which she meant to move. Her exercise books, showing great prowess, were still extant when Billault was writing about her about 1870. By 1812 she had $800 a year from Bourbon, who lived in Paris as well as in London. He grew tired of Sophie and departed to Spain to try to be rid of her, allying himself to another Englishwoman, a Miss Harris. Sophie went to Paris to await his return and managed to wheedle her way back into the favour of her 'poor dear' as she called him when speaking both English and French. In 1817 she was baptized a Roman Catholic. The duke then contrived her marriage in London on 6 August 1818 to an officer in the French royal guard, Adrien Victor de Feucheres, Baron de Feucheres, who was led to believe that Sophie was Bourbon's illegitimate daughter. At the time of the marriage, which was conducted in a protestant ceremony in St Martin-in-the-Fields and in a Catholic one at St James's, Spanish Place, she falsely made herself out to be the widow of William Dawes and the daughter of one Richard Clarck, all of which subterfuges were later to make matters of inheritance difficult. Bourbon made a settlement of 214,000 francs on her at the time of the marriage. By 1822 her husband had discovered the true state of affairs and parted from his wife, returning her dowry, a judicial separation following five years later. Louis XVIII, on hearing of the situation from the baron, banned her from court. The liaison with Bourbon continued despite her lowly origins and bullying nature, both parties being said to be 'mediocre in everything' and Sophie being reputed to take coarse lovers of her own original social standing. In order to re-establish herself in court society, Sophie started to ingratiate herself with the king's relatives. First she approached the duke of Berri, who was the king's nephew. When this failed, she approached the duke of Orleans, a nephew of Bourbon's wife, who died about this time. Bourbon was not fond of his relatives, whom he considered renegade, but was by now old and weak and succumbed to Sophie's machinations to accept the son of Orleans, the duke of Aumale, as his godson. But he was not yet prepared to name him his heir, as she wished. However by 30 August 1829 she coerced Bourbon into signing a will which left 2 million francs to herself, along with estates of St Leu, Montmorency, Enghien, Mortefontaine, and le Boissy, the remainder of the estate to go to Aumale. By now Charles X had succeeded his brother Louis, and in February 1830 readmitted Sophie to court, recognizing her liaison with Bourbon unofficially. Bourbon was unhappy, and said he was sure that once Sophie and others had obtained from him all that they wanted his life could be at risk. Sophie was an accepted hostess, known as the Queen of Chantilly and La Montespan of St Leu, with whom Talleyrand often dined; his nephew, the marquess of Chabannes, married Mathilda Dawes, who was Sophie's niece. Her nephew, James Dawes, was given a position in the Bourbon household and the lands and title of baron of Flassons. 
The revolution of 1830 altered Bourbon's attitude to his country and he, at the age of seventy-four, made plans to leave for Switzerland, possibly revoking his will. An important letter to Sophie from the new king, Louis Philippe d'Orleans, Aumale's father, begged her to prevent this flight 'at all costs', presumably to ensure the considerable financial succession. On 26 August Bourbon was at St Leu and passed a pleasant evening playing whist, asking his servant to call him at eight the next day. In the morning he was found dead in his room attached to the handle of the french window by two handkerchiefs. Many and various rumours were generated by conflicting evidence at the post-mortem inquiry, where it was proved, for instance, that the duke was by now so feeble that he could not tie his own shoelaces let alone hang himself. To some Sophie was guilty of, if nothing worse, conniving at the death from her room on an adjoining and easily accessible staircase, and she might even have been placed under arrest had not it been for intervention, it was supposed, by the king, the judges deciding that there was no case for prosecution. Whether or not the king's letter played any part is open to speculation, the letter eventually being sent back to the king and later vanishing from the collection of documents about the case in his sister's possession. Bourbon's will was contested by the De Rohans, collateral heirs, on grounds of undue influence, but this also failed. Sophie became estranged from the Orleans when they disregarded a bequest of Bourbon to provide for a charitable institution for old Vendeean soldiers at Ecouen, and finding Paris uncomfortable as a residence she moved to a house she had built at Bure Homage in Hampshire, with a leasehold house at 5 Hyde Park Square also. She gradually disposed of her considerable French estates. She became dropsical and died of that illness on 15 December 1840 at 18 Great Cumberland Street (later Place), London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 22 December. She was worth, it was said, $500,000, although the total of personal assets in the English probate was at one time reckoned at $140,000. There was much disputation about her will and her legitimacy. Eventually James Daw or Dawes, her brother, received $70,000; Mary Ann Clark, her sister, $70,000; and the Paris hospitals to which her husband assigned his share, $13,000. The remainder went to (Mary) Charlotte Thanaron or Tanceron, who had lived with her for some time and who was the daughter of her sister Charlotte, who had become insane, and a retired French army officer. 
Sophie's place is more in the history of France than in English society, although 'The Times' carried details of her career when reporting a court case of Mary Clark's lawyer suing for his fees in 1843. Sophie was described as being of an inflexible character, seeking only social and financial success, though astute; she was pretty but not beautiful, with flashing dark eyes, tall, and squarely built, with arms and legs which 'could have served as models for a statue of Hercules'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7336


Dawes, Sir William, third baronet (1671-1724), archbishop of York, was born on 12 September 1671 at Lyons, near Braintree, Essex, the third and youngest son of Sir John Dawes, first baronet ('bap'. 1644, died 1671), and Christian, daughter and heir of William Lyons of Lyons. He entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 11 September 1680; he became a good classical scholar and 'a tolerable master of the Hebrew tongue' ('Whole Works', viii), and produced as his first work a poem, 'The Anatomy of Atheisme'. He was elected a scholar of St John's College, Oxford, on 1 July 1687 and seemed destined for the church. He was not deflected from this course, despite becoming heir to the family baronetcy in 1690, following the deaths of his two elder brothers. He migrated from Oxford to Cambridge and entered St Catharine's College as a nobleman in 1689, occupying his eldest brother's former chambers. His next work was devotional in character, 'The Duties of the Closet'. Since he was still too young for the ministry he visited his estates and other parts of the kingdom. He married on 1 December 1692, at St Edmund the King, Lombard Street, London, Frances ('c'.1676-1705), eldest daughter of Sir Thomas D'Arcy, first baronet, of Branstead Lodge, Essex. They had five sons and two daughters, of whom only one son and one daughter survived. Dawes was made a fellow and MA of St Catharine's in 1695, received a DD by royal mandate in 1696, was elected master of the college in 1697 (a post that he retained until 1714), and was made vice-chancellor of the University of Cambridge in 1698. In 1697 he had been appointed a chaplain to William III, who, following a sermon on 5 November 1697, appointed him 'by way of pledge of his future favour' to a prebend in Worcester Cathedral, to which he was instituted on 26 August 1698 and which he retained until 1708. On 10 November he was appointed rector, and from 19 December dean, of Bocking, in the neighbourhood of the Dawes estates. 
With the accession of Queen Anne in 1702 Dawes was appointed one of her chaplains. He was a renowned preacher, Bishop Nicolson describing one of his sermons, at St James's in November 1702, as 'an excellent discourse' ('London Diaries', 126). Another bold sermon, preached on 30 January 1705, was reputed to have cost Dawes the bishopric of Lincoln, which went instead to William Wake, but he affected to be unmoved by this, saying that 'he had no manner of concern upon him, because his intention was never to gain one by preaching' ('Whole Works', xxx). Preferment came in controversial circumstances in 1707-8, following a political struggle in which the queen's determination to appoint him to the see of Chester was threatened by whig pressure on the Godolphin ministry to ensure that candidates for the episcopal bench were more amenable to the whig party line. Though offered the bishopric in April 1707 his appointment was not announced until 6 January 1708; he was consecrated on 8 February by his great supporter and patron John Sharp, archbishop of York. 
Dawes was active as a bishop in both pastoral and political matters. He was in Cheshire in the summer of 1708, meeting the notables of his diocese. At dinner with Sir Henry Bunbury on 1 June 1708 he was 'provoked to full discourse on the Prince of Wales [he] is clear in ['sic'] an imposture' ('Diary of Henry Prescott', 176); on consecutive days in mid-August he had dinner with Mr Cecil Booth, during which he had 'a very warm controversy about nonconformity, my lord affirming he never knew any dissenter that differed from [him] upon a principle, but upon humour, pride, prejudice or the like', followed by a meeting with Peter Legh, a prominent non-juror, 'on the subject of complying with the government and abjuration' (ibid., 185-6). In the 1708-9 session of parliament he attempted to amend the general naturalization bill to ensure that foreign protestants would only be naturalized if they took the Anglican communion, but this was defeated. It was, however, indicative of the tory platform that Dawes would promote from the episcopal bench. In May 1709 he gave a charge to the clergy advising them to 'preserve their people from Atheism, Socinianism to beware of the popish and protestant dissenters, distinguishes betwixt Toleration and Establishment, says schism is schism still... and to observe strictly the state days particularly 5 November as the day of the happy Revolution' (ibid., 238). The summer of 1709 was spent on the primary visitation of his extensive diocese, the second largest in England. He was back at Westminster for the following session, when he voted in March 1710 against the impeachment of Dr Sacheverell, and later played host to this high-flying cleric's triumphal progress through Cheshire. Dawes seems to have steered clear of the type of inflammatory sermons in which Sacheverell specialized. Nicolson recorded that on 30 January 1711 Dawes preached 'a loyal and honest sermon' and in March he reported that Dawes was ashamed that Sacheverell had read the prayers following Dawes's sermon at the celebration of the opening of a London charity school, which had degenerated into a popular demonstration of the tory cause. 
Dawes's moderation may explain why he was one of the first tories to break with the ministry of Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, which had been formed in the wake of the Sacheverell trial in the summer of 1710. Even before the start of the 1713 session Dawes was publicly expressing his concerns over the peace treaty with France, and on the opening day of the session, on 9 April, he entered the opposition lobby on the whig motion for the peace treaties to be laid before the house. He subsequently opposed the commercial treaty with France. He continued to support legislative measures to strengthen the church, such as the bill in 1713 to give the church courts power to imprison offenders, but he remained suspicious of the ministry. However, his concerns over the protestant succession were mirrored by other leading tories and were certainly not a bar to his further promotion. Queen Anne, following the wishes of Sharp, appointed Dawes to succeed him as archbishop of York on 20 February 1714, without consulting her ministers, and he was consecrated on 9 March. From this position Dawes was again able to demonstrate concern over the succession, while supporting measures designed to further the interests of the church, including strengthening the Anglican communion by parliamentary legislation. Thus he chaired the 'Schism Bill' during its progress through committee in the Lords. However, his suspicions of the ministry remained, and he continued to act as a leader of the Hanoverian tories in the Lords. Following the queen's death he acted as a lord justice while the new king was travelling to Britain. 
Dawes continued to act as a leader of the Hanoverian tories until his death. As part of George I's determination to conciliate Dawes a bill was passed in 1715 that allowed donors of more than $200 in lands, money, or tithes to a poor living to acquire the right of nominating the incumbent. Dawes remained true to the tory party. He voted on 1 July 1717 for the acquittal of Oxford on charges of impeachment. However, he was keen to defend his reputation against aspersions of Jacobitism, even complaining to the Lords in 1717 about a report in the 'St James's Evening Post' that criticized a 'Northern Prelate' for ordaining two men turned out from the excise for disaffection to the government. When in December 1717 the prince of Wales (later George II) was expelled from St James's Palace, Dawes was one of the tories who offered him support and hoped to secure an alliance. 
Dawes made a vehement speech against the bill, repealing the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts' in 1718, which led to a clash with Bishop Hoadley. He then supported the clause of Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham, aimed at preventing the growth of Socinianism. He opposed the 'Peerage Bill' in 1719 and the 'South Sea Bill' in April 1720. He was also a leading member of the cabal of William, first Earl Cowper, an opposition grouping consisting mainly of tories active from 1721 to 1723, which sought to mobilize those disenchanted with the whig ministry. In the 1721-2 session he seems to have been a kind of whip, responsible in part for five peers and solely responsible for the earls of Nottingham and Rochester. In January 1722 he opposed the 'Affirmation Bill'. Dawes left London on 11 March 1723 to attend the wedding of his son, an event that also allowed him to dissociate himself from Bishop Francis Atterbury, who was the subject of a bill of pains and penalties for his role in Jacobite conspiracy. 
Dawes died in Cecil Street, the Strand, London, of 'inflammation of the bowels' ('Whole Works', xxxiii), on 30 April 1724 and was buried in St Catharine's College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 7337


Dawes, William Rutter (1799-1868), astronomer, was born on 19 March 1799 at Christ's Hospital, London. His father, William Dawes (1762-1836), was an officer of marines, the official astronomer with the first fleet to New South Wales in 1787, and governor of Sierra Leone from 1792 to 1796, after which he was appointed mathematics master at Christ's Hospital. His mother, Judith Rutter, died when he was very young, and his father, after working for the abolitionist movement for several years, eventually settled in Antigua, where he ran a sugar plantation employing freed slaves. The young William was sent to Portsmouth to live with his paternal grandfather, Benjamin Dawes, and in 1807 was transferred to the care of Thomas Scott (the author of the biblical commentary) at Aston Sandford, near Haddenham, Buckinghamshire. Here he received his education, which was supplemented by a short period spent at Charterhouse School in 1811. 
Although originally destined for an ecclesiastical career, Dawes felt dissatisfied with certain tenets of the Church of England, and he eventually chose to enter medicine. In 1820 he began his training at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and after qualifying as a doctor in 1825 he married Thomas Scott's widow and settled in Haddenham. 
Dawes's sister, Judith, had married John Jones, who had business interests in the dockyard at Antigua. However, she died in 1826, and consequent family affairs made it necessary for Dawes to move to the Liverpool area. Here he met one of the leading independent ministers of the day, Dr Raffles, who persuaded him to take charge of a small congregation at Ormskirk. It was a position he retained for only a few years, but it afterwards resulted in his frequently being referred to as Reverend Dawes. 
As a young man, Dawes had occasionally observed with a 2 inch refractor, and after moving to Liverpool he used a 1.6 inch refractor to observe double stars, which he identified with a Fortin edition of Flamsteed's 'Atlas' that his father had taken to New South Wales. His first observatory, housing a 3.8 inch Dollond refractor, was set up at Ormskirk, and it was here that he began regular and methodical observations. 
Dawes was elected fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1830 and was a regular contributor to the 'Monthly Notices' and the 'Memoirs'. His first published observation was 'Occultation of Aldebaran, 9 Dec 1829', and his first extensive papers, submitted in 1831, were 'Observations of the triple star Zeta Cancri' and 'Observations of double stars'. These were followed by further papers on 126 double stars observed between 1830 and 1833 and by contributions on occultations, planets, comets, the solar eclipse of 1836, photometry, and instruments. He established a considerable reputation within a very short time and soon became a friend and colleague of some of the most eminent astronomers of the day, including Sir John Herschel and William Lassell, with whom he exchanged books and tested, and observed with, telescopes. 
By the late 1830s Dawes had decided to seek a paid position as an astronomer. This was a time when affluent benefactors were setting up well-equipped observatories and employing 'assistants' to carry out the observations. One of these patrons was George Bishop, who had amassed a considerable fortune in the wine trade. Bishop established an observatory, equipped with a 7 inch Dollond refractor, at South Villa, Regent's Park, London, and it was here that Dawes obtained a position in 1839. He continued to concentrate his efforts on the observation and measurement of 250 double stars, the results of which were published in 1852 in 'Astronomical Observations at South Villa'. However, he was not credited with making the observations, which led to understandable resentment and his statement that Bishop was incapable of making any observations himself. 
Dawes's second marriage, on 28 July 1842, to Ann, 'nee' Copeland, the widow of John Welsby, a solicitor of Ormskirk, provided him with independent means, and in 1844 he left Bishop's service and moved to Cranbrook, Kent, where he set up a 61/3 inch refractor by Merz. Here he worked indefatigably for the next few years, but continual headaches (probably migraine) and asthma -- both of which afflicted him throughout his life -- finally compelled him to move to Torquay in 1849. At this time he seriously considered abandoning his astronomical pursuits, but his interest was revived by a favourable improvement in his health, and in 1850 he moved to Wateringbury, near Maidstone. He had not long established his observatory there when, at the end of November, he again proved his observational skills by discovering Saturn's crepe ring, which two weeks earlier had (unknown to him) been independently discovered by W. C. Bond with the 15 inch Merz refractor at Harvard College observatory. 
In 1851 Dawes accompanied John Russell Hind (his successor at Bishop's observatory) to Sweden to observe the total solar eclipse of 28 July. This was the first European total eclipse since 1842, and Dawes's description and drawings of solar prominences formed a valuable contribution to the large number of results that were obtained at a time when the true nature of the prominences was still a mystery. The expedition seems to have inspired in him a greater interest in solar observation, and he soon afterwards designed and had made a complex solar eyepiece incorporating a sliding diaphragm-plate pierced with apertures varying from 0.5 to 0.0075 of an inch in diameter. This led to his discovery of the rotation of sunspots and the nature of their nuclei. He also disputed James Nasmyth's description of the pattern of 'willow leaves' on the solar surface, which he considered inapplicable and misleading. 
At that time, one of the prime requirements in astronomy was a standard scale for the measurement of stellar magnitudes. For many years Dawes had been carrying out methodical investigations into limiting magnitudes and the resolving power of telescopes. He also invented the wedge photometer, consisting of a sliding wedge of neutral-tint glass, originally incorporated in a later version of his solar eyepiece and afterwards used to estimate the magnitudes of stars. Much of his work formed the basis of Norman R. Pogson's research on the standard photometric scale, which was finally established in the mid-1850s. Charles Pritchard used a variation of his wedge photometer at Oxford observatory between 1881 and 1885. 
In 1851 Dawes began corresponding with Alvan Clark, of Cambridgeport, Massachusetts. Clark had written to him to tell him of the double stars that he had discovered with object glasses of his own making, and Dawes was so impressed with their obvious quality that in 1854 he purchased a 71/2 inch object glass and tube, which he placed on his Merz mount. Over the next few years he purchased another four -- an 8 inch, a 71/3 inch, another 8 inch, and an 81/4 inch -- and sold each of them in turn. All of them subsequently passed through the hands of several eminent owners. The last of them -- a complete 81/4 inch refractor which Clark brought with him when he visited Dawes in 1859 -- finally passed to the Temple Observatory of Rugby School in 1871. 
For a few months after the sale of the 81/4 inch refractor in 1863 Dawes possessed no large instrument, but he had already ordered a complete 8 inch refractor from Thomas Cooke of York, and by 1864 he was able to resume his double-star and planetary observations. After his death this instrument belonged to a number of distinguished observers until it found a home at Cambridge observatory, where it bears the name of its last private owner, William Thorrowgood. 
Dawes's contribution to double-star astronomy was enormous, and, although he never attempted to discover new double stars, a list of fifteen discovered by him between 1840 and 1859 was published in 1864. His critical eye was also turned to most solar system objects, although he rarely observed the moon or nebulae, and few variable stars were known at that time. Among his observations of Jupiter were the monitoring of white ovals, satellite phenomena, and features on the satellites. He made many important observations of Saturn, and apart from his discovery of the crepe ring in 1850 he confirmed the existence of Encke's division in 1843, suggested discontinuity in the rings, and attentively studied the phenomena attending the disappearance of the ring system in 1848. His series of drawings of Mars made during the apparition of 1864-5 are remarkably delicate and accurate, and include features similar to the 'canals' (channels) discovered by Giovanni Schiaparelli in 1877. The other planets were of less interest to him. Dawes observed the transit of Mercury in 1848 and two occultations of Venus, occasionally observed the satellites of Uranus and Neptune, and was involved in the debate concerning the suspected ring of Neptune in 1846. He declared no interest in minor planets. 
The nineteenth century was blessed with numerous bright comets, and Dawes observed many of them, notably those of Bremiker in 1840, Biela in 1845, De Vico and Mitchell in 1847, and Donati in 1858. His report on the Leonid meteor storm of 1866 was his single contribution to meteor astronomy. 
Dawes was one of the leading observational astronomers of his time and 'by 1860 probably the most skilled visual observer with a refracting telescope in the world... the expanding firms of Clark and Cooke regarded his praise as a warranty for their object glasses' (Chapman, 47). His skill earned him the sobriquet 'eagle-eyed', and his reputation was such that G. B. Airy declared that any telescope tested and approved by him could be guaranteed to be of the highest quality. Throughout his life he owned numerous telescopes, micrometers, and peripheral items of equipment, and many of his 150 or so contributions to scientific journals were major papers. His penultimate paper described his own design for an observing chair especially suited for use with a large refractor. 
Dawes appears to have been an amiable and honourable character. He was held in high regard by the people of his neighbourhood, especially the poor, for whom he always provided medical services free of charge. His scientific achievements were rewarded with the highest honours which could be bestowed. In 1855 he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society, and in 1865 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. 
After the death of his wife in 1860 Dawes's health began to decline. Heart disease and rheumatism were added to the headaches and asthma which had afflicted him throughout his life, and yet he continued to observe until the end of 1867. His most extensive work, 'Catalogue of micrometrical measurements of double stars', covering the period 1839-67, was published shortly before his death. He died at Haddenham on 15 February 1868 and was buried beside his wife in Haddenham churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 7338


Dawkins, James (1722-1757), antiquary and Jacobite sympathizer, was born in Jamaica, the eldest of four sons of Henry Dawkins (1698-1744) of Clarendon, Jamaica, a wealthy sugar planter, and his wife, Elizabeth (1697?-1757), third daughter of Edward Pennant of Clarendon, chief justice of the island, and his wife, Elizabeth. Educated at Abingdon School in Berkshire under the tory Thomas Woods, Dawkins matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 7 December 1739 and graduated DCL in 1749. 
After university Dawkins travelled extensively on the continent, moving in Jacobite circles in Paris and Rome. It was in Rome in 1749 that he planned an expedition with an Oxford friend, John Bouverie, around the eastern Mediterranean to the sites of classical antiquity. Robert Wood, seasoned traveller and classical scholar, and Giovanni Borra, an architectural draughtsman, were invited to join them. The party sailed from Naples on 5 May 1750 in a specially equipped ship, the 'Matilda', and during the summer and autumn toured the Aegean and the coast of Asia Minor. Bouverie died at Guzel Hissar on 19 September. The party were in Egypt in November and spent Christmas in Nazareth. In March 1751 they were in Syria, where they visited the ruins of Palmyra and Baalbek (ancient Heliopolis). They arrived on the Greek mainland in May, by way of Tripoli and Cyprus, and embarked for Naples on 7 June 1751. 
This was among the first expeditions of its type -- a serious journey of archaeological exploration, quite unlike the military, diplomatic, or trading missions which had previously provided the West with accounts of the Levant. 'The combination of wealth, classical scholarship, artistic and architectural talent in this party was truly remarkable' (Harris and Savage); according to Dawkins's nephew, the trip 'cost him no less a sum than $50,000' (J. T. Smith, 'Nollekens and his Times', 1829, 338), much of it supplied by Dawkins himself, but the expedition's journal shows that he was also an active and dynamic organizer, an accomplished scholar, an observant naturalist, and, perhaps above all, a passionate and apparently tireless measurer and recorder of everything that he saw. 
Robert Wood, aided and financially supported by Dawkins, published 'The Ruins of Palmyra' (1753) and 'The Ruins of Baalbec' (1757), containing detailed engravings of architectural remains previously almost unknown in western Europe. Their effect on classical taste in England and France, based until then on Vitruvian models, was immediate and explosive, scoring 'a triumph such as no architectural books had ever before achieved' (Harris and Savage). Dawkins's generosity also provided financial support for James Stuart and Nicholas Revett in their similar and ultimately more significant enterprise, 'The Antiquities of Athens' (1762). In 1755 Dawkins, proposed by Stuart, was elected to the Society of Dilettanti. A collection of manuscripts in the Bodleian Library and of marbles in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford are the products of his travels. 
Dawkins's early contacts with Jacobitism appear to have prompted his journey to Berlin in May 1753 to meet Frederick the Great. This was an attempt to get Prussian support for a Jacobite conspiracy involving William King of Oxford, the earl of Westmorland, and the Earl Marischal, Prussian ambassador in Paris. The meeting was inconclusive, but resulted in the British government issuing a warrant for Dawkins's arrest. This was not executed when, in the following year, 1754, Dawkins returned to England, bought an estate at Laverstoke, Hampshire, and was returned as MP for the open borough of Hindon, Wiltshire, which he held until his death. Dawkins is said to have made highly critical comments about the Pretender (James Stuart) in 1756, yet some contemporaries believed he died a Jacobite. 
Dawkins is now thought to be the author of an anonymous 1756 pamphlet, 'Reflections physical and moral upon the... numerous phenomena... which have happened from the earthquake at Lima'. This reveals him to have been a fierce opponent of the philosophy of Descartes and Newton. In addition to his Hampshire estate Dawkins owned 25,000 acres (1754) in Jamaica with his brother. It was here, Sutton's Plantation, that Dawkins died, unmarried, on 6 September 1757. He was buried at Old Plantation, Clarendon. In 1922, when the family estates were sold, his remains, together with those of his parents, were reinterred in St Paul's Church, Chapelton, Jamaica. 


@@@@@


doc= 7339


Dawks, Ichabod (bap. 1661, d. 1731), printer, was baptized on 22 September 1661 at St Mary's, Westerham, Kent, the eldest son of Thomas Dawks (1636-1689) ['see under 'Dawks, Thomas], printer, and Anne, 'nee' Brooker ('b'. 'c'.1638/9). By his own account, in 1672 he began to work with his father at John Darby's in Bartholomew Close, London. He continued under his father's supervision when the latter moved in 1673 to join Anne Maxwell's and Elizabeth Flesher's establishments and in 1674 set up on his own in Blackfriars. Ichabod was freed by patrimony on 6 November 1682. On 3 August 1687 he married Sarah (1657?-1737), whose surname is unknown. On his father's death in August 1689, Ichabod and his mother, Anne, succeeded to the business, of which Ichabod became sole proprietor about 1693. Between 1693 and 1725 he kept thirteen apprentices. He became a liveryman of the Stationers' Company on 5 August 1700. His work address in 1705-31 is given as at the west end of Thames Street, near Puddle Dock. 
Ichabod is best remembered for his thrice-weekly newspaper 'Dawks's News-Letter' (1696-1716). The earliest existing issue, number 23, is dated 13 August 1696, and the latest 22 December 1716 (BL set). Closely modelled on the older manuscript newsletters, Dawks's venture employed a script type whose effect lay between the intimacy of handwriting and the impersonality of newspapers in roman type. The text type, bought from the Grover foundry, was presumably cut to Dawks's order. Identified as the 'Scriptorial english no. 2' displayed in the James's Specimen of 1782 (Mores), it is also shown, recast from the original matrices, in Morison's 'Ichabod Dawks'. Foreign news predominated, with the fourth and final page left blank for late news. There were no advertisements. Dawks also published two short-lived news sheets in roman type: the 'Philosophical Observator' (first issue 22 January 1695) for John Whitlock, and on his own behalf the 'Protestant Mercury, Occurrences Foreign & Domestic' (first issue 9 March 1696). As imprints reveal, he printed many books, often on his own account, especially in the field of popular science and medicine. The copyrights of some of these he had inherited from his father. For many years he also printed two almanacs for the Company of Stationers. Dawks died in London on 27 February 1731, and was buried on 4 March at Low Leyton, Essex. His widow Sarah was still printing in 1736. 


@@@@@


doc= 7340


Dawks, Thomas (bap. 1611, d. 1670), printer, was baptized on 16 June 1611 in Stratford upon Avon, the son of Richard Dawks (died 1626/7), plumber, of Stratford upon Avon; his mother's names are unknown. He was bound on 16 June 1627 to Felix Kingston, printer, of London, and became a freeman of the Stationers' Company on 5 October 1635. In 1649, in his son's school register, he is described as printer, but where he was employed then and later is not known. His grandson Ichabod noted in his diary that his 'Dear Grand Father' died on 11 May 1670 at Low Leyton, Essex, where he owned two houses and land (Morison). Morison confuses Thomas senior with the Puritan divine Thomas Dawks ('b'. 1620, BA Oxford, 1641). Dawks married Frances (died 1667) and their son 
On 16 February 1661 Dawks married Anne Brooker ('b'. 'c'.1638/9), and Ichabod Dawks, first of eleven children, was baptized on 22 September 1661. Their daughter Dorothy married the London printer William Bowyer the elder. The family left London during the plague of 1665, and after the 1666 fire retreated temporarily to Low Leyton. On 2 April 1666 Thomas moved to Thomas Roycroft's, Bartholomew Close (too late to work on the polyglot 'Bible', despite contrary assertions). In 1672-3 he worked successively for John Darby, Anne Maxwell, and Elizabeth Flesher, before setting up for himself in Blackfriars in 1674. He had four apprentices, sons Ichabod and Thomas, and two others bound in 1683. 
Thomas the younger had shares in and printed a number of popular medical works, including William Salmon's 'Pharmacopeia Londinensis' (3rd edn, 1685). In 1676, having printed in Welsh 'The Practice of Piety' (1675), he was appointed king's printer for the British language. In 1679 he projected a short history of printing. Dawks died in August 1689, leaving his printing business to his wife and son Ichabod, and was buried at Low Leyton, where he had died. His wife married one William Ryland on 8 July 1693 in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7341


Thomas Dawks (1636-1689), printer, was born at Kelmscott, Oxfordshire, on 8 October 1636. He was admitted on 2 April 1649 to Merchant Taylors' School, London. In 1651 he 'began to Work at Printing at Mr Du Gards' (BL, Add. MS 42101). William Dugard, headmaster of Merchant Taylors' School, was also printer to the council of state. Thomas was freed by patrimony on 6 August 1655. In 1660 he unsuccessfully petitioned to become overseer of the press responsible for suppressing seditious printing. 


@@@@@


doc= 7342


Dawson, Abraham (1713?-1789), biblical scholar, was probably born at Horton, near Bradford, into a well-established Yorkshire nonconformist family. His father was Eli Dawson (died 1744), who served as a Presbyterian minister at Morley, near Halifax, then at Horton, and lastly, from 1728, at Halifax; his mother was Alice Taylor. His grandfather Joseph Dawson (1635/6-1709) had also been a Presbyterian minister and was ejected from Thornton Chapel, near Bradford. Abraham had six brothers, including Benjamin Dawson (1729-1814) and Thomas Dawson (c.1725-1782). All but one of his brothers were, like Abraham, educated for and entered the church; all in time left the ministry, Benjamin becoming a philologist, and Thomas a physician. 
Abraham Dawson served as a Presbyterian minister for several years before he conformed to the Church of England (as did four of his siblings). In July or August 1754 he was instituted rector of Ringsfield, near Beccles in Suffolk. While there he published 'A New English Translation of the First Three Chapters of Genesis' (1763), followed by his translation of the fourth and fifth chapters (1772) and the sixth and eleventh (1786). Dawson, who was married, died at Ringsfield on 3 October 1789 and was buried in the church five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 7343


Dawson, Ambrose (1705/6-1794), physician, son of William Dawson ('c'.1677-1762), of Langcliff Hall, Yorkshire, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Ambrose Pudsay, was born at Settle, Yorkshire. William Dawson was an able mathematician and a friend of Isaac Newton. After attending Giggleswick School, Dawson entered Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1724, and he graduated MB in 1730 and MD in 1735. In 1737 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians; he was censor four times, and he delivered the Harveian oration in 1744. His oration was printed the following year. He was elected physician to St George's Hospital on 27 April 1745 and held the office until 1760. Dawson lived in Grosvenor Street, London, and was known for his kindness to the poor. When he gave up practice in 1776, the parish of St George's, Hanover Square, presented him with a magnificent tea urn in recognition of his services to the poor of the parish. 
Dawson retired to his father's estate at Langcliff Hall, but he did not entirely lose interest in medicine. In 1778 he published 'Thoughts on the Hydrocephalus internus' and 'Observations on Hydatids in the Heads of Cattle'. Little was known at the time about the anatomical changes which accompany effusion into the cavities of the brain and nothing was known of the natural history of the entozoa. The publications aroused little interest either at the time or in later years. Dawson regretted giving up practising medicine, and the inactivity affected his health. A little later he moved to Liverpool, where he died on 23 December 1794. He was ill for only a few days, and at the time of his death he was the oldest fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. He was buried at Bolton, Craven, Yorkshire, the home of his mother's family. 


@@@@@


doc= 7344


Dawson, Benjamin (1729-1814), Church of England clergyman and philologist, was born in Halifax, the sixth of the seven sons of Eli Dawson (died 1744), Presbyterian minister of Morley, Yorkshire, and his wife, Alice Taylor. He and his brother Thomas Dawson (c.1725-1782), physician, entered the nonconformist academy at Kendal as exhibitioners of the London Presbyterian Board in 1746, and were there taught by Caleb Rotheram. In November 1748 he went to Glasgow University, where he and his brothers Thomas, Abraham Dawson (1713?-1789), biblical scholar, and Joseph studied as scholars on Dr Williams's foundation. He graduated MA in 1750, and defended a thesis, 'De summo bono', on taking his degree. His thesis, an able disquisition on the relationship between God and human good, was published for the university by the Foulis brothers in 1750. 
Dawson was Presbyterian minister at Leek, Staffordshire, in 1754, before moving to Congleton, Cheshire, where he worked as a teacher. He moved from Congleton in 1757 in order to become assistant minister at St Thomas's Presbyterian Church, Southwark. His elder brother Thomas had conformed to the Church of England, and Benjamin followed suit in 1758, the same year that he took the degree of LLD at Glasgow. Their brother Abraham had already conformed and served as rector of Ringsfield, Suffolk, from 1754 until 1789. Obadiah, a merchant in Leeds, was the only brother to remain a dissenter; of the others, Samuel taught at a school, Eli served in the West Indies, and Joseph became rector of Paull, near Hull. Shortly after conforming, Benjamin became rector of Burgh, near Woodbridge, Suffolk, in 1760, a living he held until his death. This did not prevent him from maintaining good relations with dissenters, and in 1763 he accompanied, as his private tutor, Sir Benjamin Ibbetson, a young baronet from Leeds, to Warrington Academy, where Dawson became a member of the active literary society around John Aikin. On 6 June 1776 he married Mary Halsey (1722/3-1803) at Burgh. 
All but one of Dawson's works were published after he conformed to the established church. He wrote two essays in defence of Edmund Law's enunciation of the mortalist thesis that the soul slept in the interval between death and the resurrection into eternal life, of which the first appeared in the 'Monthly Review' in 1758, and the second in the 'Grand Magazine' in 1758. These were later reprinted as an appendix to 'An Illustration of Several Texts of Scripture, Particularly those in which the Logos occurs', which was published by Andrew Millar in 1765. This publication put into print the eight sermons on the Anglican elucidation of trinitarian doctrine which Dawson had preached in 1764 and 1765 on Lady Moyer's foundation. While he was careful not to accuse Arians, Socinians, and Sabellians of being less than Christians, Dawson was determined to demonstrate the flaws in their arguments, thus distancing himself from the Arianism in which he had been reared as a liberal Presbyterian. The lectures were more critical of Arianism than of other anti-trinitarian systems, and he was especially concerned to demonstrate the scriptural and apostolic basis of the Church of England's teaching on the matter. Satisfied though he was of clearing himself from orthodox suspicions, it is notable that a prominent mouthpiece of rational dissent, the 'Monthly Repository', declared in 1810 that, while successful in his assault on Arianism, Dawson's account was, 'in truth, completely Unitarian' ('Monthly Repository', 1810, 325). 
Although the Lady Moyer's sermons were intended to defend the first of the church's 'Thirty-Nine Articles', Dawson quickly proved himself an ally in the campaign to repeal Anglican subscription to the authority of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. He proved a particularly astute defender of Francis Blackburne's major contribution to the campaign, 'The Confessional' (1767); Blackburne thought him 'an incomparable writer' ('Monthly Repository', 1810, 325). Most of the several pamphlets he devoted to the issue criticized point by point the writings produced by the defenders of subscription, notably those by Thomas Rutherforth, John Rotherham, Gloucester Ridley, and Thomas Balguy. Dawson began his campaign with 'An Examination of an Essay on Establishments in Religion' (1767), and brought it to an end in 'A Letter to the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Winchester' (1773). The basis of his critique can be found in a pivotal remark in 'An Answer to Letters Concerning Established Confessions of Faith' (1769), when he protested that churchmen ought not to subject 'the Gospel, the blessed Gospel of light and truth, to the institutions of fallible man' (p. 36). His was an ultra-protestant position; he argued that the doctrine of men such as Balguy would bring the Church of England ''directly' to 'Popery'' ('A Letter to the Clergy', 43). Dawson's close association with Blackburne troubled Joseph Priestley, who despised him for having conformed to a church to whose articles he had readily subscribed, paradoxically making of him, as Priestley observed in a letter to Theophilus Lindsey in April 1772, a 'man... living in every contradiction to every principle of the 'Confessional''. He cited Dawson's brother Obadiah, a member of Priestley's congregation, as saying, 'I do not know what my brother meant by attacking you, but I know he hates the Dissenters'. In the same letter Priestley boldly stated, 'I am afraid his case is that of one who hates the light because his deeds are evil' (Rutt, 1.168). Whatever the level of personal antagonism between Dawson and Priestley, Dawson remained on good terms with many dissenters, who appreciated his help in the campaign to alter the terms of subscription required by the 'Toleration Act' in 1779. 
Dawson was a firm moralist, as is apparent in his short work 'Some Assistance Offered to Parents with Respect to the Religious Education of their Children' (1759). This was confirmed in 'National Depravity the Cause and Mark of Divine Judgement upon a Land' (Ipswich, 1780), a fast sermon which he had preached in February 1780 and which he dedicated to Blackburne, 'the Firm, Strenuous, and Consistent Assertor of Religious Freedom'. The sermon espoused an Anglican version of the politics of rational dissent: the country was being judged for sinning against its 'superior principles, both in our Religious and Civil Constitution'. The war with America was described as an 'unhappy, 'unnatural' contest with our 'fellow-subjects'', hurtful to trade and commerce and, ultimately, to the British constitution; it was, therefore, the duty of Christians to 'throw our 'Mite' of Virtue and Piety, as of Taxes, into the public treasure' ('National Depravity', 14, 16, 21). The sermon he preached as part of the general thanksgiving for the restoration of George III's health in 1789 voiced his conviction that the political constitution had to be preserved, because 'The virtues and vices, the genius, manners, and customs, and also the ease and security of a people, are principally derived hence' (Dawson, 'The Benefits of Civil Government, a Ground of Praise to God', 1789, 7). 
In his later years Dawson turned from theology and politico-theology to the fashionable study of language. In 1797 he published at Ipswich 'Prolepsis philologiae Anglicanae, or, A Plan of a Philological and Synonymical Dictionary'. He saw synonyms as being introduced into languages in order to register the 'increase and refinement of ideas'; so it was that the conventional method of dictionaries explaining one word by another was 'erroneous': mathematical exactness in definition would only arise by giving the ''general'' and ''special'' import of a word (pp. 9, 34-5, 42). Philology was to be based on the same footing as entomology, ornithology, and botany. He was interested in the literal rather than the figurative use of a word: this was the proper province of the philologist. The 'Monthly Repository' of 1810 spoke highly of the 'Prolepsis', describing it as 'a work of great promise, which it is greatly to be wished that the author may live to finish', and attributing its apparent lack of success to its forbidding Latin title. Dawson published the first instalment of his dictionary at Ipswich in 1806, but his 'Philologia Anglicana, or, A Philological and Synonymical Dictionary of the English Language' never got beyond 'A-Adornment'. Its style owed much to the example of Johnson's 'Dictionary', complete with citations from English authorities. The first entry, 'A/An', gave examples from Johnson, Dryden, and Addison, and, significantly for a theologian such as Dawson, from the liberal theologian Richard Watson on Jesus, and Hobbes on the Antichrist. His dictionary plainly served broad educational purposes. 
Dawson never produced another volume, and he died at his rectory in Burgh, where he had performed his duties as rector with exemplary care for fifty-four years, on 15 June 1814. He was buried in the chancel of his church on 21 June next to his wife, who had died on 22 June 1803. 


@@@@@


doc= 7345


Dawson, Edward (c.1579-1622), Jesuit, was the only son of 'respectable' parents, 'connected with Sir Anthony Staunden', and was born in London. He completed his studies in Spain, and Louvain, in the Spanish Netherlands, and after being ordained priest was sent to the English mission. He was soon apprehended and imprisoned until 1606, when he was sentenced to perpetual exile with forty-seven other priests. He entered the Society of Jesus in Rome the same year. Having been sent back to England on the mission about 1610 he laboured for some time in London and in Lincolnshire. Recalled by his superiors to Ghent he obtained permission to devote himself to the spiritual care of the English and Irish soldiers who were suffering from the plague in the Low Countries. He soon caught the disease, and died at Brussels on 22 December 1622. He was the author of 'The Practical Methode of Meditation', printed in Vicenzo Bruno's 'Meditations', published at St Omer in 1614. 


@@@@@


doc= 7346


Dawson, George (1636?-1700), jurist, was the son of William Dawson, a 'yeoman' of Lotherton, Yorkshire. Dawson was a boy of some promise, as he was educated at Sherborne School under Mr Clarke, and was admitted as a sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, on 16 April 1655, aged eighteen. He gained a BA in 1658-9 and an MA in 1662. His college presented him to the vicarage of Sunninghill, Berkshire, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
Dawson was incorporated at Oxford in July 1669, and had married his wife, Anne, before July 1674 when a daughter was baptized at Sunninghill. They had at least five sons, all baptized at Sunninghill, three of whom survived to attend Cambridge University. Dawson wrote 'Origo legum, or, A treatise of the origins of laws, and their obliging power; as also their great variety; and why some laws are immutable, and some are not; but may suffer change, or cease to be, or be suspended, or abrogated: in seven books' (1694), which was dedicated to King William and Queen Mary. Dawson was buried at Sunninghill on 5 October 1700, aged sixty-four. His wife died on 26 November 1711. 


@@@@@


doc= 7347


Dawson, George (1821-1876), preacher and political activist, was born at 36 Hunter Street, London, on 24 February 1821, the son of a radical Baptist schoolmaster, Jonathan Dawson, and his wife, Rachel Biggs. He was educated, and later became a pupil teacher and then classics master, at his father's school, where for a time Charles Dickens was a fellow pupil. He abandoned a course at Marischal College, Aberdeen, in disgust in 1838, but graduated MA at Glasgow University in 1841: here he had been active in the University Liberal Association. He was called to the pastorate of Rickmansworth Baptist Church in 1843 but soon left, driven out, it was said, by the tory squire. In September 1844 he moved to Mount Zion Baptist Chapel, Birmingham, which he soon filled to overflowing by his brilliant, unorthodox addresses in which, among other things, he lauded Voltaire and cast doubts on the Christian character of Calvin. He left Mount Zion in 1846, ostensibly on the open communion issue, but in reality because his advanced teaching conflicted with the evangelical feelings of the older church members. On 24 August 1846 he married Susan Fanny Crompton; their two children were Rachel Anne (1848-1873), who was mentally handicapped, and Bernard (1851-1905), who became a civil engineer. 
'To get religion out of the pale of the chapel into the fresh air of heaven and give it full exercise in that world which it came to beautify and animate', the church of the Saviour was built for Dawson by his many admirers and opened in August 1848. Here this handsome, charismatic orator, dressed more like a poet than a preacher, conducted worship from a platform, preaching a gospel of service and brotherhood, based on the example of Christ. But the 'chapel of the doubters', as it was called, was no plain lecture hall. It was brightly painted and adorned with flowers; its musical standards were high -- it had a paid choir of twelve singers, and its own book of chants, anthems, and hymns (3rd edn, edited by Dawson and T. H. Gill, 1853). Dawson's prayers were beautifully crafted and the liturgy of the Christian year was observed. Popular Saturday evening concerts were held, as well as lectures for working people, adult classes, and church social gatherings -- at that time a startling novelty. In all of these activities Susan Dawson played a prominent role. As a lecturer Dawson was in great demand, both within and outside Birmingham; in Manchester he was particularly popular. He accompanied Carlyle on his first visit to Germany and witnessed with Emerson a phase of the 1848 revolution in Paris. Later his chief significance may have been to popularize Carlyle's and Emerson's thought for the English middle and artisan classes. 
Dawson was a friend of many continental radicals, especially Kossuth, the Hungarian nationalist, whom he greeted on his arrival in Britain in 1851. Out of this incident arose the curious Van Beck affair, when Dawson's fervent support for the Hungarian nationalist cause landed him in court, where he incurred a $500 fine. But Dawson was no stranger to controversy. In 1846 he crossed swords with the doughty evangelical Anglican Hugh Stowell of Manchester, who had accused him of spouting 'grandiloquent neologistic nonsense'. He clashed with the archbishop of York in 1847, the same year as the evangelical Congregationalist John Angell James arranged a secret meeting with Dawson in an effort to convert him. 
In the life of Birmingham, Dawson's role was diverse. His friends and admirers on three separate occasions backed new local newspapers with Dawson as editor: the 'Birmingham Mercury' (1848), the 'Daily Free Press' (1855), and the 'Birmingham Morning News' (1871). But none of these lasted long, for Dawson, who excelled as a flamboyant, if rather repetitious, orator, was far less at home with the written word. However, his contribution to the public library movement was undeniable: the Birmingham free libraries of the 1860s, the central lending library (1865), and the central reference library (1866) owed their inspiration to him and his friend Sam Timmins, as did the large Shakespeare collection housed in the reference library. He was one of the most active promoters of the Early Closing Association to reduce the excessive hours of Birmingham shop workers, and also of a campaign dubbed 'Lungs for the City', which helped to secure Aston Park as a public recreation area in 1858. It is perhaps as a precursor of Chamberlain and the municipal reform programme of the 1870s that Dawson is chiefly important in Birmingham's history. Most of the political remedies later popularized by Chamberlain he had anticipated -- smallholdings (the Midland Freehold Land Association of 1847), secular schooling, extension of the franchise, sanitary reform, and slum clearance -- while the Arts Club (1873), which he helped to found, was the forerunner of the Birmingham Liberal Club (1879). More generally it was his vision of God as pitying father and humanity as a prodigal son, and his profound engagement with discerning the mystery of order in the midst of man-made chaos, which gave ideological underpinning to the whole school of municipal reform: the church of the Saviour produced seventeen town councillors during Dawson's pastorate and, of these, six became mayor. 
Dawson's fame as an emotional, witty, controversial, and thoroughly compelling speaker reached its climax in 1874 when he went on a lecture tour of the USA. He died suddenly at his home, Watford House, King's Norton, on 30 November 1876, following an aneurism of the larynx. The church of the Saviour struggled on until 1895, when it was sold to the Primitive Methodists. Several of his pamphlets were published in his lifetime, including two on the restoration of the Roman Catholic hierarchy (1850, 1851) in which he strongly upheld voluntaryism and disclaimed any 'no Popery' sentiment on his own part. After his death his wife edited selections from his sermons and lectures from his shorthand notes (4 vols., 1878-82) and two volumes of prayers which appeared in 1878 and 1883. Some of his biographical lectures were also published in two volumes (1886 and 1887). 


@@@@@


doc= 7348


Dawson, Henry (1811-1878), landscape painter, was born on 3 April 1811 in Waterhouse Lane, Hull, the second and only surviving child of William Dawson (died 1826), cheesemonger and flax dresser, and his second wife, Hannah Moore, 'nee' Shardlow (1775-1844). Hull was only a temporary residence, and the year after he was born his parents moved back to Nottingham, where he spent the first half of his life. His father took to drink, and the burden of keeping the household together fell on his mother. Dawson had no formal education -- apart from a year and a half at the national school in Nottingham -- and at the age of eight was sent out to work, at first in a rope-walk and then in a lace manufactory. He was drawn to painting early but could only practise it in what little spare time he had. In 1835 he took the risk of abandoning the lace industry to become a professional artist. His formal training as a painter was limited to twelve lessons from J. B. Pyne in June 1838; nevertheless, he enjoyed some early success in Nottingham and began to exhibit landscapes in London, at the Royal Academy from 1838 and the British Institution from 1841. 
The market for landscape painting in Nottingham proved to be very limited, however, and by the early 1840s Dawson's income had fallen drastically. He had married Elizabeth Whittle (died 1879) on 16 June 1840 and they had already begun a family; the decline of his prospects in Nottingham, together with the death of his mother, determined him in October 1844 to take another gamble and move to Liverpool in the hope of finding a more lucrative market there. He began to exhibit at the Liverpool Academy, becoming an associate in 1846 and a full member the following year. In 1847 he felt confident enough to compete for the decoration of the new houses of parliament, sending in his most ambitious composition to date, 'Charles I Raising his Standard, 24 August 1642' (Castle Museum, Nottingham); his entry was not successful, though the painting was sold privately and remains one of his best-known pictures. It was during his Liverpool period that he first began to paint the marine subjects which would become a staple of his repertory. 
At the beginning of 1850 Dawson moved south in the hope of establishing his reputation in the London art world. He lived at Croydon until late 1853, at Thorpe Green, near Chertsey, until 1861, and then briefly at Camberwell in London before moving in 1862 to Chiswick, where he lived until his death. At first success still eluded him. He reached a crisis in 1851, when he contemplated giving up art and setting up as a shopkeeper; he sought John Ruskin's advice and received sufficient encouragement to persevere. His work continued to appeal mainly to provincial patrons, and although he exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy, he complained that the hanging committees never did justice to his pictures. In 1868 he was nominated for election as an ARA but only received one vote. He fared much better at the British Institution, where he showed a series of key pictures -- 'The Wooden Walls of England' (exh. 1854; smaller version 1856, City of Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery), 'British Bulwarks' (exh. 1856), and 'The New Houses of Parliament, Westminster' (1858, priv. coll.) -- and he was certainly hurt by the closure of the institution in 1867. In the 1870s his prices rose sharply and he enjoyed a few years of financial security, though his health had deteriorated by this period. In July 1878 he was honoured by a retrospective exhibition of fifty-seven of his paintings to mark the opening of the Nottingham Castle Museum and Art Gallery. 
Dawson's early paintings were in a conservative idiom, much indebted to Richard Wilson. Later, Turner became the dominant influence: some critics considered Dawson one of the main contenders for Turner's mantle after the latter's death in 1851. The work of his middle and later years combines conventional subject matter with often elaborate composition and shows a preference for patriotic or emblematically English motifs and complicated skies. Dawson was always a 'loving admirer of [his] own work'; surveying his retrospective exhibition in 1878, he wrote 'My pictures delighted me; they are a grand show -- kings in art. I don't think the work of any landscape painter living or dead could be put in competition with them' (Dawson, 119). His reputation has always lagged behind this glowing self-estimation. Henry Dawson died on 13 December 1878 at his home, The Cedars, Chiswick, and was buried in Brompton cemetery, London. His wife survived him. 
The main sources of information on Dawson are the letters and reminiscences which were included in the 'Life' published by his son Alfred in 1891; they reveal a man whose unswerving self-belief sustained him in the face of innumerable discouragements. His mixed fortunes did not deter his two eldest sons, Henry Thomas Dawson and Alfred Dawson, from following in his footsteps as artists. A third son, Charles Ernest, was the father of the marine painter Montague Dawson. (Henry Dawson had seven children altogether, though two of them died young.) His paintings are in the collections of Nottingham Castle Museum and Art Gallery; the Usher Art Gallery, Lincoln; the Ferens Art Gallery, Hull; and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. 


@@@@@


doc= 7349


Dawson, James (1716/17-1746), Jacobite army officer, was born at Salford, the eldest of the four children of William Dawson, apothecary of Manchester, and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Allen of Redivales in Bury, Lancashire, and a first cousin of the poet and stenographer John Byrom. Educated at Mr Clayton's school, Manchester, he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 23 January 1734. Dawson then entered St John's College, Cambridge, on 21 October 1737, at the age of twenty, with the intention of joining the church. He matriculated in the following December. However, his was not a lengthy undergraduate career for, having become 'acquainted with the rakes of the university, he run all manner of lengths with them' until, facing expulsion, he left the college. Never the less, there is nothing to show that he had ever been subjected to any punishment for any offence in the university court held by the vice chancellor. 
In November 1745, aware that the army of Charles Edward Stuart was approaching Manchester, Dawson joined the Jacobite forces, where he gained a captain's commission. He proved a willing recruit, being: 'so hearty in the cause, that he beat up for voluntiers himself, and took fellows in Manchester to enlist. In all their marches he appeared at the head of his company, and when the young Pretender made a general review of his army at Macclesfield, he passed before him with the usual formalities. He likewise at Carlisle, mounted guard there, and was called captain, and was among the rest of the officers at the surrender of the town [in December 1745]. ('State trials', 18.374-5)' Dawson was tried and convicted of high treason on 17 July 1746 and was one of eight officers belonging to the Manchester regiment of volunteers who were hanged, drawn, and quartered on Kennington Common on 30 July 1746. According to a traditional story, had Dawson been pardoned, the day of his execution would have been the day of his marriage to Katherine Norton, 'a young lady of good family and handsome fortune'. She is said to have followed him to the place of execution accompanied by friends and, seeing 'the fire kindled which was to consume the heart she knew so much devoted to her, and all the other dreadful preparations for his fate', drew her head back into the coach, and, crying out, 'My dear, I follow thee -- I follow thee! Sweet Jesus, receive both our souls together', expired in the very moment she was speaking ('State trials', 18.374-5). This incident was made the subject of a popular ballad by William Shenstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 7350


Dawson, John (bap. 1735, d. 1820), mathematician and surgeon, was born at Raygill Farm in Garsdale, near Sedbergh in Yorkshire, the younger of the two sons of William Dawson and his wife, Mary, and was baptized on 25 February 1735. Accounts of his life have tended to stress the extreme poverty of his background. But Raygill was, in fact, a rather substantial property, and William Dawson, who was described by Adam Sedgwick as 'a very poor statesman [a small landowner]... with perhaps not more than $10 or $12 a year' (Clark and Hughes, 61), belonged to one of the older and more prosperous families of the dale. After a rudimentary education at the Revd Charles Udal's school in Garsdale, John worked until he was about twenty as a shepherd on his father's freehold, developing an interest in mathematics in his spare time with the aid of books that he bought with the profits from stocking knitting or borrowed from his elder brother, who had become an excise officer. Despite being entirely self-taught he worked up his own system of conic sections and began to establish himself as a teacher of mathematics, often spending two or three months at a time in the houses of his pupils. 
What began as a purely local reputation spread quickly, from 1756, when three young men, including the future physician John Haygarth, and Adam Sedgwick's father, Richard Sedgwick, read with him before going up to Cambridge. But the profession on which Dawson embarked was that of a surgeon. In this he was influenced by Henry Bracken, the eminent Lancaster surgeon, with whom he worked as an assistant and pupil. For a year, back in Sedbergh, he practised as a surgeon and then, with his accumulated savings of $100 stitched in his clothing, walked to Edinburgh to study medicine and mathematics. Despite his frugality he could not stay long enough to take a degree and he returned to Sedbergh to resume his practice and save in preparation for another austere period of study, this time in London. His stay in the capital was brief, but he gained experience in the London hospitals, attended surgical and medical lectures, and made a contact, with Edward Waring, the Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge, that was to be important for his future work as a mathematician. Returning to Sedbergh with a diploma, he made his practice the best in the north-western dales and soon enjoyed security, even prosperity. On 3 March 1767 he married Ann Thirnbeck of Middleton, near Sedbergh. The one daughter of the marriage, Mary, born on 15 January 1768, was to be an important companion to Dawson in his later years, following the death of his wife in 1812. 
For over twenty years Dawson maintained his medical practice while also pursuing his work as a mathematician, and it was only from about 1790 that he devoted himself exclusively to mathematical teaching. By then his fame as a teacher was attracting a regular stream of pupils, including Cambridge undergraduates who read with him during the long vacation and others, many, though by no means all of them, from the local area, who were preparing for entry to the university. For a fee of about 5's'. a week for unlimited tuition, in addition to the cost of accommodation and food, sometimes in Dawson's house but more commonly in a local inn, pupils were taught in a characteristic peripatetic fashion. As Adam Sedgwick, who read with him in 1804 before going up to Cambridge and subsequently during vacations, recalled, Dawson would seat his pupils, often a dozen or more, at tables about the house and move constantly from one to another, correcting and advising. Dawson's method, developed at a time when the standard of teaching in the ancient universities was at a low ebb, had remarkable results. Between 1781 and 1794, at least seven, possibly eight, of the fourteen senior wranglers at Cambridge had been taught by him, as had four others between 1797 and 1807. Among these eminent Dawsonians were the future chancery barrister John Bell, the Arabist John Palmer, the lawyer and anti-slavery campaigner Thomas Harrison, James Inman, who went on to become professor of mathematics at the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, and George Butler, later headmaster of Harrow and dean of Peterborough, whose vivid account of the journey of almost five days between London and Sedbergh and his introduction to Dawson was published in 'The Sedberghian' for December 1881 (2, 79-80). Pupils who went on to Cambridge and did not achieve the rank of senior wrangler included, in addition to Richard and Adam Sedgwick and Haygarth, the lord chief justice Sir Nicholas Conyngham Tindal, the mathematician Miles Bland, who (like many of Dawson's pupils) was a boy at Sedbergh School, and several bishops. Among those whose medical interests took them to Edinburgh rather than Cambridge were Robert Willan, Thomas Garnett, and George Birkbeck. 
Dawson maintained his active engagement in mathematics into his seventies. But from 1812, with his memory and physical strength failing, he took no further pupils. Except through his teaching he left little in the way of a mathematical legacy. An anonymous correspondent writing from Trinity College, Cambridge, in the 'European Magazine' (40, 1801, 406-7) urged the university to recognize his status as the first mathematician of England by awarding him an honorary degree. But such an assessment of Dawson's achievements was extravagant. His original contributions to mathematics were not numerous, and while they did not pass unnoticed, the only formal honour they brought him was the very minor one of election as a corresponding member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. 
Dawson, in fact, never fully overcame the handicap of his isolation from the main centres of intellectual life, and he remained a victim both of the limited extent of his work and of the obscurity of the form in which it appeared. His earliest and most substantial publication was his 'Four Propositions', which appeared anonymously in 1769 in an edition that was largely destroyed by fire. In it Dawson identified errors in the calculation that had led Matthew Stewart, the professor of mathematics at Edinburgh, to overestimate the distance between the earth and the sun by more than a quarter. It was characteristic of him that, despite his reputation for modesty and a lack of worldly ambition, he pursued his argument vigorously when he was attacked by Samuel Horley in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'; his reply in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (40, 1770, 452-3) made no concessions and reinforced the respect in which he was held by several Edinburgh mathematicians and natural philosophers, including John Playfair, Lord Webb Seymour, and Henry Lord Brougham, all of whom visited him in Sedbergh. By comparison with 'Four Propositions' his other mathematical publications were slight. The most important of them was a series of rather combative letters signed 'Wadson' and published in Charles Hutton's 'Miscellanea mathematica' (1775), in which he criticized a paper by Charles Wildbore on the velocity of water emerging from vessels in motion. Less important but more acrimonious in the response that it engendered was an exchange in which Dawson took the side of Thomas Simpson against the cantankerous William Emerson by offering an independent analytical demonstration of the existence of an error in Newton's treatment of precession. 
Dawson's interests also embraced metaphysics and theology, subjects that he explored in correspondence with a favourite early pupil, the Revd Thomas Wilson, headmaster of the grammar schools first in Slaidburn and then in Clitheroe. Described by Adam Sedgwick as 'a firm believer and a good sober practical Christian of the old school' (Clark and Hughes, 68), Dawson abhorred the doctrines of David Hume and applauded James Beattie's attack on Humean scepticism. In a similar spirit he wrote against Joseph Priestley's 'The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity' (1777), which he regarded as immoral in tendency and false. His 24-page pamphlet outlining his views on the damaging consequences and unsure foundations of an acceptance of determinism, 'The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Briefly Invalidated' (1781), elicited a dismissive, unsigned rejoinder in the 'Monthly Review' (65, 1781, 66-8), which he answered in an appendix to a second edition of the work in 1803. Although Dawson is said to have retained the respect of Priestley and his other adversaries, his contribution lacked the sophistication that the debate demanded at the highest level and it made little lasting mark. 
The impact that Dawson had on those who knew him was heightened by a commanding physical presence well conveyed in the portraits that survive of him. The original of one of the portraits, painted by Joseph Allen in 1809 and showing Dawson teaching a seated pupil, had already been lost by the mid-nineteenth century, but it survived in the form of a copy by the vicar of Sedbergh, the Revd D. M. Peacock, and an engraving by W. W. Barney. The other, a watercolour painted by William Westall in 1817 of a sombre and very elderly Dawson, went to private hands. Striking though Dawson's appearance was, however, he was revered above all for his simplicity of manner and a cheerful, benevolent temperament that left him, in Adam Sedgwick's words, 'without any stiffness or affectation of superiority' (Clark and Hughes, 69). His pupils remained especially loyal to him. In his later life they presented him with a fine set of plate and when he died, on 19 September 1820, they erected a monument high in the nave of St Andrew's Church in Sedbergh, the church where he was buried, in the form of a bust of him by Robert William Sievier, with an eloquent inscription, dated August 1825, by his former pupil John Bell. 


@@@@@


doc= 7351


Dawson, Sir John William (1820-1899), geologist and educationist, was born on 13 October 1820 in Pictou, Nova Scotia, the elder of the two sons of James Dawson (1789-1858?), then a merchant and later a bookseller, and Mary Rankine of Stirlingshire. Mary, whose parents had died when she was young, was raised by relatives in Edinburgh, possibly the Boyds of the well-known firm of booksellers Oliver and Boyd. James Dawson was also Scottish, from Ordiquhill, in the north. By the time William (as he was always called by family and friends) was born, James Dawson had embarked on a career as a bookseller, enabling him eventually to discharge earlier debts incurred in maritime trade. William Dawson's intense earnestness and self-reliance were honed in this environment, where his parents constantly struggled to make ends meet. Frugality was probably as important as piety in the Dawson household, both giving him an inescapable and omnipresent seriousness of purpose. 
Although lacking in material wealth, Dawson had access to a good education at Pictou Academy, which provided him and his peers with a firm grounding in a range of subjects, especially in the natural sciences. It housed an extensive collection of scientific apparatus, a small natural history museum, and a library with a remarkable assortment of treatises in natural philosophy and natural history. Physically the coastal town was surrounded by rich sandstone and shale rock formations, which contained Carboniferous fossil plants. These provided fertile ground for Dawson's first scientific explorations, and allowed him to put together a respectable collection of geological and palaeontological specimens. When he was sixteen he delivered a paper, 'The structure and history of the earth', to the Pictou Literary and Scientific Society. 
In 1840, at the age of twenty, Dawson decided to return to his parents' homeland, where he matriculated at the University of Edinburgh and studied natural history. Although he remained fiercely proud of his birthplace and sensitive to any charges of hailing from the backwoods, Canadian life must have seemed impoverished compared to the riches of Edinburgh, a city still riding the fame of its golden years. Financial difficulties called him back to Pictou at the end of the academic year but he subsequently returned to Edinburgh in 1847, to extend his studies and to marry Margaret Ann Young Mercer ('b'. 1829/30), a distant cousin and the daughter of a lace merchant. (Later, as principal of McGill University, he received an MA from the University of Edinburgh in 1856 and an LLD in 1884.) So smitten was he with Edinburgh and its university that he stood unsuccessfully for posts there on two later occasions. 
Dawson's return to Pictou in 1841 to help with the family bookselling business could not have been better timed. The following summer he met William Logan, who was about to become director of the geological survey of Canada, and accompanied him on a geological tour of the Nova Scotian countryside, as he did about the same time with Charles Lyell. Thereafter Dawson maintained a cordial relationship with Logan and became the lifelong protege, confidant, and disciple of Lyell. On his return to Nova Scotia in 1847 after the completion of a second academic session at the University of Edinburgh (accompanied then by his seventeen-year-old bride), he sought to enlarge the sphere of his business activities beyond bookselling. He was hired by the General Mining Association of London to conduct a geological survey of Cape Breton, and also investigated coal and other mineral deposits for the provincial government and for small mining companies. 
Dawson turned his talents, as well, to educational matters, a realm that would increasingly occupy him. During the early 1850s he travelled the length and breadth of Nova Scotia as its first superintendent of education (1850-53). His devotion to the task was so complete that he is credited with single-handedly reforming the public educational system of the province. He managed at the same time to continue his scientific investigations, leading to some of his most important palaeontological discoveries. These included unearthing a fragment of a skeleton of the earliest North American reptile or batrachian ('Dendrerpeton acadianum'), the oldest land snail ('Pupa vetusta'), and the oldest millipede ('Xylobius sigillariae'). His investigations into the geology and mineral deposits of Nova Scotia provided data for his 'Acadian Geology' (1855; 4th edn, 1891). This work, the most complete treatment of maritime geology of its day and only slightly modified by the findings of the geological survey of Canada years later, made his reputation as a geologist of the first rank. 
In 1855 Dawson left his native province to accept the unanticipated offer of the position of principal of McGill University, Montreal, a post which he held until 1893. He became the indefatigable architect of McGill's rise to educational eminence. Besides his responsibilities as principal, he served as professor of natural science and principal of McGill Normal School (1857-70), which trained teachers for Quebec's protestant schools. After he stepped down from the principalship he continued to serve McGill as emeritus principal and professor, governors' fellow, and honorary curator of the Peter Redpath Museum. 
Dawson's vigorous promotion of Canada's scientific institutions extended beyond the boundaries of McGill. He successfully lobbied for the formation of a national scientific organization, resulting in the creation of the Royal Society of Canada in 1882, for which he served as the first president. During the early 1880s, as well, he brought both the American and the British associations for the advancement of science to meet in Montreal. His firm guidance was felt in the affairs of the geological survey of Canada and in myriad scientific societies, especially the Natural History Society of Montreal. 
From the 1860s onwards Dawson published an average of ten scientific papers a year, in addition to articles on educational, social, and religious matters. His scientific writings appeared in a wide range of journals and society proceedings, but the 'Canadian Naturalist', 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society', and 'American Journal of Science' each published more than thirty individual papers. 
Dawson's contributions to palaeontology and geology extend beyond publications alone. His unstinting fieldwork, first in Nova Scotia and later in Quebec, increased the number of post-Pliocene fossils known in Canada from about 30 to more than 200. He often chided his scientific adversaries that they should leave their armchairs and cabinets in order to observe specimens 'in situ'. He helped to perfect the examination of thin fossil slices using a microscope, a technique that allowed him to describe 125 new species of Palaeozoic plants. His own collection of Canadian rocks and fossils formed the nucleus of the holdings of the Peter Redpath Museum, which was donated to McGill in Dawson's honour in 1882. Dawson discovered the puzzling fossil 'Eozoon canadense' in 1864, a fragment that appeared to be a foraminifer. For the rest of his life he argued that the specimen proved the presence of animal life in the Laurentian rocks, despite mounting evidence of its inorganic composition. 
Dawson wrote numerous works of popular science. Some of these served polemical purposes in his arguments against the glacial theory (he pushed the efficacy of icebergs or 'floating ice') and evolution (he even took issue with Asa Gray's theistic version), or to promote his views on 'Eozoon'. Examples include 'The Story of the Earth and Man' (1872), 'The Dawn of Life' (1875), and 'Modern Ideas of Evolution' (1890). Almost all sought to reconcile scientific truths with religious doctrine, as in 'Archaia' (1857), 'Nature and the Bible' (1875), and 'The Meeting Place of Geology and History' (1894). Because of his devout Presbyterianism, intense anti-evolutionism, and firm commitment to the letter of biblical scripture, he was in great demand as a lecturer at religiously affiliated educational institutions across the United States and Canada. Reflecting his abiding interest in education and lucid scientific exposition, he also wrote textbooks geared towards Canadian students -- 'Agriculture for Schools' (1864), 'Hand-Book of Canadian Zoology' (1871), and 'Hand-Book of Canadian Geology' (1889). 
Apart from his important role as a popularizer and institution builder, Dawson's scientific reputation rests on his work in palaeobotany. He investigated Canadian formations stretching from the maritime provinces to the west coast, culminating in the 'Geological History of Plants' (1888), and published several papers on the subject every year. His more uneven contributions to palaeozoology (the interminable 'Eozoon' controversy marred his reputation in this realm) treated a variety of organisms ranging from the lowest forms of life to prehistoric man (in 'Fossil Men', 1880). His scientific legacy includes pioneering work in Canadian geology, particularly for the eastern provinces and the St Lawrence River valley. 
Dawson accumulated many scientific honours and awards, both in Canada and abroad. He became a fellow of the Geological Society in 1854 and of the Royal Society in 1862. He presided over the British Association's meeting at Birmingham in 1886, and over the American Association at Montreal in 1882. In 1893 he became president of the American Geological Society. He was knighted in 1884. He also received honorary or corresponding memberships in many other learned societies. Five of his six children survived to adulthood. The eldest son, George Mercer Dawson, became Canada's leading field geologist and director of the geological survey of Canada. Dawson died at his home, 293 University Street, Montreal, on 19 November 1899 following several years' struggle with chronic pneumonia; he was buried in Mount Royal cemetery in Montreal on 21 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 7352


Dawson, Matthew (1820-1898), racehorse trainer, second son of George Dawson (died 1846), himself a trainer, and his wife, Jean Alison, was born at Stamford Hall, Gullane, East Lothian, on 20 January 1820. After a demanding apprenticeship under his father, in 1838 he became head lad to his eldest brother, Thomas, at Middleham in Yorkshire but returned to Scotland two years later to train on his own account. He married, on 8 July 1844, at Kilwinning, Mary Rose (died 1895). Shortly after the death of his father in November 1846, Dawson left Scotland to train for Lord John Scott and his racing partner, Sir John Don-Wauchope. When Lord John gave up racing in 1857 Dawson arranged the sale of his stud to the wealthy Scottish ironmaster James Merry and became Merry's private trainer at Russley, near Lambourn in Berkshire. In 1860 he gained a great success for his master with Thormanby, who won the Derby and cleared $40,000 in bets. 
Six years later Dawson left Russley, following differences with Merry (never an easy man to serve), and started as a public trainer at Newmarket, where he bought Heath House. There his principal owners were the heavy-betting dukes of Hamilton and Newcastle, both ultimately forced to leave the turf by their gambling debts. In 1869, however, he secured as a patron the non-gambling Lord Falmouth, who was concerned only with winning important races. Together with the champion jockey Fred Archer, Dawson and Lord Falmouth formed a triumphant trio, winning two Derbys, three Oaks, three St Legers, three One Thousand Guineas, and three Two Thousand Guineas. In 1885, the year after Lord Falmouth retired from the turf, Dawson handed over Heath House to his nephew George H. Dawson and moved to Exning Manor, Suffolk, with just a few horses. Nevertheless, at the age of seventy-five he trained Sir Visto to win both the Derby and St Leger of 1895. That year he retired, but returned to Newmarket two years later to live at Waterloo Lodge, where he died on 18 August 1898. 
Although he had no children, Dawson passed on his training skills to many who gained their initial tuition in his yard, including his nephews George and John Dawson, and George Blackwell, Felix Leach, William Walters, and Richard Waugh. His brothers Thomas (died 1880), Joseph (died 1880), and John Dawson were also trainers. As 'Baily's Magazine' said of them collectively, 'their manners are courteous, their stable management has passed into a proverb, and their judgement of a yearling is held in as high repute as their irreproachable taste for whisky'. But Matthew was the outstanding figure. Small in stature, immaculate in dress, and autocratic in his training methods, he won twenty-eight classics, including six Derbys. 


@@@@@


doc= 7353


Dawson, Nancy (bap. 1728, d. 1767), dancer, was probably the Ann baptized at Axminster, Devon, on 17 January 1728, the daughter of William Newton. In her will she named her parents as William Newton, a staymaker, of Martlett Court, Covent Garden, and Eleanor Newton, but they may well have followed their daughter to London when she became successful. It seems likely that this is the truth, rather than the colourful, if rather seedy, account given in the anonymous 'Authentic Memoirs of the Celebrated Miss Nancy D*ws*n' (n.d. [1765?]). It seems she joined the company of a puppet-showman, Griffin, who taught her to dance, and a figure dancer from Sadler's Wells gained an engagement for her at that theatre. Here, 'as she was extremely agreeable in her figure, and the novelty of her dancing added to it, with her excellent execution, she soon grew to be a favourite with the town' ('N&Q', 2nd ser., 10, 1860, 195). In her second summer season at Sadler's Wells she was promoted to the part of Columbine. She made her first appearance at Covent Garden on 1 February 1758 as a dancer in Thomas Betterton's dramatic opera 'The Prophetess'. It was probably about this time that she became the mistress of the Covent Garden comedian Ned Shuter (1728?-1776); in 1763 George Alexander Stevens published 'a satire upon Edward Shuter, the comedian, and Nancy Dawson, the far-famed toast', 'The Dramatic History of Master Edward, Miss Ann, Mr Llwhuddwhydd, and Others', which was reprinted several times, but copies of which are very scarce. 
On 22 May 1758 Nancy Dawson was billed to dance a hornpipe, but her greatest opportunity came in October 1759, when the man who was to dance the hornpipe among the thieves in 'The Beggar's Opera' was taken ill. In the manner of Hollywood fantasy, Nancy Dawson was plucked from the chorus to take his place, and from that moment her professional reputation was made. The hornpipe by which she danced into fame was performed to a tune which had various lyrics associated with it, but which was always known as 'The Ballad of Nancy Dawson' (there is no evidence that any words were sung while she danced). The music seems to have been composed by Thomas Arne, and was one of the most popular airs of the day. It was set with variations for the harpsichord as 'Miss Dawson's Hornpipe', and was used in Carey and Bickerstaffe's musical pastiche 'Love in a Village' (1762); it was also mentioned by Goldsmith in the epilogue to his 'She Stoops to Conquer'. The tune continues to be well known as that to which the nursery rhyme 'Here we go round the mulberry bush' is sung. Dawson's performance (as well as Charlotte Brent's celebrated Polly) contributed to the success of 'The Beggar's Opera', which had an unusually long run, drawing audiences away from Garrick's Drury Lane. 
Despite being given her first speaking part (the princess in Shuter's 'The English Sailors in America', 20 March 1760), Dawson was wooed away to Drury Lane by the offer of a higher salary. She danced her hornpipe there, again in 'The Beggar's Opera', on 23 September 1760. She remained there for three years, appearing regularly in revivals of 'The Beggar's Opera' and in Christmas entertainments, including 'Harlequin's Invasion' (1761-2 season) and 'Fortunatus' (1761-2 and 1762-3 seasons). In the summer of 1761 she joined Shuter and Joseph Grimaldi the elder in Lee's company at Winchester. On 26 December 1763 she appeared in a Drury Lane pantomime, 'The Rites of Hecate', and she performed again the following night, but that was the last time she danced on stage. It is not known why she retired, or what she did between then and her death. The Axminster antiquary James Davidson, when preparing his unfinished history of Axminster between 1820 and 1830, learned from his conversations with elderly residents that Dawson made regular visits to Axminster during and after her stage career, where 'she astonished the inhabitants as well by the splendour of her appearances as the boldness of her carriage' (Chapman, 136). Dawson died on 9 June 1767 at Haverstock Hill, Hampstead, Middlesex. She was buried on 12 June in the graveyard of St George the Martyr (later St George's Gardens), Bloomsbury, behind the Foundling Hospital. In her will she made provision for her parents, for her brother and nephew, both named William Newton, and for a niece, Elizabeth Newton, who had been bound to Dawson as an apprentice, suggesting that she might have been involved in some kind of mercantile activity in her last years. 
Reputedly 'of shrewish temper' and 'immoral life', Nancy Dawson was included in Edward Thompson's 'The Meretriciad' (1761) as one of the most notorious women in London. The size and prominence of her tombstone have prompted speculation about liaisons in her later years; rumours that the stone originally bore a scurrilous eight-line ditty, beginning 'Nancy Dawson was a whore', are unfounded. 


@@@@@


doc= 7354


Dawson, Robert (1771-1860), surveyor and cartographer, was born in Plymouth on 10 November 1771, the seventh of ten children born to Matthew Dawson (died 1783) and his wife, and their only child to live to maturity. He lived with his family in Plymouth Dockyard until he was thirteen when he was taken on as an apprentice by a 'good man' as Dawson described him in a letter, probably William Gardner, chief draughtsman in the drawing office in the Tower of London, who in 1784 was conducting a survey of Plymouth. The same 'good man' secured Dawson's appointment to the Board of Ordnance in 1791. Dawson was to serve with the Ordnance Survey for forty-five years, his technical skill and ability to lead ensuring his rapid promotion. He initially took part in military surveys in the south of England and by 1800 he had gained a reputation as a competent surveyor and an excellent draughtsman and was seconded for two years to teach at the Royal Military Academy at High Wycombe. He proved an outstanding teacher of both military pupils at the academy and, after 1810, of civilian pupils at the East India Company's college at Addiscombe. In 1803 he designed the curriculum for the cadets attached to the developing Ordnance Survey -- in six months cadets using his 'Course of Instruction' were to become proficient in all practical aspects of surveying and map drawing. 
Dawson's early cartographic style owed much to Gardner's teaching, but it changed soon after he left the college at High Wycombe where he had perhaps come under the influence of the French topographical instructor, General Francois Jarry. He was also influenced by British military cartography and draughtsmanship and by French surveying textbooks. His method of showing relief by a combination of pen and ink shading and soft brushwork hachures developed until, by the 1820s, his technique of using brown colour washes to depict the Welsh landscape conveyed a vivid three-dimensional impression of topography, particularly well suited to rugged areas, which drew praise from contemporaries and continued to command admiration, although his methods were later abandoned. Although Dawson's brushwork was occasionally criticized by engravers as hard to interpret, his maps are unquestionably very pleasing to the eye. His 'model of hills' of 1830 was used to bring more uniformity to the Ordnance board's presentation of relief. He retired about 1836 on a pension, having risen to be chief draughtsman and principal instructor and one of the best paid of the Ordnance board's staff. He married Jane, sister of two well-known ordnance surveyors, Richard and Charles Budgen, in 1794 in Lewes, Sussex. They had eight children, whose various birthplaces reflect the peripatetic life of an ordnance surveyor. Two girls, both Felicia, died in infancy. Matthew and Robert Kearsley Dawson were commissioned to the Royal Engineers. Charles was a surveyor in the Ordnance Survey. George, a clergyman, was rector of Woodleigh, near Kingsbridge, Devon, where his father was living at the time of his death on 22 June 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 7355


Dawson, Robert Kearsley (1798-1861), surveyor and cartographer, was born in Dover in 1798 while his father, the surveyor and cartographer Robert Dawson (1771-1860), was employed on the survey of Kent. He was one of eight children born to Robert and his wife, Jane Budgen, and one of three sons to become surveyors. He was educated at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and obtained his first commission in the Royal Engineers in 1818. He was assistant to Thomas Colby on the triangulation of Scotland and later accompanied Colby to Ireland, where, in 1829, he supervised a staff of civil assistants who sketched hills for the one-inch map and collected material for the county memoirs to the six-inch survey. In 1831 he was recalled to England and appointed commissioner under the 'Reform Bill' to settle and map the boundaries of parliamentary boroughs, producing maps mostly at scales of one and two inches to the mile in 'Plans of the Cities and Boroughs of England and Wales' (2 vols., 1832). His maps at scales of one and two inches to the mile predate Ordnance Survey maps in the north of the country. In 1836 Dawson became assistant commissioner to the tithe commutation commission, organizing and superintending the surveys on which the permanent commutation of tithes in England and Wales was to be recorded. While employed on this work he also gave advice to the directors of the Wakefield settlements in New Zealand and Australia who were establishing colonies on principles laid out by Edward Gibbon Wakefield. Dawson successfully advocated cheaper but less accurate running surveys in preference to strict trigonometric surveys. Although he favoured the technically superior trigonometric surveys where practicable, as with his own tithe commutation maps, Dawson realized that running surveys would serve the overriding need of the colonists -- to prove title to land -- without being so costly as to delay settlement. He published his views in a pamphlet 'Report on Surveying... with Reference to New Zealand and... the Colonies Generally' (1840). Dawson's experience in Ireland and the Antipodes convinced him of the value of cadastral maps (large-scale maps showing property boundaries) and he argued persuasively that the scope of the English and Welsh tithe survey and mapping should be extended to form a national survey at a scale of one inch to three chains (26.7 inches to a mile, or 1:2376). Despite having won over the tithe and poor law commissioners, his argument found no favour with the exchequer and Britain thus remained without a general cadastral map. None the less, the tithe maps, many drawn to Dawson's specifications, constitute an impressive cartographic achievement. He was appointed assistant commissioner and head of the survey department of the commons enclosure and copyhold commission and for his services was made CB civil division in February 1836. He reached the rank of colonel before his death at 4 Grove Place, Blackheath, on 28 March 1861. He left a widow, Frances Jane, but nothing more is known of his family circumstances. 


@@@@@


doc= 7356


Dawson, Thomas (c.1725-1782), physician, was one of the seven sons of Eli Dawson (died 1744), a Presbyterian minister in Yorkshire, and his wife, Alice Taylor. He was the brother of Benjamin Dawson and Abraham Dawson. He was educated at Kendal Academy from 1746 and Glasgow College from 1749, and graduated MD at the latter in 1753. In March 1754 he became minister of the Gravel Pit meeting-house in Hackney, but preferring medicine he gave up the pulpit and paid back to the Presbyterian fund what had been granted for his education. He soon began practice in London, occasionally going round the wards of Guy's Hospital. One day he found a Miss Corbett, a patient of his, sitting in her room gazing at the words of '2 Samuel' 12: 7: 'Thou art the man'. Taking this to express a wish which she had perhaps suggested less directly before, he made her an offer of marriage and became her husband on 29 May 1758. 
Dawson was elected physician to the Middlesex Hospital, London, in 1759, but only held the post for two years. In 1762 he was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, and two years later he was elected physician to the London Hospital, where he remained until 1770. He also saw patients at Batson's Coffee House in Cornhill. In 1774 he published 'Cases in the Acute Rheumatism and the Gout, with Cursory Remarks and the Method of Treatment', in which he prescribed half-ounce doses of tincture of guaiacum during the painful stage of both rheumatic fever and gout. His only other work was 'An Account of a Safe and Efficient Remedy for Sore Eyes and Eyelids' (1782). Dawson died on 29 April 1782. 


@@@@@


doc= 7357


Dawson, William (1773-1841), Wesleyan Methodist preacher, was born on 30 March 1773 at Garforth, near Leeds, the eldest child of Luke Dawson and his wife, Ann Pease. His father was colliery steward to Sir Thomas Gascoigne, bt, of Gawthorpe for twenty-one years. On his father's death in 1791 William succeeded to this post, which included the management of a farm of 150 acres. William, whose parents moved to Barnbow, near Barwick, in his infancy, was educated locally and at the school of a Mr Sanderson at Aberford. His literary ability was noticed by John Graham, curate of Barwick, and others; they hoped to send him to Cambridge with a view to his taking orders in the Church of England. Family and financial reasons put a stop to this plan. 
During the Leeds conference of 1793 and subsequently, Dawson heard several eminent Wesleyan ministers, and after long reflection he joined the Wesleyans, becoming an accredited local preacher among them. His popularity steadily increased until he became famous as the eloquent Yorkshire Farmer. He was invited to become an itinerant minister, but his mother and seven young children were dependent upon his income as steward and farmer, and he declined the offer. While working hard as a colliery superintendent and a practical farmer he developed remarkable dramatic powers. On the platform and in the pulpit his natural oratory exercised an unusual charm, moving his audiences to laughter or to tears. He advocated the shortening of the hours of labour in factories and addressed other public issues. 
In September 1837 Dawson retired from his employment, and his time became mostly occupied in the opening of chapels, the preaching of anniversary sermons, the advocacy of Christian missions among the heathen, and other charitable objects. From Burmantofts, Leeds, where he now lived, he made preaching tours through the three kingdoms. While at Colne, Lancashire, where he had gone to open a new chapel, he died suddenly on Sunday morning, 4 July 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 7358


Day, Alexander (1745-1841), miniature painter and art dealer, was born in Somerset, the son of John Day. He was the pupil of Ozias Humphry in London, and exhibited miniatures with the Society of Artists in 1768, 1772, and 1773. He was described as 'At Mr Humphrey's, King Street, Covent Garden' in 1768, and as the 'Late Pupil of Mr Humphry's' in 1773 (Graves, 'Soc. Artists'). In December 1773 he was at Lyons, travelling to Rome, where Humphry, already resident, obtained a room for him. On his arrival in April 1774 Day was described as a 'scolar to Humphrys' (Stainton). He was to stay more than forty years, practising as a miniaturist, copyist, and dealer. 
From 1774 to 1777 Day shared apartments with Humphry in the strada Gregoriana and strada Felice; after Humphry left in April 1777 he continued living in the strada Felice with the Scottish painter James Nevay. He also became the friend of the artist Prince Hoare, who was in Rome between 1776 and 1779, and remained in correspondence with him between 1780 and 1791 (letters in the Beinecke Library, Yale University). On 8 December 1792 Day, described as being forty-two, married Anna Mattei, aged twenty-four, 'an Italian woman who he had secreted in his apartment three years & had children by her'; he had been obliged to marry her 'on it being discovered by an Ecclesiastical authority' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1380). In 1801 Day and his wife had a son and two daughters aged between one and nine. 
Very little is known of Day's work as an artist, though contemporary accounts show he maintained a practice in Rome. A miniature of John, Lord Hervey, dated 1795, is at Ickworth, Suffolk; he copied a portrait of Lady Hamilton in 1792 and painted William Lambton in 1797 (both untraced). His miniatures of Venus and Antinous (ex Sothebys, 11 July 1991) are dated 1793, the year in which Day's miniatures were described as 'much inferior in merit to several in London' (journal of Sir William Forbes, Ingamells, 285), but by that time he was also being employed as a copyist by the fourth earl of Bristol and Philip Hardwicke (later third earl of Hardwicke). 
Already in 1779 Day was being described as both a miniature painter and a dealer (Gwynne, 164). In 1787 he was trying to persuade the sculptor Vincenzo Pacetti to sell a marble faun, and in January 1792 he was sending to Sir William Hamilton in Naples 'a Colossal Head & Leg' (Ingamells, 286) cast (presumably) from the celebrated group 'Alexander and Bucephalus' on Monte Cavallo (of which Day subsequently assembled a set of casts). When the French invaded Rome in 1798 Day was able to make spectacular acquisitions from apprehensive Italian collectors, in particular from the Aldobrandini, Borghese, and Colunna palaces. At the time he had two French officers billeted on him, 'but they provided for themselves and almost daily invited him to their dinner, thinking it unreasonable to live upon Artists' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1571); Day meanwhile secreted his pictures 'in walls etc' (Farington, 'Diary', 3.1066). 
In 1800 Day returned to London and exhibited his purchases for sale by private contract at 20 Lower Brook Street. There were twenty-nine paintings, including masterpieces now in the National Gallery, London, such as Titian's 'Bacchus and Ariadne', Raphael's 'Aldobrandini Madonna' and 'St Catherine', the Michelangelo 'Manchester Madonna' and Annibale Carracci's 'Domine quo vadis', besides Bellini's 'Feast of the Gods', now in the National Gallery, Washington, and the Graeco-Roman bas-relief 'The Apotheosis of Homer', now in the British Museum. It was a remarkable exhibition; whenever he visited it Benjamin West said he 'used to walk home as if he felt himself some inches taller' (Buchanan, 2.9). In July 1801 Day returned to Rome. He sent more pictures to London in 1802 and 1806, and in 1804 he briefly returned with Vincenzo Camuccini, one of two brothers, who were acting as his business partners in Rome. He was again exhibiting pictures in London in 1808. 
Although at Easter 1816 Day and his family were listed in the via Sistina (as the strada Felice had become in 1804), in March that year he had already been lodging in London 'for the past six months' with the gem-engraver Nathaniel Marchant (Farington, 'Diary', 14.4805). In February he had appeared before a parliamentary commission as an enthusiastic witness for the purchase of the Elgin marbles. He had also been permitted by the prince regent to adapt the royal stables in the King's Mews for an exhibition of his casts from Monte Cavallo together with further pictures and antiquities. Prince Hoare wrote an explanatory pamphlet for the exhibition which was open at least from February to September. In July, Day was said to have married Mrs Burnage, Marchant's housekeeper, who had been in 'a very poor state of health' on her master's death in March, but had subsequently received more than $9000 in his will (ibid., 4805, 4878); there was then no mention of Day's previous marriage. 
There are few facts concerning Day's later years. In 1819 he was offering pictures to the prince regent from an address at the 'Mews Gallery, Charing Cross' ('Letters of George IV', 2.294-5). He apparently returned to Rome, for in 1821 Farington noted that Day 'who has long been a resident in Rome' had enabled an English artist, Evans, to make copies of Raphael's 'Loggie' (Farington, 'Diary', 16.5745). On 21 June 1833 Day held a sale in London at Christies which included pictures from the Aldobrandini collection. He died in Chelsea in his ninety-sixth year on 12 January 1841, by which time, according to his obituarist, he had often been described as 'long since deceased' ('Art Union', 87). The final dispersal of his collections took place at Christies on 27 May 1843 and 24 May 1845. 
When his obituary was reprinted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', new series, 16 (1841), 101-2, his age was transposed from '96' to '69', which led all his subsequent biographers to assume the existence of at least two, and sometimes three, artists called Day. 


@@@@@


doc= 7359


Day, Alfred (1810-1849), music theorist, was born in London in January 1810. His father disapproved of his early enthusiasm for music, and he proceeded to study medicine in London and Paris, eventually gaining a diploma from Heidelberg. On his return to London he set up in practice as a homoeopathist, while at the same time nurturing his musical interests. He received instruction from the opera conductor W. H. Kearns and sought the acquaintance of prominent younger musicians such as George Macfarren. Around 1840 he was engaged by Macfarren's father as a critic for the 'Musical World', 'until he could no longer bear with the laconical bitterness of this reviewer' (Banister, 80). He had already begun work on his controversial 'Treatise on Harmony', the work on which his reputation is entirely based; it was eventually published in London in 1845. 
In his attempt to explain harmonic practice in a scientific manner, Day was subscribing to a tradition that stretched back to Rameau's treatise of 1722. But he felt dissatisfied with the inconsistencies of earlier theory, and sought to devise a comprehensive and logical system, based on two broad principles. Firstly, he proposed a clear distinction between the ancient and modern styles: the one strict, diatonic, and contrapuntal, with codifiable laws of dissonance preparation; the other free, chromatic, and harmonic (the chromatic notes explicable without recourse to modulation). Secondly, he developed a systematic theory of harmonic progression, based on three fundamental chords of tonic, supertonic, and dominant, all with the possibility of superimposed thirds up to the thirteenth. The novelty and complexity of this seemingly dogmatic system led initially to a cold reception. Macfarren, however, espoused Day's theories at the Royal Academy of Music, even resigning in 1847 when his adherence was questioned; he published a second edition of the 'Treatise' in 1885. Day's work was enormously influential on British pedagogy in the later nineteenth century, but his concentration on harmony as a generative procedure has been much criticized, and superseded by a modern view of functional harmony within a contrapuntal context. 
Day's intellectual curiosity led him constantly to question established modes of thought, in medicine as well as in music. But he did not live to see his ideas achieve a measure of acceptance during the Victorian era. Following several years of illness he died from consumption at 102 Park Street, Camden Town, London, on 11 February 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 7360


Day, Angell (fl. 1563-1595), stationer and writer, was the son of Thomas Day (Daye), parish clerk. Though little is known of his personal life, Day was apprenticed to Thomas Duxsell, stationer in London, in 1563, beginning his service on Christmas day of that year. By 1575 Day probably had completed his apprenticeship, and on 4 December 1582 he married Frauncis Warley in London. Following the completion of his apprenticeship Day next distinguished himself as the compiler of a handbook for epistle writing entitled 'The English Secretorie', printed first in 1586 in London by Robert Waldegrave and sold by Richard Jones. Day's book was so successful that it was reprinted in 1592 and again in 1595, 1599, 1607, and 1614. Other subsequent printings occurred: one identified as 'now newly revised', which Pollard and Redgrave dated at 1618, and later printings which are identified as having been printed in 1621, 1625, 1626, and 1635. There also appears to have been a printing of the second part of the book alone in 1614. By the time of its final printing 'The English Secretorie' had been in print regularly for almost fifty years. The second printing of the book, entered in the Stationers' register in 1587, but not printed finally until 1592, was dedicated to Sir William Hatton, to whom Day had appealed for patronage in his dedication to 'Daphnis and Chloe', also published in 1587. 
Encouraged perhaps by the success of this early work, and urged on by the popularity of pastorals such as Edmund Spenser's 'Shepheardes Calendar' (1579), Day produced an adaptation of 'Daphnis and Chloe', a pastoral romance translated from the Greek into French by Jacques Amyot (printed in 1559). Day's version appeared in 1587 (also printed by Robert Waldegrave). Since its republication in a facsimile edition (1890, ed. Joseph Jacobs) literary critics have noted the poem's overt nationalism, with its idealized depiction of Queen Elizabeth as a symbol of England. Today Day's translation of 'Daphnis and Chloe' survives in only one copy, now housed in the collection of the British Library. 
Day's other literary work was more modest in scope and stature. In 1595 he published commendatory verses, 'Nennio, or, A Treatise of Nobility', a translation of the Italian humanist treatise by William Jones, 'gentleman', printed by Peter Short, who produced the 1599 edition of 'The English Secretorie'. Two additional pieces are frequently attributed to Day. The first is the printing of a poem in six-line stanzas entitled 'Upon the Life and Death of the most Worthy and Thrice Renowned Knight, Sir Phillip Sidney' by Robert Waldegrave in 1587 bearing the authorial initials 'A.D.'. The second is a pamphlet (not dated, but thought to be 'c'.1585) entitled 'Wonderfull Strange Sightes Seene in the Element, over the Citie of London and other Places'. 
Nothing is known of Day's life beyond the details of his apprenticeship and his publications. Although biographers have assumed that he gave up a career as a stationer in order to pursue his writing there is, in fact, no evidence to corroborate this. If nothing else, Day's consistent association with printers such as Robert Waldegrave and booksellers such as Cuthbert Burbie and Richard Jones suggests that he retained close ties with the world of printers and booksellers throughout his literary life. 


@@@@@


doc= 7361


Day, Daniel (1683-1767), engineer and founder of Fairlop fair, Essex, was born in Southwark, Surrey, where his father was a prosperous brewer. Day never married, and resided all his working life in Wapping, then on the eastern margin of London, where he pursued his trade as an engine, pump, and block maker. He was known as an upright and ingenious mechanic, and was responsible for many improvements and inventions. His modification to the brewers' jigger -- a pump used to force beer into vats -- was in use for many years. His business prospered and he became sufficiently wealthy to enjoy the pleasures of generosity, endowing his nieces at their marriages, and lending or giving to those in need. Such was his reputation for probity that he was regularly called on to settle local disputes. 
Day had many inoffensive eccentricities, some of which he was able to indulge at what became Fairlop fair. He owned a small estate near the Fairlop oak, a venerable and wide-spreading oak in Hainault Forest, Essex, about 10 miles from London, and went there each summer to collect his rent. It became his custom to invite a few neighbours to accompany him, and after his business was done, to partake of a meal of beans and bacon prepared by the nearby public house and consumed under the oak tree's shade. In the course of a few years, this modest beanfeast expanded into a vast gathering of local people as well as fun-seekers from London, to whom, nevertheless, Day continued to distribute beans and bacon beneath his favourite tree. The event naturally attracted a swarm of hucksters, who set up amusement stalls, giving, by 1725, the appearance of a regular fair. 
In his youth, Day walked to Fairlop and back. Later he went on horseback, but after a fall, vowed never to mount a horse again and purchased a mule which, however, also threw him. He next took a post-chaise or cart, but in one of these he also met with an accident and thereafter refused to enter either. He then invented a machine to go by the aid of mechanical power alone, but it too failed on the third journey. His last resort was a jockey cart in which, attended by music, he made his annual trip until July 1767. For some years before his death the pump and block makers of Wapping attended the fair in a boat covered by an awning and mounted on a carriage drawn by six horses. A few years before his death the oak shed a large limb, out of which Day had a coffin made for himself. He died at Wapping on 19 October 1767; the catastrophes which he had suffered on his journeys induced him to direct that his remains be conveyed by water to his place of burial, the churchyard of Barking, Essex. 
The roistering that accompanied the fair displeased the authorities, who made several attempts to suppress it, but it survived Day's death, the eventual destruction of Fairlop oak, and even the disafforestation of Hainault. About 1856 the area was enclosed but the fair transferred to various nearby sites before lapsing soon after 1900. 


@@@@@


doc= 7362


Day, Francis (c.1605-1666x73), founder of Madras, was the fourth son of William Day (died 'c'.1628) of Bray, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Helen (died 1630/31), daughter of Paul Wentworth of Burnham, Buckinghamshire; William Day (1529-1596), bishop of Winchester, was his grandfather. He probably attended Eton College, where his grandfather had been provost, between 1618 and 1620. During the 1620s he may have learned the clothworker's trade in London under Peter Miles, freeman of the Clothworkers' Company from 1622, though there is no record of his having been apprenticed or made free of the company himself. On 5 July 1630 he obtained a licence to marry Elizabeth Matson ('b'. 'c'.1609), daughter of Robert Matson, yeoman, of Satwell, Berkshire; both were described as living in the parish of St James Garlickhithe, but the marriage was to take place at the parish church of Chelsea, Middlesex. In 1632 Day was appointed a factor by the East India Company, and in 1634 chief of the factory (trading station) at Armagon, a small port on the Coromandel coast of eastern India. The Coromandel coast was important to the European trading companies because it was there that they could purchase Indian textiles, notably chintz, a kind of 'painted' cloth made nowhere else and which was highly sought after in Europe. Diamonds, commonly used as a means of remitting money to Europe, were also available from nearby Golconda. Owing to the dilapidated state of the Armagon factory, its impoverished trading hinterland, and oppression by both the local Indian ruler and the Dutch at Pulicat, Day contemplated the establishment of a new factory to the south. In 1637 he made an exploratory voyage from Masulipatam to Pondicherry, and in 1639 he again sailed south. On 23 July of that year he arrived at the coastal village of Madrasipatam, just south of the village of Chinnapatnam and north of the Portuguese settlement of San Thome. Discovering the area to be a good source of textiles, he negotiated the grant of a plot of coastal land on behalf of the company from Damarla Venkatadri, the local ruler. In February 1640 Armagon was dismantled, and on 20 February the establishment arrived at Madras, where work soon began on building a new fort, later named Fort St George. For this construction Day took on loans on his own account. Finding the financial burden excessive, in August 1640 he proceeded to Surat to plead his case with the governing council, who, although freeing him of the responsibility, dispatched him to England in December 1640 to answer certain charges relating to private trading. Apparently exonerated by the company, Day was admitted a freeman of the company by service on 22 October 1641, and re-employed as a merchant for a voyage on the 'Hopewell', commanded by captain Andrew Trumbull, to Madras and Persia, underwriting the voyage himself with $500, but his request for private trade to the value of $100 was refused. He sailed accompanied by his son, also Francis, and the ship arrived at Madras on 5 July 1642, before proceeding to Balasore. At the end of 1642 he was again at Fort St George, sitting as second on council, before continuing to Persia. In mid-1643 Day and others charged Trumbull with violence and tyranny. In vituperative response, Trumbull accused Day of habitual drunkenness, of stealing a Danish captain's wife and two waiting gentlewomen, and of gaming and illicit private trading. However, Trumbull was dismissed and his allegations remain uncorroborated. 
On 27 August 1643 Day took over as chief of Fort St George from Andrew Cogan, but immediately applied to the company to be relieved of the responsibility. He was superseded by Thomas Ivie on 4 August 1644, and on 7 September sailed for Bantam. His subsequent career remains obscure. In 1646, in England, he was fined by the company for private trading, and in 1652 he gave evidence in a case before the court of committee. He was mayor of Wallingford, Berkshire, in 1665-6, when he made a statement about the town for the visitation. He made his will in November 1666, when he was described as a gentleman of Great Haseley, Oxfordshire, and owned property in Wallingford, Wargrave, and Kilham, Berkshire. He had died by August 1673, when his will was proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 7363


Day, Francis (1829-1889), military surgeon and ichthyologist, was born on 2 March 1829 at Maresfield, Sussex, the third son of William Day (1797-1849) and his wife, Ann Elliott, 'nee' Le Blanc. The family moved to Hadlow House in Mayfield about 1833, and farmed an estate of some 2000 acres. Day was educated at Shrewsbury School from 1838 to 1843, and it was here that his interests in natural history developed, revealed in 'boyish observations on the habits of fish' ('Cheltenham Examiner'). 
In September 1848 Day enrolled at St George's Hospital in London to study medicine and in 1851 qualified as MRCS. In 1852 he was appointed as an assistant surgeon in the Madras establishment, India, and from 1853 to 1856 he was attached to various regiments at Mercara, Bangalore, and Hyderabad. His interests in Indian natural history began to develop, and subsequently his life was devoted to the people and fauna of India. His twenty-two years in the country were punctuated only by periodic returns to England to recuperate from illness. 
Day spent much of 1857 in England on sick leave. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society on 16 June 1857; his proposal form indicated that it was his knowledge of ornithology that underpinned his application, rather than ichthyology -- the branch of zoology for which he became best known. On 3 November 1857 he married Emma Covey of Basingstoke, Hampshire, and the couple travelled to India in 1858. From 1859 until 1864 they lived in Cochin, where Francis had been appointed civil surgeon. Most of his medical publications -- largely accounts of fevers -- date from this period. His daughter Fanny Laura was born in Cochin (November 1861), and it was here that he began to study fishes, explored the Nilgiri hills (1863), and wrote 'The Land of the Permauls, or, Cochin its Past and Present' (1863). 
The family returned to London in 1864, and a son, Francis Meredith, was born in April that year; they moved to Cheltenham in October. In 1865 Day's observations on Cochin fishes were presented at meetings of the Zoological Society -- he had been elected a fellow in 1864 -- and 'The Fishes of Malabar' was published. In 1866 Francis and Emma returned to India, leaving their two children in the care of family friends. Day had various posts in Ootacamund, Madras, and Kurnool, began a series of fish stocking experiments, and published on cholera; their second daughter, Edith Mary, was born in October 1867. In 1868 and 1869 Day undertook extensive fishery surveys around Madras, in Orissa, Burma, and the Andaman Islands. He published on new species of fishes and compiled a catalogue of Indian freshwater fishes. Following the death of his wife, Emma, in 1869, Day returned to England in 1870. 
Day was appointed inspector-general of fisheries in July 1871. He divided his time between Calcutta and Simla, published extensively on his discoveries, and was promoted to surgeon-major in December. During a brief return to England in 1872 he married Emily Sheepshanks at Coventry on 13 April, the couple travelling together to India where they lived in Simla while Day continued his relentless survey work and published accounts of marine fish and fisheries of India. Sadly, Emily died in 1873, and in 1874 Francis Day left India for the last time, returning to England in May. 
Day devoted all his energies to researching and writing about fishes, beginning with 'The Fishes of India'. From his home in Richmond-on-Thames he made frequent visits to the British Museum (to examine specimens he had donated between 1864 and 1870), and also journeyed to Paris, Berlin, The Hague, and Leiden in 1875. Part 1 of 'The Fishes of India' was published that year, with part 2 appearing in 1876, the same year that Day retired from the army and moved to Cheltenham. Parts 3 and 4 appeared in 1877 and 1878 respectively. Arguably 'The Fishes of India' was Day's greatest achievement. While preparing this major publication, Day had been pursuing his interests in British fishes, and a clear indication of his industry was the publication of part 1 of 'Fishes of Great Britain' in 1880. Parts 2 to 4 were completed and published between 1881 and 1884. In addition to writing he took an active role in a number of international fisheries exhibitions, including those in Paris (1875), Berlin (1880), and London (1883), and won several medals. His fascination with salmon and trout led to the publication of 'British and Irish Salmonidae' in 1887. In the following year a supplement to 'Fishes of India' appeared, and his scientific achievements were recognized by the award of an honorary LLD by the University of Edinburgh. In 1889 Day corrected in proof his last major work, the contribution on 'Fishes' to the 'Fauna of India'. In his journal articles and books Day had described some 328 new species of fishes. He died on 10 July 1889 at his home, Kenilworth House, Cheltenham. 
In addition to his published works, Day's major legacy to science was his extensive collections. During his early career in India, he had interests in many aspects of natural history, and made collections of birds, insects, crustaceans, reptiles, and mammals in addition to fishes. Day's large collections of fishes -- his own estimate of the number of specimens shipped to England in 1873 was 'about 12,000 specimens in spirit, besides skins' -- were distributed among at least twelve institutions. The Indian Museum, Calcutta, the Australian Museum, Sydney, the Rijksmuseum in Leiden, the Zoologisches Museum, Berlin, and the Naturhistorisches Museum in Vienna retain substantial collections, but the largest is that at the Natural History Museum in London, where over five thousand specimens are deposited. 


@@@@@


doc= 7364


Day, George (c.1502-1556), bishop of Chichester, was the third son of Richard Day, gentleman, of Newport, Shropshire, and Agnes Osborne, and the elder brother of William Day (1529-1596). Early in 1521 he graduated BA from St John's College, Cambridge, the centre of humanism in the university. The following year he became a fellow, and in 1523 he had two short Latin verses printed in the treatise 'Assertionis Lutheranae confutatio', published by the university chancellor, John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, a co-founder of his college; these were his only published works. Having proceeded MA in 1524, he became first Linacre professor of medicine in 1525, and then the college praelector in Greek. Early in 1528 he became public orator to the university. 
Ordained deacon at Lincoln on 7 March that year, Day became chaplain to Fisher. The bishop perceptively observed in 1534, however, that Day 'studies to obtain the goodwill of both sides' ('LP Henry VIII', 8.859). As orator he wrote the university's decree in support of the royal supremacy, and in spite of his connection with Fisher he was appointed a royal chaplain. From 1537, although vice-chancellor that year, he was often at court. Henry VIII gave Day the sapphire ring he later bequeathed to Archbishop Nicholas Heath, and royal influence was responsible for his appointments on 27 July 1537 as master of St John's, in September to the livings of Holsworthy, Devon, and All Hallows-the-Great, London, and then on 5 June 1538 as provost of King's College, Cambridge. Although he held no secular offices, he served on important ecclesiastical commissions. In November 1538 he was one of the theologians nominated to revise the articles in the 'Bishops' Book' on the ten commandments, justification, and purgatory, and the same month was called to express the king's views at the trial for heresy of John Lambert. The following year the king wrote in his name as bishop of the proposed new diocese of Dunstable. In 1540 he was a member of the committee on doctrine, in February 1542 he was among those appointed to correct the 'New Testament' in the short-lived plan to revise the 'Great Bible', and he was a member of the team responsible for the conservative article on justification in the 'King's Book' (1543). He was further rewarded with prebends in Beverley College, York, and St Stephen's, Westminster, acquiring the latter on 23 March 1543. 
When three weeks later, on 15 April, he was nominated as bishop of Chichester, Day resigned all his benefices, but kept the provostship of King's, by royal dispensation. He was installed by proxy but he usually resided and conducted regular visitations. In 1544 he and Bishop Nicholas Heath drew up the statutes for the cathedrals of the new foundation. In July 1545, by now almoner to Queen Katherine, he with others investigated the distribution of funds for the relief of the poor and maintenance of highways, and in the following July he was one of those appointed to nominate the recipients of these funds. In November he participated in a commission to investigate the alleged bigamy of Sir Ralph Sadler's wife. When early in 1546 Archbishop Thomas Cranmer suggested to Henry VIII that Day's endorsement of the abolition of certain ceremonies would make them more generally acceptable, Day duly acquiesced. That February he served on the commission to survey chantries in Sussex, Surrey, and Southwark. 
The new reign began well enough for Day when his gift of books to the king earned from the young Edward VI praise for his learning. However, early in 1547 he criticized the fellows of King's for discontinuing private masses, and he resigned as provost before April 1548. He was not present on 9 September when Robert Ferrar became the first bishop to be consecrated according to the rites of the newly introduced English ordinal. His answers to Cranmer's questionnaire of 1548 on the sacraments upheld traditionalist views, except for an ambivalent response about the sacrificial aspect of the mass. Though he had opposed the order of communion of 1548, he enforced its use in his diocese. Later that year he was involved with the draft English prayer book but he objected to parts of it. He regularly attended the Lords, where in opposing most of the religious legislation of the reign he publicly identified himself with the conservative viewpoint, most notably in the debates on the eucharist in December 1548 when he audaciously cited the executed Bishop Fisher and spoke in support of transubstantiation. In January 1549 he voted against the 'Act of Uniformity' and continued to oppose changes in religion except for the 'Act on Fast Days' of 1549. In April 1549 he was appointed to a commission to investigate radical heresies, but he does not seem to have been an active member. In April 1550, possibly in response to the threat of deprivation, he preached a sermon against transubstantiation. Though the following October he cleared himself against a charge of seditious preaching, he was summoned before the council in November and December for his refusal to replace altars with tables in churches in his diocese. He was committed to the Fleet prison on 11 December, and deprived on 10 October 1551. In January 1552 he rejected an offer from the secretary of state William Cecil (another St John's man) to free him if he would accept the removal of altars. In June he was transferred to the custody of the chancellor, Thomas Goodrich, bishop of Ely, possibly through the intervention of Sir John Cheke, his former pupil (his 'bringer-upp... in learning'; Nichols, clxi) and his successor as provost of King's. Cheke, now a royal tutor, had praised Day's learning and loyalty to the crown. 
Immediately after Mary's accession, Day was released on 4 August 1553. A distinguished preacher, he was the queen's choice to preach at the funeral of Edward VI on 8 August. His provocative sermon praised the late king but attacked the religious politics of Edward's regime. By 29 September 1553 he was the queen's almoner, and on 1 October he preached at her coronation. In March 1554 he was appointed to the commissions to deprive protestant bishops. In November 1555 during a visit to John Bradford he confessed that fresh from the university, he 'went with the word' but 'it was always against my conscience', although he acknowledged that he approved communion in two kinds for the laity ('Acts and Monuments', 7.176 and 178). That year he was involved in the examinations of Bishop John Hooper, John Philpot, and others. The extent of his involvement in the executions for heresy in his diocese is not clear. He died in London on 2 August 1556 and was buried in Chichester Cathedral. In his will, drawn up on 28 July, he placed his hope for salvation on the merits of the blood and death of Jesus Christ, but did not invoke the saints. To his successors at Chichester he left his mitre and crosier, and to the cathedral a new vestment of red silk, chalices and matching pattens, and $40 to buy a silver cross. St John's College library received a copy of the trilingual Complutensian polyglot 'Bible', and King's the works of Chrysostom and Clement of Alexandria. Apart from Archbishop Heath, other beneficiaries included the bishop of Ely, Day's four brothers, Roger, William, Thomas of Ford, and Thomas, precentor of Chichester, and his 'mother-in-law' (stepmother), Johane Day, and her daughter Johane. 


@@@@@


doc= 7365


Day, George Edward (1815-1872), physician, was born on 4 August 1815 at Tenby, Pembrokeshire. He was the son of George Day of Manorabon House, Swansea, who had inherited the fortunes of his father, George Day, physician to the nabob of Arcot, and his uncle Sir John Day, solicitor-general in Bengal. G. E. Day's mother was Mary Hale, a descendant of Sir Matthew Hale, and after his father's ruin by the failure of a bank in 1826 he was brought up by his grandmother, Mrs Hale. Day may have been apprenticed to a general practitioner in Worcestershire before he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1833. After one term he obtained a scholarship at Pembroke College, where he graduated as twenty-ninth wrangler in 1837. He studied medicine in Edinburgh, where he won medals in anatomy, midwifery, and physiological botany. He was awarded the Harveian prize medal for 1843. He took his MA degree at Cambridge in 1840 and was granted a licence to practise by the university in 1842. In 1843 he began practice in 3 Southwick Street, London, becoming a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1844 and a fellow in 1848. He became FRS in 1850. He was physician to the Western General Dispensary and lecturer on materia medica at the Middlesex Hospital. 
Day supplemented his income through reviewing and translating, and was co-editor of the 'Monthly Journal of Medical Science' (1845-55), 'Monthly Retrospect of Medical Sciences' (1849), and the 'Edinburgh Monthly Journal of Medical Sciences' (1848-52). He was also a contributor to many other periodicals. His translations included 'Animal Chemistry' (2 vols., 1845-6), from the German of J. F. Simon; 'The Pathological Anatomy of the Human Body' (1847), from the German of J. Vogel; and 'The Pathological Anatomy of the Organs of Respiration and Circulation' (1852), from the German of C. Rokitansky. In 1849 he became Chandos professor of anatomy and medicine at St Andrews, and quickly obtained the necessary MD degree from Giessen. He was a popular professor, and carried out reforms in the MD examination. Day's own publications include 'A Practical Treatise on the Domestic Management and most Important Diseases of Advanced Life' (1849), an early English language textbook on geriatric medicine, an American edition of which also appeared in 1849, and his 'Chemistry and its Relation to Physiology and Medicine' (1860). In 1841 he married Ellen Anna, daughter of James Buckton, solicitor, of Doctors' Commons and of Wrexham. They had two sons and four daughters. 
Day broke his right arm after falling down a mine shaft on Helvellyn in 1857, as a result of which the arm became virtually useless except for writing 'which he did by lifting the injured arm with his left hand on to a cushion placed on the desk and moving it only from the wrist' (Scott, 833). He soon developed a sinovitis of the right knee which confined him to a wheelchair for the rest of his life. Day retired in 1863 and settled at Torquay in the forlorn hope that it would improve his health. He died at Andersey, Torquay, on 31 January 1872. The council of the St Andrews Medical Graduates Association later organized an appeal in an attempt to provide for his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 7366


Day, James (fl. 1637), poet, is entirely unknown, apart from a volume of devotional verse, entitled 'A New Spring of Divine Poetrie', published in 1637 with an acrostic dedication 'To Mistris Bridget Rudge' and commendatory verses by H. G. and T. J. The two principal poems in the volume are 'The Worldes Metamorphosis' and 'Christ's Birth and Passion'; these are followed by some shorter poems. T. J. may well have been Thomas Jordan, printer and plagiarist. At any rate, Day's work seems not to have sold well, and in 1646 the unsold copies were reissued by Jordan, with a new title-page describing them as the 'Divine Raptures' of Jordan himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 7367


Day, John (1521/2-1584), printer and bookseller, may have been born in Dunwich, Suffolk. The capital investment that he brought to his work as a printer and publisher has led some to suppose that he came of a prosperous family, but this may equally be attributed to his business acumen, innovative spirit, and ruthless pursuit of pious opportunity. By 1540 he seems to have been in London, as in that year a John Day was noted in a city deposition as a late servant of the printer and physician Thomas Raynalde. In 1546 Day was very probably one of twenty men freed by redemption (by purchase) into the London Stringers' Company, and, having secured the valuable privilege of the city freedom, he began to print in the same year. From 1547 to 1549 he was based in the parish of St Sepulchre at the sign of the Resurrection; in 1549 he moved into the gatehouse of Aldersgate, rented from the city for $23 a year, which seems to have served as home and printing house for the rest of his career. 
Of Day's commitment to the evangelical cause there can be no doubt and from 1546 he worked mostly in partnership with other members of the emerging protestant book trade, principally William Seres. Seres and Day were among the first to grasp the new opportunities afforded by the accession of Edward VI in 1547. A relaxation of the law against heretical books, combined with the positive advocacy of an evangelical agenda by prominent members of the new governing clique, led to a vast increase in the number of books published from 1547 to 1549, an increase entirely accounted for by protestant works. Day found himself in the vanguard of the new movement. Numbered among his publications were books by some of the most prominent authors: John Hooper, Hugh Latimer, John Poynet, and William Turner of the new evangelical establishment; John Calvin of the major continental theologians. Ten of the twenty books published in 1548 by Day and Seres were contributions to the debate over eucharistic doctrine, including works by Luke Shepherd, Robert Crowley, and William Turner. Day also developed a notable speciality in bringing to an English market important works of continental protestantism. His translations included milestone works such as Herman von Wied's 'Consultation' on the reform of the diocese of Cologne, a work of obvious relevance to the present debate on the future direction of the English church. Day's editions were mostly congenial octavos, published in a clear, pleasantly ordered blackletter type with plentiful room for marginal annotation. 
In 1550 Day opened a shop in Cheapside, transferred from the Stringers' Company to the Stationers' Company, and dissolved his partnership with Seres. However, he continued to print with or for a number of London publishers, and also under his own name. A steady stream of small-format editions were punctuated by larger, more ambitious projects, most notably an elaborate folio 'Bible' (for which Day seems to have been granted a patent). In all, something like 130 works may be attributed to his press, or were published with his collaboration, during the Edwardian period. In a period when the output of the English printing industry was still markedly less sophisticated than that at most major continental centres, Day's work was also characterized by a notable technical assurance, which may partly be attributed to the extensive use he made of foreign workmen, a professional reliance on foreign expertise that would last for the whole of his career. Day was also closely connected to leading members of the church establishment and political elite, and in 1553 he was granted a patent to publish works by Thomas Becon and John Ponet, a monopoly which became both significant and lucrative when Ponet's 'Brief Catechism' was appended to the 'ABC'. All of these features of Day's work -- typographical sophistication, close connections with the continental printing industries, and official patronage -- would underpin his more spectacular success in the Elizabethan period. 
For a bookseller so closely associated with the Edwardian regime, the reign of Mary Tudor was bound to be difficult, and Day made little attempt to embrace the new religious principles, though the precise chronology of his activities during the period has been difficult to establish. He did not help his cause by becoming embroiled in the production of clandestine protestant literature. Between October 1553 and May 1554 at least eight works hostile to the new regime appeared, published secretly in England, under the pseudonym Michael Wood of Rouen for which Day may well have been responsible. Although there seems little to connect these grubby, ephemeral tracts with Day's usual quality of workmanship, the distinctive Garamond roman type used by Wood is indeed found in autograph works of Day's press published both before and after. Whether or not responsible for these books, Day certainly did enough to arouse the suspicions of the authorities, and in October 1554 he was arrested and briefly imprisoned. By 1556 he was working again in London, though on a much reduced scale. 
With Elizabeth's accession Day's business burst into renewed life. He embarked on a steady production of editions that would continue unabated until his death. His work early in the reign represented partly the re-establishment of patterns established during the Edwardian era: liturgical handbooks for the London Dutch church, sermons and controversial works of the leading figures of the new church establishment. But he also had more ambitious plans. In 1559 he secured a crucial if ambiguous privilege to print Cunningham's 'Cosmographical Glass' for life, and any other books 'not repugnant to Holy Scripture or the law' and not covered by other patents, for seven years ('CPR', '1558-60', 4). Day exploited this to establish control of publication of the 'ABC with Little Catechism' (a restoration of his Edwardian privilege), and the period's best-selling book, the English psalter of Sternhold and Hopkins. Even without other prestige projects, such as collected editions of the works of Becon, Latimer, and Tyndale, control of these two staples of English religious life would have made him a rich man. When other aggrieved printers challenged Day's monopoly late in his life, they estimated his annual profit from these two books alone at between $200 and $500. Not surprisingly, the defence of such a lucrative monopoly required powerful protectors at the heart of the regime: in Day's case apparently most crucially Robert Dudley, the queen's favourite and soon to be earl of Leicester. 
It was probably only the profits generated by Day's small books which made possible one of the great publishing ventures of the Elizabethan era: John Foxe's 'Book of Martyrs'. Foxe returned to England from exile in October 1559, and as he set about gathering the contemporary testimonies that would be the book's enduring claim to greatness, a partnership with Day, who was already engaged in the publication of works by prominent Marian martyrs and whose shop, almost alone in London, had the technical resources to match Foxe's ambitions, seemed a natural choice. In the months leading to the final publication of the 'Actes and Monuments' in March 1563 Foxe was a frequent presence at Day's printing house, and indeed received much of his correspondence there. But the burden of making Foxe's vision a practical reality fell on Day. 
Remarkably little attention has been paid to the technical aspects of production of this work. This was a project of a complexity seldom before attempted by an English printer. Not only was the book enormous -- the first English edition ran to 1800 pages -- its complex compositional structure of different typefaces, columns, and marginalia added greatly to the technical difficulties. As news of Foxe's venture spread, new witnesses to the persecutions came forward, and the author was receiving new information up to and after the date of first publication, all of which had to be included. The extent of the interpolations is revealed in the irregularity of the collation, with inserted leaves and extra or irregular gatherings; more modest changes were made possible by the addition of small slips pasted over already set text. Finally, the fifty woodcut illustrations, all new, and all probably cut abroad or by Flemish artists working in England, had to be commissioned and designed. Although one of the great glories of the book, these represented a considerable extra investment; there is some internal evidence that the larger illustrations arrived late in the day, and their incorporation with the text caused further technical difficulties. 
Although we lack any precise information about the production process, it is possible to reconstruct in broad outline the impact such an enormous project would have had on Day's press. For the second edition of 1570 Day employed three presses simultaneously. If this were the case for the first edition, a book of 900 folio leaves would still have occupied three presses for almost twelve months, assuming an edition of 1250 copies. That they were indeed so occupied is clearly indicated by the fact that after two busy years the published output of Day's presses slowed to virtually nothing in 1562, when he was described as being forty, with only two works published apart from the valuable psalms. The cost of keeping three presses running, paying the wages of highly skilled Dutch workmen, and buying ink and paper may have amounted to an investment of not far short of $1000 -- all before a single copy was available for sale. 
Having taken such risks, Day reaped his reward. The book was an instant success, helped on its way by official patronage (in 1571 it was ordered to be set up in every cathedral and in the houses of the senior clergy) and it made Day's reputation. Further editions followed in 1570, 1576, and 1583: Day was still giving pains to this last edition shortly before his death. Foxe and Day remained on good terms throughout, and in the preface to his edition of the works of Tyndale, Barnes, and Frith in 1573 Foxe paid generous tribute to a partner without whom his ambitious plans could scarcely have been realized. 
Publication freed Day to return to other projects. In 1564 a smaller-format edition of the letters of the Marian martyrs catered to demand for a cheaper, more accessible version of the martyrology, and works of protestant theology and controversy remained the core of his business. Day also made himself available to publish political tracts helpful to the regime, such as three works by Thomas Norton responding to the papal bull of excommunication (1570) and George Buchanan's polemic against Mary, queen of Scots. In addition, from 1564, Day was the official printer to the city authorities. But the success of the 'Actes and Monuments' and steady income from his patents also gave Day room to diversify. Early in the reign Day struck up a relationship with Matthew Parker, to whom he proved a willing foil in the archbishop's cherished antiquarian projects. In 1566 he published for Parker Aelfric's 'Testimonie of Antiquitie', a book which required the design and casting of special Anglo-Saxon characters. The reward for this and other establishment connections was a new and valuable patent: in 1570 Day received the rights to Nowell's 'Catechism', extended to all Nowell's works four years later. Emboldened by the technical success of the 'Actes and Monuments', Day also diversified into other categories of illustrated work, most notably an English translation of Euclid's 'Elements of Geometry' (1570), a brilliant deluxe folio. 
Day's success was not entirely unalloyed. In 1573, 'one asplyn', either Day's apprentice Thomas Asplin or the stationer Robert Asplin, attempted to murder him and his family (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.466). About the same time a bold but unsuccessful attempt by Day to build a new shop in the centre of St Paul's Churchyard led to a clash between the city and church authorities; Day eventually secured premises elsewhere in the Churchyard. In the years after 1577 Day became less ambitious, falling back on the reliable best-sellers that were the basis of his wealth. His shop retained a steady output, and in 1583 still operated four presses. His last years were marred by controversy, as competitors in the London trade, led by his former apprentice John Wolfe, made a determined effort to break his stranglehold on such large areas of protestant print. Following a commission of inquiry, Day handed the rights to thirty books to the Stationers' Company in 1584, though not including his most lucrative monopolies. The dispute remained unresolved at his death, leaving a troubled and complex inheritance for his son Richard Day (b. 1552, d. in or before 1606). 
Day was married twice, and had thirteen children by each marriage; among those from the second marriage was John Day (1566-1628), Aristotelian scholar and Church of England clergyman. The name of his first wife is unknown; his second, Alice Lehunte (died 1612), a gentlewoman, survived him. He accumulated extensive property in London and Suffolk, and a range of printing types and ornamental materials that would have done justice to a major continental printer. He died at Walden in Essex on 23 July 1584, 'en route' to visit his second wife's family in Suffolk. He was buried on 2 August in the parish church of Little Bradley, Suffolk, where a funeral monument was erected; administration of his estate was granted to Alice on 30 August. His death removed one of the titans of the Elizabethan book world, and one of the London book trade's most innovative and adept members. 


@@@@@


doc= 7368


Day, John (1573/4-1638?), playwright, was born at Cawston, Norfolk, the son of Walter Day, husbandman. He attended school at Ely, and on 24 October 1592, at the age of eighteen, entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. Barely six months later, on 4 May 1593, he was expelled for stealing a book. 
Day is next heard of in 1598, when he sold a play, 'The Conquest of Brute', to the Admiral's Men for $2. This appears to have been revised by (or with) his older colleague Henry Chettle and performed with some success, since Chettle immediately began work on a sequel. Having got his start with the company, Day wrote regularly for it for the next five years, though of his plays recorded in Philip Henslowe's diary the only one to survive is a further collaboration with Chettle, 'The Blind Beggar of Bednal Green' (1600, first printed in 1659). Day apparently called on his Norfolk origins in creating several characters in this play. At one point young Strowd recalls being 'as naked as your 'Norfolk'-Dumplin' (sig. D2'v'), and the play is filled with assertions of regional pride and plain yeoman virtues. 
In 1599 Day wrote with William Haughton two domestic murder plays, 'Cox of Collumpton' and 'The Tragedy of Thomas Merry', the latter at least being based on contemporary events. Another lost play of the same year, 'The Orphan's Tragedy', which Day wrote with Chettle and Haughton, may be of similar provenance. This was also the year in which the playwright Henry Porter was killed by 'John Daye of Southwark, yeoman', and although the name is a common one, it is possible that this was the result of a quarrel between two of Henslowe's dramatists -- of whom, incidentally, there is no record of collaboration on a play. Day claimed self-defence, was convicted of manslaughter, and apparently pardoned. 
'Cox of Collumpton' was seen by Simon Forman at the Rose Theatre in the spring of 1600, and his summary is interesting not only because it supplies the basic plot but also for its account of a stage bear that drives two guilty brothers to suicide. Day collaborated with Thomas Dekker, Chettle, and Haughton on five further plays in 1600, and early in the following year he and Haughton wrote parts 2 and 3 of 'The Blind Beggar', indicating that the first instalment had been judged a winning formula. (The sequels have unfortunately not survived.) Day appears to have made a reasonable living working for Henslowe: he remained an active contributor to the Admiral's repertory after the company moved to the new Fortune Theatre, and was paid over $7 for work on four collaborations between February and May 1601. When Worcester's Men took over the Rose Theatre in 1602, Day wrote for both companies and his earnings rose to a healthy $14 for the season. 
The record of Day's lost plays for Henslowe allows glimpses of the playwright's forays into action drama in 'The Conquest of the West Indies' and 'The Conquest of Spain by John of Gaunt' (both 1601), and occasional essays at the history play, in addition to domestic tragedies and city comedies. In 1602-3 he was employed with Chettle to write or revise a play about 'Shore's wife', and a few verse lines in Day's hand dating from about 1601 (preserved in 'The Alleyn Papers', 24) appear to conclude a play about defeated rebellion by 'Percy' and his 'gallant band', one that was perhaps trying to catch the wave of success enjoyed by Shakespeare's 'Henry IV' plays. 
The first of Day's plays to be printed (and apart from 'The Blind Beggar' the earliest to survive) was 'The Isle of Gulls' (1606), written for the Children of the Queen's Revels, the boys' company that acted at the Blackfriars playhouse. This appears to have been a new departure for Day, not only in the play's auspices and venue, but also in his cultivation of the kind of topical satire that was fashionable in the private theatres. Day drew on Sir Philip Sidney's 'Arcadia' for his plot, and in the prologue protested that a writer seeking to 'ope the vaine of sinne' should not be 'inform'd against for libelling' (sig. A3'v'). His plea was disregarded: on 7 March 1606 Sir Edward Hoby reported 'much speech of a play in the Black Friars, where, in the 'Isle of the Gulls', from the highest to the lowest... all men's parts were acted of two divers nations: as I understand sundry were committed to Bridewell' (Birch, 1.60-61). The 'two divers nations' were apparently the English and the Scots, so that the royal circle of King Basilius in the 'Arcadia' was transformed by the actors' accents into the confrontational world of James I's court in its early years -- a satire made more pointed by the inclusion in the play of a hunting scene, highly redolent of James but nowhere part of King Basilius's leisure activities in Sidney's original. Like another Blackfriars play, 'Eastward Ho!', in the previous year, and for similar reasons, 'The Isle of Gulls' apparently got its makers into trouble; and punishment this time meant not only imprisonment of the leading players -- though not, as far as is known, of Day himself -- but also the loss of Queen Anne's patronage. The company had to drop the word 'Queen's' from their title, as the title-page of the printed quarto of the play shows; and there is evidence of interference during printing of the play, with the publisher's name being removed from the title-page and titles like 'king' and 'queen' substituted by 'duke' and 'duchess'. 

'The Isle of Gulls' is a lively and accomplished satire, and Day composed two further comedies for the boys that have survived: 'Law-Trickes, or, Who would have Thought it' (which was probably written with George Wilkins), and 'Humour out of Breath', both published in 1608. All these plays show Day at home in the elegant and witty milieu of the children's theatres, capitalizing on what Shakespeare had added to the comic vocabulary of earlier writers for the boys' companies like John Lyly, and giving it a Jacobean edge. However, Day had not turned his back on the popular stage. His fifth extant play was written for Queen Anne's Men and acted at the Red Bull in Clerkenwell, a playhouse with a reputation for bombast and crowd-pleasing spectacle. 'The Travels of the Three English Brothers', which Day wrote with William Rowley and George Wilkins in 1607, relates a current political story with unusual freedom and directness -- Day was clearly not cowed by official dislike of 'The Isle of Gulls', since he risked further censure with this play about the adventures of the Sherley brothers, minor Sussex gentry whose exploits abroad earned them the intense disapproval of the English government. The play's dedication 'To Honour's favourites', however, is a canny appeal to the more militant ethos of Prince Henry and his circle; and its dramatization of the Sherley visit to Persia, and of subsequent efforts to raise support for a Perso-Christian alliance against the Turks, offers a flattering image of English courage and diplomatic skill in the trickiest of contexts. 'The Travels' is not a very polished play, but it is one of the most interesting treatments on the early-modern stage of cultural encounter and exotic ordeal. 
Day drops out of sight after 1608, apart from an entry in the Stationers' register in August 1610 of 'A Booke called the Madde Prancks of Merry Moll of the Bankside... Written by John Day'. This, if it was a stage work, may have been a Red Bull anticipation of the successful play about Moll Frith, 'The Roaring Girl' by Middleton and Dekker, acted at the Fortune in the early summer of 1611. Day is next heard of a decade later, in January 1620, when a play called 'Guy of Warwick' was entered in the Stationers' register under his and Dekker's names. Two more plays followed, both probably collaborations with Dekker: 'The Bellman of Paris' was licensed for performance by the Prince's Men at the Red Bull in July 1623, and 'Come see a wonder' was acted on the same stage in September of that year. None of these works has survived, and there is no further record of Day's activity in the theatre. His stage career, though possibly interrupted, was a long one; for most of it he was a jobbing dramatist invariably collaborating with other writers in all the fashionable genres; but his surviving work for the theatre, nearly all from a brief period between 1605 and 1608 when he also wrote at least two single-authored plays, shows him to have been a writer of distinctive accomplishments. 
Day was the author also of two non-dramatic writings. 'The Parliament of Bees' survives in manuscript (BL, Lansdowne MS 725) and in a 1641 quarto, of which the title-page describes the work as 'A Bee-hive furnisht with twelve Honycombes, as Pleasant as Profitable. Being an Allegoricall description of the actions of good and bad men in these our daies.' The quarto text is a revision of the manuscript, which must have been composed before 1634, when 'The Noble Soldier' by Dekker and Rowley, which borrows several passages from Day's text, was published. Charles Lamb admired the work, and quoted from it in his 'Extracts from the Garrick Plays', thereby giving Day's poetry wider currency than his plays have ever achieved. Lamb and earlier editors cite a 1607 quarto of the 'Bees', but this has not been found. The other work is a manuscript prose tract entitled 'Peregrinatio scholastica, or, Learneinges pillgrimage' (BL, Sloane MS 3150). It appears to belong to Day's later years, since in the epistle the author hopes that his efforts 'may not finde the lesse welcome in reguard I boast not that gawdie spring of credit and youthfull florish of opinion as some other filde in the same rancke with me' (sig. f.2'v'). 
Day's death is the subject of an elegy by his friend and fellow dramatist John Tatham in the latter's 'The Fancies Theater' (1640). The poem laboriously puns on Day's name in likening his death to an eclipse ('in that sight was ta'ne away, / Our thrice desir'd refulgent day'; sig. F3'v'), but it is possible that Tatham was taking advantage of an actual eclipse that 'did late arise' on 11 December 1638. This date is consistent with Day's being the John Dey of Eydolveston, Norfolk, whose will was proved at Norwich in 1639. 


@@@@@


doc= 7369


Day, John (1566-1628), Aristotelian scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born 'in or over Aldersgate in London' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 412), the son of John Day (1521/2-1584), printer, and his wife, Alice Lehunte (died 1612), and brother of Richard Day (b. 1552, d. in or before 1606), Lionel, and twenty-four other siblings of whom only Lionel survived him. Admitted to St Alban Hall, Oxford, in 1582, he graduated BA on 15 February 1587. Elected a fellow of Oriel College on 8 May 1588, he was admitted on 23 September, and proceeded MA in 1591. He remained a fellow until his death, holding the offices of senior treasurer (1593/4, 1601/2, 1604/5, 1608/9) and dean (1601, 1611-12, 1616). 
Day was a significant exponent of the revived philosophy of Aristotle, taught in Elizabethan Oxford by John Case and John Rainolds. In 1589 he was asked by the fellows of his college to expound the text of Aristotle in the light of modern learning to the scholars of Oriel; the text of his lectures on the 'Physics' survives, together with the headings of various arguments for and against numerous Aristotelian propositions, apparently for college disputations. His course must have paralleled that of Rainolds at Corpus Christi College, and his references, inserted in his lecture text, show that he shared the catholic learning of Case. Beside the Latin and Greek classics and modern humanist writers, including his contemporary Joseph Scaliger, he cited with approval numerous scholastic commentators, especially Aquinas, and singled out for praise three contemporary Jesuits. His extremely wide and eclectic reading allowed him, like Rainolds and Case, to relate the teaching of Aristotle to the moral basis of the Elizabethan polity. 
In 1605 Day sought leave to study divinity in France, presumably at the new Calvinist academy of Saumur or a similar establishment. On his return, either in college or at St Mary's, Oxford, the college vicarage where he was admitted on 3 December 1609, he aimed to instil a moderate Calvinism in sermons or addresses, frequently refuting Catholic apologists, which were successively printed at the university press. His two English sermons of 1609 expounded the 'Bible' with broad classical and theological learning of a traditional kind. In 1611 he proceeded BD. His Latin address to the heads of houses and doctors of divinity, in 1612, evoked Oxford's academic past and contribution to the commonweal. His twelve sermons in St Mary's on God, the sacraments, and the public virtues (1610-15), published as 'Day's Festivals' (1615), were a plain exposition of protestant teaching for a lay congregation, but his best known work, 'Day's Dyall' (1614), was like his Aristotelian course delivered to the undergraduates of Oriel in 1612/13, to encourage 'proficiency in both learnings, secular, and celestiall' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 413), and abounds with references to classical and theological texts from the fathers onwards. His last work was a 'Descant' on the first eight psalms, a moral exposition published in 1620. Taken together, they support Wood's description of him as 'well vers'd in the Fathers, schoolmen, and councils', and as 'a plain man, a primitive Christian, and... wholly composed to do good' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 413). 
In 1618, on the death of Provost Anthony Blencowe, Day was an unsuccessful (and absent) candidate for the provostship of Oriel and afterwards challenged the election result before the visitor, but in vain. At the next election, in 1621, he was present and again a candidate, and was once more not elected, whereupon he resigned the living of St Mary's and was preferred in 1622 to that of Little Thurlow, Suffolk, by Sir William Soame, 'not without some discontent at the loss of the said provostship' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 413). He died at Little Thurlow on 10 January 1628 and was buried there; his brother Lionel's memorial to him, with Latin verses, is in the chancel of Little Thurlow church. Day gave a silver beaker to Oriel on his election, which does not survive, and a book of commentaries on Cicero's orations to the college library. 


@@@@@


doc= 7370


Day, Matthew (bap. 1611, d. 1663), Church of England clergyman and schoolmaster, was baptized on 24 February 1611 at Windsor, the third son of Matthew Day (1574-1661), mayor of Windsor, and his wife, Mary (1580/81-1667), daughter of George Dowdeswell of Eton. A king's scholar at Eton College between 1624 and 1630, he was then a scholar (1630-33) and fellow (1633-43) at King's College, Cambridge; he graduated BA in 1634 and proceeded MA in 1637. On 9 September 1642 Day, presented by Eton, succeeded David Stokes as rector of Everdon, Northamptonshire; he married Stokes's daughter Elizabeth on 7 May 1645. When parliament's Northampton committee had sought, on 18 May 1644, a reason for his non-appearance before it, Day answered from his home in Windsor that he would not take the covenant. The living's sequestration, for his desertion to royal quarters, was confirmed despite Day's letter of 24 August 1644 explaining his movements (which, he claimed, had included only a day in Oxford). Subsequently his wife was granted a fifth of the revenue (13 April 1647). The committee for advance of money heard on 13 November 1649 that Day -- described on this occasion as late minister of Caversham, Oxfordshire, delinquent -- had $500 in the keeping of his father and father-in-law. 
Undeterred by Day's royalism, Abraham Colfe appointed him master of his Lewisham grammar school, which opened on 10 June 1652. That year Day's only book was published: ''Parekbolai', sive, Excerpta in sex priores Homeri Iliados libros', a selective short commentary for students, dedicated to Colfe. Day resigned his mastership, effective from Michaelmas 1660, after Charles II had made him vicar of Staines, Middlesex, and the bishop of London had collated him to St Paul's prebend of Neasden (17 and 25 August respectively). In 1661 he became DD at Cambridge by royal mandamus. Day's wife died on 31 December that year. He himself died in the autumn of 1663 and was buried at Windsor on 4 October, leaving his mother and father-in-law, the beneficiaries of his will dated 25 September, to care for his four children, Matthew, Mary, Thomas, and Elizabeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 7371


Day, Richard (b. 1552, d. in or before 1606), printer and Church of England clergyman, was born at Aldersgate, London, on 21 December 1552, the son of the printer John Day (1521/2-1584). Intended by his father for the church, he was educated at Eton College and was admitted as a scholar to King's College, Cambridge, on 24 August 1571. He matriculated in November 1572 and was admitted as fellow on 24 August 1574, proceeding to BA in 1575. He continued his studies, only to give up his fellowship shortly after Michaelmas 1576 without matriculating MA. He later claimed that he had left because of persistent complaints by his stepmother and John Day's second wife, Alice Lehunte, about how much his education was costing and because his father wished him to join the family printing business. In fact, however, it appears that Richard left Cambridge because he had fallen in love with a girl called Ellen Bowles, who lived near Aldersgate. (This was not the woman he married some years later, whose maiden name was Pope.) 
In 1576 Day assisted his father in the printing of, and wrote some of the prefixed verses to, the third edition of Foxe's 'Actes and Monuments'. The following year, on 28 August 1577, he was named as co-patentee when his father secured the renewal of a lucrative patent for the printing of a number of works including the 'Psalms' in metre and the 'ABC with Little Catechism', although it appears that Richard may have gained his half-share by misleading his father about the terms of the grant. None the less, he was admitted as a freeman of the Stationers' Company at some point before 30 June 1578 when he was elected to the company's livery. In that same year he and his father were part of a patent dispute with William Seres and Henry Denham successfully resolved by the Stationers' Company. 
Day entered his first book in the company's registers on 28 May 1578, his own translation of John Foxe's 'Christ Jesus Triumphant'. The work was followed by a newly prefaced edition of 'A Booke of Christian Prayers, Collected out of the Auncient Writers', otherwise known as 'Queen Elizabeth's Prayer Book'. He also variously edited, translated, registered, and printed a handful of books over the next two years. However, his father evidently did not allow him to produce any works covered by the 1577 patent, as Richard took to pirating the little catechism and the metrical 'Psalms'. As a result, in 1580 his father, then master of the Stationers' Company, assisted by the company's wardens, entered Richard's premises and took from him the bulk of his books, type, and press. No books were issued by Richard Day after this event. 
Day was ordained on 1 December 1580, serving as vicar in Mundon, Essex, until about 1583, and occupying Foxe's living at Reigate, Surrey, for a brief period from 24 May 1583 until he resigned at some point during 1584. About this period John Day made a deed of gift to his wife and her family, intended to deprive Richard of his inheritance (worth several thousand pounds) and to force Richard to pay all of his own mounting debts himself. It may well be that, left little option by his father's actions, Richard saw no opening for him other than the church. It is also possible that this was a final attempt to win back his father's approval (and his inheritance), a hope that ended with his father's death on 23 July 1584. The following year Day successfully challenged in chancery the validity of his father's deed of gift. Alice and her brother John Le Hunte counter-sued, and it is this second suit in particular that provides much of the evidence for Richard Day's activities from 1576 onwards. 
Despite an attempt by his father in his final years to revoke Richard Day's rights to the 1577 patent, the patent continued in Richard's name until at least 1604 although all printing for it was done by five nominated assigns. In Michaelmas 1585 he and his assigns exhibited a bill of complaint in Star Chamber accusing a number of individuals of infringing the patent. Nothing further is known of his activities after this date, although on 26 February 1591 Verney Alley was granted the reversion to the Day patent on the event of Richard's death. Richard died some time before 13 April 1606, upon which date the court of the Stationers' Company granted 7's'. to 'Richard dayes wydowe for her relief' (Jackson, 24). His widow seems to have continued to receive a pension from the company until 1615. The Day patent was eventually passed to the Stationers' Company by Alley's executors in 1614. 


@@@@@


doc= 7372


Day, Thomas (1748-1789), author and political campaigner, was born on 22 June 1748 in Wellclose Square, London, the only child of Thomas Day ('c'.1690-1749) and his wife, Jane ('c'.1728-1796), daughter of Samuel Bonham, a City merchant. His father, deputy collector outwards of the customs of the port of London, died when young Thomas was no more than a year old, leaving him with a massive fortune in trust until he came of age. He attended a school at Stoke Newington, Middlesex, but after recovering from smallpox became a boarder at Charterhouse (1757-64). From Charterhouse he went to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he studied classics, became a member of a select debating society and close friend of William Jones, but left without a degree in 1767. He enrolled at the Middle Temple in 1765. 
While living at Barehill, Berkshire, with his mother and stepfather, Thomas Phillips, Day became great friends with an ardently progressive neighbour, Richard Lovell Edgeworth. Edgeworth, an enthusiastic disciple of Rousseau, had resolved to educate his son Dick in accordance with the precepts of 'Emile', and Day became a kindred spirit in the great experiment. The more he learned of Rousseau, the more excited he became. Were all the world's books destroyed, he declared in 1769, the 'Bible' and 'Emile' were the two he would save. He accompanied Edgeworth and young Dick on a trip to Ireland and, later, on a visit to Rousseau. 
During all this time, however, Day was also in search of a wife. A large, swarthy, gloomy, heavy-lidded and rather ungainly young man, his face severely pockmarked and his hair rarely combed, Day was not the ideal suitor. In quick succession he fell in love with Edgeworth's sister, with an unknown 'lady of the west', and, during a prolonged stay in Lichfield, with two sisters -- each of whom resisted his blandishments. Day decided that, if his ideal woman did not exist, she would have to be created. In 1769 he adopted, with scant regard for legal niceties, two girls from foundling hospitals and secretly bore them off to France to see which of them he could educate (in accordance with Rousseau's ideas) into becoming a suitable wife for himself. One, whom he renamed Sabrina Sidney, seemed promising, and in 1770 he brought her back to Stowe House, near Lichfield, for special tuition. But after conducting some extraordinary experiments to test her hardiness, which included dropping hot sealing wax on her arm and firing a pistol at her skirts, Day concluded that she was insufficiently phlegmatic. He cast her off with a small allowance and declared that he wished never to see her again. Sabrina would later marry Day's friend John Bicknell. 
Day joined the Lunar Society of Birmingham, a circle of scientists, chemists, and inventors presided over by Erasmus Darwin, which included Matthew Boulton (to whom he lent considerable sums of money), Josiah Wedgwood, and James Keir (his first biographer). He also met the leading lady of Lichfield, Anna Seward, a young poet. Initially Anna was a confidante, and recipient of some of his lengthiest letters, but in later years (mainly because of his friendship with Edgeworth) became a violent enemy. In 1804 she wrote a vicious and inaccurate account of him which besmirched his reputation, particularly with regard to his supposed treatment of his wife, as well as revealing the identity and whereabouts of his former pupil, Sabrina Sidney. 
With John Bicknell, in 1773, Day wrote 'The Dying Negro', a long and harrowing poem narrating the tale of a runaway slave, which proved a best-seller. In that same year, after some eighteen months in France, Day began legal studies at the Middle Temple. He shared rooms with William Jones and refused the latter's celebrated command to kill a spider, on the grounds that he had no right to do so and that such instructions created alarming precedents. He was called to the bar of the Middle Temple in 1779 and acquired chambers at Furnival's Inn although his subsequent legal practice, if not totally non-existent, was minimal. 
Day's exacting standards for the ideal wife were met in Esther Milnes (1752-1792), an heiress from Chesterfield, the daughter of Richard Milnes (1705-1757), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1757). He and Esther were married at Bath on 7 August 1778. While not totally submerging her own personality, and doubtless distressed at having to surrender her poetry, harpsichord, and friends to comply with her husband's demands, Esther proved a satisfactory soulmate, and their marriage was close and loving. They settled in 1779 on a small estate at Stapleford Abbotts, near Abridge in Essex, although it proved singularly dismal and non-productive. The Days were to have no children, though Thomas Lowndes, Esther's nephew, became for all practical purposes their adopted heir. 
Day strongly supported the American colonists in their independence struggle and his poem 'The Devoted Legions' (1776) was a scathing indictment of the government's actions. In 1780, caught up in England's short-lived revolutionary movement, he delivered three ringing speeches in favour of an early peace and parliamentary reform. They were published as pamphlets and it seemed that a new John Hampden had appeared on the scene. He declined invitations to stand for parliament and accept a government post, but acted as unpaid private secretary to Henry Laurens, an American congressman involved in the peace negotiations. He continued to publish political reflections including the partial text of a letter written to a plantation owner in 1776. 'If there be an object truly ridiculous in Nature', he declared, 'it is an American patriot signing resolutions of independency with one hand, and with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves.' 
In 1780 Day purchased an estate at Anningsley, in Surrey, where he and Esther took up full-time residence in 1783. They ran it primarily as a philanthropic concern, with the bodily and spiritual welfare of its workers and their families of paramount importance. In desolate surroundings, they laboured to create a new Jerusalem. A pioneer in every sense, Day was not only conscious of the hazards of air pollution, and a campaigner for land reclamation, but an early exponent of afforestation. 
Day had meanwhile made an astonishing reputation as a writer of instructive fiction for children. 'The History of Little Jack' (1787), a tale for the very young, enjoyed great success. But his most famous production, destined to be a best-seller for eighty years, was 'Sandford and Merton'. Published in three volumes (1783, 1786, and 1789), it tells how rebellious Tommy Merton, the spoilt son of a wealthy plantation owner from Jamaica, and his friend Harry Sandford, the poor but worthy son of a local farmer, are patiently educated by the Revd Mr Barlow -- and how Master Tommy is brought, by precept and self-discovery, to see the error of his ways. A host of interpolated stories, providing introductions to ancient history, astronomy, biology, science, exploration, and geography, enable facts and figures to be absorbed relatively painlessly but the main narrative easily holds the attention. Rousseau's deductive techniques are deployed to good effect. What comes through is the basic Christian (and early socialist) message that the members of society should be kind not only to each other but also to the poor and the sick, to those of a different race, and to animals, birds, and insects. They should labour to the best of their ability and contribute to a common pool of goods and happiness. But for the idle rich, particularly those who wear fine clothes, play cards, and treat lesser mortals with contempt, the author has no mercy. The book, however sententious, would play a crucial role in moulding the ethos of nineteenth-century England. 
A holder and practitioner of strange ideas, a perpetual optimist and a profound pessimist, a philanthropist and a misanthrope, an opponent of organized charity but a soft touch for those on the cadge, a preacher and an iconoclast, and above all a recluse who found it almost impossible to keep out of the limelight, Day was a strange bundle of contradictions. Sometimes lonely and bitter, but endeavouring always to obey the dictates of his conscience, he was a man deeply loved and respected by most of his contemporaries. 
Day was thrown from his horse at Barehill, Berkshire, on 28 September 1789 and died almost instantly. He was buried at St Mary's Church, Wargrave, Berkshire, on 6 October 1789. Esther, distraught, survived him by less than three years. 


@@@@@


doc= 7373


Day, William (1529-1596), bishop of Winchester, was the son of Richard Day of Newport, Shropshire, and Agnes Osborne. He was educated at Eton and King's College, Cambridge, where his elder brother George Day, future bishop of Chichester, was provost between 1538 and 1547. He was admitted scholar on 14 August 1545 and fellow on 15 August 1548, graduating BA in early 1550 and proceeding MA in 1553. 
William Day's conversion to protestantism caused a serious breach between himself and his brother. When he applied for money to buy books and other necessities the request was sharply refused on the grounds that George was not prepared to assist anyone who was not a member of the true church. Day nevertheless retained his fellowship under Mary and during Cardinal Pole's visitation of the university in January 1557 he appears to have entertained 'all the thirteen seniors' to dinner at his chamber in King's and to have discharged the part of 'Christmas king' (Lamb, 197). Later that year he was chosen proctor. 
Day's potential as one of the leaders of a revived protestant regime was at once recognized by Elizabeth's government. He resigned his fellowship in 1559 and, although still a layman, received letters patent, 'sede vacante', for the prebend of Ampleforth in York Minster on 7 November 1559, succeeding the deprived Alban Langdale, and for the archdeaconry of Nottingham on 23 December 1559, succeeding the deprived suffragan bishop of Hull, Robert Pursglove. He was ordained deacon by Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, on 24 March 1560, giving his age as twenty-nine, and priest seven days later by Richard Davies, bishop of St Asaph, acting on Grindal's behalf. He was elected a fellow of Eton later in 1560. 
Following the death of the provost of Eton, William Bill, on 15 July 1561 the conservative majority within the fellowship made a futile attempt to thwart the royal prerogative by electing Richard Bruerne as his successor. The election was inevitably declared invalid and Grindal submitted to William Cecil a list of fourteen suitable candidates, many of whom had been in exile under Mary. It was, however, Day who was elected by the fellows on 18 October 1561. He was formally admitted on 5 January 1562. Because of Elizabeth's well-advertised dislike of clerical marriage it has been traditionally assumed that it was Day's celibacy that determined his selection but there is no evidence that the queen took a personal interest in the appointment. The factor which is likely to have most influenced Cecil and the privy council is his lifelong association with Eton and King's. Nor did Day remain celibate. His wife, Elizabeth, whom he married 'c'.1565, was one of the five daughters of William Barlow, bishop of Chichester, who all married bishops. 
In 1562 Day proceeded BTh at Cambridge. His radical views were at the same time forcibly expressed during his early months as provost. The college chapel was transformed with iconoclastic thoroughness. The images were removed, the niches in which they had stood plastered over, and the imposing rood screen demolished. If Sir John Harington is to be believed, he was held in great affection by his scholars. Harington described him as affable and courteous, pleasant in conversation 'yet allwayes sufficiently retaining his gravitie'. He had 'a good and familiar fashion of preaching... apte to edifie, and easie to remember' (Harington, 2.95-7). 
On 13 January 1563 Day preached the sermon that opened the first convocation of the reign since the parliamentary settlement of 1559, on the text 'Feed the flock of God which is among you'. Thereafter he was one of those members of the lower house who attempted to do away with the Catholic ceremonies retained in the 'Book of Common Prayer'. When a modified form of their proposals, summarized in a series of six articles, was eventually accepted for debate they were defeated by a majority of one after proxy votes had been taken into consideration. 
At the end of 1563 Day clashed with the French ambassador, Paul de Foix, who had been consigned to Eton under a form of house arrest in retaliation for the French king's similar treatment of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, English ambassador in Paris. De Foix resented the strictness of college discipline and when on 30 December he was refused the keys for the exit of two guests after the gates had been locked he burst into the provost's chamber, sword in hand, and demanded their surrender. Day complied but not unnaturally dispatched a formal complaint to William Cecil, expatiating on the unacceptable behaviour of the ambassador's entourage and describing their excesses in great detail. 
On 12 May 1565 Day received letters patent for the canonry at St George's Chapel, Windsor, formerly occupied by Richard Bruerne. Perhaps for that reason he resigned the archdeaconry of Nottingham in June 1565 and the prebend of Ampleforth at the same time or shortly afterwards. He continued to receive special marks of favour from the government and to discharge the duties that went with them. On 11 August 1569 he was granted letters patent for the valuable rectory of Lavenham, Suffolk, and in November 1570 Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, successfully recommended his appointment as an ecclesiastical commissioner 'for some causes necessary' ('Correspondence', 370). In 1572 he was promoted both dean of the Chapel Royal and, on 23 June, dean of Windsor, resigning his canonry but remaining provost of Eton. 
The first historian of Windsor College, Thomas Frith, writing within living memory of Day's tenure, dismissed him as a rapacious and unpopular dean who reduced the revenues by overmuch leasing of the estates. He cited a remark by Lord Chancellor Ellesmere that 'Dean Day had excellent skill to creep out of the law' (Ollard, 44). Historians of ancient foundations are, however, notoriously apt to concern themselves with stewardship of estates, and it is possible that Ellesmere was in fact expressing a grudging admiration for Day's ability to preserve, rather than squander, the resources of the deanery by resisting the petitions of importunate suitors for easy pickings from its assets. 
Be that as it may, only one serious incident in Day's 24-year sojourn at Windsor survives in the public records. In December 1575, Elizabeth having commanded him to 'permitt no innovacions', he prohibited the catechizing of children in the churches over which, as dean, he exercised ordinary jurisdiction. He was rapped over the knuckles by Cecil (now Lord Burghley), who with consummate diplomacy observed that, catechizing being formally authorized by the 'Book of Common Prayer', Day must in some way have interpreted the queen's 'spech or admonicion to a wrong sense' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/172/1.i). 
In 1580 Day served as prolocutor of convocation and was one of many theologians who disputed with Edmund Campion before his execution in 1581. He and Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's, thereafter wrote 'A true report of the disputation with E. Campion, whereunto is joyned a true report of the other three dayes conferences' (1583). 
The chief interest of Day's long career is his failure to secure a bishopric until the last months of his life. As early as 1568 his brother-in-law William Overton, future bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, suggested that he succeed their late father-in-law, William Barlow, at Chichester, a diocese in urgent need of protestant evangelization. In March 1570 Archbishop Parker advised Cecil that Day was 'meetest' of the available candidates to follow Grindal as bishop of London ('Correspondence', 360). The post, however, went to Edwin Sandys. There is no evidence that Day's claims were seriously considered when in 1577 Sandys was elevated to York and John Aylmer promoted in his stead. Yet when in March 1580 Aylmer suggested himself unsuccessfully for vacant Winchester, it was Day whom he recommended as his successor. 
At the beginning of his primacy in 1583 John Whitgift renewed the proposal that Day be consecrated to London if Aylmer were to be translated (on this occasion to Ely). After the death of Richard Barnes, bishop of Durham, on 24 August 1587 Burghley vigorously espoused Day's candidacy for the palatine see, in the process opposing that of yet another of his brothers-in-law, Tobie Matthew, dean of Durham. By the end of November, Burghley had secured Elizabeth's approval of his elevation but, as Day reminded Robert Cecil seven years later, 'the finishing of it was some while put off' when in December Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, returned from the Low Countries: subsequently Day's nomination was 'clean overthrown' ('Salisbury MSS', 5.8). In the months that followed Leicester oscillated between the claims of Matthew and those of John Piers, bishop of Salisbury. Deadlock ensued and the disposal of Durham had not been resolved when Leicester died in September 1588. In January 1589 the proposal to translate Aylmer to Ely and promote Day in his place was yet again revived, without success. If Burghley was still privately hoping to secure Day's elevation to Durham he was finally thwarted when Matthew Hutton was elected on 9 June 1589. 
When Aylmer died in June 1594 London was finally within Day's grasp: although now sixty-five he remained Burghley's preferred candidate. Day appointed his son-in-law, Thomas Ridley, former headmaster of Eton, to conduct negotiations on his behalf but in the power struggle which followed Burghley and his son Robert Cecil made little headway. London was bestowed on Richard Fletcher, bishop of Worcester, whose candidacy had the backing of Leicester's stepson and political heir, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, and (after his failure to secure any support for his protege Richard Bancroft) of Archbishop Whitgift. 
Essex and Whitgift were nevertheless anxious to see Day elevated to the bench at this juncture since another of Essex's proteges, Henry Savile, had his sights firmly set on the provostship of Eton. They therefore suggested Day as Fletcher's successor at Worcester. Burghley, however, once again proposed him for Durham, soon to become vacant with the translation to York of Matthew Hutton. Day formally accepted Durham in a guarded letter of thanks to Robert Cecil on 14 October 1594, dryly observing (as quoted above) that a previous offer of the palatine see had failed in 1587. Perhaps he was already aware that other forces were at work. During the clandestine manoeuvres which followed it seems that, behind his father's back, Robert Cecil entered into secret alliance with Essex to secure Elizabeth's approval of Tobie Matthew. With extreme reluctance Day accepted the bishopric of Worcester instead. Both appointments were announced in council on 1 December. 
Although Thomas Ridley twice assured Robert Cecil that he was resolved to proceed to election Day formally withdrew his acceptance of Worcester on 5 January 1595. On 14 January, informed that Elizabeth was displeased at this display of 'lese majeste', Day explained himself more fully to Robert Cecil. He had made enquiries into his likely income from Worcester and concluded that 'if I should take it, it would utterly beggar me'. He had served the queen at Eton and Windsor 'the greatest part of my life and never sought any further preferment'. He therefore asked that Cecil petition Elizabeth to allow him to remain where he had 'been bred and brought up (child and man) these forty years' rather than, in old age, to be forced 'to seek another country, a strange air, new acquaintance and another living without sufficient maintenance' ('Salisbury MSS', 5.84). 
Yet when another of his brothers-in-law, William Wickham, bishop of Winchester, died unexpectedly in June 1595, Day at once succeeded him. In stark contrast to the power struggles of 1594-5 there is not a hint in the records that his candidacy was in any way challenged and indeed he later wrote to Burghley and Robert Cecil that 'you two alone have brought me to the place I am in' ('Salisbury MSS', 6.64). Day was elected by the Winchester chapter on 3 November 1595 and consecrated on 25 January 1596. 
Day was instantly confronted with a demand for an episcopal lease on behalf of Sir Francis Carew, for whom Robert Cecil had been attempting to extract some 'douceur' from the late Bishop Wickham. Although Day refused on the usual grounds that he would be despoiling the see to the prejudice of his successors, he was within weeks pressured into offering a lease worth $1000, but only for twenty-one or thirty-one years. Dissatisfied, Carew refused it. Meanwhile, claiming with much melodramatic detail that unless the necessary formalities were expedited he was doomed to financial disaster, Day fought hard for restoration of his temporalities and for favourable terms of composition for Winchester's hefty tax liability. Here he was successful, obtaining on 6 May a royal warrant whereby he received five years to pay off his first fruits, the first instalment not falling due until thirteen months after he had become entitled to his revenues. 
Day died on the following 20 September. Thomas Ridley loyally wrote that he 'left behind him a very good remembrance' in Winchester 'for his great housekeeping, painfulness in preaching and diligence in executing his duty in all sorts under her Majesty' ('Salisbury MSS', 6.408). Perhaps for that reason Elizabeth granted his executors half the profits of the bishopric due at Michaelmas 1596 for the discharging of his funeral expenses. 
Day had made a short will on 11 September 1596, from which it would appear that he had already disposed of most of his assets to his family. There were only token bequests to his wife, two sons, and three married daughters Susan Cox, Rachel Barker, and 'Ridley' -- Alice, wife of Thomas Ridley. The only substantial legacy was $500 to his unmarried daughter Elizabeth, presumably as a marriage portion. No servants were remembered and there were no charitable bequests. His sons Thomas and William were granted probate as joint executors on 2 October. 
Almost nothing survives from Day's pen apart from the volume on Campion. Notes taken from his sermons exist in manuscript in the university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge and a description of the St George's day festivities at Westminster is extant (BL, Harley MS 304, fol. 144). 
The frequent recommendations for Day's further promotion by Parker, Burghley, Aylmer, and Whitgift are clear-cut evidence that he lacked neither energy, administrative ability, nor the queen's goodwill. Why then did he remain bishop of London in waiting for a full quarter of a century after 1570 and twice fail to capture the bishopric of Durham? The steady opposition of Leicester, and then Essex, is a possibility but the ultimate key to Day's failure to prosper perhaps lay in his own temperament. At one point during the struggle for Durham in 1587-8 Tobie Matthew -- a consummate ecclesiastical diplomat who on occasion rashly threw diplomacy to the winds -- observed to Sir Francis Walsingham's secretary that 'my brother Daye is a good wise man, setting as muche by wealth as by honor, and his old Master [Burghley] no very toughe savior in such maters, when he is well incountred with reason' (BL, Cotton MS Titus B.vii, fol. 424'r'). Indeed, in 1594 Day's mandarin decision to negotiate for the bishopric of London through the agency of Thomas Ridley seems to have irritated Burghley, who evidently felt that he was not doing enough to win other friends for himself at court. There followed his bold, and potentially fatal, refusal of Worcester. Was it, in sum, Day's apparently patrician stance, in a court where churchmen were expected to be respectful to their Erastian masters, that so frequently cost him promotion? When it came at last it was surely as the result of Burghley's fierce determination to demonstrate his loyalty, in his final months of power, to an old and often disappointed friend. 


@@@@@


doc= 7374


Day, William (bap. 1605, d. 1684), Church of England clergyman and biblical commentator, was baptized at Windsor on 23 June 1605, the eldest son of Matthew Day (1574-1661), five times mayor of Windsor, and lord of the manor of Sunninghill, Berkshire, and Mary (1580/81-1667), daughter of George Dowdeswell, gentleman, of Eton, Buckinghamshire, and grandson of his namesake, William Day (1529-1596), bishop of Winchester; he had five brothers and six sisters, including Matthew Day (bap. 1611, d. 1663). He became a king's scholar at Eton, and in 1624 was admitted as a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1628, proceeded MA in 1632, and was a fellow until 1637. He was also incorporated at Oxford in 1635. 
In 1637 Day was presented by Eton College to the vicarage of Mapledurham, Oxfordshire, on the resignation of his prospective father-in-law, Daniel Collins, fellow of Eton and canon of Windsor. He married Mary Collins on new year's day 1638 in St George's Chapel, Windsor, and apparently lived in the town, since his first two sons were baptized at St George's. From late 1643 he was resident at Mapledurham, where five daughters and three more sons were born, several of whom died in infancy. He continued in the parish throughout the Commonwealth. In 1654 he described himself as 'An Unworthy Servant of God in the Gospel, at Mapledurham' when he published 'An Exposition of the Book of the Prophet Isaiah', a scholarly commentary on the text intended for family use, with questions and answers to assist learning, and a glossary of technical vocabulary. In 1660 he was made divinity reader at St George's Chapel, but remained resident at Mapledurham, virtually unassisted, where he also wrote 'A Paraphrase and Commentary upon... Romans' (1666); this took a traditional evangelical approach, and argued dispassionately against texts used by Anabaptists and Quakers respectively to support baptism by immersion and personal guidance by the Holy Spirit. 
With his eldest son, Matthew, Day helped manage the Sunninghill estate in his father's last years, but sold it in 1668 after his mother's death. After inheriting he gave property to New Windsor parish to endow alms for the poor. He died in 1684, and was buried at Mapledurham church on 20 December; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7375


Day, Stephen (1593/4-1668), locksmith and first printer in the British American colonies, was born in England, probably at Cambridge, and married Rebecca, 'nee' Wright ('bap'. 1588, died 1658), widow of Andrew Bordman, on 24 February 1617 at St Mary-the-Less, Cambridge. He was working as a locksmith in Cambridge on 7 June 1638, when he bound himself and his family to take passage to New England on the 'John' of London. The Revd Joseph Glover, who had resigned his cure at Sutton, Surrey, in 1636 rather than read King James's 'Book of Sports', advanced $51 toward passage and supplies for Day, his wife, their two sons, his stepson William Bordman, and three menservants; Day in return engaged for himself and the servants to work for Glover for two years after their arrival 'in the trade wch the said Stephen... now useth... at such rates... as is usually paid... in the Country there' until the debt of $51 plus interest was worked off (Harvard University archives, Dunster MSS). Glover took along a small press worth $20, fonts of English, Greek, and unpointed Hebrew, and 120 reams of paper, but he died on the way over and the press, together with the services of Day and his workmen, passed to his widow. On 21 June 1641 she married Henry Dunster, president of Harvard College, who controlled the press until 1654, when he resigned from the presidency and sold it to the college. 
The 'John' arrived in Boston about October 1638 and the press began to operate at Cambridge in 1639, evidently under Day's direction, for the general court granted him 300 acres of land on 10 December 1641 as 'the first that sett upon printing' (N. B. Shurtleff, ed., 'Records of the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England', 5 vols., 1853-4, 1.344). Until 1667 the product was solely dedicated to the church, state, and college, beginning with the freeman's oath of allegiance to the colony (no copy extant) and 1700 copies of the 'Bay Psalm Book' (1640), a metrical version by the ministers of Boston and its vicinity. Apart from annual series of Harvard commencement programs (1642-) and possibly of almanacs (1640?-; surviving from 1646) the press produced nothing between 1643 and late 1645, when Governor Winthrop's 'Declaration' of his dealings with the Narragansetts appeared, printed in a new pica type probably acquired by Dunster. 
Day mortgaged much of his Cambridge property in 1642 and, during the lull in printing, launched upon more congenial but less celebrated enterprises, establishing an ironworks and an Indian trading post with others at Nashaway, and prospecting for graphite and bog iron on behalf of John Winthrop jun. at Tantiusques and Chapnacongoe Pond, all in western Massachusetts. He resented his employment at the press, which had not been envisaged in his bond, and, perhaps because he could have earned more as a locksmith, he later claimed that Dunster owed him $100. Day's eldest son, Stephen, died in 1639 and Matthew (the only Day named in a surviving imprint) probably took over the direction of the press in his father's absence; at Matthew's death, on 10 May 1649, Samuel Green succeeded him as colony printer, leasing the press from Dunster or from Harvard. Day was a shaky speller and neither he, Matthew, nor Green had any regular apprenticeship in printing, but the scanty production of the press required no great competence. 
According to Governor Winthrop the Nashaway entrepreneurs were 'most of them poor men, and some of them corrupt in judgment, and others profane' ('Journal of John Winthrop', 504). Despite 'entertaining both English & Indians at my own house [in Lancaster], from day to day for some yeares together' (Massachusetts Archives, Columbia Point, Boston, 30.135) Day never settled there and forfeited his rights as one of the original company after the plantation was incorporated in 1652. His wife died on 17 October 1658 but there is no evidence that he ever remarried, despite Littlefield's circumstantial assertion (Littlefield, 1.125). He joined the church of Cambridge (where he sat below Samuel Green) on 28 February 1661, and on 22 December 1668 he died, leaving his stepson William, a tailor, about $75 of personal estate, which included his smithy, and land in Cambridge, Lancaster, and Shawshine. A wooden press in the Vermont Historical Society, once hopefully identified as 'the Stephen Daye Press', cannot be dated earlier than 1714. 


@@@@@


doc= 7376


Dayes, Edward (1763-1804), watercolour painter, was born on 6 August 1763 in London. He was apprenticed to the mezzotinter and miniaturist William Pether and entered the Royal Academy Schools on 6 October 1780. He made his debut at the academy in 1786, showing in the next few years a mixture of portraits, miniatures, topographical watercolours, and figure subjects, which set the tone for a wide-ranging career encompassing different media and subject types. In all Dayes showed sixty-four works at the Royal Academy, although he was unsuccessful as a candidate for associate membership. He also exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1790 and 1791, and was appointed draughtsman to the duke of York about 1791. 
Dayes's work as a miniaturist was confined to the early part of his career and it was as a topographical watercolourist that he made his name. Many of his watercolours were modest in scale and were produced for the print trade. Eleven plates after his works were engraved for the 'Copper Plate Magazine' between 1794 and 1797, and he contributed more than forty scenes for John Aikin's 'Description of the Country from Thirty to Forty Miles Round Manchester' (1795). However, he also provided more ambitious compositions for 'Views on the River Wye' (published by E. Dayes and F. Dukes, 1797-1802), which consisted of sixteen sepia aquatints, while the four watercolours of Oxford scenes for the 'Oxford Almanack', dated 1794 (AM Oxf.), showed that he could exceed the limited brief of architectural publications. Dayes also produced watercolours from the drawings of a number of amateurs. He was commissioned, in 1790, by Lord Stanley to realize views of his trip, in 1789, to Iceland, and he was employed by James Moore to paint watercolours after his drawings of antiquarian subjects; many of these were published in 'Twenty Five Views in the Southern Part of Scotland' (1794). Dayes also specialized in producing small-scale watercolours for patrons such as the Wynn family, of Nostell Priory, selling them for a few shillings only. Such works were often carelessly produced, reusing compositions and employing a limited palette of greys and blues, with a little rapid pen work. 
At his best, however, in views of the Lake District, such as 'Haweswater' (1795; Whitworth Art Gallery), or of architectural subjects, such as 'Ely Cathedral' (1792; V&A), Dayes united carefully balanced compositions with a lucid, luminous style of painting. During the mid-1790s such works proved highly influential with a new generation of watercolourists, including his pupil Thomas Girtin (apprenticed in 1789) and J. M. W. Turner. Before they broke away to develop the potential of the medium in ways unimagined by Dayes, these two artists produced works which are sometimes indistinguishable from his. Dayes's 'Instructions for Drawing and Colouring Landscapes' (1805) suggests that despite a difficult personality -- which damaged his relationship with Girtin -- he was an innovative thinker on professional practice and on the teaching of watercolour techniques, including sketching in colours from nature. 
Dayes was also an elegant figure draughtsman, his talent being most apparent in the architectural subjects that he executed for publishers. The fashionably dressed figures in scenes such as 'Buckingham House, St. James's Park' (1790; V&A, published 1793) or 'Queen's Square' (exh. 1787; Yale U. CBA), one of four views of modern London squares which were published in 1787 and 1789, went far beyond the standard staffage of contemporary watercolourists. Dayes also employed his talents in a number of large-scale watercolours of contemporary events, often with a patriotic theme, which were aimed at the print market. Among the most impressive was 'View of the choir of St. Paul's on the day of solemn thanksgiving for the recovery of his majesty, 23 April 1789' (engraved by R. Pollard). Dayes also continued to work occasionally as a mezzotinter and produced two plates, in 1788, after George Morland, 'Juvenile Navigation' and 'Children Nutting', and, in 1790, 'A Visit to the Grandfather', after a work by John Raphael Smith. 
Dayes illustrated a number of literary texts, including scenes for Bell's 'British Theatre', but these did not satisfy his ambitions as a history painter, and from 1798 he spent an increasing amount of his time painting scenes from the 'Bible' and from the works of Dryden and Milton. His diary for 1798 gives a detailed account of his work on four watercolours, including the striking image of 'The Fall of the Angels' (exh. RA, 1798; Tate collection). This work attracted some reviews, albeit mixed, but later works -- some in oils -- went unnoticed, and there is no evidence that he either attracted sales or succeeded in transforming his status. The extent of Dayes's ambitions was underlined in his theoretical 'Essays on painting', published in the 'Philosophical Magazine' for 1801-2, which stressed the importance of the artist's moral role as a teacher. Landscape painting, he urged, must be governed by the intellectual process of selection rather than the mere imitation of nature; his attacks on the landscape of 'effects' marked him out as an opponent of the new generation of artists. 
Dayes's last years were marked by a mounting sense of professional failure. He turned more to oils, producing unconvincing works, such as the 'View of Welshpool' (1803; exh. Sothebys, 1987) and his one-person exhibition in 1801 seems to have attracted no attention. His 1798 diary underlines the precarious nature of his career, which in that year combined the production of historical watercolours with work for Thomas Barker on the production of a panorama, while earning small sums for colouring prints, painting landscape backgrounds for architectural drawings, and teaching. The unstable state of Dayes's mind is sadly apparent in his account of a 'Tour in Yorkshire and Derbyshire' (of 1803), which displays a religious mind, deeply affected by nature but also prone to violent shifts in mood. Dayes committed suicide, in London, late in May 1804. His writings, including the often acerbic 'Professional Sketches of Modern Artists', were collected and edited by E. W. Brayley and were published in 1805 for the benefit of his widow, a miniaturist who exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1797 to 1800, but of whom no further details are known. 


@@@@@


doc= 7377


Dayrolles, Solomon (d. 1786), courtier and diplomat, was the nephew and heir of James Dayrolles (died 1739), British resident at Geneva, and at The Hague from 1717 to 1739. Nothing is known of his early life until 1730, when his godfather, Lord Chesterfield, tried to obtain for him his first diplomatic posting, though without success. Although Dayrolles received a court position, as master of the revels, on 12 April 1744, he acted as Chesterfield's private secretary on a diplomatic mission to The Hague in 1745 and on his brief visit to Ireland in 1745-6. His persistent patron finally secured him the much coveted diplomatic post on 12 May 1747, when Dayrolles was appointed resident at The Hague. After more than four years he was transferred to Brussels, where he arrived on 30 January 1752. He was recalled late in August 1757 as the French started to take possession of the Austrian Netherlands, seizing Ostend and Nieuport in October. 
In 1739 Dayrolles used his inheritance to buy from Sir Richard Child the estate of Henley Park, near Guildford. He returned to London from The Hague to marry Christabella (died 1791), daughter of Colonel Peterson of Ireland, on 4 July 1751. They had one son, Thomas Philip, who became a captain in the 10th dragoons and married a Swiss wife, Mlle H. G. Thomasset. Of their three daughters, the eldest, Christabella, married Townsend Ventry in 1784; Emily married the Baron de Reidezel, aide-de-camp to the duke of Wurttemberg, on 24 December 1786; and Mary married Richard Croft, a banker, on 5 February 1788. Mary Dayrolles is thought to have inspired Fanny Burney to create the character of Miss Larolles in her novel 'Cecilia'. 
Dayrolles, who was a member of the Egyptian Club, died in March 1786. His library was sold later that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 7378


Deacon, James (d. 1750), miniature painter, of whose parents nothing is known, was talented as a painter and a musician. In 1746 the miniature and enamel painter C. F. Zincke was obliged, his sight failing, to give up his house in Tavistock Row, Covent Garden, and retire from his profession. Deacon then took this house and quite probably a proportion of the older painter's business. Horace Walpole noted that he 'painted portraits in miniature in a very masterly manner' (Walpole, 4.183). In the print room of the British Museum there are portraits by Deacon, in Indian ink, of the marine painter Samuel Scott and his wife. Deacon had not long been established in his profession when, attending as a witness at the Old Bailey, apparently at the 'black sessions', he caught gaol fever and died, young, on 21 May 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 7379


Deacon, Thomas (1697-1753), bishop of the nonjuring Church of England and physician, was born on 2 September 1697 at Stepney, Middlesex, the son of William Deacon (died 1706), a mariner, and his wife, Cecelia ('fl'. 1697-1733). Lacking a university education, by early adulthood he had become an accomplished writer and had mastered Greek, Latin, French, and possibly Hebrew. The nonjuror George Hickes, who took a paternal interest in Thomas, may have directed his education. 
Deacon's mother, who may have married the nonjuring bishop Jeremy Collier (1716), introduced her son, while still a child, to Jacobitism and such leading nonjurors as Hickes and Collier. Ordained by Collier to the priesthood on 19 March 1716, the eighteen-year-old cleric's first public appearance as a nonjuror came at the execution of William Paul and John Hall in 1716. He denied offering absolution to the two Jacobites, but he did admit to writing the strongly worded Jacobite speeches given by the two men on the gallows. It is most likely that he also ministered to the prisoners in private. After a trip to the Netherlands in 1717 he returned to study medicine with Richard Mead (1673-1754), one of England's most distinguished physicians. In London he served as the minister of the nonjuring congregation at Aldersgate and as assistant at Robert Orme's Trinity Chapel. 
Deacon moved to Manchester about 1722, where he became a leading physician. At this time also he married Sarah ('b'. 1700?, died 1745), about whom further details are unknown. They resided on Fennel Street, a short distance from the collegiate church and Chetham's Library, and had twelve children, two of whom died in infancy. 
While Manchester had a significant Jacobite community and Deacon was the leading nonjuring figure in the city, the extent of his Jacobite activities remains unclear. The Presbyterian Josiah Owen, in a series of letters published in 1746 in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', charged Deacon with having both popish and Jacobite sympathies, offering absolution to William Paul and John Hall on the gallows in 1716, fleeing for the Netherlands with warrants issued against him, and then living 'unmolested' in Manchester. He suggested that three of Deacon's sons had served at their father's behest in the Manchester regiment in 1745, that Deacon himself had received a dispensation from serving from Charles Edward, and that he had been escorted to the 'Pretender's lodgings' ('GM', 16.69, 579). Of the three sons in question, Thomas Theodorus ('c'.1723-1746), a captain in the Manchester regiment, was executed at Tyburn; Robert Renatus ('c'.1725-1746), a lieutenant, died in prison awaiting trial; while Charles Clement ('c'.1727-1749), ensign, died in Jamaica after being transported. Deacon denied most of Owen's charges in 1748, at which time he replied that he had indeed lived unmolested if by that Owen meant being attacked by mobs, detained by soldiers, and living in fear that his house would be brought down (ibid., 18.206). 
Though Jacobite in sympathy, Deacon's primary attention was given to the creation of a separate nonjuring Church of England. He took an extreme view of the church's independence from the state and did not consider reunion with the established Church of England to be possible or desirable. His 'ideal was always the creation of an Orthodox Catholic Church separate from both England and Rome', while his Jacobitism was a 'secondary matter' (Broxap, 'Biography', 140-41, 147). With Thomas Brett, Collier, and Roger Laurence, he was a member of the usagers party, which called for the restoration of four ceremonies: the invocation of the Holy Spirit, the oblation, the mixed chalice, and the prayers for the dead. Believing that these items had been wrongly omitted from the prayer book of 1552, in 1718 Deacon and Thomas Brett drafted a new liturgy. This attempted to be true to the liturgical principles of the early church and to restore the four usages. Though many nonjurors believed that the usages were desirable, they did not wish to obstruct the possibility of a future return to the Church of England. The usagers party, however, insisted that tradition required their inclusion for an efficacious eucharist. Deacon remained adamant about these principles and refused to join in the reunion of the two parties engineered in 1732 by Brett and George Smith of Durham. The usagers party maintained their existence after 1732 when the Scottish bishop Archibald Campbell, acting alone, consecrated Deacon and Laurence as bishops of what had now become the Orthodox British church in 1733. In 1734 Deacon issued his 'Compleat Collection of Devotions', which included a new liturgy, 'The order of the divine offices of the Orthodox British church'. Following Campbell's death in 1744, this replaced the liturgy of 1718. Modelled on the liturgies found in the 'Apostolic Constitutions', it sought to restore even more primitive usages, including infant communion. Thus, Deacon's new liturgy fulfilled the 'warning prophecy' given by the critics of the 1718 session that if one returned to ''some' primitive customs, others would follow' (Grisbrooke, 117-18). Others note that, by attempting to create a liturgy true to the earliest Christian liturgies and by reclaiming for the Anglican tradition the primitive doctrine of eucharistic sacrifice, Deacon's work brought to maturity the work of earlier scholars from Jeremy Taylor to William Whiston (Cuming, 186). The 'Compleat Collection' is notable also for its inclusion of excerpts from John Wesley's 'Essay upon the stationary fasts'. John Clayton, a member of Wesley's Oxford group and a native of Manchester, introduced Wesley to Deacon. Deacon requested Wesley's help in the preparation of his collection of devotions and Wesley 'returned from this visit thoroughly fired with zeal both for the ancient church and for the stations' (Baker, 31). 
In 1747 Deacon published his most significant work, 'A Full, True, and Comprehensive View of Christianity', which provided two catechisms for teaching the primitive faith and a detailed theological commentary on his 'Compleat Collection of Devotions'. Deacon also set out the theological suppositions for his liturgical work and explained the doctrines of the 'Orthodox British Catholic Church'. He also made clear his understanding of the sacraments, which went beyond the Anglican two sacraments, to include twelve offices, such as confirmation, marriage, ordination, and infant communion. His other writings included 'The Doctrine of the Church of Rome Concerning Purgatory' (1718), which sought to distinguish between prayers for the dead and the doctrine of purgatory, thereby defending the nonjurors against charges of popery. He also translated two works by the French Jansenist Sebastian le Nain de Tillemont (with whom Deacon had much in common theologically), the translations appearing as 'History of the Arians' (1721) and 'Ecclesiastical Memoirs of the First Six Centuries' (1733, 1735). 
In his later years Deacon encountered financial and physical difficulties. His friend the poet John Byrom wrote to William Law in 1752 noting that Deacon could no longer care for himself or his children. He died on 16 February 1753 and was buried on 19 February in Manchester at St Anne's churchyard alongside his wife, who had predeceased him on 4 July 1745. Deacon was survived by three sons, including Edward Erastus ('c'.1741-1813), surgeon, and a daughter, Sarah Sophia (1731-1801), who married William Cartwright, nonjuring bishop and Shrewsbury apothecary. 


@@@@@


doc= 7380


Deacon, William Frederick (1799-1845), journalist and author, was born on 26 July 1799 in Caroline Place, Mecklenburgh Square, Bloomsbury, London, the eldest son of William Wranius Deacon, a wealthy merchant, and Caroline Harriet Clayton. At the age of eleven he was sent to Reading School, where the celebrated Dr Richard Valpy instilled in him a love of literature. His senior schoolfellow Thomas Noon Talfourd remembered Deacon as 'tall for his age and naturally graceful, with dark eyes and dirty hands; gay, light-hearted and heedless' (Talfourd, 7). He was apt to neglect lessons for novel-reading and this tendency followed him to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a pensioner in June 1817. He did not reside at Trinity and in the following October he migrated to St Catharine's College and soon, according to Talfourd, became known for his 'fine taste and conversational powers'. He was already composing verse and in 1817 found a publisher in William Hone for 'Hacho, or, The Spell of St. Wilten', a long poem influenced by Sir Walter Scott, which sold well. 
Deacon later regretted the 'irregularities' at Cambridge that resulted in his being sent down, and on returning to London he encountered strong disapproval from his father. With this failure went Deacon's hopes of taking holy orders and instead he resolved to enter on a literary career. An annuity of $100 from his grandmother gave him a degree of freedom, and while living in the family home he sought out publishers. He eventually found one in 1820, when the newly established partnership of Joyce Gold and William Northhouse launched its 'London Magazine and Monthly Critical and Dramatic Review' as a rival to the better-known 'London Magazine' of Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy, which was edited by John Scott. Deacon's connection with Gold's journal probably dates from the first appearance of the Alchymist feature in March 1820, but he may have contributed articles from the outset, in January. From April 1820 until the magazine folded in mid-1821 he was its sheet anchor, contributing to its pages romantic tales, verse, literary criticism, serio-comic sketches, and parodies under his initials (W. F. D) or using a variety of pseudonyms, including Greville Faulkland, Sam Quiz, and Paul Clutterbuck. Although usually a sound critic, he was less gifted as a writer of romantic fiction and verse, where his immaturity is apparent, but his parodies were mostly accurate and some of them found their way into Deacon's acclaimed 'Warreniana' (1824). Of his sketches the best are autobiographical and show the writer drawing heavily on his experiences in and around Reading. 'A day at the mill', for instance, describes Three Mile Cross and interestingly predates by over six months the first sketch by Mary Russell Mitford in her 'Our Village' series. 
On 21 October 1820 Deacon launched the 'Dejeune, or, Companion for the Breakfast Table', a daily miscellany costing 2died which was modelled on Leigh Hunt's 'Indicator'. This venture represented a large commitment for Deacon, who was probably the magazine's sole contributor. The strain told and on 15 December the 'Dejeune' became a thrice-weekly publication and soon afterwards ceased. With the merging in February 1821 of Gold's 'London Magazine' with the 'Theatrical Inquisitor' Deacon's stint as editor very possibly began. By June, however, a 'sudden and severe illness' had forced him to retire and in the following month the journal was bought out by Taylor and Hessey, the new owners of Baldwin's 'London Magazine'. Deacon meanwhile had taken a small cottage near Llangadog in Carmarthenshire, and here he amused himself for several months 'with a few old books and a daily ramble among the Black Mountains' (Deacon, 'The Innkeeper's Album', 424). From Llangadog he wrote to his hero Sir Walter Scott asking for advice and guidance and enclosing samples of his work. In reply Scott praised his writing but strongly recommended that he exchange the insecure and penurious life of a journalist for one of honest toil in a counting-house, according to his father's wishes. 
By now Deacon was contemplating a new life in South America, but a partial reconciliation with his father left him free to pursue literature as a career. He became interested in Welsh folklore and for a short while may have been the schoolmaster at Llanwrda, not far from Llangadog. Before long he had returned to London and by late December 1822 was living in Chelsea. In this period he became friendly with the historian Charles Mills, with whom he had much in common, and his first book, 'The Innkeeper's Album' (1823), a collection of sketches inspired by his stay in Wales, is dedicated to him. Deacon's next volume, 'Warreniana' (1824), was a series of parodies of his contemporaries, including Coleridge, Byron, Scott, and Hunt, in the style of 'Rejected Addresses', and it proved enormously popular. A further collection of tales and sketches, many with a Welsh setting, appeared in 1826 as 'November Nights'. 
The loss of his annuity in 1829 drove Deacon to depend entirely on his literary efforts. After a short period as an assistant in a school at Dulwich he was without work for a while before joining 'The Sun' newspaper as a contributor to its literary criticism. He soon gained a reputation as a critic of taste and scholarship and he became an early champion of Dickens. His own first novel, the two-volume 'Exile of Erin' (1835), contained satirical portraits of prominent Irish patriots, such as O'Connell, and was well received both at home and in the United States. Between 1837 and 1839 he wrote a series of papers for 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' under the heading 'The Picture Gallery' (which were much in the style of his earlier sketches), and in doing so realized a long-standing ambition to contribute to a journal he had always admired. These papers were collected in book form in 1858. About 1840 he was appointed editor of 'The Sun', but the extra responsibility weakened an already delicate constitution. He died in London surrounded by his wife Alice and their three children at his home, 2 Malvern Terrace, Islington, on 18 March 1845. He left behind him the manuscript of 'Annette', a novel which was published in three volumes in 1853, with a prefatory memoir by Sir T. N. Talfourd. 


@@@@@


doc= 7381


Dealtry, Thomas (1796-1861), bishop of Madras, was born at Knottingley near Pontefract on 19 October 1796, the son of James Dealtry, of the Dealtry family of Lofthouse Hall, Wakefield. He was largely self-taught and from the age of fifteen worked as an usher in a Doncaster school and as a tutor to a private family. In 1819 he married the sister of his pupil 'under romantic circumstances' (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.', pt 2, 1944, 2.263), with whom he had a daughter, Dorothy (1820-1892), but his wife died young and on 22 April 1824 he married a woman whose given names were Jane Brannon (1804-1892). 
In 1826 Dealtry entered St Catharine's College, Cambridge, to study law, supporting himself by private tuition. He graduated LLB (first class) in 1828 and in June of the same year was ordained deacon and became officiating minister at St Mary-the-Less, Cambridge. An evangelical but nevertheless catholic in his sympathies, Dealtry was a good preacher and he soon attracted the attention of Cambridge's leading evangelical divine, Charles Simeon, who procured for him an East India Company chaplaincy in Bengal. Dealtry was ordained priest in November 1828 and arrived in Calcutta in early 1829 to take charge of the old mission church. There, as Simeon had hoped, he befriended the missionaries, and eventually he became secretary of the local branch of the Church Missionary Society. 
In 1835 Bishop Daniel Wilson appointed Dealtry archdeacon of Calcutta, an administrative post well-suited to his legal abilities. In 1849, when on leave in England, he was appointed third bishop of Madras. 
In Madras from January 1850, Dealtry again proved to be an excellent administrator and wisely treated his East India Company employers with courtesy and understanding. Despite his well-known missionary sympathies he managed to persuade the company to increase its clergy roll in Madras and during his episcopate he ordained forty-four deacons and sixty-one priests, many of whom were Indians. As in Calcutta, Dealtry was occasionally involved in bitter disputes with other churchmen, most notably a long-running feud with Alfred Radford Symonds, secretary of the Madras Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. In 1861 he earned more enemies by making his son Thomas (1825-1882) archdeacon of Madras. Cries of nepotism were raised, though as a former president of the Cambridge Union the younger Thomas may genuinely have been the most able candidate. Dealtry's critics also accused him of lacking talent and intellect. Neither was true, though his long Indian service had cut him off from theological developments in Britain and his religious thinking often appeared naive to clerics newly arrived from Oxford or Cambridge. His one major publication, 'The Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ Proved from his Own Discourse', had appeared in 1830. Unlike his critics, however, many of Dealtry's flock appreciated his simple, tolerant evangelicalism and his common-sense approach to church administration. One of his first acts in Madras -- to shorten the Sunday morning services -- remained one of his most popular. 
Dealtry died in Madras from an infected foot on 4 March 1861 and was buried in the burial-ground of St George's Cathedral the following day. A sculpted memorial, funded by public subscription, was placed in the cathedral. He was survived by his wife, Jane; their son Thomas, afterwards rector of Swillington, Yorkshire (1872-8), and vicar of Maidstone, Kent (1878-82); and his daughter from his first marriage, Dorothy, widow of Henry Thomas, East India Company chaplain (1842-59). 


@@@@@


doc= 7382


Dealtry, William (1775-1847), Church of England clergyman, was born at Whitgift, Yorkshire, on 20 July 1775, the son of William Dealtry, a small landowner of Swinefleet, Yorkshire. He attended a village school in Swinefleet before going to Hull grammar school (1790-92), where he was one of a number of distinguished pupils during the headmastership of Revd Joseph Milner, a noted evangelical. He was admitted a sizar at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in 1792, migrating in the following year to Trinity College. He was elected to a scholarship and graduated BA as second wrangler in the mathematical tripos and second Smith's prizeman in 1796. He spent a year in Clapham as tutor to the sons of Charles Grant, meeting the leading figures in the Clapham Sect. Elected a fellow of Trinity in 1798, he proceeded MA in 1799, and later BD in 1812 and DD in 1829. After his ordination in 1799 he served as curate to Robert Jarratt, rector of Wellington, Somerset, and also a former pupil of Hull grammar school. In 1801 he returned to Cambridge as a college tutor at Trinity, where he became identified as a supporter of Charles Simeon (whose obituary sermon he later delivered). He was an early promoter of the Church Missionary Society, and from 1805 contributed to the 'Christian Observer', an evangelical periodical. 
Dealtry was appointed professor of mathematics at the East India College, Haileybury, in 1805, and was among the original members of staff when the college opened early in 1806. There he became a friend of Malthus. Remembered as an effective teacher, he published 'The Principles of Fluxions' (1810), which was characteristic of the textbooks produced by Cambridge mathematicians to prepare students for examinations in the period before the adoption of continental differential notation. He laid stress upon developing his pupils' powers of reasoning. He was revered by evangelicals for his courageous pamphlets defending the British and Foreign Bible Society against the criticisms of influential high-churchmen. He published replies to objections by Christopher Wordsworth (1810), Herbert Marsh (1812), and H. H. Norris (1815). His anniversary sermon to the Church Missionary Society in 1813, answering the political objections to missionary activity in India, was published and circulated to members of parliament. He was also active in the anti-slavery movement. 
In July 1813, on Simeon's recommendation, the trustees of the rectory of Clapham, Surrey, presented Dealtry to the living made vacant by the death of John Venn. A year later he married Harriet, daughter of Richard Stainforth, with whom he had a son and three daughters. Relinquishing his Trinity College fellowship, he held the college living of Hatfield Broadoak, Essex, from 1814 to 1816. In 1817 his former pupil Abel Smith, the banker and MP, presented him to the rectory of Watton, Hertfordshire, where he occasionally resided. At Clapham he presided over the building of new churches and promoted parochial visitations among the sick and poor. His sermons delivered there, published in 1827, were neither profoundly theological nor particularly spiritual, but of a more practical tone, giving 'clear statements of scriptural truth' ('Christian Observer', Feb 1848, 135). As a preacher he was noted for the clarity of his exposition. In November 1819, in the period of unrest following Peterloo, he preached a sermon entitled 'The dispositions and conduct required of Christians towards their rulers', drawing a connection between irreligion and disloyalty towards the secular power. During the 1820s he was a correspondent of Thomas Chalmers, whose ideas he disseminated among his Clapham parishioners. His support for church establishments, reiterated in sermons delivered in the early 1830s in response to the campaigns of dissenters against the Church of England's temporal privileges, increasingly aligned him with more orthodox Anglican churchmen. The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, of which he became a committee member, published his 'Religious Establishments Tried by the Word of God' (1833); membership of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel also signalled his attachment to the Anglican establishment. 
On 25 February 1830 Dealtry was appointed by Charles Sumner, bishop of Winchester, chancellor of the diocese of Winchester with a canonry in the cathedral; he resigned his living at Watton (though he retained Clapham until his death). Energetic in persuading churchwardens to extend accommodation and restore the fabric of churches, he was credited with achieving a general improvement in the decorousness of church interiors in Hampshire. He was appointed archdeacon of Surrey in 1845 and was chosen by Lord John Russell to deliver the sermon to both houses of parliament on the day of national penitence and fasting observed on 24 March 1847 in response to the famines in Ireland and Scotland. By then he was severely ill. Dealtry died at Brighton on 15 October 1847, survived by his wife and three children. Contemporaries knew him as a cheerful man, with a ready wit allied to a natural humility of character. He gave generously to charity in his lifetime with the result that his accumulated wealth was said to amount to no more than the equivalent of a year's income. 


@@@@@


doc= 7383


Dean, Richard (bap. 1726, d. 1778), essayist and Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 8 November 1726 at Kirkby in Craven (or Kirkby Malham) in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the son of Robert Dean (died 1766) and his wife, Elizabeth King ('bap'. 1704, died 1788/9). Nothing is known of his childhood or his upbringing. However, the university education sometimes attributed to him is fictitious. Like many boys of relatively humble origins in the eighteenth century, Dean was destined for the church; his vocation was to be a teacher and a scholar. He became master of Middleton grammar school, near Manchester, the third oldest foundation in Lancashire, receiving his first stipend from the patrons, Brasenose College, Oxford, on Lady day 1753. Licensed by the bishop of Chester on 8 July 1754, Dean was also ordained curate on 15 September, probably serving at St Leonard's parish church in Middleton. He was certainly the first curate at St Paul's in nearby Royton, a chapel established in 1754 as part of the church extension movement in south-east Lancashire. Although not licensed to this post until as late as 7 July 1757, marriage registers at St Leonard's confirm that Dean regularly performed duties in both places until his retirement from Royton in 1760. 
By the late 1750s Dean was comfortably ensconced both as schoolmaster and curate of Middleton. His rector was the learned Dr Richard Assheton, kinsman of the lord of the manor and a senior Manchester clergyman with moderately evangelical leanings. Dean now enjoyed several years of professional contentment. His personal life also brought him happiness and further opportunities. On 20 November 1764 he married Hannah Lancashire (1744/5-1771). In order to supplement his income, he took a small farm on the hill at Hebers, above Middleton, leased from the manor; in 1765 he even advertised lodgings for pupils in the 'Manchester Mercury' (22 January). However, the later 1760s were an unhappy time for Dean. Sir Ralph, the last Assheton lord of Middleton, died in 1765, leaving the estate to his two married daughters and an uncertain future. Dean had been a witness to Sir Ralph's will and was required to pray for the soul of the deceased. The next year Dean's father died. His young wife Hannah also contracted a long and ultimately fatal illness. 
It was in this understandably depressing period that Dean composed the text for which he is principally noted, 'An Essay on the Future Life of Brute Creatures' (1767). Published in Manchester by subscription and reprinted in London in 1768, the 'Essay' enjoyed the patronage of the Asshetons and other leaders of regional society. Otherwise just another contribution to an age-old technical debate recently enlivened by Locke and Voltaire, Dean's work displayed two distinctive aspects which accounted for its momentary popularity. First, he volubly attacked the insidious philosophical materialism of the contemporary Enlightenment. Second, he offered a striking depiction of 'natural evil' as the product of moral weakness. Both features must have appealed to Lancashire's landed elite, many of them sympathetic to the revivalist sentiments sweeping through established English religion. Dean savaged those, like Descartes and La Mettrie, who thought animals mere machines, devoid of souls. He spoke of sin and salvation for man and animal alike, appealing emotively to the evangelical mood of the age. He also attacked both determinism and predestination, asserting the absolute primacy of free will in human morality. This was perhaps the most crucial polemical feature of the 'Essay', which was disparaging of Calvinism in particular. Presbyterianism, after all, was the separatist tradition which, throughout the Manchester area, was the principal rival to the evangelicalism offered by Dr Assheton and his like-minded colleagues from within the Anglican church. 
The 'Essay' subsequently fell into an obscurity explicable by its very pertinence to this singular context. James Rothwell, a more conventional Anglican who mistrusted its evangelical flavour, responded with the 'Letter to the Reverend Mr Dean' (1769). But by the early 1770s Dean's work had largely been forgotten. His life now entered its final, dark phase. Dean's wife died on 20 February 1771 and was buried three days later in the churchyard of St Leonard's. Always somewhat irascible, Dean thereafter became embroiled in a property dispute with the manorial steward of the absentee lord, Sir Harbord Harbord of Gunton, Norfolk. Over the next few years, his two surviving children, Ann and Elizabeth, also died. Dean may even have neglected his duties at the grammar school, whose fabric fell into disrepair during the final years of his tenure. Samuel Bamford, recounting local legend, describes the schoolmaster around this time as a superstitious individual, afraid of ghosts and constantly aware of his own mortality (Bamford, 1.29). Such intimations were prescient. On 8 February 1778, after a period of ill health, Richard Dean died at Middleton; he was buried two days later beside his wife and children in St Leonard's churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 7384


Deane, Thomas (b. 1686/7), musician, was the son of the Revd William Deane of Nottinghamshire. He matriculated at University College, Oxford, the day before taking the degree of DMus on 9 July 1731. He was organist of St Michael's, Coventry, from 1733 to 1749 and of Warwick parish church from 1719 to 1744. This is all that can be asserted positively about him. It is possible that he was the Mr Dean who contributed the 'Allmand by Mr Dean' in 'The Second Part of the Division Violin' (1705), and he was almost certainly the violinist who played in several London concerts in 1709 and 1710. A Thomas Deane of Worcester wrote incidental music for Oldmixon's 'The Governor of Cyprus' (1703). Whether there were one, two, or three Thomas Dean(e)s active as musicians in the early eighteenth century now seems impossible to ascertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 7385


Dean, William (c.1557-1588), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born at Grassington, Linton in Craven, Yorkshire. He was the son of Thomas Dean, who was a retainer of Richard Norton, one of the principals of the 1569 northern rising. William attended school in Leeds and Clitheroe. Following the collapse of the uprising it appears that he conformed to the Church of England. He matriculated at Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1575 and was a pensioner at Gonville and Caius College in 1577. He was ordained, and served as a curate at Monk Fryston in the diocese of York. In 1581, however, he was converted to the Roman Catholic church by Thomas Alfield, a Rheims seminarist, and he entered the English College, then at Rheims, in July that year. He was ordained a priest at Soissons on 21 December 1581. Early in 1582 he went back to England and within a month was arrested in London. Dean was imprisoned in Newgate, where he was interrogated by Richard Topcliffe as to where he had said mass. Having spent three years in prison he was at length brought to trial at the queen's bench and was found guilty of high treason, but he was exiled in 1585 with twenty other priests. He went to Rheims and almost immediately, on 21 November, returned to England to continue his work. After less than two years he was again apprehended in London and brought to trial; he and thirteen others were condemned under the 'New Act' of 1585. He was executed by hanging, with great cruelty, at Mile End Green, Middlesex, on 28 August 1588. Dean was beatified by Pius XI in 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 7386


Deane, Sir Anthony (c.1638-1720?), shipbuilder, was born in Harwich, the son of Anthony Deane (died 1659), master mariner. He served his apprenticeship as a shipwright under Christopher Pett, master shipwright at Woolwich and one of the family which dominated the naval dockyards of the period. The distinction between the ship designer, or 'naval architect', and the practical shipbuilder was not clear at that time, but Deane, having been bound to the master shipwright of a naval dockyard, would emerge from his training as more than a mere craftsman. He rose rapidly, and was assistant master shipwright at Woolwich by 1660, at the age of twenty-two. 
Two years later Deane first met Samuel Pepys, later his great friend and patron and then a member of the Navy Board, who saw Deane as a possible rival to the Pett family. Pepys found him 'a very able man, and able to do the King's service... [I] will commend his work with skill and vie with others, especially the Petts' (Pepys, 'Diary', 18 Aug 1662). Pepys's diary contains many references to Deane, as he instructed Pepys in the art of shipbuilding. The shipyard at Harwich was reopened in 1664 and Deane was appointed its master shipwright, giving him his first chance to design and build ships. He became an officer in the militia in 1667 and used the title 'Captain' from then until he was knighted in 1675. He was promoted master shipwright of the larger yard at Portsmouth in 1668 and rose to become commissioner at Portsmouth in 1672. 
Deane soon gained a reputation for fast vessels, whether building royal yachts or ships of the line carrying 60 to 100 guns. Pepys exulted in the speed of his ships: the seventy-gun 'Resolution' of 1667, for example, was 'the best ship by report in all the world' (Pepys, 15 July 1668), and of the sixteen-gun 'Greyhound' of 1672 it was said: 'She steers singularly well, keeps a weather helm and never missed staying... We believe she will be as good a sailer as ever built in England' (Johns, 181). Deane built three large ships, first rates of 100 guns and three decks, during his period at Portsmouth, as replacements for ships lost in the Dutch wars. One of these, the 'Royal Charles' of 1673, had initial problems of stability, and this seems to have convinced Deane that ships of the line should be made more stable. In all, Deane designed and built twenty-five ships between 1660 and 1675, more than a quarter of the ships added to the navy in those years, and he built sixteen out of forty-four of the larger or 'rated' ships. 
Deane's career as an active naval shipbuilder declined when he went to London in 1674 to become a member of the Navy Board as commissioner of the victualling accounts. The duties of his post were light, however, and he designed a few small ships and supervised the construction of thirty new ones ordered by act of parliament in 1677, setting the pattern for naval shipbuilding for the next seventy years. Under his supervision his son, Anthony junior, built two ships of a new type, called galley frigates, intended for use against the Barbary corsairs in the Mediterranean; these combined the advantages of rowing and sailing. 
In 1675 Deane visited France on the orders of the king, to build two yachts for Louis XIV. This was held against him in 1679, during the exclusion crisis, when he was accused of giving information to the French and imprisoned in the Tower of London with Pepys. He successfully defended himself but left office in 1680. He was elected to the Royal Society in 1681, serving on its council, and made a substantial living as a commercial shipbuilder for five years, perhaps designing private yachts. In any case he demanded a salary of $1000 to return to the navy as a member of a special commission for the repair of the fleet in 1686. Pepys denigrated the other leading shipwrights in order to ensure that Deane was appointed. The commission appears to have been successful but its term expired in 1688 and Deane was not reappointed after the revolution of that year. He and Pepys were again imprisoned in 1689, but released in 1690. He dined with Evelyn that year, and apparently renounced much of the work he had done since 1664 on the design of ships of the line. He urged their abolition and replacement with small, fast frigates and fireships, reverting to the policies of his youth. 
Deane took part in many experiments, for example in building the 'Nonsuch' designed by Van Hemskirke, a renegade Dutchman. Pepys later recalled this as 'the ridiculous proposition... of building a ship with regard to the grain of the timber, and laying the roots all one way' (Chappell, appendix II, 301). Deane invented a cannon known from its stout form as Punchinello, and he experimented with the lead sheathing of ships' bottoms. His 'Doctrine of Naval Architecture' was written in 1670, and gives the clearest account, before the eighteenth century, of how the hull of a warship was designed. The title page bears the inscription 'written in the year 1670 at the instance of Samuel Pepys', and it had found its way into Pepys's library by 1682, but perhaps that does not tell the whole story. The treatise contains many references to 'the young artist', and also expresses an intention to 'leave nothing unfolded which may advance anything to the meanest capacity'. This was hardly flattering to Pepys, and may suggest that Deane intended it for publication, for the training of young shipwrights. 
Little is known about Deane's family life, except that his first wife, Anne, died in childbirth in 1677 and that he married, on 22 July 1678, Christian, widow of Sir John Dawes. He cited his fifteen children as one of the reasons why he needed to be paid $1000 in 1686. In his early days he was often accused of arrogance, having a quarrel with the lord chancellor in 1664 over the felling of timber in his private estate; two years later he was accused by the captain of the 'Colchester' of 'having an uncivil tongue... in regard he was a tradesman' (Johns, 171). He died at Charterhouse Square in London, probably in 1720. 
Deane's reputation as a ship designer was much boosted by his friendship with Pepys, who lost no opportunity to praise him in his diary and elsewhere. According to Pepys, 'He is the first that has come to any certainty beforehand of foretelling the draught of water of a ship before she is launched' (Pepys, 19 May 1666). Deane mentions the system in his 'Doctrine', but does not claim its invention, and there is evidence that it was in common use by the 1660s. A different view of his qualities was provided by William Sutherland, a shipbuilder of the next generation, who wrote: 'I could never learn that Sir Anthony was much of a mathematical practitioner, or a very great proficient in the practice, but had the art of talking well, and gave good encouragement to those men who was well known to be grounded in the practice part of building ships. (Hattendorf, 266)' A more balanced view might suggest that Deane was indeed the best shipbuilder of the early restoration period, but only marginally ahead of rivals such as Sir John Tippets and Christopher, Peter, and Phineas Pett, and not head and shoulders above them as Pepys suggests. 


@@@@@


doc= 7387


Deane, Henry (c.1440-1503), administrator and archbishop of Canterbury, is first recorded in 1457 as a canon of Llanthony by Gloucester and a young student there. That he later pursued his studies at Oxford is indicated both by his reference in a letter, years afterwards, to that university as his 'most gracious mother' (Anstey, 675-7), and by the fact that in 1473 and 1488 he is recorded as renting rooms from Exeter College. His parentage and early life are totally obscure, but it is likely that his family came from the Forest of Dean, in Gloucestershire; the subsequent progress of his career suggests that he was born 'c'.1440. 
In 1467 Deane was elected prior of his community, an office he was to retain, despite his elevation to the episcopate, until 1501. In 1477 he is described, unusually for a religious, as a royal chaplain, and in 1481 he received a papal indult in common form to hold any other benefice with the priory. He proved to be an excellent monastic administrator. In 1481 he obtained from Edward IV, for a fine of 300 marks, the union and subordination to his own community of its ancient mother house of Llanthony Prima in Monmouthshire, where liturgical observance and financial management had sunk to a low ebb. At his own monastery he embarked upon a building programme, of which only the gatehouse survives, decorated (characteristically in this age) with his own arms, a chevron between three birds. 
Marks of favour from Henry VII came soon after the king's accession, in the form of grants and confirmations to the priory from December 1485. It is possible that Deane's rise to much greater prominence was through contact with his diocesan Robert Morton (died 1497), from late 1486 bishop of Worcester, and through him with the latter's uncle John Morton (died 1500), archbishop of Canterbury and chancellor. Deane, whose knowledge of the common law is suggested by his admission to the society of Lincoln's Inn on 30 October 1489, served as a royal councillor, and on 13 September 1494 was appointed chancellor of Ireland (where Llanthony had substantial possessions), to serve under Sir Edward Poynings (died 1521), the deputy governor acting for Prince Henry. It was Deane who gave the opening speech at the Drogheda parliament of December 1494, where Poynings' law, and other legislation designed to bring Ireland more firmly under the English crown, was enacted. He was in effective control of Irish administration for much of 1495 while Poynings was on campaign further south, and his regime drew forth a protest from the bishop and clergy of Meath. On Poynings' recall in January 1496 Deane was appointed deputy governor and justiciar of Ireland, and engaged in the strengthening of the boundaries of the pale. Soon however, in August 1496, reversion to a policy of government through Anglo-Irish nobles brought about his replacement. 
Before his departure from Ireland, Deane had on 13 April 1494 been granted custody of the temporalities of the bishopric of Bangor, to which he was papally provided on 4 July following. The temporalities were restored on 6 October 1496. The diocese was still suffering from the ravages of Owain Glyn Dwr's rebellion, at the beginning of the century, in which both cathedral and bishop's palace had been severely damaged. Deane inaugurated a process of reconstruction which was completed after his translation. His determined reassertion of episcopal rights is illustrated by his recovery of the bishop's fisheries in the Skerries, now claimed by William Gruffudd. Deane personally led a fishing expedition, successfully repulsed armed resistance, and ultimately re-established the see's control over this lucrative right. 
Within less than five years Henry VII signalled his intention of securing ecclesiastical preferment for his 'faithful counsellor' by granting Deane, on 7 December 1499, custody of the vacant see of Salisbury, to which he was provided by the pope on 8 January 1500. Later that year, on 13 October, after the death of Archbishop John Morton, the chancellor, he was appointed keeper of the great seal, an office he held until 27 July 1502. Thomas Langton, bishop of Winchester, was elected to succeed Morton at Canterbury, but died on 27 January 1501, and Deane was in turn elected to the primatial see on 26 April 1501 and translated on 26 May. When Henry VII restored the temporalities of the archbishopric on 2 August, that parsimonious monarch signalled his 'special favour and sincere love' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 2.773-5) by granting Deane the proceeds of the lordship of Canterbury since Morton's death. He was the first religious to be elevated to Canterbury for 135 years, and he was, of course, the last. 
The surviving fragments of Deane's Canterbury register provide information only on routine matters. In his sacramental duties he was represented, as at Salisbury, by John Bell, bishop of Mayo. It appears that there was conflict with the University of Oxford over an unspecified jurisdictional issue. Deane's enthusiasm for architectural refurbishment, so characteristic of late fifteenth-century prelates, was manifested in his rebuilding of the archiepiscopal manor of Otford. On a wider national stage he was chief commissioner in the negotiations that resulted, in January 1502, in the contract of marriage between Henry VII's daughter Margaret and James IV, king of Scots, and in a treaty of perpetual peace between the two kingdoms. The showpiece of his pontificate was his celebration on 14 November 1501, assisted by nineteen bishops, of the marriage between Prince Arthur and Katherine of Aragon. 
The extravagance of the royal marriage was matched by that of Deane's own funeral after his death at Lambeth Palace on 15 February 1503. The arrangements specified in his last testament provide an excellent illustration of the late medieval desire for conspicuous commemoration (to be organized in this case by, among others, the archbishop's young chaplain, Thomas Wolsey). Deane's coffin, surmounted by his effigy, was transported by barge from Lambeth to Faversham and thence to Canterbury, surrounded all the way by tapers, accompanied by river-men in mourning livery and on the final stages by an escort of gentlemen tenants. On 24 February he was buried in Canterbury Cathedral near to the site of Thomas Becket's martyrdom, and to the saint's tomb he bequeathed a valuable image of St John the Evangelist. His grave was marked by a monumental brass in the martyrdom (the north-west transept), where mass was to be celebrated for his soul for twenty years. A memorandum in a cathedral priory register suggests that his last wishes were not fulfilled, and that he did not even have his month's mind because of financial exigencies, but that he was betrayed by his executors (of whom the foremost was Sir Reginald Bray). In material terms this alleged neglect is paralleled by the losses of his registers as prior of Llanthony and bishop of Bangor and Salisbury. Because of these lacunae, and because the voices of Henry VII's individual councillors are muted, Deane remains a remarkably obscure figure, whose certain distinction can be illustrated far more often by inference than by evidence. He was obviously an able administrator, in both ecclesiastical and secular spheres, while his probity is surely attested by the plaudit delivered by John Fisher (died 1535) at the funeral of Queen Elizabeth, the day before Deane's own burial, where the loss of the archbishop is equated with that of the queen and Prince Arthur. However anonymously he was certainly one of the pillars of Henry VII's regime, and at the same time a conscientious prelate. 


@@@@@


doc= 7388


Deane, Richard (bap. 1610, d. 1653), army and naval officer and regicide, was baptized on 8 July 1610 in the parish church of Guiting Power, a younger son of Edward Deane (died before 1653) of Temple Guiting, Gloucestershire, and his second wife, Ann Wass (died 1670). Little is known of his early life. His uncle or great-uncle, Sir Richard Deane, lord mayor of London in 1628-9, was a member of the Skinners' Company, one of the founders of the East India Company, and a member of the Levant, Virginia, and North West Passage companies, and Deane may have begun a mercantile career under his auspices. Though Sir Richard was known as a puritan he gave no help to the merchants who rebelled against impositions during his mayoralty and he received a knighthood from Charles I at the end of his term. There was a Richard Deane at Gray's Inn in 1619 -- simultaneously with future regicides -- but this was the future general's uncle. Through his mother's family, however, he was related to Cromwell, Hampden, and many future Buckinghamshire parliamentarians. Like George Blake, younger brother of the future general-at-sea, a shipowner called Richard Deane traded out of Plymouth, and had a cargo of deals, ironwork, and timber from Goteborg, on board the 'Matthew' of Plymouth, enumerated in the Plymouth customs book under the date 25 November 1633. This is probably the same man who in 1637 is mentioned as having bought a French prize at Plymouth and who was probably the future general. (In June 1653 the council of state ordered the import, customs free, of wines, sugar, and tobacco belonging to Major-General Deane, reinforcing the likelihood of a mercantile background.) As both Blake and Deane were trading with northern Europe in timber there is a strong possibility that they were acquainted and that, through George Blake, Deane was already in contact with his brother Robert. 
On the outbreak of war Deane served in north-west Kent with a group of parliamentarians headed by Captain Willoughby which secured Woolwich Dockyard, capturing seventy-five pieces of ordnance. Willoughby then occupied Gravesend Fort where Deane became a member of the garrison. He was probably at Edgehill on 23 October 1642, possibly at the first battle of Newbury on 27 September 1643. By August 1644 he was comptroller of the ordnance with Essex's army in Cornwall, waiting on and giving advice to his general, who speaks of him as 'an honest, judicious, and stout man'. When Essex abruptly quitted the army, leaving it to Major-General Philip Skippon to get out of the difficulty the best way he could, Skippon called a council of war, which rejected his proposal to cut their way through the enemy, and determined rather to treat. The negotiation ended in the army of 6000 men laying down their arms and surrendering their guns, of which there were forty-nine, all of brass. Deane, who seems to have been left by the desertion of his seniors in actual command of the artillery, was one of the twenty officers who formed this council and signed the 'attestation' or published report of its proceedings. His involvement in the surrender did him no harm and following parliament's approval for the formation of a siege train for the New Model Army in January 1645 he was again appointed comptroller of the ordnance. He commanded the artillery at Naseby (14 June 1645), where his steady fire broke the force of Rupert's headlong charge. He continued to serve with Fairfax in his conquering march into the west country, and his guns played a particularly important part at the battle of Langport and the capture of Sherborne Castle. At the reduction of Bristol (11 September) his 'dexterity, industry, and resolution' were specially commended. He was one of the commissioners to arrange the terms of Ralph Hopton's surrender at Truro (14 March 1646) and afterwards took part in the siege of Oxford, which surrendered, by the king's orders, on 20 June. 
On 21 May 1647, at the Temple Church, Deane married Mary, daughter of John Grymesditch of Knottingley in Yorkshire, the witnesses being Colonel Robert Lilburne, afterwards a fellow regicide, and the Leveller Colonel Thomas Rainborowe. Meanwhile, with the end of active fighting, relations between the army and parliament deteriorated. On 28 May 1647 the parliament appointed Cromwell to be lord-general of the forces in Ireland, and Deane to be with him as lieutenant of the artillery. Their scarcely veiled object was to get Cromwell out of the way, and the association of Deane with him suggests that he was now recognized as one of Cromwell's partisans. Cromwell declined the appointment, choosing to remain in England, as did Deane, now promoted to adjutant-general. The quarrel was rapidly coming to a head. On 4 June the control of the king's person was assumed by George Joyce, who brought him to the army. At Newmarket he was waited on by many of the superior officers, Deane among them, who kissed the king's hand. Joyce asserted that what he had done was by Cromwell's order but this Cromwell denied in the most positive and violent manner, and is said on one occasion to have been prevented from doing Joyce 'some mischief' only by the interposition of Deane and others ('Harleian Miscellany', 8.304). Throughout this period Deane was a member of the council of officers and on 23 June 1647 signed the remonstrance of the army to parliament. On 5 July he was one of those nominated to draw up propositions to the king and on 16 July was among the officers negotiating with the agitators, drawn from the soldiery. He was present at the Putney debates, where he took only a small part but was placed on the committee appointed to revise the 'Agreement of the People' in the light of army resolutions. His stance was that of the less radical element, aligned with Cromwell and Ireton. On the resignation of William Batten in September 1647 Rainborowe was nominated as vice-admiral of the fleet and Deane was immediately given his regiment, much to Rainborowe's annoyance. 
When the royalist uprising in 1648 called the army again to the field Deane, in command of a regiment, accompanied Cromwell, first into Wales, where he was actively engaged in the reduction of Pembroke Castle, and afterwards to the north, where in the battle of Preston (17 August) he and Colonel Thomas Pride did good service on the parliamentarian right wing. The army determined to deal with the king. The contribution of Deane's regiment to the remonstrance of the army (20 November 1648) was presumably drawn up by Deane himself, or at any rate in strict accordance with his views; its most important clauses are: 'That the parliament be desired to take a review of their late declaration and charge against the king, as also to consider his own act in taking the guilt of bloodshed upon himself; and accordingly to proceed against him as an enemy to the kingdom. 
That strict inquiry be made after the chief fomenters, actors, and abettors of the late war, especially those who were the chief encouragers and inviters of the Scotch army; and that exemplary justice may be accordingly executed, to the terror of evil-doers and the rejoicing of all honest men.' In addition to these, among other matters of detail, was the very practical demand that 'speedy supplies should be sent to the army' so as to put an end to 'that which is so insufferable for us to take and so intolerable for the people to bear, namely, free quarters'. These demands not being met, the army marched on London, and while Pride was instructed to 'purge' the House of Commons, Fairfax wrote (8 December) to the lord mayor and corporation that as the arrears of the assessment due to the army had not been paid as demanded, he had ordered 'Colonel Deane and some others to seize the treasuries of Goldsmiths' Hall and Weavers' Hall'. 'Two regiments of foot and several troops of horse accordingly took up their quarters in Blackfriars and some at Ludgate and Paul's Church. They likewise secured the treasuries... and took away from Weavers' Hall above $20,000' (Rushworth, 2.1356). The proceeding, as Fairfax pointed out to the lord mayor, was the same as 'our forces have been ordered to do by the parliament in the several counties of the kingdom where assessments have not been paid'. And in carrying out his orders Deane exercised a stern control over his men; two, newly listed, being found by court-martial guilty of extortion on their own account, were sentenced to 'ride the wooden horse for an hour', and 'to run the gantelope through the regiment... for the example of others who, under colour of being soldiers, care not what knavery they act' (ibid., 2.1369). 
Deane played an active part in the trial and execution of the king in January 1649. On 12 January he was on the committee for planning the king's trial and attended fifteen (or possibly nineteen) of the twenty-three sessions of the high court of justice. On 24 January he was appointed one of the committee to examine the witnesses; on the 27th he stood up in approval of the judgment; on the 29th he was one of the committee of five to consider the time and place of execution; and he was the twenty-first out of the fifty-nine who signed the death warrant. His signature is written in his usual firm, bold hand, and his seal of arms is distinctly impressed, without the least sign of hurry or nervousness ['see also 'Regicides]. 
Cromwell had wanted Deane to succeed Batten as vice-admiral in September 1647, and in December 1648 he appears to have discussed with a deeply discontented earl of Warwick the possibility of Deane's replacing him. No action was taken, however, ahead of the first meeting of the council of state on 17 February 1649, and on the 20th it resolved 'that the commission making the Earl of Warwick lord high admiral be called in', and that the command at sea should be given to commissioners. On the 23rd they named Colonel Edward Popham, Colonel Robert Blake, and Deane as the three commissioners 'to go to sea this summer, to take the command of the fleet'. This appointment of trusted army officers was unquestionably made chiefly from political motives. In the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries military qualifications always took precedence, it being assumed that the commander would take advice on navigational matters from his council of captains. 
In the early part of 1649 the generals-at-sea co-operated in forcing Prince Rupert's privateers to leave the channel, but once he was safely cooped up in Kinsale they separated. Deane concentrated on protecting the army dispatched for the reconquest of Ireland. In August he convoyed Cromwell's army from Milford Haven to Dublin. He was then sent back to London with the marquess of Ormond's intercepted correspondence and missed the siege of Drogheda. He was back in time to command the twenty ships which carried food, siege guns, and ammunition for the attack on Wexford. In the later operations the army suffered much from sickness; Deane, writing from Milford Haven on 8 November 1649, reported: 'I have, ever since my coming out of Ireland, been troubled with the distemper of that country's disease, which brought me into a fever'. He was still sick on 4 December, when orders were sent to Blake 'to go towards Cadiz to seek out Prince Rupert' (Penn, 1.293). 
In 1650 Deane commanded in home waters while Blake and Popham chased Rupert to Portugal. His chief task was to cut off communication between the Netherlands and Scotland but he was unable to prevent Charles II's landing. When Cromwell invaded Scotland, Deane sent a squadron under Rear-Admiral Hall to assist him but he himself only visited Leith briefly on 15 September. During the winter the squadron in the Forth was commanded by Captain Lionel Lane, and Deane did not return until the spring. On 29 March he arrived at Leith, bringing his own regiment and, among other supplies, a number of large flat-bottomed boats for the transport of the troops across the firth. On 6 May he was ordered by Cromwell to take command on shore as major-general of the army, in which capacity he had a prominent part in the operations of the ensuing summer, the pursuit of the Scottish army into England, and the battle of Worcester (3 September 1651). 
Deane returned to Scotland as one of eight commissioners appointed to settle civil government and prepare for a union with England in October 1651; from December 1651 he also shared the chief military command in Scotland with Monck and John Lambert. By March 1652 he was left in sole military command, the departure of the other civil commissioners by the end of the following month leaving him effectively to head the civil and financial administration also. He had been working with Lambert to regulate assessments in Scotland since the previous December, and by November 1652 was empowered to authorize all disbursements of revenue in Scotland. He oversaw the implementation of plans formulated by the commissioners, including the establishment of a high court of judicature consisting of four English and three Scottish judges, to replace the abolished Scottish juridical institutions. In June 1652 he was named as one of the commissioners for the regulation of the universities and the ministry. Deane also managed to get the customs duties between England and Scotland at Carlisle and Berwick abolished. As military commander he secured the three remaining royalist garrisons: Brodick Castle on Arran and the Bass Rock, which commanded the navigation of the Forth and the sea approach to Edinburgh, fell in April 1652, while Dunnottar Castle, the 'last place in Scotland which displayed the standard of Charles II' and the location of the regalia of Scotland, surrendered to Colonel Thomas Morgan in May (Firth, xix). In June Deane issued a proclamation to the clan chiefs and inhabitants of the north-west before launching a two-pronged advance intended to subjugate the highlands. He set out for Inveraray where he finally secured from the marquess of Argyll a submission to the English parliament and acceptance of the union in a series of agreements which allowed Argyll to retain much of his standing. 
On 26 November 1652 Deane's commission as general-at-sea was ordered to be renewed, as also was Blake's. Popham had died in August of the previous year, and the vacancy was now filled up by the appointment of Monck. The commission was a matter of routine, and there was probably no immediate intention of calling Deane away from Scotland, but on Blake's representation, after the untoward action off Dungeness on 30 November, both Deane and Monck were ordered to join the fleet as soon as possible. Deane received a grant of $400 'for fitting him with necessary accommodation', and went on board the 'Triumph', in which Blake already had his flag. Thus closely associated with Blake, he took part in the battle off Portland on 18 February 1653 and in the subsequent pursuit of the Dutch fleet. In this obstinate battle the loss on both sides was very great. As Blake was incapacitated by his wound, the letter of 27 February giving the official account of the battle, though signed by the three generals, was probably written by Deane. He and Monck were now left in command of the fleet, and hoisted their flag on board the 'Resolution'. 
To refit and prepare for new battles was the work of the next two months. Deane had arrived from Scotland too late to take part in framing the articles of war (25 December 1652) but a great number of letters written by him about this time testify to the close attention he was paying to all the details which might ensure efficiency. Similarly, proposals for the encouragement of seamen and increases in their wages had been introduced before his return (20 December 1652) but his correspondence in 1653, together with that of his earlier command, shows the watchful care he had for the welfare and interests of those under his orders. 'We want', he wrote on 30 March: 'an answer to the petition of the officers of the fleet and of the widows of the slain, as we are much importuned by them for some sort of subsistence, and can hardly put them off by telling them it is under consideration.' Or again, he wrote that if possible 'turning men over from one ship to another should be avoided, for it breedeth trouble and discontent', but that when necessary they should be paid their wages in money, for 'a little bit of paper is soon lost' (BL, Add. MS 22546, fol. 103). Appeals of this kind were signed sometimes by Deane alone, sometimes by Popham and Deane, sometimes by Blake and Deane, sometimes by Deane and Monck. His signature is, in the same way, equally affixed to many rules and proposals for the better organization of the naval service, then still in a very crude state. Lieutenants are to be capable seamen; none other will be appointed. Inducements must be offered to seamen; they should be entered for continuous service and kept on continuous pay, the same as soldiers (25 March 1653). A surgeon's mate should be borne in ships having complements of 150 men or upwards; the care is too great for one man (30 March 1649). Other letters, referring to proposed changes in the victualling, in the ordnance stores, and to different matters of detail, with an exactness and intelligence widely different from mere routine, suggest previous experience in equipping and manning ships for sea. 
On 20 April 1653 Cromwell dissolved the Rump Parliament. Deane probably knew of the impending step, and agreed with it, but the published 'Declaration of the Generals at Sea and the Captains under their Command' ('Resolution', at Spithead, 22 April 1653), in the drawing up of which he had at least a large share, wisely contains no word of approval or disapproval. 'We have had', they say: 'a very serious consideration of the great changes within this nation... and we find it set upon our spirits that we are called and entrusted by this nation for the defence of the same against the enemies thereof at sea... and we are resolved, in the strength of God, unanimously to prosecute the same according to the trust reposed in us.' 

On 30 April the fleet put to sea and, cruising to the northward, was off Aberdeen on 10 May. On the 14th it anchored in Bressa Sound, in Shetland, and after a council sailed again on the 17th. On the 24th the ships were off the mouth of the Scheldt, and they anchored in Solebay on the 31st. They had spent the month vainly looking for the Dutch fleet, but not until the morning of 1 June did they receive any certain intelligence of it. The fleet, increased by successive reinforcements to upwards of a hundred vessels, large and small, immediately put to sea, and sighted the enemy about four o'clock in the afternoon. The next day towards noon the fighting began. As the fleets approached the English appear to have been in three squadrons each in a rough line ahead but the wind dropped and the battle commenced with a cannonade which inflicted great damage on the Dutch. Whether the English intended that to be their final formation is unclear as fleets often turned into a line abreast when they came to close quarters. Later in the day there was heavy fighting which continued until dark, when the two fleets lay by for the night. The battle was renewed the next morning, 3 June; towards afternoon of the second day the Dutch were already retiring when Blake, coming up with a strong reinforcement fresh from the river, completed their rout and put them to the run. The Dutch lost twenty ships sunk or captured, the English none at all. Deane, however, did not live to see this. At the very beginning of the battle a Dutch shot struck him full in the body, cutting it nearly in two. He fell where he stood, and Monck, fearing lest the sailors might be discouraged by the loss, threw a cloak over his mangled remains. 
Deane's body was afterwards taken to Greenwich, where it seems to have lain in state, of a sort. The highest honours the government could bestow were granted. A public funeral was ordered. On 24 June the body was taken to Westminster Abbey with great pomp, and buried in the chapel of Henry VII. Deane's widow was granted a pension of $600 a year, secured on estates in Lancashire. Deane left her his property at Hornchurch in Essex and his fee farm rents from the manor of Sydenham and lands at West Court in Ewelme, both in Oxfordshire, but they were burdened with annuities of $25 per annum to his mother and $12 to his sister Jane, whose husband Drue Sparrow had been secretary to Blake and Deane and had been killed standing at their side in the battle of Portland. He was also able to direct that portions of $1000 each should be paid to his two daughters Mary and Hannah, either when they married or reached the age of twenty. On 2 January 1655, being then thirty-two, his widow married Colonel Edward Salmon. After the Restoration Deane's remains were among those ordered to be 'taken up and buried in some place of the churchyard adjoining', but the taking up and reburial were done without either ceremony or solemnity, and it is believed that the remains were thrown promiscuously into a common pit. 
A month after Deane's death Cromwell wrote to William Penn, vice-admiral of the fleet, 'I often think of our great loss in your General Deane, my near friend' (Gardiner and Atkinson, 5.266-7). Cromwell had been deeply upset by Deane's death and had gone in person to console his widow. They had worked closely together and shared common political and religious attitudes as well as being distantly related. Deane had been a strong supporter of 'The Heads of Proposals', had signed the king's death warrant, and had sided with Cromwell over the Leveller 'Agreement of the People' as against the stance of Rainborowe. He shared Cromwell's strong puritan convictions and his desire for religious toleration, though that did not extend to Roman Catholics. He had a strong mystical streak, being described as a Behmenist (or disciple of Jakob Boehme), and both he and his wife had premonitions of his death. She claimed she had seen it in a vision before it was announced to her, while for him it was foreshadowed in the discovery that part of his doublet had been eaten by rats. Even Clarendon recorded that Deane had 'the reputation of a bold and excellent officer' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.288). For all his talents he comes across as a fixer and an enabler, the ideal second-in-command. Perhaps, though, such an impression may just be the result of his living in the shadow of two such colleagues as Blake and Monck. If the cannon ball had hit Monck instead perhaps Deane would be thought of differently. 


@@@@@


doc= 7389


Deane, Thomas (1651-1735), Roman Catholic convert, was the son of Edward Deane of Malden, Kent. He matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 19 October 1669, the same day as his friend and future colleague Nathaniel Boyse, and subscribed the articles and took the oath of supremacy in the following month, when he was probably admitted a servitor. He graduated BA in 1673 and MA in 1676. He became a tutor in the college, of which he was elected fellow on 4 December 1684, and Greek lecturer. He 'declared himself a papist much about the same time that his master, Obadiah Walker, did' in March 1686, 'whose creature and convert he was' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.450). Walker had been his tutor, and Deane, Boyse, and John Massey, future dean of Christ Church, Oxford, were known as Walker's 'three disciples'. Royal permission was given to Deane, Walker, and Boyse to establish a Roman Catholic chapel in May 1686, instead of attending Church of England worship, a development described as 'a propaganda 'coup' out of all proportion to the small numbers involved' (Tyacke, 613). 
Deane was the author of 'The Religion of Mar. Luther neither Catholick nor Protestant, Prov'd from his Own Works', privately printed in Obadiah Walker's lodgings in Oxford in 1688. He contributed to a volume of congratulatory verse produced by the university for the birth of James II's heir, the prince of Wales, James Stuart, in 1688. To Deane has been attributed 'An essay towards a proposal for Catholick communion' (London, 1704), but the real author was probably Joshua Basset. 
After the landing of the prince of Orange in England, Deane and Massey withdrew privately from Oxford (30 November 1688) to avoid the tumult of the mob, and went to London. Deane's fellowship was declared vacant on 4 February 1689. He was once or twice committed to prison in London on suspicion of being a Jesuit or priest. On 18 December 1691 he stood in the pillory at Charing Cross under the name of Thomas Franks, a reputed Jesuit, for concealing a libel or pamphlet against the government, written by a person who lodged in the same house as himself. During the latter part of his life Deane was a prisoner for debt in the Fleet; but he died at Malden on 10 November 1735, having subsisted for some years mostly on charity. 


@@@@@


doc= 7390


Deane, Sir Thomas (1792-1871), builder and architect, was born on 4 June 1792 in Cork, the eldest of the eight surviving children of Alexander Deane (1759/60-1806), builder, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1828), daughter of Thomas and Elizabeth Sharpe, also of Cork. The Deanes, who had come originally from Scotland, had been involved in the building trade in Cork for several generations. After his father's death in 1806, aged forty-six, his mother took over the business and Deane, who was reputedly self-educated, joined her while still in his teens. In 1809 he married Catherine Connellan, with whom he had two children, John Connellan (1815-1887), assistant secretary to the Dublin Exhibition of 1853 and secretary to the Manchester art treasures exhibition of 1857, and Julia (died 1863). 
In 1811 Deane designed the Cork Commercial Buildings in South Mall, won in competition against William Wilkins of London. This had a competent, if unexciting, palace facade in the Regency style. He arranged the education of his siblings, training his brothers Alexander (1796-1847) and Kearns (1804-1847) as architects and sending them to London to study under the drawing master Alfred Nicholson. Kearns, who was particularly talented, designed the Dominican church of St Mary, Pope's Quay, Cork (1832-9). He probably also played a major role in the design of Dromore Castle, near Kenmare, co. Kerry, built by the Deane company in 1831-8. He was jointly responsible for a number of designs with Thomas, including Horsehead, Passage West (1836-7), and Frankfield Chapel, Cork (1838), both in the Gothic style, and the neo-classical Cork Savings Bank on Warren Place (1839-42). The latter superseded Thomas's earlier savings bank on Pembroke Street (1824). Thomas also designed his own residence, Dundanion Castle (1832), the Bank of Ireland in Cork (1838-40; dem.), and the Limerick Savings Bank (1839; executed by W. H. Owen, engineer). 
Following the death of his first wife, Deane married, on 13 January 1827, Elizabeth (Eliza) O'Callaghan Newenham (died 1851), with whom he had three children, Sir Thomas Newenham Deane (1828-1899), who was to join the practice, Susanna, and Olivia. In 1830 he was knighted by the lord lieutenant during his second term in office as high sheriff of Cork. He represented tory merchant interests on the corporation, which seems to have effectively excluded him from architectural practice in the surrounding whig-controlled county. Much of this business went instead to the brothers James and George Richard Pain, to whom the Deanes lost the commission (which they had won in competition) for the city and county court house in Cork (built 1830-35). While Deane's public persona was ebullient (one contemporary described him as a 'ceaseless chatterbox'), he was watchful of professional and political rivals and was ever ready to seize his opportunity. He was also prone to self-doubt, seeking reassurance from friends for his actions. 
In addition to his business and political interests, Deane was one of the founders, in 1816, of the Cork Society for the Promotion of the Fine Arts. His proteges included the sculptors John Hogan and Edward Ambrose, and the painter Samuel Forde. Deane's collections included geological specimens, carved marbles from Baalbek and Palmyra, and James Cavanah Murphy's survey drawings of the great Gothic monastery at Batalha in Portugal. 
In December 1845 the board of works commissioned Deane to design the new Queen's College, Cork. Firm designs were not, however, prepared until after the board had agreed the following April to purchase a site at Gill Abbey, recommended by Deane for its 'excellent and commanding' situation. Kearns Deane, who was in declining health and died in January 1847, may have had some involvement with the design, which was in the Perpendicular Gothic style. However, much of the credit was due to Deane's new assistant Benjamin Woodward (1816-1861), who joined the practice some time in the first half of 1846. 
In April 1847 Deane was awarded a further board of works commission, a new district lunatic asylum at Killarney. The elevations, in the Early English style and much influenced by A. W. N. Pugin, were probably Woodward's, but the planning, which owes much to the writings of Dr John Conolly of Hanwell, was probably largely dictated by the board. The building was opened at the end of 1852. 
After the death of his second wife, from breast cancer, in June 1851, Deane fell victim for a time to recurring bouts of depression. The practice was reconstituted with Deane, his son Thomas Newenham Deane (who had graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1849), and Woodward as partners. In the earliest known design of the partnership, an unplaced entry in the Belgic-Gothic style for the Cork town hall competition of 1851, can be seen the origins of their best-known building, the University Museum at Oxford (1854-60). Deane was one of the instigators of the Irish National Exhibition, Cork's answer to the Crystal Palace, which opened in June 1852: his portrait by James Butler Brenan, which was displayed at the exhibition, is now in the collection of the Royal Hibernian Academy. A slightly later lithographic portrait is in the Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland. Deane was somewhat stocky in appearance, with striking features and a receding hairline. 
In August 1852 Deane and Woodward were invited to submit a design for the new museum building at Trinity College, Dublin, in a limited competition. Following the submission of the working drawings in October 1853, Deane made arrangements to take over the lease of a house on Upper Merrion Street, Dublin, which would serve as both an office and a residence for his son (now married with two children). Deane remarried on 16 November 1853 (in Manchester) and effectively went into semi-retirement, remaining in Cork until 1860. He and his third wife, Harriet Williams ('c'.1814-1881), had one child, Hermann Frederick (1858-1921), later an ordained minister and librarian and chapter clerk of St George's Chapel, Windsor. 
While the partnership of Deane and Woodward continued until Woodward's death from tuberculosis in May 1861, there is little evidence that Sir Thomas played any significant role in the design of the buildings that made them famous: the Trinity Museum building (1853-7); the University Museum at Oxford; the Oxford Union (1856-7), decorated by the Pre-Raphaelites; the Kildare Street Club in Dublin (1858-61); and the highly placed competition entry for the government offices in Whitehall (1857). At the Trinity Museum, where they were tied to the plans of the college architect, John McCurdy, the Ruskin-inspired elevations in the Venetian cinquecento style and the use of naturalistic carving can be ascribed to Woodward. The minutes and archives of the University Museum, Oxford, indicate that while Deane attended some early meetings, Woodward was in charge of both the design and execution. When questioned on the matter in 1855, Ruskin wrote: 'Mr. Woodward is, as far as I am concerned, the acting man... I see Woodward and tell him what I want and if [Sir Thomas] Deane does it I am much obliged to him' ('Works of John Ruskin', 16.xlvi). The main contract was substantially complete by the time Woodward's declining health forced him to spend periods abroad. While Thomas Newenham Deane played an increasing role in running the practice from this time, Woodward managed to continue designing, and can be credited with the bulk of the smaller commissions also, such as houses and schools. Sir Thomas Deane's connections remained useful in securing work and his friendship with the Acland family seems to have been a factor in their entering (and winning) the University Museum competition at Oxford. 
Sir Thomas assisted in the revival of the Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland in 1863: he was elected president in 1868 but offered his resignation at the end of the year on account of advanced age and ill health. In 1860 he was one of the first architects to be admitted to membership of the Royal Hibernian Academy under a new charter and served as its president in 1866-8. He died in his house, 26 Longford Terrace, Monkstown, co. Dublin, on 2 October 1871, at the age of seventy-nine, leaving an estate of almost $14,000, large by Irish standards. He was buried in St Michael's churchyard, Blackrock, co. Cork. Thomas Newenham Deane continued to run the practice up until his death in 1899, having been joined by his own son Thomas Manly Deane in 1878; both were knighted for their services to the profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 7391


Deane, Sir Thomas Newenham (1828-1899), architect, was born at Dundanion, near Cork, on 15 June 1828. He was the son of Sir Thomas Deane (1792-1871), architect, and his second wife, Elizabeth O'Callaghan (died 1851), daughter of Robert O'Callaghan Newenham and granddaughter of Sir Edward Newenham, politician. Deane was educated at Rugby School and at Trinity College, Dublin, graduating BA in 1849. He received his early professional training from his father, whose firm he joined in 1850, and was thus concerned in the important buildings carried out at Oxford and elsewhere between 1850 and 1860, largely designed by his father's other partner, Benjamin Woodward. On 29 January 1850 he married Henrietta, daughter of Joseph H. Manly of Ferney, co. Cork; they had several children. On the death of his father in 1871 Deane became the sole member of the firm, Woodward having died in 1861. His work in the 1860s and 1870s included St Mary's Church of Ireland Cathedral at Tuam, co. Galway (1861-78), the restoration of St Canice's Church of Ireland Cathedral, Kilkenny (1864-70), and a number of important additions to Dublin architecture, of which St Ann's Church in Dawson Street (1867) and the Munster and Leinster Bank in Dame Street (1872-4) are perhaps the chief. He also designed the Clarendon Laboratory (1869) and the Meadow Buildings at Christ Church, Oxford (1862-4). In a number of these works he continued the earlier firm's allegiance to the Venetian style. In 1878 he was joined in his practice by his eldest son, Thomas Manly Deane (1850-1933), with whom he remained in partnership until his death. Together with his son he was responsible for such notable buildings as the town hall at Bray, co. Wicklow (1882), and the McArthur Hall at Methodist College, Belfast (1887-91), but unquestionably the work for which Deane will be best remembered is the Science and Art Museum (known as the National Museum) and National Library of Ireland in Dublin. The result of a public competition, it was begun in 1885, the foundation stone being laid by the prince of Wales (afterwards Edward VII), and it was completed in 1890. At the opening Deane was knighted by the lord lieutenant of Ireland, the earl of Zetland. This work was followed by important additions to the Natural History Museum and the National Gallery of Ireland, and by the building of the Royal Dublin Society's lecture theatre, all of these forming part of the group of buildings of which the eighteenth-century Leinster House (now the seat of the Irish parliament) is the centre. The sustained repute of the firm was shown by its winning second place in the competition for the Imperial Institute at South Kensington, London, and by the submission of its name by the Royal Institute of British Architects to the commissioners of works for selection for the new government buildings in Whitehall and Parliament Street, London. 
Deane was keenly interested in the movement for the preservation of the ancient monuments of Ireland, and was appointed to the post of inspector of national and ancient monuments following the 'Ancient Monuments Protection Acts' of 1882 and 1892. He was also a member of the Royal Hibernian Academy and the Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland. Deane was described by a contemporary as a man of a light and elastic temperament and social disposition, and enjoyed a wide popularity in Dublin. He died suddenly at 37 Stephen's Green, Dublin, on 8 November 1899. After his death his practice was continued by his eldest son, Thomas Manly Deane. 
Thomas Manly Deane was born in 1850 at Ferney, co. Cork. He was a pupil of William Burges ARA (1827-1881), of London, and also studied at the Slade School, London, and later in France and Italy. He gained the Royal Academy travelling scholarship in 1876. After his father's death he was joint architect, with Sir Aston Webb RA (1849-1930) of London, for the College of Science and government offices in Dublin (1903-11), and on their opening in 1911 he was knighted by George V. He was a member of the Royal Hibernian Academy but did not join any architectural institutes or societies. Affected by failing eyesight he retired to Wales where he died in 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 7392


Deane, William John (1823-1895), Church of England clergyman and biblical scholar, born on 6 October 1823, was the third son of John Deane of Lymington in Hampshire. After attending Rugby School he matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 20 October 1843, graduating BA in 1847 and MA in 1872. He was ordained deacon in 1847 and priest in 1849. He was successively curate of Rugby (1847-9), curate of Wick Rissington in Gloucestershire (1849-52), and rector of South Thoresby in Lincolnshire (1852-3). In 1853 he was presented by the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster to the rectory of Ashen in Essex, which he retained until his death. 
Deane was the author of a number of exegetical works, written in a clear and interesting manner. In 1881 he edited the Greek, Latin, and English texts of the 'Wisdom of Solomon' for the Clarendon Press, Oxford, with critical notes, and in 1891 he published 'Pseudepigrapha', a well-written description and estimate of the apocryphal books. He also published biographies of the prophets in the 'Men of the Bible' series and introductions to 'Old Testament' books in the 'Pulpit Commentary'. He was a frequent contributor to 'The Thinker', and published on holy days (1850 and 1864), also editing a volume entitled 'Lyon sanctorum' (1850). He died at Ashen rectory on 30 May 1895, leaving a widow, three sons, and three daughters. He was buried on 4 June in Ashen churchyard, under the east window of the chancel. 


@@@@@


doc= 7393


Deane, William Wood (1825-1873), architect and painter, was born on 3 or 22 March 1825, in Liverpool Road, Islington, London, the third son of John Wood Deane, a bank cashier and painter, and his wife, Anna Maria, 'nee' Glasse (1784-1859), whose father had been mayor of Barnstaple. He attended the Islington proprietary school until 1842, and won prizes for mathematics, perspective, and French. He showed an early taste for drawing, but as his elder brother Dennis had become an artist, his father determined to make him an architect. On 7 September 1842 he was articled to Herbert Williams, a surveyor. On 13 January 1844 he became an architectural student of the Royal Academy, and in December 1844 he won the academy's silver medal. He continued to exhibit both designs and, later, drawings at the Royal Academy throughout his life. On 21 July 1845 he was awarded the students' book prize for a design at the Institute of British Architects. After completing his articles, in 1846, he became an assistant to David Mocatta (1806-1882) for a short time. He became an associate of the Institute of British Architects in 1848. 
In 1844 or thereabouts Deane became involved with private theatricals, and played at Frances Kelly's Royal Soho Theatre at 73 Dean Street, Soho (afterwards the Royalty; dem. 1954), which he subsequently decorated. In 1850 he went to Italy with his brother Dennis and while in Rome became a friend of the painter George H. Mason ARA. He returned to London in late 1851 with his folios full of measured drawings and watercolour sketches. He gave lessons in watercolour drawing to young architects, and started practising as an architect in partnership with Alfred Bailey, a surveyor, at 13 Great James Street, Bedford Row. Though the partnership broke up in 1855, Deane's early work, including Langham Chambers, showed great promise. He abandoned architecture in 1857, however, for drawing on wood, and making designs and perspectives for architects. He married Ellen Maria, sister of the architect George Aitchison, who later became president of the Royal Institute of British Architects and acted as Deane's executor. 
Deane spent most of his summers sketching in the country: he travelled in 1856 to Normandy, in 1857 to Belgium, and in 1859 to Whitby. On his mother's death in September 1859 he inherited a small sum of money, and determined to devote himself to painting. He moved to 17 Maitland Park Terrace, Haverstock Hill, in 1860, and spent a good part of the year sketching in Cumberland. He was elected an associate of the Institute of Painters in Water Colours in 1862, and became a member in 1867. He also exhibited at the Royal Academy and at the Dudley Gallery, Worcestershire. 
In May 1865 Deane left for Venice, intending to settle in Italy, but he returned in October of the same year, and went to live at 64 King Henry's Road, Primrose Hill, London. His watercolours of 'The Rialto' and 'The Interior of Sta Maria dei Miracoli' showed greater technical ability than his previous sketches. In 1866 he travelled in Spain with the watercolourist Francis William Topham. The oriental character of Spain seems to have acted as a spur to his powers; his drawing of 'The Gates of the Alhambra' was one of his most brilliant works. 'The Fair at Seville', with its lines of tents, clouds of dust, and picturesque horsemen, and his 'Bull Ring at Seville', with its brutal crowd in the shade, and the blazing sunshine in the arena, raised his art from the tranquil portraiture of stately buildings and a pearly atmosphere to a higher and more imaginative level. Every year he went to France, Germany, or Italy, and made elaborate studies of the subjects he meant to paint. His drawings were mainly of architectural subjects, and were distinguished by the purity of their colour, their pearly greys, and the effects of sunlight, though he is sometimes considered to have been over-lavish in his use of bodycolour. Among his fellow artists he was called an impressionist. 
In 1870 Deane was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours. In the autumn of that year poor health caused him to visit Scotland, though in 1871 he still managed to produce drawings of 'Sta Maria della Salute', 'Jedburgh Abbey', and 'The North Porch of Chartres'. In 1872 he went to Florence, Verona, and Perugia, and made a beautiful drawing of the basilica of S. Miniato, which was not exhibited until after his death. In 1873 he was posthumously awarded a medal at the Vienna exhibition for 'The Bull Ring at Seville'. Examples of his work may be seen in the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the Wakefield Art Gallery, Yorkshire. 
Deane died at the age of forty-seven at his home, 64 King Henry's Road, Primrose Hill, on 18 January 1873 of cancer of the liver, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 7394


Deare, John (1759-1798), sculptor, was born in Liverpool on 26 October 1759, the son of Thomas Deare ('fl'. 1757-1789), a jeweller and artist in hair of Liverpool, and Esther Molyneaux. He was apprenticed in 1776 to Thomas Carter, a successful London carver, particularly of chimneypieces. The next year he enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools, and in 1780 he won a gold medal for his model on a subject from Milton. After completing his apprenticeship in 1783 he worked freelance, modelling for other sculptors, notably John Bacon (whom he admired), John Cheere, and Carter. His independent commissions included a plaster relief, 'The War of Jupiter and the Titans', for the pediment of Whitton Park, Hounslow (1783), a relief entitled 'The Good Samaritan' (after 1782) for the Liverpool Dispensary designed by the Liverpool architect John Foster, and a fireplace for a Manchester patron for $63. Contemporary artists, especially Joseph Nollekens, admired his skill. The figures manufactured in ceramic by Derby to decorate clocks by Benjamin Vulliamy -- Deare's only surviving early work -- are dexterously modelled and derive stylistically from Bacon's decorative neo-classicism and the popular 'putti' of Duquesnoy. 
In 1785 Deare went to Rome on a three-year pension from the Royal Academy; he remained there until his death. Intoxicated by life in that city, he studied and drew with passion the great collections of antique sculpture in the Villa Albani, Capitoline Museum, and elsewhere. Warm-hearted but quick-tempered, he became the leader of a circle which included the painters Robert Fagan, Charles Grignion, and Samuel Woodforde, and the writer George Cumberland. To discharge his obligation as an academy pensioner -- to send a work to the annual exhibition -- Deare modelled the largest relief undertaken by a British sculptor in the eighteenth century, 'The Judgment of Jupiter'. More than twenty figures of different physical types, in various levels of relief, are woven into a composition emulating contemporary history painting. Owing to a dispute with the academy over its size, the plaster was not sent to London. A marble version (1.48 m x 2.97 m) was commissioned in 1788 by Sir Richard Worsley for $470 (Los Angeles County Museum of Art). For the subject of his next relief, 'Edward and Eleanor' (1786), Deare looked to James Thomson's play on this British legend and transposed it from medieval Acre to ancient Greece. Eleanor (modelled in high relief) sucks the poison from her husband's wound -- a supreme act of wifely devotion -- while he (modelled in shallow relief) sleeps. The marble version (1790, priv. coll.), for Sir Corbet Corbet, dazzles the viewer with its virtuoso carving. 
In the marble relief 'Marine Venus', purchased in 1787 by Sir Cecil Bisshop for Parham Park, Sussex, a sensuously carved goddess is borne along by an exuberant sea monster; here Deare blends his devotion to the antique with a new enthusiasm for sixteenth-century mannerist sculpture. He evolves this pictorial style further in the marble 'Cupid and Psyche' (1791) for Thomas Hope of Deepdene (plaster version, Lyons House, co. Kildare), and especially in 'The Landing of Julius Caesar in Britain' (1791-4; Stoke Manor, Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire) for John Penn, who had chosen the subject. 
Although Deare attracted the patronage of collectors buying from adventurous sculptors such as John Flaxman (Thomas Hope and the earl of Bristol) and Antonio Canova (Henry Blundell and John Latouche), his livelihood, when his academy pension expired, depended on a practical approach to his craft. As in London, he combined the roles of artisan and fine artist. Like many of his contemporaries, he and his workshop carved copies of celebrated antiques for British visitors. Prominent among these were his 'Apollo Belvedere', commissioned in 1792 for Attingham by Lord Berwick (for whom he also restored some antiquities), 'Faun with a Kid' (Prado Museum, Madrid), acquired by Lord Cloncurry (priv. coll.), and a bust, 'Ariadne' ('c'.1789, now in the Capitoline Museum, Rome), for John Latouche. Deare continued to make chimneypieces; the prince of Wales purchased one carved stylishly with masks and festoons (Frogmore House, Windsor). Sometimes Deare employed architects such as Joseph Gandy on chimneypiece design. He also carved a small number of portrait busts, including that of John Penn (Eton College). 
Deare, who had married at some time before 3 October 1796, died in Rome on 17 August 1798, apparently from a chill caught while sleeping on a block of marble in the hope of inspiration -- not out of character for a man who probably belonged to the Adamiani sect, which held that God should be worshipped naked. He was buried within three days in the protestant cemetery, Rome. Friends including Vincenzo Pacetti and Christopher Hewetson organized the disposal of the contents of his studio for the benefit of his Italian wife and children. Having died young without substantial output, Deare was soon almost forgotten. The high esteem in which his contemporaries held him as a designer and carver of reliefs is well deserved. 
John Deare's nephew 
Deare stayed on in London, exhibiting at the Royal Academy in 1826 and from 1828 to 1832, but from about 1833 he worked also in Liverpool. He exhibited portrait busts, often of local celebrities, such as 'Dr Stewart Trail', at the Liverpool Academy in 1832 and 1834, and posthumously in 1836. He died on 5 August 1835 following an accident while climbing a wall to get into his Liverpool studio. The only work certainly by him traced to date is a sketchbook of portrait studies in Liverpool Public Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 7395


Joseph Deare (bap. 1803, d. 1835), sculptor, was baptized on 27 May 1803 at the church of St Nicholas, Liverpool, the son of Edward Deare, an attorney, and Margaret Wattleworth of Liverpool. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in London in 1822, and won silver medals in 1823 and 1825, and a gold medal in 1825 for his model 'David and Goliath', which he showed at the Royal Academy in 1826 (the model, formerly at the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, is now destroyed). He also twice won the silver Isis medal of the Royal Society of Arts, for his model entitled 'Bacchus' in 1823 and a relief the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 7396


Deas, Sir David (1807-1876), naval medical officer, son of Francis Deas (died 1857), provost of Falkland, Fife, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of David Moyes, was born at Falkland in September 1807. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and the University of Edinburgh, and became a licentiate of the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1827. 
Deas entered the Royal Navy on 7 June 1828 as an assistant surgeon. He saw much service, and in July 1836, at the age of twenty-nine, he was promoted to the rank of surgeon. Before his return to Britain in 1842 he took part in the operations on the coast of Syria and at the Cape of Good Hope. He was promoted to the rank of deputy inspector of hospitals and fleets in June 1854, and was on the 'Britannia' during the engagement with the sea defences of Sevastopol on 17 October. In March 1855 he was gazetted inspector-general of the Black sea Fleet and served on the 'Royal Albert' until the end of the war with Russia. He served with the fleet on the coast of China, and his attention to the sick and wounded at the capture of Canton (Guangzhou) on 28-9 December 1857 was specially mentioned by the commander-in-chief, Michael Seymour ('London Gazette', 1858, 1024). On his return to Britain Deas was appointed senior inspector-general of Haslar naval hospital, Portsmouth, a post he retained for eight years, in that time instituting many reforms. In July 1860 he married Margaret Hepburn, daughter of William Hepburn. Deas retired from active service in March 1872. 
Deas never rose to the position of director-general, despite predictions to the contrary by contemporaries. He was a respected administrator, had a reputation for singleness of purpose, and showed great compassion for the sick and wounded under his charge. In 1856 he was nominated CB, and in 1867 he was promoted to KCB. He was awarded a good-service pension in 1869. Deas held the Syrian medal, the Crimean medal with Sevastopol clasp, and the Turkish medal, was a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and wore the order of the Mejidiye of the fourth class. Deas died on 15 January 1876 at 32 Heriot Row, Edinburgh, the home of his brother, Sir George Deas, and he was buried in the Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh, four days later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7397


Deas, Sir George (1804-1887), judge, was born on 7 January 1804 at Falkland in Fife, the eldest son of Francis Deas (died 1857), provost of Falkland, Fife, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of David Moyes. Sir David Deas, naval medical officer, was his brother. His initial schooling took place in Falkland and was then carried on in Perth, probably for some time at the Academy. His father was for some time deputy governor of Perth prison and the family then lived within its walls. Deas may also have attended school at Milnathort, Kinross-shire, during an unsuccessful attempt of his father's at farming there. After an early apprenticeship under Charles Gulland, writer, Deas worked initially for a practice in Cupar, and then moved to Edinburgh. In addition to legal work there he attended classes in logic, moral philosophy, and law at Edinburgh University. His work, marked by talent and great effort, was described by Professor Wilson as 'the perfection of clear, vulgar common sense' ('The Scotsman', 8 Feb 1887) and was rewarded by class prizes and an honorary MA for one essay. Deas was also a member, and in 1831-2 president, of the Speculative Society. In later years he continued as an extraordinary member, taking an active part in the resolution of disputes between the university and the society over its accommodation in the mid-1860s, for example. 
Deas was called to the Scottish bar on 10 June 1828 and quickly built up a large practice. He was helped by his thorough practical training and his extensive contacts with agents. He overcame prejudice about his lack of gentility by earning a reputation for delivering results through effort. He was not graceful or eloquent, but persistent and direct, and his shrewdness and plain talk went down well with juries. 
On 14 August 1838 Deas married Margaret ('b'. 1818), daughter of Silvester Reid, writer to the signet. She died in August 1850. On 29 December 1857 Deas married Sarah (1816-1899), daughter of Joseph Outram, merchant of Glasgow, and widow of Sir Benjamin Fonseca Outram CB MD of London, well known in Indian and medical circles. Among his children, Deas's eldest son, Francis, also became an advocate and wrote a work on railway law. 
Deas had friends of influence, notably Admiral Erskine Wemyss, MP for Fife, and Edward Ellice the younger, MP for St Andrews burghs. He was appointed an advocate-depute in 1840, a position he held until the Melbourne ministry fell the following year and to which he was reappointed by the Russell administration in 1846. In 1850 he became sheriff of Ross and Cromarty and in 1851 he was made solicitor-general for Scotland under Lord Advocate James Moncreiff, holding this position until the whigs resigned in 1852. As Lord Aberdeen's whig-Peelite coalition tried to achieve a balance in its Scottish appointments, he was passed over for the same position in early 1853, but was appointed to the court of session as a lord ordinary in May of the same year, taking the courtesy title of Lord Deas. In 1854 he was also given responsibility for criminal cases as a lord of justiciary. On 10 February 1858 he was knighted. 
It was as a judge that Deas made his mark. He was reputed to be the last on the bench to use the Scots vernacular. The struggles of his early life were one source of an outwardly hard character, spiced with a good sense of comedy. He avoided an abstract, philosophical approach to the law and approached questions from the practical side. Deas was a self-made man, driven by ambition, and this was reflected in his acerbity and impatience, especially with junior counsel. His opinions could be blunt and crushing, as for example in the Cardross case of the late 1850s and early 1860s when he held that the Free Church had no jurisdiction whatsoever, even ecclesiastical. Through his work as a circuit judge and as a result of press coverage he gained a contemporary reputation for being a voluminous authority on Scottish law and an awe-inspiring, hanging judge, especially when working with Glasgow juries. The trial and sentencing to death of Jessie (or Mary) McLachlan for murder in Glasgow in 1862 provided a controversial example of this. Deas was felt to have summed up the evidence very strongly against the accused and otherwise to have managed the trial unfairly. The resulting widespread calls and petitions in favour of a reprieve were successful in so far as Sir George Grey, the home secretary, decided in favour of an inquiry. This was carried out by George Young (later lord advocate) and resulted in the commutation of the sentence to penal servitude for life. Generally the case raised serious questions regarding the lack of a review procedure for cases heard in the high court of justiciary. Deas's reputation was also coloured by his apparent over-dependence on expert witnesses in medical matters. Such negative opinions were, however, balanced by examples of what he perhaps meant when he said he would be found to have left more poetry than law behind him. In the 1859 Maciver divorce case, for example, he acquitted a woman of all but indiscretion for visiting an old and dying lover. 
Deas also earned a reputation for leniency with those who, because of a sudden temptation or violent emotion, made a single lapse into crime. An otherwise respectable background and good looks were said to help also. This attitude extended to those who could prove that they suffered from a mind temporarily weakened, for instance by a history of ill health. A well-known example of this is Deas's handling of the 1867 trial of Dingwall, an alcoholic, possibly epileptic Aberdeenshire laird who had killed his wife on the previous new year's eve. In his directions to the jury, Deas referred to Dingwall's repeated attacks of delirium tremens and advised them that state of mind could be an extenuating circumstance. Such a case did not, in his opinion, warrant acquittal on the grounds of insanity, but the jury could bring in a verdict of culpable homicide, which they then did. A similar case was that of Andrew Granger in 1878, who was also tried for murder, but found guilty, following Deas's directions, of culpable homicide. Deas was careful to point out before sentencing that simple intoxication would not have been sufficient grounds for such a verdict, but that a weak or diseased state of mind at the time of the act had been. Deas's role in these trials eventually took on a significance beyond Scotland when his attitude was referred to much later, and especially in the 1950s, in support of the introduction of a defence of diminished responsibility in murder trials in England. 
An isolated figure in later years, Deas was said to have had more enemies than friends, but was noted for the care he invested in relationships with family and relatives. He was awarded the degree of LLD by Edinburgh University in 1884, the tercentenary of the founding of the university. Increasingly hard of hearing and ill, he resigned in February 1885. Deas died at his Edinburgh home, 32 Heriot Row, on 7 February 1887 and was buried on 11 February in the Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7398


Dease, William (c.1752-1798), surgeon, was born at Lisney, co. Cavan, Ireland. He was sent to Dr Clancy's school in Dublin, and afterwards studied medicine in that city and in Paris. He set up in practice in Dublin, and quickly gained repute as a surgeon, holding good hospital appointments. He took an active part in procuring a charter of incorporation for the Dublin surgeons, and became the first professor of surgery in the new college in 1785, and its president in 1789. He had a good practice, and was much esteemed for his virtues. He married Eliza, daughter of Sir Richard Dowdall. Dease wrote 'Observations on Wounds of the Head' (1776; much enlarged, 1778), 'Different Methods of Treating the Venereal Diseases' (1779), 'Radical Cure of Hydrocele, and on Cutting for the Stone' (1782), and 'Observations on Midwifery' (1783). 
Dease's death in Sackville Street, Dublin, on 21 January 1798, occurred under circumstances which no coroner's inquest would seem to have cleared up. According to one account he had made the mistake of opening an aneurysm in a patient with a fatal result, taking it for an abscess, and was so appalled by his error that he went to his study and opened his own femoral artery; according to another account, he died from an accidental wound of the femoral artery; and by a third account, from the rupture of an aneurysm. In 1812 the Irish College of Surgeons acquired his bust and placed it in the inner hall; in 1886 a statue of him, presented by his grandson, was placed in the principal hall of the college. 


@@@@@


doc= 7399


Deasy, Rickard (1812-1883), judge, was born at Clonakilty, co. Cork, on 23 December 1812, the second son of Rickard Deasy (1766-1852), of Clonakilty, brewer, and his wife, Mary Anne, 'nee' Caller (died 1853). He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1833, MA in 1847, and LLB and LLD in 1860. He was called to the Irish bar in the autumn of 1835 and quickly acquired a large practice. In 1849 he was made a queen's counsel, and at once became the leader in the equity courts and on the Munster circuit. On winning a by-election in 1855 Deasy became MP for Cork and held his seat until he was promoted to the bench in January 1861. In 1858 he was elected a bencher of King's Inns, Dublin, and became third serjeant-at-law. He was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland in Lord Palmerston's administration in July 1859. In 1860 he succeeded Lord Fitzgerald as attorney-general for Ireland, and was sworn a member of the Irish privy council. His appointment as baron of the court of exchequer after Baron Greene's resignation in 1861 was one of a number of Liberal appointments of Roman Catholics to the bench. Deasy held the post for seven years and was then promoted by the Conservative government to the post of the lord justice of appeal. In 1861 Deasy married Monica (died 1880), younger daughter of Hugh O'Connor of Sackville Street, Dublin; they had three children, Rickard, Henry, and Mary. Both sons were soldiers; and both Rickard and Mary predeceased their father. 
Deasy held the post of lord justice of appeal until his death at his home, 41 Merrion Square East, Dublin, on 6 May 1883. He was buried in Dean's Grange cemetery, Dublin. His death was a great blow to the Court of Appeal, as he was an accomplished lawyer, and a patient and impartial judge. Described by Chief Justice Morris as the Bayard of the Irish bench, Deasy is best remembered for pushing through the 'Landlord and Tenant Law (Amendment) Act (Ireland)' of 1860 (otherwise known as 'Deasy's Act'), which codified and regularized the law in Ireland relating to the duties of landlord and tenant. 


@@@@@


doc= 7400


Jacobus de Baen (1673-1700). Jan was warden of the Confrerie Pictura in The Hague several times between 1666 and 1676. He took apprentices from 1672 onwards, and was governor of the Draughtsmen's Academy from 1699 to 1700. He was buried in The Hague on 8 March 1702. 


@@@@@


doc= 7401


Baen, Jan de (1633-1702), portrait painter, was born on 20 February 1633 in Haarlem, Holland. Houbraken's life of de Baen, published within sixteen years of de Baen's death, would appear to be reliable because the artist painted a portrait of Dr Jacob Souburg of Dordrecht, Houbraken's father-in-law. 
Both de Baen's parents died when he was three and he was brought up by his uncle, the painter Hinderk Pyman ('c'.1580-1647), in Emden. When Pyman died de Baen went to Amsterdam as apprentice to the portraitist Jacob Backer (1608-1651). On qualifying as a painter and etcher, de Baen deliberately chose to follow the style of Anthony Van Dyck, because it was marketable. His only etching is of the 'Burning of Amsterdam Town Hall' (dated 1652). 
At some point, according to Houbraken, Charles II invited de Baen to England, sending Thomas Killigrew with the royal yacht to fetch him. This story is unproven. De Baen is said to have painted the king, Queen Catherine, and several courtiers, but in fact Charles II's principal painter, Peter Lely, was a jealous man, and de Baen made no headway at the English court. The known facts about his life are as follows. In December 1660 he was in The Hague. There, in 1665, he married Maria de Kinderen, and they had eight children, one of whom was the painter 
Jan de Baen specialized in portraits of notable Dutch subjects: Admiral Tromp, Van Beverning, and Jan de Bisschop, the duke of Celle, and some court beauties were among his sitters, and also the grand duke of Tuscany to whom he presented his own self-portrait (Uffizi, Florence). He portrayed the young prince of Orange in antique dress (British Royal Collection) and he was patronized by the then current rulers of Holland, Johan and Cornelis De Witt. He painted an infamous 'Apotheosis of Cornelis de Witt', a huge horizontal picture showing Cornelis being crowned by trumpeting fames, nearly half of which depicts the burning of the English fleet in the Medway. It hung publicly in Dordrecht town hall. 'Filling their towns with abusive Pictures' was cited as one cause of the Third Anglo-Dutch War of 1672-8 (TNA: PRO, SP 29/311/101). After their fall later that year, portraits of the De Witts were ordered to be destroyed and de Baen's house was searched. Versions of the 'Apotheosis' survived in private hands and can now be seen in Dordrecht Museum and the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam. Perhaps to ingratiate himself with the newly empowered Orangists, de Baen coldbloodedly painted the mutilated bodies of the De Witt brothers as they hung in the gallows after their executions. 
When the French army captured Utrecht, Louis XIV tried to entice de Baen to paint his portrait, but the artist refused. Frederik-Willhelm, duke of Brandenburg, also invited him to Berlin in 1676, but de Baen sent his nephew and pupil, Jan van Sweel, instead. His wife is said to have prevented him from accepting these offers. He depicted William III as king of England several times, though none appears to be convincingly from the life. He was, according to Lionel Cust, 'a second-rate artist in spite of his success' ('DNB'). 
Jan de Baen painted several large group portraits for public institutions: 'The Regents of the House of Correction in Amsterdam' (Historical Museum, Amsterdam); 'The Magistrates' (1682; Historical Museum, The Hague); 'The Drapers of Leyden', the owners of the East India Company (Hoorn Westfries Museum, Netherlands). These works, painted from life, are among his more powerful compositions. Another fine portrait is 'Prince Johan-Maurits of Nassau-Siegen', with the gardens of Cleves in the background (Mauritshuis, The Hague). 
Jan taught his son Jacobus to paint. Jacobus came to England during William III's reign, in 1693, and subsequently travelled to Italy, France, and Germany. He led a dissolute life and died in 1700 aged twenty-seven in Vienna. 


@@@@@


doc= 7402


Debbieg, Hugh (1731/2-1810), military engineer and army officer, was educated at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1742-6). Nothing is known of his parentage and birthplace. His ability was manifest at an early age, and he advanced rapidly in the Royal Artillery, becoming matross on 1 April 1742, cadet in May 1744, and cadet gunner in April 1745. During September and October 1746 he served as an engineer in the futile expedition against Point L'Orient, then returned briefly to Woolwich for further study. Appointed engineer-extraordinary in Flanders on 30 January 1747, Debbieg won the praise of William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, for the courage he exhibited at Val, on 2 July 1747. On Cumberland's nomination, he then served at Bergen-op-Zoom during the siege that culminated in a French seizure (17 September). On 2 April 1748 he became a practitioner engineer, and after the cessation of hostilities served on a team of engineers that surveyed the former theatre of war. Early in 1749 he returned to Britain, where he played a major role in surveying the military road which, on completion in 1752, linked Newcastle upon Tyne with Carlisle. He was also engaged in preparing a survey of Scotland, a duty which, he later claimed, awakened superiors to his 'Talent for sketching the Face of a Country' (Debbieg, 13). Newly promoted sub-engineer (2 August 1751), he was assigned to surveying defences at Chatham. He acquired a lieutenancy in the 37th foot on 1 September 1756, but did little if any service with the regiment, and after advancing to the rank of captain-lieutenant on 4 January 1758 he sold his commission (11 March 1761). On 14 May 1757 he was promoted lieutenant in the Royal Engineers, then, in quick succession, captain-lieutenant (4 January 1758) and captain (17 March 1759). 
Ordered to America, Debbieg sailed for Halifax, arriving on 9 May 1758. During the siege of Louisbourg (11 June to 26 July) he served as assistant quartermaster-general under Major-General James Wolfe, continuing in that position throughout the campaign of 1759, except for a brief period when he relinquished it in order to take up duties as an engineer. He participated in the battles of Montmorency (31 July 1759) and the Plains of Abraham (13 September). Debbieg appears to have been with Wolfe when he died, and was so depicted in Benjamin West's 'The Death of Wolfe'. During the winter of 1759-60 he remained at Quebec, and he was present at the battle of Sillery (28 April 1760). After the subsequent siege of Quebec (raised on 17 May) and brief service in Boston and Louisbourg, he spent most of the next two years in Halifax, directing the construction of new defensive works. When the French seized Newfoundland during the summer of 1762, he participated in the successful counter-attack, winning praise for his contributions and valour. 
Debbieg remained at St John's in 1762-3, supervising work on the defences. On returning to Britain he married Jane (or Janet) Seton (died 1801) in Edinburgh (27 March 1763). His wife may have been a Scottish Presbyterian -- as Debbieg may also have been -- and their second and third sons, Henry and Hugh, were baptized at Swallow Street Scotch Church, Westminster, on 13 October 1767 and 13 February 1769 respectively. When and where their eldest son, Clement, was baptized is unknown. 
Debbieg returned to Newfoundland in 1766, this time as chief engineer, arriving at St John's on 20 August. The following February he submitted an account of the harbours in Newfoundland, and in May he reported to Granby on the condition of the barracks at St John's. His reputation was now sufficient to win him offers of high positions from both the East India Company and Venice. Instead of accepting either offer, he undertook in June 1767, at the request of Richard, fourth Viscount Howe, a secret mission to study harbour defences in France and Spain. Although as he toured he was the object of suspicion, at times confined and ill-treated, he completed the mission, returning to England in March 1768. He subsequently provided the government with plans of Marseilles, Cartagena, Corunna, and Cadiz, as well as with extensive evaluations of the defences of these and other ports. During his travels Debbieg had noted that defences at Gibraltar were weak, and in 1769 he served on a committee of engineers which advised on improving them. 
In March 1769, at the instance of his patron, Granby, Debbieg was rewarded for his secret mission with a lifetime pension of $1 per diem. On 23 July 1772 he was breveted major. He expected more, however, and initially directed his anger at Howe, who he claimed had not only failed to provide adequate recompense for his mission but also reneged on a promise, made in November 1770, to win him a brevet as lieutenant-colonel. Furthermore, while on his mission Debbieg was supplanted as senior engineer in North America by an officer who was his junior in service. This switch, which he considered 'almost Petrifying' (Debbieg, 15), he likewise blamed on Howe, claiming the latter had promised that the position would be held for him during the mission. 
Late in 1775 Debbieg was offered a position in America, but he refused to serve under his junior and was incensed by word that his pay while on the service would be cut sharply. At the instance of Sir Guy Carleton, Debbieg was in December 1775 appointed chief engineer in Canada, but he again declined, explaining in a cryptic letter that he had been prevented from going by 'one higher than himself' (Debbieg file, Society of Genealogists). On 29 August 1777 he was breveted lieutenant-colonel, and in May 1778 appointed chief engineer on the staff of Lord Amherst, who had come to know him well when both served in America. By a second appointment (17 March 1778), Debbieg became chief engineer at Chatham, and during the next few years he oversaw improvements to the defences there and elsewhere. He also designed several military bridges and invented an improved pontoon and machinery to defend a breach. 
During the Gordon riots of June 1780 Debbieg, on Amherst's orders, organized and participated in the defence of public buildings of London. Twice rioters attacked the Bank of England, and although they were repulsed he later advised the bank on security measures. He also became alarmed at how easily the London water supply could be sabotaged, and recommended safeguards. Both schemes, however, were costly, so neither was pursued. Nevertheless, Debbieg's promotions continued: major and sub-director of the Royal Engineers on 24 January 1781, and colonel on 20 November 1782. 
Although Debbieg continued to advance, it was not because he ingratiated himself with those in power. Toward his subordinates he tended to be solicitous. While at Chatham he employed a young recruit, William Cobbett, as his clerk, and instilled in him the importance of reading and grammar. He also strove to protect bargemen on his crew from being pressed for naval duty. His relationship with superiors, however, was often contentious. Bitter towards Howe for the alleged wrongs already noted, he also attacked Lord George Germain in several letters (1775-6), claiming that the latter was duplicitous and was not adequately supporting him in his quest for promotion and preferment. At Chatham he feuded with the commanding officer. A few men in high positions, notably Amherst, may have regarded him with affection, but in general he appealed through his ability, not his personality. A contemporary reported that during the American War of Independence Debbieg 'differed with the ministers... as to their system of conducting their military operations, yet he was consulted by them on many occasions' ('GM', 595). Debbieg was aware of his reputation within the high command. In a letter to William Pitt, he acknowledged that he was widely seen as 'a Discordant Spirit', while insisting that in fact he was one: '
Whom not the D -- l himself can Drive 

But Led, the Gentlest thing alive. 
(TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/129/1, fol. 8)' 

Debbieg's fortunes turned when Charles Lennox, third duke of Richmond, became master-general of the ordnance in March 1782. The two men had been at odds since the mid-1770s, and their relationship worsened in 1784 when Richmond obtained a royal warrant to reduce and reorganize the engineers and cut emoluments of colonels in the regiment. Debbieg responded with an angry letter to the duke, and for his temerity he was court-martialled and reprimanded. He was further angered when Richmond blocked his appointment to a board of officers to advise on home defence, then ignored 'the first Principles of a System of Fortification', a plan for fortifying Britain that had occupied Debbieg during much of the 1780s. In March 1789 Debbieg wrote to the duke in contemptuous terms, comparing him to an 'Architect who built an Elegant Town Hall, and left no room for a Stair-case to ascent to it' and challenging him to initiate another court martial (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/129/1, fols. 5-6). When Richmond did not respond, Debbieg published the letter. The result was the court martial that he had desired, but the court denied him an opportunity to submit his plan of fortification for its review. For having challenged 'good Order and military Discipline' by attacking Richmond, Debbieg was sentenced to be deprived of rank and pay for six months. This penalty was light, which the king attributed 'to the Opinion entertained by the Court Martial of Colonel Debbieg's former Services and professional Merit' ('Proceedings of a General Court Martial', 103). Both courts martial were widely publicized; after the second a critic of Richmond commented: '
Learn thoughtless 'Debbeige', now no more a youth, 

The woes unnumber'd that encompass truth. 
('Criticisms on the Rolliad, Part the Second', 1790, 24)' Debbieg's feud with Richmond coincided with increasing animosity towards Pitt. In this case the issue was mainly financial. He still believed that he had received less than he deserved for his secret mission of 1767-8, and he had spoken or written to various government officials about obtaining further benefits. His bitterness was compounded when in early 1785 he was threatened with imprisonment for debt. On 22 April of that year Pitt, responding to his petition, communicated to him a promise of an additional stipend, plus, as Debbieg interpreted the letter, future preferment. This briefly mollified Debbieg, but he lost patience, and on 16 January 1788 he complained to Pitt, 'Can any Man believe, Sir, that with the Character which I hope I deservedly hold in the Publick Estimation, I should have accepted $290 pr. Annum in lieu of all further Promotion or advantage?' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/129/1, fols. 3-4). He appended a list of 'Final Demands', including: companies for two sons in the army and civil employment for a third, 'full compensation for his Disappointments and Losses during the time he was abroad', a doubling of his annual allowance, and assurance that he would be appointed chief engineer in Britain when the position fell vacant. Pitt responded that he had already been amply rewarded for his services (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/8/102, fols. 100-01). For the next few years Debbieg submitted further petitions, lacing them with increasingly personal attacks on the prime minister and threatening to make the matter public, through either publication or parliament. When Pitt was unmoved, Debbieg published some correspondence relevant to the aftermath of his mission of 1767-8 and his difficulties with Germain in 1775-7. He appended notes on his career, highlighting alleged mistreatment, and here he referred to Pitt, but not harshly. This work, 'Letters to and from Colonel Debbieg, to Several Great Men' (1790), appears to have been published in a very small printing, and to have attracted little notice. 
Debbieg's last years were marked by advancement: he was promoted major-general on 12 October 1793, lieutenant-general on 1 January 1798, and general on 25 September 1803. Each promotion, however, came in association with a cohort, and did not reflect special favour. Debbieg was disappointed at being assigned to the invalid engineers (31 August 1799). On 15 March 1800 his pension was augmented, but this did not satisfy him, and he continued to press Pitt for fuller remuneration. Debbieg died at his residence, 52 Margaret Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 27 May 1810, aged seventy-eight. His wife had died on 23 March 1801; their three sons survived him. He died intestate, and his estate was valued at less than $450, suggesting that his complaints of financial distress had not been exaggerated. 


@@@@@


doc= 7403


Debrett, John (d. 1822), publisher and bookseller, took over John Almon's business at 178 Piccadilly, London, in 1781. Debrett inherited some of Almon's whig patronage, and his shop was reputed to be 'much frequented about the middle of the day by fashionable people, and... used as a lounging place for political and literary conversation' ('Picture of London', 27), especially by those with whiggish sympathies, while those who supported Pitt would visit the neighbouring shop belonging to John Stockdale. Debrett published many works, among them a new edition of 'The Foundling Hospital for Wit' (1784), 'Asylum for Fugitive Pieces in Prose and Verse' (1785-8), the 'European Magazine' (1782-1801), and 'The British Imperial Calendar' (1818, 1820-22). During the 1780s he also published a series of pamphlets by John Almon in support of the parliamentary whigs, and in 1797 he published the parliamentary papers. But Debrett is best known for his works on the peerage. The first edition of Debrett's 'Peerage of England, Scotland, and Ireland' appeared in 1803. Debrett edited the next fifteen editions (the fifteenth appearing in 1823, after his death). Debrett's 'Baronetage of England' began in 1808. Both works, usually published in one volume, still flourish, and Debrett's name is used in a wide variety of reference books. 
Despite his fame, Debrett was twice declared bankrupt (in 1801 and 1804). His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' described him as 'a kind, good-natured, friendly, man, who experienced the vicissitudes of life with fortitude. He had full opportunity of acquiring a large fortune, but from too much confidence and easiness of temper, he did not turn it to the best account'. Debrett appears to have given up his shop in 1805, but did not retire from publishing until about 1814. He then lived partly on an annuity from his wife, Sophia, which supplemented the money he earned from the 'Peerage' and the 'Baronetage'. He died at his lodgings in Upper Gloucester Street, Regent's Park, London, on 15 November 1822, having been ill for some time. He was survived by his wife and four children: John Edward Debrett; Sophia Mirabella, wife of Richard Samuel Butler Sandilands; Maria Amy Debrett; and Henry Symons Debrett. 


@@@@@


doc= 7404


Bry, Theodore de (1528-1598), engraver, was born at Liege, at that time an independent state controlled by prince-bishops. He came from a family of engravers active in the Low Countries and Germany. By 1570 he had left the city as a protestant refugee and in 1589 was living at Frankfurt am Main. De Bry engraved plates for a number of notable works, including the first four volumes of Boissard's 'Roman Antiquities' (1597-1602), those for the fifth and sixth volumes being engraved by J. T. and J. I. De Bry. 
De Bry travelled to London in 1586/7, where he engraved a depiction of the elaborate funeral procession and obsequies of Sir Philip Sidney, as staged by Thomas Lant, Portcullis pursuivant, on 16 February 1587. He also illustrated Hakluyt's English translation of Thomas Hariot's 'Briefe and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia' (1590). De Bry died at Frankfurt on 27 March 1598. 


@@@@@


doc= 7405


Bruyn, Theodore de (1730-1804), landscape painter, was born in Amsterdam. He studied at Antwerp under Nicholaes van den Bergh, and moved to England to carry out decorative work for the duke of Norfolk in 1768. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in October 1773, aged forty-three, as a sculptor, but proceeded to exhibit landscape paintings at the Royal Academy, the Society of Artists, and the Free Society of Artists over the next twenty years. He contributed elegant, well-designed works to the genre of country house views. His 'View of Painshill', exhibited in 1790, was sold at Christies in 1950; others included 'Luxborough House, Essex', 'Sudley House', and 'Lulworth Manor'. He also exhibited rustic landscapes with cattle and figures. His grisaille paintings of sculpture bas-relief were well regarded. The chapel at Greenwich Hospital and Carlton Towers, Yorkshire, contain grisaille decorations by de Bruyn. He died in London in 1804. His two sons, John, born on 9 September 1764, and Henry ('b'. 1772), both entered the Royal Academy Schools as painters in 1782 and 1792 respectively, and subsequently exhibited at the Royal Academy. 


@@@@@


doc= 7406


Caus, Isaac de (1589/90-1648), garden designer and architect, was born in Dieppe. He was a relative (possibly a nephew) of Salomon de Caus, and was, like him, a Huguenot. The date of his arrival in England is not known, but he was in the country by the early 1620s, and was naturalized in 1634. 
Like Salomon, Isaac de Caus specialized in the design and construction of grottoes and waterworks. His earliest recorded work in England was the grotto in the basement of the Banqueting House in Whitehall, recently built to the designs of Inigo Jones, which he made in 1623-4. His most celebrated work of this kind was the grotto at Wilton House in Wiltshire, where it formed part of an elaborate formal garden designed by de Caus for the fourth earl of Pembroke in 1632-5. This, 'the greatest of English Renaissance gardens' (Strong, 151), featured statues and fountains set in parterres of 'broderie', flanked by arbours. The grotto was entered through a classical facade at the far end of the garden and contained spouting sea monsters, a table with hidden jets to wet the unwary, and hydraulically simulated birdsong. The whole was illustrated in a set of engravings published by de Caus entitled 'Wilton Garden' (undated). He was also the author of a book entitled 'Nouvelle invention de lever l'eau plus hault que sa source avec quelques machines mouvantes par le moyen de l'eau' (1644). This was closely based on the treatise 'Les raisons des forces mouvantes', published by Salomon de Caus in 1615, from which most of the copperplates were taken. An English translation was published in 1659 as 'New and Rare Inventions of Water-Works'. 
As an architect de Caus was involved in the fourth earl of Bedford's development on his Covent Garden estate in London (1631 onwards). Although Inigo Jones was responsible for the general scheme, there is evidence that de Caus supervised the building of some of the houses, and he himself lived in one of them for a time. At Wilton House the names of Inigo Jones and Isaac de Caus again appear together in connection with the rebuilding of the south front in 1636-40. 
According to John Aubrey, this was to have been designed by Jones, but: 'having at that time... engaged in his Majesties buildings at Greenwich, [he] could not attend to it: but he recommended it to an ingeniouse architect Monsieur... de Caus,... who performed it very well: but not without the advice and approbation of Mr. Jones. (J. Aubrey, 'The Natural History of Wiltshire', ed. J. Britton, 1847, 83-4)' That de Caus was in charge at Wilton is confirmed by documentary evidence, but precisely how the responsibility for the design of this celebrated building should be apportioned between Jones and de Caus is a problem to which the surviving evidence does not provide a categorical answer. Only one other building is known to have been designed by de Caus: an addition, long demolished without record, to Stalbridge Park, Dorset, for the first earl of Cork. 
Isaac de Caus died in Paris, and was buried on 24 February 1648 in the Huguenot cemetery there. He was described in the register as 'Isaac de Caus, natif de Dieppe, age de 58 ans, architeque'. His return to France may have been because of the civil war in England, but his family appears to have remained in London, for in July 1655 the will of Mary de Caus, widow, the lessee of a tenement on the Bedford estate in London, was proved by her elder son, Isaac. Other children mentioned in the will were Peter, Mary, and Magdalen. 


@@@@@


doc= 7407


Caus, Salomon de (c.1576-1626), engineer and architect, was born in the pays de Caux (whence derived the family name) in Normandy, probably in Dieppe. He was a relative (possibly an uncle) of Isaac de Caus (1589/90-1648). In all probability Salomon's parents were Huguenots who took refuge in England. Knowledge about de Caus's youth is restricted to what he himself revealed in the dedications of his books. He studied such classical authors as Hero of Alexandria, Vitruvius, and Pliny, and was also familiar with the historical works of Diodorus Siculus and Diogenes Laertius. He derived his knowledge of mathematics from the first six books of Euclid and was acquainted with technical treatises by Jacques Besson and Agostino Ramelli. 
From about 1595 until about 1598 de Caus journeyed through Italy, a tour which proved to be of great importance for his education. After his Italian travels, about 1598 he became an engineer in the service of the archdukes Albert and Isabella at Brussels. Here he became responsible for the construction of artificial grottoes and fountains in their gardens in Brussels and on their estate at Mariemont. On 21 January 1605 he received an official appointment as engineer to the archdukes, and on 10 April 1606 he married Hester Picart in the parish of St Gery in Brussels. Their only son, William, was baptized on 24 February 1607, but died shortly afterwards. 
In 1610 de Caus became an engineer in London at the court of James I. During his stay in Brussels he had already given some lessons in perspective to Henry, prince of Wales, and he was now attached to Henry's household at Richmond Palace. He supervised and transformed gardens for Queen Anne, the prince of Wales, and some of the principal courtiers. With his relative Isaac, he built the porticoes and loggias of Gorhambury and Campden House, Kensington. He must have known Cornelis Drebbel, who at that time -- like de Caus -- was in the service of Henry as an inventor. De Caus made a number of ingenious discoveries, which he later published in the second part of his 'Les raisons des forces mouvantes'. 
De Caus gave drawing lessons to Princess Elizabeth, Henry's youngest sister, and built a picture gallery at Richmond Palace for Henry, who was a great art lover; in 1612 he published the lessons he had given to Henry as 'La perspective avec la raison des ombres et miroirs'. The death of the prince in November of that year marked the end of his employment. On 26 July 1613 he was paid $50 'for attendance on the late Prince' ('CSP dom.', '1611-18'). In the year of Henry's death his sister Elizabeth married the elector palatine, Frederick V, and she asked de Caus to join her entourage. At her husband's residence, the castle of Heidelberg, de Caus designed a fabulous emblematic garden, for which the hillside had to be terraced; he later described the technical problems he had to conquer in his 'Hortus palatinus, a Frederico rege Boemiae, electore palatino, Heidelbergae exstructus' (1620). On 14 July 1614 he became the elector's official engineer and architect. During his stay at Heidelberg he published two other works, 'Institution harmonique divisee en deux parties: en la premiere sont monstrees les proportions des intervalles harmoniques, et en la deuxiesme les compositions d'icelles' and, his most important work, 'Les raisons des forces mouvantes avec diverses machines tant utilles que plaisantes: aus quelles sont adjoints plusieurs desseings de grottes et fontaines', both in 1615. 
In 1619 Elizabeth became queen of Bohemia for one winter; she later settled at The Hague. De Caus did not follow her into exile, but returned to France. During the years 1618-20 he had vainly negotiated with the council of Rouen about the construction of a bridge over the Seine; in 1620 he was employed in public works in Paris, where his duties involved the transportation of water from the Seine into the city, both for drinking water and for cleaning the streets and the squares. In the last years of his life he occupied himself mainly with mathematical studies. His last book -- which was on the subject of sundials -- was published in 1624. 
De Caus supplemented his income by producing air- and water-driven engines, which were used mainly to make emblematic figures to move. He used water, light, and artificial or solar heat as sources of energy. From 'Les raisons des forces mouvantes', it appears that he was an Aristotelian: he explained the action of his machines in terms of the four Aristotelian elements earth, water, fire, and air. Both artist and artisan, he attempted to place his inventions in a magico-philosophical framework. He died in Paris, where he was living with his wife in the rue Poitou. On 15 January 1626 they made a mutual last will, from which it appears that they had no children. De Caus was buried at the protestant cemetery La Trinite at Paris on 28 February 1626. 


@@@@@


doc= 7408


Decker, Sir Matthew, first baronet (1679-1749), political economist and merchant, was born in Amsterdam, the son of Derrick (Dirk) Decker, of Amsterdam, and his wife, Katherina. He received his commercial education under Burgomaster Velters of Amsterdam, but in 1702 travelled to London to establish himself as a merchant, and was naturalized in February 1704, at the second attempt. He then consolidated his business interests, and it was through trader and banker John Drummond that he secured a match on 16 August 1710 with Henrietta (1679-1759), daughter of Richard Watkins DD, rector of Whichford, Warwickshire, a union which produced two sons and four daughters. His daughters are the subject of a group portrait (1718) by the Dutch artist Jan van Meyer which is now in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. Decker's eldest daughter, Catherine ('c'.1710-1786), married Richard Fitzwilliam, sixth Viscount Fitzwilliam of Merrion, and was the mother of Richard Fitzwilliam, seventh Viscount Fitzwilliam, whose art and manuscript collections -- including works inherited from his maternal grandfather -- formed the basis of the Fitzwilliam Museum. 
By the time of his marriage Decker had already become a leading figure in Anglo-Dutch commerce, but the change of ministry in the summer of 1710 proved the making of his career, for he quickly established himself as one of Robert Harley's trusted City agents. As early as August 1710 he was ready to loan the government $40,000 to bolster its credit, and during the last three years of the War of the Spanish Succession he advanced several large remittances to keep the forces in the Low Countries supplied. He was also one of the leading backers for Harley's South Sea Company, subscribing for $49,271 worth of stock, and was appointed as one of its original directors. However, he withdrew from the board the following year, and thereafter sought prominence in the East India Company, where he served as a director from 1713 to 1743, as deputy governor in 1720-21 and 1729-30, and as governor in 1725-6 and 1730-33. 
By the summer of 1713 Decker was a powerful figure in the City, using his position to advance relations between his native and adopted countries. It was even said that he would 'become a very rich man without risking what he has already got, which is a happiness that few can arrive to' ('Portland MSS', 5.330). Such good fortune was less apparent the following year, when his patron Harley was dismissed from office, and he found himself 'extremely' pressed for lack of money ('Portland MSS', 5.497). Although he was never to achieve as close a connection with any Hanoverian ministry, his influence was recognized on 20 July 1716, when he was raised to the dignity of baronet. Three years later he entered parliament as member for Bishops Castle, thanks to the interest of James Brydges, duke of Chandos, a former paymaster of the forces, with whom he had had many financial dealings. In common with the rest of the City, Decker faced great difficulty at the time of the South Sea Bubble, and rumours circulated that he faced bankruptcy. However, his friends moved quickly to quash these reports, observing that he 'had sold out betimes, and had left nothing in any of the stocks but what was pure gains' ('Portland MSS', 7.282). Decker himself was bullish at this critical moment, writing to assure his Dutch banker Andreas Pels that he could 'draw at sight $100,000 on him' (ibid.). However, despite his importance in the City and as a former director of the South Sea Company, Decker did not play a prominent parliamentary role in the wake of the bubble, when the regulation of the City was of great national interest, and he declined to seek re-election in 1722. 
Although a City magnate, Decker did not covet advancement within the London corporation, and away from East India business his consuming passion was his estate at Richmond, where he entertained George I in 1716. As if to demonstrate his attachment to country life, he was prepared to undertake the onerous position of sheriff of Surrey in 1729-30. He appears to have taken especial care in developing his gardens, and was credited by contemporaries as the first to grow the pineapple in England, although this claim was later refuted. His commercial activities brought other exotic curiosities to Richmond, including a Chinese cock pheasant. 
Decker had far from retired from commerce, however, and his principal fame rests with two anonymous treatises of the 1740s which have been attributed to him. The first, 'Serious considerations on the several high duties which the nation in general, as well as trade in particular, labour under, with a proposal for preventing the removing of goods, discharging the trader from any search, and raising all the public supplies by one single tax', appeared in 1743, and went through seven editions by 1756, the last of which named Decker as author. Joseph Massie's pamphlet of 1757, which attacked 'The Proposal, Commonly called Sir Matthew Decker's Scheme for one General Tax upon Houses', also pointed to Decker's involvement, but historians have remained sceptical about such claims. The second work, 'An essay on the causes of the decline of the foreign trade, consequently of the value of Britain, and on the means to restore both', was published in 1744, although 'begun in 1739', and was translated into French by Abbe de Gua de Malves in 1757. Josiah Tucker identified it as Decker's in 1751 ('Townshend MSS', 376-7), but another contemporary, Francis Fauquier, thought it the work of William Richardson (McCulloch). Such arguments have continued ever since, although it is generally accepted that the 'Essay' is Decker's. The principal difficulty in identifying him as the author of both tracts is the irreconcilability of the tax proposals which appear in these writings, with the 'Considerations' calling for a single duty on houses, while the 'Essay' supports an imposition on luxury consumers. However, there are important similarities between the two works, most notably a proposal for licensing tea consumers. 
The treatises attracted considerable comment, particularly for their bold advocacy of free trade and the introduction of an all-embracing single tax. Indeed, the 'Considerations' was 'strongly recommended to the electors of Great Britain, that they should, preferably to place and pension bills, or even triennial Parliaments, press their representatives to pass an Act pursuant to the author's scheme' ('GM', 13.653-5). Both schemes held the plethora of existing customs and excise duties currently as an obstacle to the advancement of trade, an attack meeting the approval of economists such as Fauquier and Malacy Postlethwayt. Equally popular was the expressed concern to alleviate the burden of taxation on the lower orders, and to shift taxes from the merchant to the consumer. Other observers, most notably Joseph Massie, Arthur Young, and Adam Smith, were less convinced by the workability of the schemes, and even the 'Considerations' conceded that some prohibitive duties might be needed to regulate trade to protect domestic manufacturers. Such radical proposals had little hope of immediate parliamentary sanction, for eighteenth-century governments remained too timorous to tamper with the customs system in favour of direct taxation. 
Decker was still eager to serve the government in June 1747, writing to the duke of Newcastle to enquire whether he could fulfil any services on a forthcoming trip to the Netherlands, or as he still termed it, 'the old fatherland' (BL, Add. MS 32711, fol. 557). However, it was in his adopted country that he died on 18 March 1749, and his body was laid to rest at St Mary Magdalene's Church, Richmond. Estimated by one source to be worth 'upwards of $100,000' at his death, Decker bequeathed his considerable estate to his three surviving daughters ('London Magazine'). His will urged a charitable disposition upon his heirs, for he declared that 'I never have felt so much inward joy as when I gave money or other things in charity, especial[ly] when I was satisfied that it was disposed upon honest, good and industrious Christians' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/769, sig. 103). By the testimony of one obituarist, this was no rhetoric, for he had 'a remarkable evenness of temper, and an uninterrupted tranquillity of mind,... the proofs and rewards of such conscious virtue' ('GM', 19.141). 


@@@@@


doc= 7409


Declan mac Eircc (fl. late 5th cent.) was the founder of the important monastery of Ardmore (Ard Mor) and patron of the Desi (modern co. Waterford). The monastery, where the saint died and was buried, was situated on the south-east coast in the kingdom of Desi Muman. Declan is commemorated on 24 July in the martyrologies. The founder saint and bishop was a member of the Desi royal dynasty through his father, Ercc (Ercbran). His mother, Dethiden, is not given a genealogical affiliation. The close links between church and aristocracy indicated by the position of the saint's father are highlighted by the hagiographers. The main source for Declan's life and cult is a roughly twelfth-century Latin life preserved only in 'Codex Kilkenniensis', but possibly containing earlier materials. The Irish life, transcribed by O Cleirigh, is dependent on the Latin. The earlier text is very much influenced by the Salamanca life of Ailbe. It describes Declan's journey to Rome, where he makes the acquaintance of Ailbe. Later, on his way back to Ireland, he meets Patrick. Throughout, Declan is shown as subordinate to these two saints. It is Patrick who tells him where to settle. Declan eventually converts the Desi with Patrick's blessing. Much of the stress in the life on Declan's episcopal status fits the twelfth-century period of church reform, during which Ireland was re-organized into a full diocesan system. In the event, Ardmore ultimately failed to win the status of an episcopal see, which was given to Lismore. An impressive round tower marks the site of the medieval monastery. 


@@@@@


doc= 7410


Cort, Henry Francis de (1742-1810), landscape painter, was born at Antwerp, and first studied painting under W. Herreyns. On 16 May 1769 he entered the studio of the landscape painter Hendrik Joseph Antonissen, and on 16 May 1770 he was admitted a master in the guild of St Luke at Antwerp. His chief works were topographical paintings of towns and landscapes; in some of these he was assisted by his fellow pupil Ommeganek, who painted the figures for him. Leaving Antwerp he proceeded to Paris, entered the academy there, and was elected a fellow in 1781. There he painted some views of Chantilly, and was appointed painter to the prince de Conde. In 1788 he returned to Antwerp, and took an active part in reorganizing the school of painting there, acting as secretary to the newly constituted academy. He contributed six pictures to the first exhibition of the new academy held in 1789. Shortly after this he arrived in England, with some of his pictures, and in 1790 exhibited seven pictures at the Royal Academy. During the following twelve years he contributed numerous landscapes to the Royal Academy, particularly of the west of England. A total of sixty-three paintings were exhibited. In 1806 he contributed three landscapes to the first exhibition of the British Institution. Although his status does not seem to have been very high, his landscapes were much valued by private collectors, being agreeably coloured and treated in the Italian manner, very much in vogue at the time. His sepia drawings were also much admired. G. H. Harlow was one of his pupils. He died in London on 28 June 1810, and was buried in St Pancras old cemetery. 


