@@@@@


doc= 67769


Swanston, Eyllaerdt (d. 1651), actor, was a member of the prestigious King's Men from about 1624 until the closure of the theatres in 1642. We do not know his parentage or when or where he was born. There are more than twenty variant spellings of his unusual forename, and at least ten of his surname. Our first record is of his marriage to Alice Ivieson (died 1651) on 16 December 1619 in the parish of St Gregory by St Paul's, London. He and his wife lived in the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury, whose registers record the baptisms of ten of their children between 3 September 1620 and 21 January 1639. 
Although Swanston spent most of his professional life with the King's Men, he was not one of those 'bred from Children in the kings service' ('Dramatic records', 371). He is to be found first with the Prince Charles's Players and with the Lady Elizabeth's Men. A list of the chief actors at the Phoenix made in 1622 includes Swanston, so he must by then have been an experienced actor. The Phoenix was a well-known theatre in Drury Lane. Swanston joined the King's Men some time before 20 December 1624, as on that date he and a number of other members of that company signed an apology to the master of the revels for performing 'The Spanish Viceroy' without a licence. Almost ten years later Swanston again apologized to the authorities, this time for problems over censorship. 'Ellyart Swanstone' was one of fifteen King's players issued with black cloth for King James's funeral on 7 May 1625 ('Dramatic records', 325-6). The royal patent of 24 June the same year lists 'Elliart Swanston' as one of King Charles's well-beloved servants ('Royal patents', 282). Livery lists pertaining to the King's Men and dating from May 1629, April 1637, and March 1641 all include his name in diverse forms. 
The King's Men performed an extensive and varied repertoire. Shakespeare's plays were revived regularly. An early theatrical chronicler, James Wright, tells us that Swanston played Othello but none of his other Shakespearian roles have been identified. Of his known roles three are in plays by Philip Massinger: Aretinus Clemens in 'The Roman Actor' (performed in 1626), Ricardo in 'The Picture' (performed in 1629), and Chrysalus in 'Believe as you List' (performed in 1631). About the same time he also played Count Utrante in Lodowick Carlell's 'The Deserving Favourite', Alcidonus in Arthur Wilson's 'The Swisser', and Lugier in 'The Wild Goose Chase', a revival of a 'Beaumont and Fletcher' play. Other roles that can be assigned to him are Bussy D'Ambois, the hero of George Chapman's tragedy, and Philaster in Fletcher's tragicomedy. Swanston also appeared in John Ford's 'The Lovers' Melancholy' (performed in 1628). 
As a leading player and shareholder Swanston often acted for the company in financial matters. From 1632 to 1641 he, with his colleagues John Lowin and Joseph Taylor, regularly received the payments for the King's Men's frequent performances at court. In 1635 he and fellow King's Men Robert Benfield and Thomas Pollard petitioned the lord chamberlain for permission to purchase shares in the Globe and Blackfriars theatres. The surviving members of the Burbage family and John Shank, another colleague, objected, but the request was granted. However, no agreement could be reached, and eventually, as the 'Sharers' Papers' show, the matter was referred for arbitration to the master of the revels. Shank died in January 1636 with the matter unresolved. On 26 August 1639 Richard Benfield, Robert's kinsman, left bequests both to Swanston and to members of Shank's family. 
During the civil war, perhaps surprisingly, Swanston seems not to have supported King Charles. According to James Wright, 'he profest himself a Presbyterian, took up the trade of a Jeweller, and liv'd in Aldermanbury' (Wright, 409). His alliance with the parliamentarians is confirmed by the statement in 'A Key to the Parliament by their Remembrancer' (1648) that Swanston the player was one of them. During the interregnum a folio collection of the plays attributed to Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher was published. Swanston was one of the King's Men who signed the dedicatory epistle of the 1647 volume. He is also mentioned in one of its prefatory poems, Henry Vaughan's 'Upon Mr Fletcher's Playes, Published 1647'. Swanston made his will on 24 June 1651 and was buried, together with his wife, in St Mary Aldermanbury, London, on the 28th. 
In a scene in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Virtuoso' (performed in 1676) the theatre of 'the last Age' is compared unfavourably with the contemporary theatre. To Snarl, one of the participants in the debate, modern actors seem too tame when compared with the great King's Men of old: 'I, that have seen Joseph Taylor, and Lowin and Swanstead; Oh a brave roaring Fellow! Would make the house shake again' (Shadwell, 'The Virtuoso', 1691, 10). Although Swanston is scarcely known today, he was an important actor in his day and his reputation survived well into the Restoration period. 


@@@@@


doc= 67770


Weaver, Elizabeth (fl. 1661-1678), actress, joined the King's Company in 1661 under her maiden name, Farley. Little is known about her family. Pepys heard from Elizabeth Knipp that 'the King first spoiled Mrs. Weaver' (Pepys, 9.19). Subsequently she became the companion of James Weaver, assuming his name during the 1660s. A daughter, also Elizabeth, was baptized on 20 May 1661. The following year James Weaver asked permission to sue Elizabeth Farloe on a bond of $30 for using his name to defraud creditors. Lawsuits over debt dogged Mrs Weaver throughout the 1660s, as did personal problems. In 1664 the dramatist Sir Robert Howard wrote to Henry Bennet, Lord Arlington, explaining why Mrs Weaver 'of her own accord brought in all her parts and... wou'd act noe more'. 'Big with child' and clearly unmarried, her appearance offended 'women of quality'; and the actress, indignant her parts had been reassigned, 'continued her resolution to goe' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/109, no. 16). Despite this vow, by April 1665 she was acting again. 
Never a prominent actress, Mrs Weaver mainly performed minor roles although early on she did play several leading parts: Richard Flecknoe intended her for the title role in 'Erminia' (1661), but the play was probably never staged. In a revival during 1663-4 of John Ford's play 'Love's Sacrifice' she played Biancha, a proudly unrepentant adulteress. Roles assigned after her notorious pregnancy were far more slight: Alibech in Dryden's 'The Indian Emperour' (1665); Mrs Martha in Wycherley's 'Love in a Wood' (1671); Eudoria in Leanerd's 'The Rambling Justice' (1678); and the whore in D'Urfey's 'Trick for Trick' (1678). In 1671 Mrs Weaver resumed performing under her family name of Farley. She disappeared from the stage after 1678. An obscene poem, 'Dreaming Last Night on Mrs Farley', incorrectly attributed to the earl of Rochester ('Rochester's Poems', 77), suggests that she subsequently became a prostitute, unfortunately a likely conjecture given the downward spiral of her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 67771


Strachey, Oliver (1874-1960), cryptanalyst, was born on 3 November 1874 at Stowey House, Clapham Common, London, the third son among the thirteen children of Sir Richard Strachey (1817-1908), public works secretary, India, and former lieutenant-general in the Royal Engineers, and his wife, Jane Maria Strachey, nee Grant (1840-1928) ['see under 'Strachey, Sir Richard], the daughter of John Peter Grant, the governor of Bengal. He was the brother of (Giles) Lytton Strachey, James Strachey, Ralph Strachey, (Joan) Pernel Strachey, the principal of Newnham College, Cambridge, from 1923 to 1941, Philippa Strachey, and Dorothea Bussy. 
Strachey was clever and good-looking, but also egotistic and somewhat feckless in his personal life. He was educated at Eton College (1889-93), but did little 'except talk and play the piano' (Hamilton, 268). After studying music in Vienna for several years, he eventually found a post as a traffic superintendent with the East Indian Railway Company (of which his father was the chairman), but intensely disliked the work and life in India. He had wanted to be a concert pianist, and greatly missed artistic life in Britain. After his marriage to his first wife, Ruby Julia Mayer, was dissolved (there was one daughter, Julia), he returned to Britain and married Rachel Conn (Ray) Costelloe (1887-1940) ['see 'Strachey, Rachel], the feminist and stepdaughter of Bernhard Berenson, on 31 May 1911. They had two children, Barbara and Christopher Strachey. 
To the dismay of his in-laws, Strachey preferred at first to live off Ray's money and theirs, instead of working. Charming and sociable, he enjoyed playing the piano at Bloomsbury parties. Despite his lack of educational success, he was well able to converse on philosophy with Bertrand Russell. According to his daughter Barbara Strachey, he was 'a very alarming arguer... because he would get up, throw his arms into the air and shriek with rage at you, and say 'but you're absolutely wrong'' (private information). 
Strachey shared his wife's suffrage concerns, and was on the executive committee of the (non-militant) National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (1915-19). He also wrote 'Keigwin's Rebellion' (1916) with Ray. Strachey did not take up work again until 1915, when he joined the War Office's code-breaking unit, MI1B, under Major Malcolm Hay. As one of MI1B's best code-breakers, he was sent to Egypt in mid-1916 for one year to establish a small code-breaking group there. He was fortunate to survive when his ship was sunk by a torpedo. 
Strachey was one of the top three 'original key men' (Denniston, 54) recruited for the Government Code and Cypher School (GCCS), with Ernst Fetterlein and Dillwyn Knox, when it was formed under Alastair Denniston in 1919, with a secret directive 'to study the methods of cypher communications used by foreign powers' (ibid., 49). Strachey was a senior assistant -- the equivalent of a principal in the administrative civil service. He worked mainly on American codes in the 1920s, and helped GCCS to achieve considerable success against diplomatic traffic in the inter-war years. Despite having very few staff (twenty-five cryptanalysts in 1919, and about fifty-five in 1937), GCCS could read 'all diplomatic communications of all powers' (ibid., 57) by 1939, except those which, like Germany and Russia, used unbreakable one-time pads. One of Strachey's rare failures occurred around 1938, when, along with other senior members of GCCS, he unsuccessfully attempted the extremely difficult task of reconstructing the wiring of Wehrmacht Enigma's rotors. 
Strachey and Hugh Foss broke an early Japanese naval cipher machine (codenamed M-1 by the US navy) in September 1934. They were also almost certainly the code-breakers responsible for the GCCS solution a few months later of the 'Type A' cipher machine (codenamed Red by the US army) used by Japanese naval attaches and the Japanese foreign office. 
Strachey is best-known for an important series of decrypts known as ISOS (Intelligence Services -- sometimes Section -- Oliver Strachey), consisting of Abwehr (the German armed forces' intelligence service) signals which had been encrypted using manual ciphers. However, the first Abwehr decrypts were not issued by GCCS until mid-April 1940, weeks after the Radio Security Service (RSS) had solved some Abwehr messages. Although the RSS knew from operators' chat that they were German messages, GCCS concluded that they were harmless Russian signals transmitted from Shanghai. In frustration, Hugh Trevor-Roper and E. W. B. Gill, in the RSS, solved the messages themselves, although the RSS was responsible only for intercepting illicit traffic. They proved that the traffic was Abwehr, and in doing so somewhat ruffled GCCS, which then took the task on board. Strachey was placed in charge of a new section, which eventually had to attack at least twenty different types of Abwehr hand ciphers. The ciphers were initially simple, often involving only columnar transposition (the 'shuffling' of columns of text), but became increasingly complex as the war progressed: some were virtually intractable. 
About 98,000 ISOS decrypts were distributed by GCCS under the supervision of Colonel Felix Cowgill in Section V (counter-espionage outside the United Kingdom) of the Secret Intelligence Service (MI6). ISOS became a crucial weapon against the Abwehr and other German intelligence services, especially when integrated with a related series, ISK (Intelligence Services (Dillwyn) Knox), decrypts of signals using a special Abwehr Enigma machine. Both series also played a vital role in ensuring the success of many strategic deception operations, such as Fortitude, which successfully disguised the target area of the Normandy D-day landings in June 1944. 
Strachey was sent to Canada at the end of 1941, to head a small code-breaking section called 'the examination unit' in the department of external affairs. Lacking experienced Canadian cryptanalysts, the department had naively appointed Herbert Yardley, the former head of the American cipher bureau, a joint war and state department code-breaking agency, to head the examination unit in mid-1941. However, Yardley was anathema to GCCS following his revelation of American code-breaking operations in his best-selling book 'The American Black Chamber' (1931). Under intense pressure from GCCS, the Canadians sacked Yardley. In return they expected GCCS to supply a replacement, and to be treated as a partner by both GCCS and the American code-breakers, although the latter expectation was not fully realized. Since Yardley had been breaking Abwehr signals from South America, Strachey was the obvious choice to replace him, despite his age. 
As well as working on Abwehr signals in Canada, Strachey also solved some Vichy French traffic there, and trained members of the examination unit. He returned to GCCS around September 1942, but not to be head of the ISOS section, since he was past retirement age. In December he successfully opposed a somewhat arrogant -- and unwise -- British proposal to dissolve the examination unit. Strachey was appointed CBE in 1943. 
Despite being married Strachey had a number of relationships with other women. However, according to his daughter Barbara, he had 'a rather sad later life' after Ray's death in 1940. He had a heart attack in 1943, after which he moved into a house in Gordon Square, Bloomsbury, with his sisters Philippa and Pernel. His final years were spent in a nursing home. Strachey died on 14 May 1960 at 28 Kenilworth Road, Ealing, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 67772


Wallinger, Sir John Arnold (1869-1931), intelligence officer and literary prototype, was born on 25 October 1869 at Poona, India, the son of William H. Arnold Wallinger, deputy conservator of forests in the Indian forest service, and his wife, Anne Jane. He had two brothers and two sisters. 
In 1896 Wallinger joined the Indian police in Ahmadabad as an inspector. Having been promoted assistant superintendent, in 1902 he was seconded to the Metropolitan Police in London as an instructor at a time of rising anxiety about Indian political activists and fears concerning the security of the coronation of Edward VII. He then stayed in England on 'special deputation' to Scotland Yard. In 1904 he returned to India and established a reputation as a brave officer with a talent for acquiring local native dialects and a flair for undercover criminal intelligence operations when he would 'black up'. On one occasion, while mounted, he saved a subordinate from a mob during a violent strike by charging a hostile crowd, and received a sword wound to the head that kept him in hospital for three months. Wallinger was transferred to London in 1910, with the rank of superintendent, to head the Indian political intelligence office, a new organization created to monitor the subversive activities in Britain of Indian nationalists. 
In 1915 Wallinger acquired an assistant, Philip Vickery, who was gazetted with the rank of major, and attached to general headquarters (GHQ) in France as a staff officer to assess discontent among Indian troops. His task was to identify and isolate malcontents while preventing enemy propaganda from undermining morale at the front and in India. While at GHQ he encountered his younger brother Ernest, a gunnery officer who had lost a foot at Le Cateau and had joined the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS). Based in offices in Basil Street, below his flat, Ernest Wallinger had organized an espionage network of train watchers, codenamed WL, that stretched behind the German lines and into Belgium and neutral Holland. John Wallinger was appointed his controller in Geneva, supervising a network of British agents in Switzerland. According to the deputy director of military intelligence, Sir Walter Kirke, an attempt to expand into Holland and Scandinavia proved unsuccessful. 
Wallinger is said to have been a keen reader of spy stories, but his initial agents -- mostly waiters in restaurants -- were easily spotted by the Swiss authorities. Instead, in autumn 1915 he persuaded an established writer, W. Somerset Maugham, to work for him, based in Geneva. The latter was subsequently very dismissive of his experiences, which he described as 'on the whole extremely monotonous' (Maugham, viii), and by summer 1916 he had returned to Britain. Nevertheless, he accumulated enough material for a book of short stories, 'Ashenden, or, The British Agent', published in 1928. 
Interestingly, Maugham used Wallinger as the model for his spymaster in the Colonel R stories. This character had 'a yellow, deeply-lined face... [with] thin grey hair and a toothbrush moustache... a man that you could neither like nor trust at first sight' (Maugham, 2). Colonel R reminded the narrator that: 'If you do well you'll get no thanks and if you get into trouble you'll get no help' (ibid., 4). Alfred Hitchcock's film 'The Secret Agent' (1936), starring Madeline Carroll and John Gielgud, was based on the stories. According to one authority, in his portrait of 'R', Maugham expressed a mood of disenchantment and hard-nosed realism that 'set the tone for an entirely new generation of espionage writing' (Stafford, 182). 
In August 1916 Wallinger was posted back to India to suppress agitation there, and was busy with such intelligence operations until the end of the war. In 1919 he was seconded to Egypt. On his return to London in the following year he was appointed deputy inspector-general of the Indian police service. In 1925 he was knighted. Although offered the post of deputy commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, Wallinger chose to retire to Brighton in 1926. He died on 7 January 1931 at his home, Kingswood, Surrenden Road, Brighton. Wallinger never married, but Maugham later recalled dining with him and his attractive mistress. 


@@@@@


doc= 67773


Vivian, Valentine Patrick Terrell (1886-1969), intelligence officer, was born in Kensington on 17 March 1886, one of four sons and five daughters of (Thomas) Comley Vivian, a portrait painter of 80 Warwick Gardens, and his wife, Elizabeth Baly Farquhar ('b'. 1846). Comley Vivian exhibited at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists in 1874-5 and at the Royal Academy between 1877 and 1892. Valentine Vivian's mother, the daughter of William Farquhar, inventor and chronometer maker, was a miniaturist and, later, portrait painter who exhibited at the Royal Academy under her maiden name between 1867 and 1871, and under her married (and widowed) name between 1886 and 1918. 
Like his elder brother Percy (Sylvanus Percival (1880-1958), registrar-general 1921-45, knighted 1937) Vivian was educated at St Paul's School, where he was a foundation scholar in classics; he left in 1905. Intended for a curatorship at the Victoria and Albert Museum, he went instead to India, in 1906, and joined the Indian police in the Punjab. In 1910, still in the Punjab, he was transferred to the small provincial criminal intelligence staff, under a deputy inspector-general, that had been established as a result of Sir Andrew Fraser's police commission of 1903. Vivian served in the Punjab until 1914 and, while there, married, on 14 November 1911, Mary Primrose (1890-1971), daughter of the Venerable Edmund John Warlow, archdeacon of Lahore. They had two sons and a daughter. 
In 1914 Vivian was appointed to the government of India's central department of criminal intelligence in Simla, as an assistant director. The department, established in 1904 as one of Curzon's reforms, co-ordinated but did not direct the work of the provincial departments of criminal intelligence. It also took an interest in seditious activity outside India. Vivian saw active service in the Indian army in Palestine and Turkey in 1918-19. He was mentioned in dispatches and appointed OBE in 1918. 
By 1920 Vivian was holding an ostensibly military intelligence appointment as a major at the headquarters of the general officer commanding, allied forces, Constantinople. His post was in fact jointly sponsored by the government of India, anxious about the threat of pan-Islamism, and by the section of the War Office known as MI1c, a label for Mansfield Cumming's Secret Service Bureau, about to become the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS). Vivian became actively involved in the latter's operations to gain intelligence on Soviet subversive activity in Turkey and Persia. His work must have been sufficiently successful to catch Cumming's eye, for he was promoted CBE in 1923, the year in which he joined SIS, one of the last officers to be personally appointed by Cumming. In his later career he was often referred to by his initials, V. V. 
Reluctant to stay overseas after so long abroad, Vivian undertook a short tour of duty with the Allied Control Commission in Cologne and then returned to SIS headquarters in 1925 as head (and for many years the only officer) of section V (counter-espionage). As early as 1921 SIS had circulated annual reports on 'Bolshevism, Chinese communism and anarchism'. Under Vivian section V concentrated upon the subversive aspects of Soviet communism, in particular the clandestine activities of the Comintern. He was ideally suited to this task both by experience and temperament and brought to his post habits of meticulous casework and attention to detail acquired in India. The professional experience of Constantinople had also given him first-hand knowledge of Soviet clandestine activity. The mental discipline of a classical education may also have helped. 
Later, in 1933, when Johann Heinrich deGraff (known as Jonny), a Comintern agent, offered his services to Frank Foley, the SIS representative in Berlin, Vivian was dispatched by Admiral Sinclair, Cumming's successor, to oversee the handling of the case. As deGraff moved to Manchuria, then to Shanghai, and finally to Brazil he kept Vivian, his case officer, abreast of Comintern activity. Thus by 1938 the British government was completely informed about the internal effect of Stalin's purges on the leadership of the Comintern. Furthermore deGraff's intelligence had also substantially contributed to the failure of the Comintern's 1935 armed conspiracy (orchestrated by deGraff and led by Luis Carlos Pestes) to overthrow the government of President Vargas in Brazil. This was a major success, both for SIS and for Vivian personally. 
In 1939 Vivian, now fifty-three and more accustomed to a small service run on a shoestring, handed over the expanding section V to Felix Cowgill. Thus the successes of the war-time section V, based upon the exploitation of German intelligence service communications, were achieved under Cowgill, some of whose junior officers failed to recognize Vivian's role in securing the survival of the section and the relevance of its counter-intelligence experience between the wars. Vivian was promoted to the uneasy triumvirate at the top of SIS as nominal deputy to Sinclair's successor, Sir Stewart Menzies. The other member was the acerbic Claude Dansey, cheese to Vivian's chalk and no believer in counter-intelligence. 
Vivian did not have a second good war. His CMG (1947) came long after Foley's (1941) and was eclipsed by Dansey's knighthood. He retired, finally, in 1951, after a number of anomalous appointments in security policy. It is ironical that he retired just at the time that the Soviet Union had resumed its position as SIS's major opponent. The policy of attacking its intelligence apparatus, rooted in Vivian's pre-war penetration of the Comintern, led to considerable success, though it took a decade or more to re-acquire his experience and skills. In this sense Vivian was a man ahead of his time. 
Vivian, in his old age, did not escape the controversy that surrounded the treachery of (Harold) 'Kim' Philby. He was attacked, with cruel hindsight, for fostering Philby's SIS career. He had known the father, St John Philby, as a self-opinionated assistant commissioner in the Punjab, and his wife had been a childhood friend of St John Philby's wife, Dora. He had thus taken an avuncular interest in the young Philby. But the defects of attitude and approach within SIS that failed to recognize the flaws in Philby or to detect their consequences were as much systemic as personal. Nevertheless the effect on Vivian made an already reserved personality more austere. 
Valentine Vivian died at the War Memorial Hospital, Milford-on-Sea, on 15 April 1969. His elder son, John Michael Comley Vivian (1917-1979), was a member of the diplomatic service. 


@@@@@


doc= 67774


Bevan, John Henry (1894-1978), intelligence officer and stockbroker, was born on 5 April 1894, at 4 Lower Berkeley Street, London, the younger son of David Augustus Bevan (1856-1937), stockbroker, and his wife, the Hon. Dame Maude Elizabeth Bevan (1856-1944). Educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, Bevan was commissioned as a territorial in the Hertfordshire regiment in October 1913 and served on the western front during the First World War, being twice mentioned in dispatches and winning the MC as a captain in 1917. In January 1918 he joined the specially selected staff of Field Marshal Sir Henry Wilson at the supreme war council as a GSO2; his speciality was writing strategic appreciations from the enemy's point of view during the great German offensives in spring 1918. After the war he spent three years with Hambros bank in Copenhagen before returning to the City to join the stockbroking firm founded by his father. In 1927 he married Lady Barbara Bingham (1902-1963), daughter of the fifth earl of Lucan; they had a son and two daughters. 
A Territorial Army reservist, Bevan was recalled in 1939, working first in MI5 before joining as a major the staff of 'Mauriceforce' for the ill-starred campaign in Norway. His career in strategic deception did not begin until his appointment as controlling officer by the chiefs of staff on 21 May 1942. Systematic, organized deception, as practised on an unheard-of scale during the Second World War, had its origins in the Middle East in 1940 under the sponsorship of General Sir Archibald Wavell and Lieutenant-Colonel Dudley Clarke of A force. Yet it was only in the early 1970s that their achievements and those subsequently of Bevan's London controlling section began to receive the historiographical acknowledgement they deserved, thanks to the release of official sources following the 'Public Records Act' of 1967 and the publication of Sir John Masterman's 'The Double-Cross System in the War of 1939 to 1945' in 1972. 
In appointing Johnny Bevan, the chiefs of staff found an officer with the necessary combination of imagination, initiative, resilience, and sound military instincts, to say nothing of personal charm and persuasiveness. 'His most remarkable feature was a very fine forehead, both broad and deep; and one of his greatest assets an extraordinarily attractive smile', according to the novelist Dennis Wheatley, a member of the London controlling section (Wheatley, 59). The new controlling officer had to start from scratch -- almost singlehandedly planning the cover and deception for operation Torch (the invasion of north Africa), winning the confidence of the prime minister and the chiefs of staff, and developing as wide a range of contacts as possible so as to 'sell' deception. Ever present was the strain of playing with dynamite, intensified for Bevan by recurrent insomnia. The main UK-based deception in 1943 misfired but the system was preserved, a system based on an unprecedented combination of watertight security and superb intelligence. MI5 had decided in June 1942 that they did indeed control all 'Abwehr' agents in the country and from then on the latter were used with growing confidence for deception purposes; moreover, ULTRA intelligence made it possible to monitor the credibility of the agents with their controllers and to identify those strategic presuppositions of Hitler's that could most profitably be played up to mystify and mislead him. For no operation was it more urgent to induce Hitler to make 'a calculated false move' (Wingate, 'Narrative', 1.4) than the cross-channel invasion in 1944. 
Bevan and the London controlling section made a decisive contribution to the success of operation Overlord. Their primary function was to co-ordinate deception between theatres of operation and to formulate overall deception policy. This they fulfilled for the invasion by drawing up plan Bodyguard, the grand strategic deception for 1944, as well as implementing a number of supporting schemes involving liaison with a wide range of authorities from the Foreign Office to the Ministry of Economic Warfare. Bevan himself flew to Moscow, barely surviving a defective oxygen mask, to arrange Soviet co-operation with Bodyguard. The tactical cover plan for the cross-channel assault was, as always, planned and executed by the operational headquarters concerned, in this case the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF). By this stage of the war large-scale visual deception had been reduced to a form of insurance against chance sightings by sporadic German aerial reconnaissance. To an extent totally unforeseen in 1942, reliance was now put upon the XX (or double-cross) agents, in particular Garbo and Brutus, backed up by bogus wireless traffic to 'validate' an inflated order of battle in the UK. Bevan was one of a handful of officers representing SHAEF, MI5, and the London controlling section, who worked quickly and at times off the record to preserve surprise for the assault and to put across Major Roger Hesketh's brilliant 'story' that the D-day landings were mere preliminaries to a more powerful invasion of the Pas-de-Calais, thereby pinning German reserves north of the Seine while the battle for Normandy was decided. 
Appointed CB in 1945, Bevan returned to stockbroking; he also became chairman of the Equitable Life Assurance Society. His recreations remained those of the countryman, particularly gardening and ornithology. Once a year he hosted a dinner at Brooks's Club for his wartime associates, mostly majors and colonels, whose conventional background and appearance concealed such a rich talent for ingenuity and guile. Bevan died at the age of eighty-four of lung cancer on 3 December 1978 at 232 Cranmer Court, Sloane Avenue, London, and his body was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 67775


Clarke, William Francis (1883-1961), intelligence officer, was born on 22 May 1883 at 37 Russell Square, London, the son of the celebrated Edwardian advocate and solicitor-general Sir Edward George Clarke (1841-1931) and his wife, Kathleen Mathilda Bryant (died 1944). He was the youngest of three children and the only child of his father's second marriage. Educated at Harrow School and Magdalen College, Oxford (1902-5), Clarke was called to the bar in 1906 (by his father, who was treasurer of Lincoln's Inn that year). On 31 July 1907 he married Dorothy Mainland (1885?-1949), and they had one son and two daughters. He was familiarly known as Nobby. 
Before the war Clarke had entertained a 'sneaking desire' to join the Royal Navy and 'get to the sea' (Clarke, 'My way to Room 40', TNA: PRO, HW3/3). In February 1915 he reported to the Royal Naval division at Crystal Palace. Had he passed the eye examination, his hope of securing a commission as an executive officer by knocking ten years off his real age of thirty-three might have succeeded. In any case, Clarke accepted a commission as an assistant paymaster (later promoted to paymaster lieutenant-commander) and spent much of his first year in the Royal Navy engaged in routine pay and disciplinary matters. However, legal training combined with a command of the German language qualified him admirably for intelligence work. In early 1916 the director of naval intelligence, Captain W. Reginald Hall, recruited the keen paymaster into the embryonic code-breaking unit Room 40, designated by its location in Admiralty old block. 
When Clarke joined Room 40 in March 1916 it had, with the benefit of captured German naval code books and the backing of the first lord of the Admiralty, Winston S. Churchill, begun the process of transforming itself into Britain's most successful intelligence organization to date. Though usually remembered by historians for the interception and decoding of the celebrated Zimmermann telegram, its main contribution was to the war at sea. Most significantly, Room 40, with its ability to read the coded radio communications of the German high seas fleet, robbed German commanders of the advantage of surprise and permitted the British Grand Fleet to tailor its state of readiness to German plans. The Admiralty, however, failed to exploit Room 40's full potential by not integrating it into its operational command and control procedures. During the battle of Jutland, for instance, Clarke -- who was on duty in Room 40 throughout the engagement -- witnessed with frustration the tactical confusion generated by the inefficient distribution of intelligence to commanders at sea. The decision in May 1917 to end the code-breakers' relative isolation within Admiralty command arrived in time for radio interception to be a contributing factor in the defeat of the U-boats. 
The lessons of 1914-18 informed Clarke's career. In Room 40, under Commander Herbert Hope, a professional sailor with a great talent for analysis, he learned that intelligence officers should aim to build a comprehensive picture of enemy intentions. Indeed, Clarke's strength lay in the analysis of information gleaned from wireless interception rather than code-breaking. This probably explains his selection in 1919, along with his friend and colleague Frank Birch, to compile a history of Room 40. When the task was finished the following year, it reflected Clarke's characteristically outspoken approach to the navy's errors in the handling of intelligence and was consequently 'suppressed' (Clarke, 'The years between', TNA: PRO, HW3/16). 
Also in 1919 Clarke joined the Government Code and Cypher School (GCCS), the successor to Room 40 and its War Office counterpart. He had hoped to specialize in naval matters, but by 1920 the work was mostly diplomatic, and Clarke was assigned for the next four years to the section attacking American diplomatic traffic. None the less, fearing that the Admiralty might neglect signals intelligence in peacetime, he kept his hand in naval work. In 1924 these efforts paid off with a promotion to head of the newly created naval section within the GCCS -- an appointment Clarke retained until 1941. Certainly, his chief contribution to the development of British intelligence was his tireless efforts to build up the naval section during the lean years of the late 1920s and early 1930s, and the steady expansion under his careful guidance of the naval section prompted by the Abyssinian crisis and the Spanish Civil War, when once again a premium was placed on the decoding of foreign naval communications. Yet before September 1939 doubts were often expressed by top naval officers and other officials that Room 40's feats could be duplicated owing to the introduction of machine encryption. Clarke vigorously disputed this view in lectures to naval officers and in correspondence with the Admiralty. 
The ability of Bletchley Park (the wartime home of the GCCS) to decrypt the German and Italian (Enigma) machine codes vindicated Clarke's expectation. Along with other key Room 40 veterans, he played an important role in laying the foundations for Bletchley Park's remarkable success. In 1939-40 Clarke devoted himself to the subsection responsible for breaking Italian naval codes, while Frank Birch, his former colleague and successor as head of the naval section, took responsibility for attacking German traffic. Clarke retired in October 1945 and completed his memoirs, which, though unpublished, remain an important historical source. He died on 5 February 1961 at St Mary Abbots Hospital, Kensington, London, and was buried in Selworthy church, Minehead, Somerset. 


@@@@@


doc= 67776


Landau, Henry (1892-1968), intelligence officer, was born in Transvaal, on 7 March 1892, the son of Charles Landau, an English merchant, and Christina Smith, who was Dutch. Educated at Durban high school and Dulwich College (1902-3), Landau went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1910 and gained first class honours in the natural sciences tripos. Fluent in French, German, and Dutch, he travelled widely in Europe and after graduating from Cambridge in 1913 he joined the Royal School of Mines, London. On the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 he joined the Australian Volunteer Hospital, and was soon in France. In December 1914 Landau enlisted in the Royal Field Artillery and, after brief training, returned to France in April 1915 as second lieutenant. On sick leave in London in May 1916 he successfully applied for a transfer to the intelligence corps, and in the following month was seconded to Commander Mansfield Cumming, head of the British secret service. The Germans had recently broken up Cumming's spy network monitoring troop movements in occupied Belgium and northern France, and he informed Landau that 'it is up to you to reorganise the service' (Landau, 'All's Fair', 43). Landau was dispatched to Rotterdam to work with Richard Bolton Tinsley, one of Cumming's senior agents. 
In Rotterdam Landau headed Tinsley's military section, running train-watching networks in the eastern half of Belgium under an agreement with British general headquarters, which ran its own networks in the western half. His agents monitored the distribution of German forces, passing messages across the electrified barrier which the Germans had constructed along the Dutch-Belgian border. The most significant of his networks was La Dame Blanche, which by the end of the war included over 900 agents and ninety observation posts. By October 1916 Landau's networks were producing results, while the general headquarters' systems were in decline. By July 1917 the general headquarters' networks were in such poor shape that Sigismund Payne Best was sent to Rotterdam to reorganize them. Best found Landau 'a very hard worker', but heard rumours that he had been poaching general headquarters' agents. More significantly he found Tinsley to be 'a most thorough-paced scoundrel' (Payne Best correspondence, Walter L. Leschander Collection), who was heavily involved in blackmailing Dutch businessmen through the allied blacklist of firms known to trade with Germany. 
By September 1917 Tinsley was under official investigation and Best claimed that on two occasions Tinsley sent agents to beat him up, although each time Landau tipped him off. In November 1917 general headquarters was obliged to transfer Best to London, after official complaints from Colonel Oppenheim, military attache at The Hague. As a postwar report noted, Landau was now Tinsley's second in command, 'and was undoubtedly the brains' of the Rotterdam operation (Jeffery, 77). 
In June 1918 Cumming recalled Landau to London, noting in his diary that he 'won't speak but gives me the impression that there is 'something rotten'' (Judd, 416). According to Best: '[Landau] was put through a proper interrogation.... He was quite ready to quit and he told us all about the conspiracy being run by Tinsley and Laurence Oppenheim over the 'black book'. He said that they got millions out of the Dutch business people by threatening to have them put on the black book unless they paid for their names to be omitted. (Payne Best MSS)' Despite these revelations Landau was permitted to return to Rotterdam and Cumming declined to take action against Tinsley, who survived a second investigation some months later and was said to have ended the war $200,000 richer. 
After the war Landau joined Best on the inter-allied intelligence commission in Brussels, with responsibility for awarding medals and compensating the families of agents captured and executed. In August 1919 the 'London Gazette' carried the names of almost 1400 of Landau's former agents, and the same month saw the creation of a new passport control department, providing diplomatic cover for Cumming's agents abroad. Landau was assigned to Berlin as senior passport control officer for Germany, a job that he knew to be 'one of the most important posts in the post-war British Secret Service re-organisation' (Henry Landau, curriculum vitae). However, Landau quickly got into serious financial difficulties and was obliged to resign from the secret service in 1920 (Jeffery, 193-4). 
Landau became foreign representative for John Brown and Company, the Glasgow shipbuilders. Based in Berlin, he was responsible for tracking down patents and inventions which could be useful, travelling through France, Belgium, Holland, Austria, and Hungary, and doing freelance work for Cumming 'on odd occasions' (Landau, 'All's Fair', 251, 258). In August 1923 Landau got married, but then, according to Best, he 'went wrong' while working as a representative of the Royal Packet Steamship Company in Budapest. In October 1925 he told his wife that he was going on a business trip, and simply disappeared, Best hearing later that he had staged his own suicide, taking with him all the money he could find. Landau eventually resurfaced in the United States, working as a teacher and in 1928 applying for US citizenship. 
In 1933 Landau became a US citizen, and began working as an investigator on the US compensation claim against Germany, before the Mixed Claims Commission. Based in Europe, his job was to search for evidence of wartime sabotage by the German secret service in the USA, but the British secret service cautiously informed its European officers that, although they had employed Landau during the war, his conduct 'has since been unsatisfactory and contact or communication with him should be avoided' (Jeffery, 244). In 1934 Landau caused further animosity by publishing a detailed memoir, 'All's Fair: the Story of the British Secret Service behind the German Lines', followed in 1935 by 'Secrets of the White Lady', dealing with La Dame Blanche. 
The British secret service was particularly concerned that one of the agents described in 'All's Fair' was still working in Germany, and when he was arrested and executed in October 1939 they blamed Landau. There had been plans to threaten Landau with the 'Official Secrets Act' if he tried to republish 'All's Fair' in Britain, and when the United States entered the war in December 1941, some attempt was apparently made to have him arrested. But there was never any firm evidence that his revelations had compromised operations, and he continued in his job as an investigator for the US Federal Works Agency, looking after public construction projects. From 1943 he spent three years as an investigator for the US Maritime Commission, and in 1946 he went into business as an importer. Landau married, for a second time, in the USA, and had children. He retired to Florida and died in Chilapa, Mexico, in May 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 67777


Gizycka, Countess Krystyna (1915-1952), special operations officer, was born on 1 May 1915, probably at Mlodziesyn, some 30 miles from Warsaw, Poland. Her father, Count Jerzy Skarbek, had married in 1899 Stephanie Goldfeder, daughter of a Jewish banker, and they already had a son. The estate was soon overrun by the German army, and her infancy was spent under German occupation. In 1920 the family moved to another estate, at Trzebnica, near Piotrkow, where she learned to ride; she later learned to ski. 'She was recalcitrant to any form of discipline' (Masson, 9). In 1930 her father died of tuberculosis; her mother moved to Warsaw and let Krystyna leave her convent school to work as a clerk for a motor dealer. She had dark hair, small bones, and graceful movement. She was a boisterous teenager, who hated office work and was strongly attractive to young men. She liked to spend holidays round Zakopane, on the Czechoslovak border, skiing, and smuggling tobacco for fun. In 1933 she was briefly and unsuccessfully married to Karol Getlich, a wealthy Polish businessman of German origin; they divorced promptly by mutual consent. 
By accident, Krystyna met on a skiing slope near Zakopane a Polish diplomat, Jerzy Gizycki, who was captivated by her, and married her in Warsaw on 2 November 1938. He took up a post as consul in Addis Ababa, and introduced Krystyna to Africa; but that marriage too soon became one of incompatibles. On hearing of the German invasion of Poland in 1939 they at once moved to London, and Krystyna was engaged that autumn by George Taylor as an agent for the British secret service. From that time onwards she was known as Christine Granville. She travelled to Budapest, whence she set out to cross Slovakia into Poland, intending to deliver leaflets to sustain the morale of the Poles. She made three journeys into Poland that winter, and once got as far as Warsaw; she returned with several Polish officers who wanted to continue fighting, and with valuable information. Her friendships with the locals made these crossings feasible; but they seemed suspicious both to the Polish and to the British secret authorities. The Polish government in exile asked the British not to employ her again. She failed to persuade her mother to leave Poland, and never saw her again; Countess Skarbeka was later murdered by the Nazis. 
While in Budapest, Christine renewed friendship with an acquaintance of her gentry childhood, Andrzeij Kowerski (called Andrew Kennedy later, in the Special Operations Executive, or SOE). They became strongly attached to each other, and travelled together to Constantinople, later to Cairo. Though devoted to him, she detested housework and preferred living in single rooms in hotels, and eating in cafes, to keeping house. Eventually (1 August 1946) she divorced Gizycki, who had settled in Canada. 
SOE found both her and Kennedy office jobs, successively in Constantinople and in Cairo. Entirely fluent in French from childhood, she was accepted as an agent by AMF section of SOE, which worked from Algiers, and parachuted into France on 6-7 July 1944 to act as courier to Francis Cammaerts ('Roger'), who was in charge of all subversive activities east of the Rhone. She arrived just in time to be at Cammaerts's elbow during the fighting in the Vercors in mid-July, and evaded capture with him -- by marching 70 miles in twenty-four hours -- when the Germans reconquered the plateau. She next crossed into Italy, beyond Briancon, and made contact with a band of Italian partisans in the Alps; then, at the Col de Larche farther south, she talked a unit of Polish conscripts in the Wehrmacht into changing sides. 
On 13 August, at a chance road control, Cammaerts, his other courier, Xan Fielding, and a Gaullist officer called Sorensen were arrested and imprisoned in Digne. Christine, bold as brass, called on Max Waem, a Belgian, the local Gestapo interpreter, indicated what would happen to him if he did not release the prisoners promptly, secured (by parachute from Algiers) a bribe of 2 million francs and on 17 August drove Waem and all three prisoners away into the country. Waem was saved from any prosecution. For this feat she was awarded a George Medal by the British and a Croix de Guerre by the French. She was also commissioned into the Women's Auxiliary Air Force; but plans to parachute her back to Poland were cancelled. She was appointed OBE instead. 
At the end of the war Christine quarrelled with Kennedy and drifted from job to job, mainly in London, sometimes in Kenya; always short of money. She was granted British citizenship on 23 November 1946. She settled in May 1951 to be a stewardess on Shaw Savill liners plying to Australia. On her first liner she met a sailor, Dennis George Muldowney, whose advances she resisted. He pursued her closely, even when she switched to the Union Castle Line, and in a frenzy knifed her to death in the hall of a small hotel in South Kensington on 15 June 1952. He was hanged ten weeks later. She was buried in St Mary's Catholic cemetery, Kensal Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 67778


Jolly, George (bap. 1613, d. in or before 1683), actor and theatre manager, was baptized at St Luke's Church on 23 March 1613 as the son of Ralph Gellye, whose origins and occupation are unknown. George Jolly's career had three distinct stages. In July 1640 he was living in the house of the actor Matthew Smith in Whitecross Street, where his son John was baptized. The baby, 'sonne of George Jolly Player', died a week later and was buried at St Giles Cripplegate. Like Smith, Jolly was undoubtedly a member of Prince Charles's Men, then acting at the Fortune playhouse, close to Whitecross Street, but his name does not appear among any surviving records of the company, and he must have still been a junior member of the troupe when playing ceased in 1642. 
At some time before 1647 Jolly moved to continental Europe, and appears to have remained there until 1660, travelling considerable distances as the leader of a variety of acting troupes. Initially he may have joined his colleagues who had gone to perform for the English royalist community in exile, first at The Hague, then in Paris, between 1644 and 1646. This group has been called Prince Charles's Men, since it sought the patronage of the exiled prince; it certainly included two of Jolly's fellows from the Fortune company. By April 1647, however, Jolly had emerged as head of a troupe of fourteen players perhaps capable of playing in a variety of languages, but working principally, from 1648 onwards, in German. Jolly's theatrical activity in Germany for the next twelve years ranks among the most important contributions of the 'Englische Komodianten' to the early German stage, a cultural exchange which had begun in the early 1590s but had been interrupted by the Thirty Years' War. 
In 1647 the company appears to have been in Brussels, then at Bruges, and in spring 1648 at Cologne, where they played for three months, moving to Frankfurt am Main in August. Early in 1649 they returned to Cologne; by October they were in Danzig, and by December in Sweden, returning to Danzig in August 1650. Throughout the 1650s Frankfurt and the surrounding area formed the base for Jolly's touring enterprises, chiefly in the southern German-speaking territories. His company included a growing number of native German actors, and by 1654 actresses; at the same date he advertised plays and operas produced with Italianate scenery. Most records of his playing are connected with annual town fairs and festivals, but he occasionally performed for the nobility. By November 1650 he had acted before the emperor Ferdinand III, and again in May 1653 his company entertained the imperial court in Vienna; in September 1655 he played before the visiting Prince Charles at Frankfurt, and it seems likely that he also played at the elector's court in Heidelberg: Elector Karl Ludwig von der Pfalz (Charles Lewis) was a cousin of Prince Charles and the brother of Prince Rupert, who resided in Mainz after 1652. It was probably Jolly's troupe which played Gryphius's German tragedy 'Carolus Stuardus' near Frankfurt in 1656. The play dramatizes the trial and execution of King Charles I. 
Jolly's reputation as a strolling manager was that of an irascible and violent man: two of his German actors made official complaints of assault at his hands, and he was expelled from Nuremberg in 1660 as the result of a quarrel. Of his personal life at this period there are very few indications. In appealing for permission to stay in Frankfurt in the winter of 1657-8 he claimed that his wife was very sick; it may be doubted whether this woman was the mother of the child born in London seventeen years earlier, but late in 1659 Jolly's second known child was baptized, in Nuremberg: the mother was recorded as Maria di Roy of Utrecht, perhaps one of the German-speaking actresses of the troupe. 
Jolly returned to England late in 1660, and in December was granted a royal licence to form an acting company, in addition to the two led by Sir William Davenant and Thomas Killigrew. The licence put Jolly in a remarkably strong position in the new theatrical world, especially when one considers both his obscurity before 1642 and his social status relative to the two courtiers who were given charge of the other companies. He must have been able to argue, or had patrons to argue, that his theatrical enterprises in Europe had had some significance in supporting the royalist cause. Over the next two years Jolly played at both the Cockpit in Drury Lane and the Salisbury Court playhouses; among his repertory was at least one old play, Marlowe's 'Doctor Faustus'. Killigrew and Davenant sought to maintain their joint monopoly on London theatre by buying the royal licence from Jolly, at the cost of $4 per week to be paid to him throughout his life. An agreement to this effect was signed at the very end of 1662, immediately following which Jolly obtained a licence to form a provincial company -- a venture which he may already have begun at Cambridge in 1662. By April 1663, however, his company was playing at the King's Arms in Norwich, where it remained until September, presenting a repertory of pre-war plays by Middleton, Ford, Fletcher, Massinger, and others. During 1664 the arrangement with Davenant and Killigrew collapsed, and Jolly resumed playing in London, at the Cockpit. In 1667 Killigrew contrived to have Jolly's 1660 patent recalled, but Jolly evaded compliance: warrants for his arrest were issued in April 1667 and again in January 1668, when he was acting in the company of John Russell, Paul Ryemes, and Peter Gryen. As a temporary settlement of the dispute with the other patentees Jolly was given supervision of the Nursery, a training school and theatre for young actors, with an income to be based on the company's performances. Jolly's control would appear to have been largely managerial, with the performers under the direction of Thomas Bedford, and after 1669 of John Perin. 
Jolly remained involved in touring, however. He received permission to play in Norwich in September 1669, and his players seem to have stayed there for three months. Following Killigrew's appointment as master of the revels in April 1673 there was a further dispute about Jolly's position at the Nursery. Probably in the summer of 1674 Jolly lodged a complaint that Killigrew was denying him the money due to him from the 1662 agreement and the arrangements derived from it. The document speaks of the ruin of the complainant and his family -- a wife and an unspecified number of children. No further records of Jolly's life and affairs survive; by March 1683 at the latest he was dead, when, at Norwich, John Coysh claimed to hold the succession to Jolly's patent to act. 


@@@@@


doc= 67779


Marshall, Rebecca (fl. 1660-1683), actress, was accused by Nell Gwyn of being 'a Presbyter's praying daughter' and Samuel Pepys was told that she and her sister Anne Marshall (later Anne Quin) were the daughters of the famous puritan divine Stephen Marshall (Pepys, 8.502-3). He was misinformed: their father was probably another, much more obscure, clergyman, chaplain to Lord Gerard of Gerard's Bromley, Staffordshire. Their father's first name is unknown; their mother was named Elizabeth. Rebecca Marshall may have been active in the King's Company at Vere Street in their first season of 1660-61, having been sworn a member of that company in 1661 according to lord chamberlain records; however, these lists are difficult to interpret. One 1663 roster of sworn actors lists her. 
As with many performers of this period, the biographical evidence that exists about Marshall concerns her stage life. Her first recorded role was Colona in John Ford's 'Love's Sacrifice' (no later than August 1664). She was primarily known for her portrayal of tempestuous, passionate women, usually in tragedies. For example, she played the queen of Sicily in John Dryden's 'Secret Love' (1667), Lyndaraxa in both parts of Dryden's 'The Conquest of Granada' (1670-71), Fulvia in William Joyner's 'The Roman Empress' (1670), and Calphurnia in Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar' ('c'.1672). The roles usually offset those played by another actress of the same company, Elizabeth Bowtell. Numerous rival pairs were written so the company could take advantage of the contrast between Marshall's fiery characters and Bowtell's sweet ones (demonstrating how contemporary playwrights deliberately created roles to match the strengths of individual company players). For example, Marshall played Olivia against Bowtell's Fidelia in William Wycherley's 'The Plain Dealer' (1676), and she played Roxana against Bowtell's Statira in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens' (1677). 
The characters Marshall played on stage seem to reflect her own character. In a deposition of February 1667 she stated that she 'taxed' Sir Hugh Middleton 'with some ill language he had cast out against the women actors of that house', and she accused him of 'calling her Jade, and threatning he would kick her and that his footman should kick her'. Middleton waited outside the playhouse, 'which gave her some apprehension that he lay in wait to doe her some mischief or affront', and finally, she complained, some ruffian she believed to have been hired by Middleton followed her home and approached her in the street, where he 'clapd a Turd upon her face and haire' and ran away (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 7.426). This was not the only time Marshall had public problems with men. Some time about spring 1665 she petitioned the king for protection from one Mark Trevor. Actresses were often vulnerable to threats and insults from spectators and others who regarded them as servants of the public. 
Later legal papers indicate that Marshall sued Mary Meggs, the King's Company orangewoman, in November 1669 for 'abusing' her, and that Marshall was sued for debt by Richard Uttings, beginning in May and continuing at least into late June 1672 (Milhous and Hume, 1.110). The evidence suggests a woman not much afraid of speaking her mind, nor of confrontation. Some time in the spring of 1677 Marshall left the King's Company and joined the Duke's Company at their Dorset Garden theatre. Her only known role after this move was as Maria in Thomas D'Urfey's 'A Fond Husband' (1677). She seems to have left the stage after that date, and no death date has been discovered. 
The only two other pieces of information about Beck Marshall that survive from after 1677 concern her personal life. An anonymous manuscript 'Lampoon' ('c'.1678) at Harvard suggests that she had had a daughter, though no other evidence supports this. This poem also calls her a 'Proud Curtizan' and, although this is not an unusual accusation for an actress of this period, an anonymous 'Satyr on both Whigs and Tories' of 1683 implies that she had been the mistress of the 'famous fop' Sir George Hewitt. This is the last known reference to this colourful and important Restoration actress. 


@@@@@


doc= 67780


George Bunyard (1841-1919), nurseryman, and his wife, Katherine Sophia Ashdown. His father was born on 5 February 1841 at London Road, Maidstone, the son of Thomas Bunyard (1804/5-1880) and his wife, Mary Ann Butler (1814/15-1889). He married Katherine Sophia ('b'. 1850/51), daughter of Charles Ashdown, paper maker, on 3 June 1873 and they had eight children. George Bunyard became one of Britain's foremost nurserymen, a leading fruit authority and head of George Bunyard & Sons Ltd, of Allington and Maidstone. His grandfather, James Bunyard (died 1844), had founded a nursery at Maidstone in 1796 and George entered this business aged fourteen in 1855, before becoming partner and manager in 1869. Severe family and financial problems brought the firm to bankruptcy in 1879, but George was able to get the business back and begin again. His fortunes had changed with a contract in 1880-81 to supply half a million trees for Lord Sudeley's estate in Gloucestershire and the business continued to prosper with the enormous investment in fruit that occurred in the last decades of the nineteenth century as the modern British fruit industry was founded. 


@@@@@


doc= 67781


(George) Norman Bunyard (1886-1969), nurseryman and iris grower, was born on 21 October 1886 at London Road, Maidstone. Norman joined the family nursery in Kent on his return from the war in 1919. The business was still famous for its fruit trees and ornamental plants, especially roses, and he took over as its head on his brother's retirement in 1939. Under his direction the firm had begun an interest in irises in 1920 and Norman Bunyard raised a number of fine cultivars. He helped found the British Iris Society in 1922 and was its secretary in 1922-7 and for many years served on its committee. He married, and he and his wife, Dorothy Mary, had two daughters. Norman Bunyard died at home at 10 Faraday Road, Maidstone, on 9 February 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 67782


Richardson, Charlotte Caroline (1796-1854), poet and novelist, was born on 15 May 1796 in Lambeth, London, the youngest of the three daughters of Robert Richardson (died 1804), clerk, and Elizabeth Smales ('c'.1759-1841). When Charlotte's father died in 1804, her mother opened a boarding-school in Vauxhall, in order to combine a source of income with supervision of the education of her older daughters, but she sent the youngest to live with an aunt in Hinderwell, Yorkshire. What had begun as a temporary measure was prolonged for more than ten years, apparently contrary to the wishes of both mother and daughter. 
Charlotte Richardson's parents had become acquainted through the pages of the 'Ladies' Diary', an almanac that featured verse enigmas, charades, and rebuses, along with prose mathematical puzzles, and offered prizes for verse answers. The mode of question and reply fostered a degree of courtly flirtation between the various contributors, and Robert Richardson, who had been contributing since the 1780s, was so taken with the contributions of Miss Smales that he tracked her down and after a short correspondence they were married. Charlotte Caroline in turn seems to have regained contact with her mother by publishing a poem in the 'Ladies' Diary' in 1815, identifying herself as the youngest daughter of Mrs Richardson, 'formerly Betty Smales'. Mrs Richardson, who was familiar to readers by both names, replied in a poem the following year, greeting her 'long-lost child', and in the meantime arrangements were made for Charlotte to visit her family in London. The two generations of Richardsons were steady contributors to the 'Ladies' Diary' (and its successor the 'Lady's and Gentleman's Diary') for over seventy years, Charlotte's sisters Elizabeth Anne (later Mrs Baker) and Eleanor (later Mrs Long) playing their part, and in 1846 Charlotte and Elizabeth Anne edited a volume of their mother's 'Poems', drawn from her contributions, and provided a memoir of her life. 
Charlotte, however, was the most successful writer in the family. Her brief volume 'Waterloo, a Poem on the Late Victory' (1817) and her book of verse for children, 'Isaac and Rebecca', of the same year, were followed by the more ambitious 'Harvest, a Poem, in Two Parts: with other Poetical Pieces' (1818), which was dedicated to the mathematician Charles Hutton, editor of the 'Ladies' Diary'. Charlotte's last substantial work was a complicated 'legendary tale', 'Ludolph, or, The Light of Nature, a Poem' (1823). Her sentimental-gothic novel, 'The Soldier's Child, or, Virtue Triumphant' (1823) was not well received, but it contains a minor character called Clara Roberts whose childhood closely parallels Charlotte's and may reflect her feelings about having been separated from her family. Charlotte continued to write for the 'Ladies' Diary' until the year of her death, and contributed occasional verse to other periodicals such as 'Pawsey's Ladies Fashionable Repository'. 
On 5 November 1827 Charlotte married John Richardson, a wharfinger; they do not seem to have had any children. Thereafter she styled herself variously Mrs Charlotte Caroline Richardson, Mrs C. C. Richardson, and, after her mother's death in 1841, Mrs Richardson of Vauxhall. As a consequence she has been regularly confused in library catalogues and elsewhere with her mother and with Mrs Charlotte Richardson of York and Mrs C. E. Richardson of Dumfries. She died after an attack of paralysis on 29 March 1854 at her home, 25 Vauxhall Street, Vauxhall, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 67783


Farquhar, William (1774-1839), colonial administrator in Singapore, was born at Newhall, Kincardineshire, on 26 February 1774, the seventh son of Robert Farquhar of Newhall and his second wife, Agnes, eldest daughter of James Morison of Elsick, provost of Aberdeen. Following the entry of his elder brother, Arthur Farquhar, into the Royal Navy he was appointed to a cadetship in the East India Company, and after his arrival at Madras in 1791 he was gazetted ensign in the corps of engineers. He served in the grand army under Lord Cornwallis in Mysore, and in 1793, as adjutant to the corps of Madras engineers, he took part in the capture of Pondicherry. 
Farquhar was engineer in charge of a party of Madras pioneers sent on the military expedition against the Dutch settlement of Malacca in 1795. After its capture he served as chief of staff to the British commandant with the rank of captain-lieutenant. In 1803 he succeeded to the post of commandant, later resident and commandant, which he held until the settlement was restored to the Netherlands in 1818. During his administration the Dutch legal and land systems were modified in accordance with British practice, but the revenues were never sufficient to meet the costs of administration and the East India Company decided to abandon the settlement and destroy the fortifications. Farquhar protested against this decision but it was not until the company's directors received a skilfully worded report from Thomas Stamford Raffles in 1808 that the order was countermanded. 
Farquhar was appointed to take charge of military intelligence and of the guides during the British conquest of Java in 1811, and on 26 August he took part in the capture of the Dutch stronghold of Meester Cornelis. He declined the appointment of British resident at the Javanese court of Yogyakarta, and resumed his command at Malacca on 30 October. In the following year he was placed in temporary control of Bangka, where he supervised the construction of a fort and other buildings, and he later returned briefly to the island to report on its military defences. In 1818 he was appointed to conclude commercial treaties with the rulers of Riau, Lingga, and Siak, and he was subsequently ordered to assist Raffles in establishing a trading factory at Singapore. He was appointed first resident and commandant of the new settlement and set about constructing roads and allocating lands to the European merchants, who soon recognized Singapore's commercial potential. He was under instruction to restrict such grants of land to the south of the Singapore River but, because of the unsatisfactory nature of the ground, he was obliged to make temporary grants north of the river. This and other short-term measures brought him into conflict with Raffles, who dismissed him from office in 1823. 
Farquhar returned to London in 1824 and protested, unsuccessfully, to the East India Company about his treatment. He settled at Perth in Scotland, and in 1828 married Margaret Loban (died 1844), daughter of Robert and Isabella Loban of Fochabers, with whom he had six children; he had consorted in Asia with a half-Malay woman named Nonya Clement, or Clemaine, with whom he also had six children. In 1829 he was promoted to colonel and in 1837 to major-general. Farquhar had a keen interest in natural history and his discoveries at Malacca of the Malayan tapir, binturong (or bearcat), and banded linsang were among the most important ever made in Malaysian zoology, though none is named after him. He donated his large collection of natural history drawings, made by Asian artists, to the Royal Asiatic Society in 1826, but this was sold in 1993 and is now in the Singapore Art Museum. Farquhar died at Early Bank Villa, Perth, on 11 May 1839 and was interred in the burial-ground of Greyfriars, Perth, where a substantial monument to him was erected by his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 67784


Roper, Primrose (1908-1978), painter and gardener, was born on 19 April 1908 at 25 Harley Street, Marylebone, London, the younger daughter of Vaughan Edward Berkeley Harley (1864-1923), a doctor, and his wife, Mary Blagden, of Harley Street and Walton Hall, Bletchley, Buckinghamshire. After the sudden death of her father in May 1923 (when Walton Hall was left to her elder sister, Diana) she became spiritedly independent: having studied at Chelsea School of Art and in Paris, she settled at 5 Seaforth Place, London, where she began to paint professionally. On 21 December 1936 she was married, in the chapel of Wellington Barracks, to Major John Alfred Codrington (1898- 'c'.1990), who had just returned from three years in India. She leased Park House in Onslow Square, London, and they made the garden there together. The marriage was only briefly happy, and she obtained a divorce in 1942 when Codrington left for service abroad. Primrose Codrington volunteered for work as a war artist, designing and painting camouflage with, among others, Basil Spence, painting murals for rescue centres, hospitals, and schools, and -- in her spare time -- drawing and painting the ruins of bombed city churches: as all this work was unpaid, it is also largely unrecorded. After the war she divided her life between Park House, where she restored her garden with an innovatory use of wild flowers to create the feeling of a country garden, and winters spent in Claviers in Provence. Many commissions for murals were fulfilled, most notably for the British European Airways offices at Dorland House in Lower Regent Street in 1948 (now destroyed). The only surviving mural attributed to her is in the church at Walton, Buckinghamshire, now part of the campus of the Open University. 
On 19 December 1952 Primrose Codrington married Lanning Roper (1912-1983) and they both contributed to the development of Park House and its garden, which was widely illustrated in magazines and newspapers and seen by thousands of garden visitors when it was opened for the National Gardens Scheme. While in England she mainly painted flowers, studies in oil in the manner of R. J. Thornton's 'Temple of Flora' (which was one of her husband's most treasured possessions), and watercolours of garden vignettes or plants, exhibiting a marvellous control of colour both in the garden and on canvas or paper. In Claviers she painted many landscapes, always with abundant plants, of tremendous variety and with a sure touch, and also still lifes. She was an accomplished draughtswoman, and painting was a constant and vital means of self-expression for her otherwise reserved personality. Her work is mainly of the quality and in the manner of British Romantics such as John Nash and Edward Bawden; indeed, many of her friends were part of their East Anglian artistic community. In appearance she was neat, elegant, and chic; in manner she was efficient and sometimes intimidating, undoubtedly because of her shyness and deep desire for privacy. These last may have been the reason for her separation from Lanning Roper after about ten years, and their eventual divorce in 1968. Her reserve and the possession of private means explains why she rarely (if ever) exhibited her work for sale, and at her death many paintings were distributed among her circle of long-standing and devoted friends. She died of cancer at her home, 44 Cadogan Square, London, on 22 April 1978, and was buried at Walton church. In her will she left substantial donations to the Friends of Hammersmith Hospital, the Sir Malcolm Sargent Cancer Fund for Children, the National Art Collections Fund, and other charities. 


@@@@@


doc= 67788


Enoch ap Evan (c.1599-1633), murderer, was born at Clun, Shropshire, the elder son of Edward ap Evan (died 1633), yeoman, and his wife, Joan ('c'.1561-1633). Enoch and his brother John ('c'.1602-1633) helped their father farm his holding, and Enoch served in the trained bands in 1631. The family, including Enoch's five sisters, was pious, reading the 'Book of Common Prayer' twice daily. He purchased a 'Bible', which he carried with him, attended weekday lectures, and sometimes rode three or four miles to hear sermons. About 1631 he became dissatisfied with episcopal polity, kneeling at communion, and the sign of the cross in baptism, probably owing to his exposure to the network of puritan ministers centred around Julines Herring, a protege of Arthur Hildersham and lecturer at St Alkmund, Shrewsbury, from 1618 to 1635. A year later he ceased to kneel at communion, believing this posture 'thrust the heeles and legges behind the bodie' and thus impeded the flow of spiritual nourishment. 'By inspiration' he came to the conclusion that the Lord's supper should be received while sitting or standing and bowing (TNA: PRO, SP 16/244/67). Convinced that he was one of the elect, he believed the Holy Spirit guided him. 
Enoch's mother and brother attempted to dissuade him from such views, and during a discussion about kneeling on 30 June 1633 she reputedly told him he was 'a very sorry fellow' (Studley, 'Looking-Glasse', 36-7). After being jilted on the night of 4 July by the woman he expected to marry he got little sleep. About one o'clock the next afternoon, feeling called to 'vindicate the cause of God... by effusion of his owne brothers bloud' (ibid., 35), he hit John in the head with the blunt end of a hatchet as the latter napped with his head on the kitchen table, knocking him to the floor, and then decapitated him with two more blows. When his mother entered the room, shrieked, and rebuked him, he hit her in the face, though he had not planned to harm her. In the ensuing struggle he struck her with the hatchet between the left shoulder and the neck, slicing into her breast and pushing her to the floor, and then decapitated her. After knocking a hole in the wall to create the impression of a break-in, he carried the heads, wrapped in linen and a jerkin, into a meadow and secreted them under a pile of ferns to be burnt. He then went to his cousin's house, read 'Isaiah' 1, and borrowed a copy of Lewis Bayly's 'The Practise of Pietie'. As the two men walked toward Enoch's house two maids and some neighbours apprehended him and turned him over to a local magistrate, Sir Robert Howard. 
At first Enoch professed his innocence, but he finally confessed to Erasmus Powell, vicar of Clun, who had baptized him. According to the record of his examination, 'the divill being strong with him at that instan[t] tempted him to doe this' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/242/39). As he was transported to the county gaol at Shrewsbury his sister confronted him, asking why he had committed the murders. 'Peace foole', he reportedly replied, 'hold thy tongue, wee live in a false Church, and thou shalt see a change shortly' (Studley, 'Looking-Glasse', 53). At his trial he manifested neither 'distraction' nor a remorseful countenance, though he expressed sorrow for the crimes (TNA: PRO, SP 16/244/67). Numerous ministers visited him in prison, hoping to obtain his repentance, and the puritans also wanted him to blame his actions on something other than the family argument over kneeling, which he had cited. Mental illness would have been a better explanation in their judgement, and there were unsubstantiated rumours that he was an Anabaptist. Determined to use the murders to tarnish puritans, Peter Studley, Arminian-inclined minister of St Chad's, Shrewsbury, visited him eighteen times, concluding that he was not insane, that he continued to hold Calvinist tenets, and that he believed Satan could not prevail over God's children. However, he told Gervase Needham, vicar of Bishop's Castle, Shropshire, that he had experienced visions of a dove. 
Prior to his execution, on 20 August, ap Evan allegedly told other prisoners that killing the hangman would not be sinful. In order to take communion before his execution he received it kneeling, and on the gallows at Bishop's Castle he cried to God for mercy and exhorted the audience to heed his example. Bound in chains, his corpse remained on the gibbet for more than two weeks before unknown persons secretly buried it. 
Accounts of the murders appeared in several penny dreadful pamphlets, 'A True Relation of a Barbarous and most Cruel Murder' (1633) and 'A Mirror for Murders' (1633), as well as Studley's tract, 'The Looking-Glasse of Schisme' (1634), which Archbishop William Laud's chaplain licensed. Although he refused to approve a rival account by another local magistrate, Richard More, 'A True Relation of the Murders', which deemed ap Evan insane, it circulated in manuscript and was rebutted by Studley in 'A Refutation of such Calumnies' (1635). In 1636 the puritan Henry Burton cited Studley's book as evidence of a Jesuit conspiracy to defame puritans, and its publication was noted in a list of grievances presented to the Short Parliament by Sir Robert Harley. The refusal of Laud's chaplain to license More's account, eventually published in 1641, was the subject of a complaint to the Long Parliament. Robert Wright, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was interested in the case, and Augustine Lindsell, bishop of Hereford, responded to the affair by restricting the combination lecture at Bishop's Castle to conformist ministers. The author of 'The Ranters Ranting' (1650) retold the story with gross inaccuracies to conclude his sensationalist pamphlet. 


@@@@@


doc= 67789


Gunter, Anne (bap. 1584), demoniac, was baptized at Hungerford on 10 May 1584, the fifth and youngest child of Brian Gunter ('c'.1540-1628) and Anne Gunter (died 1617). She enjoyed a brief period of fame in the summer and autumn of 1605 when James VI and I interested himself in her supposedly bewitched condition. 
The Gunters were an extensive gentry clan which had originated in Abergavenny, and which by the time of Anne's birth was firmly established in Berkshire. About 1588 Anne's family moved to North Moreton in that county when her father inherited the village's rectory on the death of a brother. Brian Gunter was a contentious, litigious, and violent man, this last quality being demonstrated in May 1598 when he inflicted fatal injuries on John and Richard Gregory, members of a local yeoman family, in the course of a brawl at a village football match. 
In summer 1604 Anne Gunter briefly fell ill; her sickness at this stage was attributed to 'the mother', or hysteria. She rapidly recovered, but fell ill again in October of that year. This time the symptoms persisted, and, when the numerous doctors who were called to examine her failed to diagnose a natural disease, it was decided that she was bewitched. By this point, indeed, she was showing the classic symptoms of what might be described as possession by witchcraft, including going into fits and comas and vomiting pins, and was naming three village women as her tormentors. The chief of these was Elizabeth Gregory, who had married into the family upon two of whose members Brian Gunter had inflicted fatal injuries in 1598. 
As was common in such cases Anne Gunter's sufferings attracted a large audience, among which, remarkably, were a number of figures from Oxford University. Anne's elder sister Susan was married to Thomas Holland, regius professor of divinity at Oxford, and at one point Anne was lodged in his apartments at Exeter College, where he was rector, while her father obviously enjoyed a wide social circle at the university. Among those who witnessed her sufferings were Bartholomew Warner, regius professor of medicine, and a man who was subsequently to achieve considerable eminence at Oxford, John Prideaux. 
Elizabeth Gregory and another of the suspected women were tried for witchcraft at the Abingdon assizes on 1 March 1605, and acquitted. Matters should have ended there, but Gunter's afflictions persisted. She was taken into custody for observation by Henry Cotton, bishop of Salisbury; most of those who examined her at this stage were convinced she was simulating being bewitched or possessed. Brian Gunter, however, was anxious to demonstrate the genuine nature of his daughter's afflictions, and took her to meet James VI and I when the king visited Oxford University in August 1605. 
James was sceptical, and passed Gunter's case on to Richard Bancroft, the archbishop of Canterbury, who in turn delegated investigating her to Samuel Harsnett. Bancroft and Harsnett had been involved in investigating a number of incidents of possession, witchcraft, and exorcism (notably those involving John Darrell) and had developed a thoroughly sceptical position, while the physician Edward Jorden, another proven sceptic, was brought in to examine Anne. The net effect of their efforts was that by 10 October 1605 James was able to write a letter to the earl of Salisbury stating that Anne had confessed that she had simulated her sufferings at her father's instigation. 
Early in 1606 Star Chamber proceedings were initiated against Brian and Anne Gunter for false accusations: Harsnett and Richard Neile were heavily involved in orchestrating these proceedings, which were probably initiated by Bancroft. More than fifty witnesses gave evidence, their depositions covering hundreds of foolscap pages, making this among the best documented English witchcraft cases. The Gunter case showed many remarkable features, but is perhaps chiefly significant for demonstrating how witchcraft accusations, begun in the context of personal grudges and village conflicts, might emerge in the context of national ecclesiastical politics. The scepticism of those leading clerics who brought the Gunters to trial was part and parcel of their hostility to the pretensions to powers of exorcism made by certain godly ministers, a hostility which was but one strand in an anti-puritanism which involved conflicting visions of the church. 
Gaps in documentation mean that the outcome of the Star Chamber proceedings cannot be established, while we have no sure evidence of Anne Gunter's later fate. James's letter of 10 October 1605 mentions that Anne had fallen in love with one of Bancroft's servants, surnamed Asheley, and that a marriage was being arranged with royal support, and a number of other sources support this story, but no record of such a marriage, or of any other indication of what later happened to Anne, has yet been found. Brian Gunter died at Oxford, and was buried at St Mary the Virgin on 17 November 1628. 


@@@@@


doc= 67792


Robinson, Edmund (b. 1622x4, d. in or after 1677), witch accuser, was the son of Edmund Robinson (also known as Edmund Rough, alias Robinson), a mason or waller of Wheatley Lane in the chapelry of Newchurch in Pendle, Lancashire. His mother's name is not known; she was alive in 1634 and, he acknowledged, had brought him up to spin wool and fetch home her cattle. 
In 1634 Robinson made allegations which led to the second major Lancashire or Pendle witch trial twenty-two years after the first and more famous trial of 1612. Edmund's age -- eleven according to a deposition taken on 10 February 1634, 'ten years or thereabouts' according to a source dated 10 July 1634 (Webster, 347; 'CSP dom.', '1634-5', 141) -- echoes the earlier case, when the star witness was the nine-year-old Jennet Device. 
Edmund Robinson's story began on All Saints' day, 1 November 1633. He claimed that he was gathering wild plums when two greyhounds, one black, one brown, each with strings that shone like gold tied to their collars, came running up to him. When they refused to chase a hare for him he tied them to a bush to beat them, whereupon the black greyhound turned into Frances Dicconson, the wife of a neighbouring husbandman, and the brown into a little boy. Dicconson offered Robinson a piece of silver to hold his tongue, and when he refused abducted him. She put a bridle over the neck of the little boy, who now changed into a white horse. They carried Robinson to a house called Hoarstones about a quarter of a mile off, where about sixty witches were feasting, both women and men (though apparently mainly women). A young woman offered him 'flesh and breade upon a trencher, and drinke in a glasse, which, after the first taste, hee refused, and would have noe more, and said it was nought' (Potts, lxii). Following a group of witches to a nearby barn he saw: 'sixe of them kneelinge, and pullinge at sixe severall roapes which were fastened or tyed to the toppe of the house; at or with which pullinge came then in this informers sight flesh smaokinge, butter in lumps, and milke as it were syleinge [passing through a sieve] from the... roapes, all which fell into basons which were placed under the... roapes. (Potts, lxiii)' When they had finished another six women took their places, all the time that they pulled making 'such foule faces that feared this informant' (ibid.). He saw three women take three pictures stuck with thorns down from a beam: he recognized one of them, Loynd's wife (evidently Jennet Loynd). A terrified Robinson stole away and ran home; some of the witches, Loynd's wife at the front, pursued him for a while until discouraged by the sight of two horsemen on the road. 
Robinson arrived home as evening approached, only to be sent out again by his father to fetch home two cows. On the way he fell in with a boy who started a fight with him, 'and they fought soe together till this informer had his eares made very bloody by fightinge, and lookinge downe, hee sawe the boy had a cloven foote' (Potts, lxiv). He fled towards what he thought was a friendly light, only to find it was Loynd's wife standing on a bridge; turning back, he immediately ran into the boy again, who struck him a blow on the back which made him cry out. His father, who confirmed that he had sent Robinson to bring home the cattle, told how he went to look for him when he was late home and found him crying and so distracted that at first he neither recognized his father nor knew where he was and only came to himself after about a quarter of an hour. 
Several times after that night Robinson saw Loynd's wife, Frances Dicconson, and Jennet Davies (or Device) in a close adjoining his father's house (some have identified Jennet as the witch accuser of 1612). On the Thursday after new year's day 1634 he saw Loynd's wife sitting across a beam in his father's chimney. When he called her to come down she immediately disappeared upwards. 
The magistrates Richard Shuttleworth of Gawthorpe and John Starkie of Huntroyd took the Robinsons' statements on 10 February 1634 -- over three months since the feast and a month after he claimed to have seen Loynd's wife in the chimney. They sent many for trial at Lancaster assizes and further accusations followed. Robinson senior claimed five months later that the magistrates had taken the initiative in the prosecution, summoning him to bring his son before them and then managing the prosecution. By July the father had good reasons to deny his own questionable part in the business, but it is plausible, and would help explain the time lag between the alleged incidents and the taking of statements -- that the magistrates were responding to a groundswell of rumour and anxiety that had gathered around the boy's story by the beginning of February. The Robinsons themselves played a very active part in generating such an atmosphere -- if not before they appeared before the magistrates, then certainly after. John Webster, then curate of Kildwick, recalled how: 'the boy, his Father and some others besides did make a practice to go from Church to Church that the Boy might reveal and discover Witches, pretending that there was a great number at the pretended meeting whose faces he could know, and by that means they got a good living. (Webster, 277)' When Webster attempted to confront the boy his minders prevented him from answering. 
At the assizes many of the accused (different sources give seventeen, nineteen, or twenty-one) were found guilty. A list of twenty 'accused and condemned' noted the individual charges of 'maleficium' -- acts of harm wreaked on persons or animals -- for which these women and men had been convicted, and the evidence of the marks found on their bodies after intimate body searches which confirmed that they were witches. These were the accusations which, without Robinson's story to provide a focus, might have remained matters of local gossip and suspicion and never come to court: that Frances Dicconson had haunted Edmund Stevenson when he lay sick; that Jennet Hargreaves had caused the death of two women and of the foetus of another; that Jennet Loynd had killed the son of Edmund Higgins and various farm animals, for instance laying a hand on a cow of Sharpee Smith's which had never risen again. The judge, however, was dissatisfied with the evidence and wrote to the king. In May the privy council ordered John Bridgeman, bishop of Chester, to examine seven of the accused and send them to London, together with the Robinsons. Three had already died in gaol, among them Jennet Loynd. The bishop was sceptical: 'Conceit and malice are so powerful with many in those parts, that they will easily afford an oath to work revenge upon their neighbours' ('CSP dom.', '1634-5', 78). Frances Dicconson claimed that the accusations against her were revenge for a dispute over a cow which her husband had sold to Robinson's father but then refused to turn over without a bond guaranteeing that he would be paid for it. Moreover, she claimed that Robinson senior had promised that he would see that she got off, that neither his son nor he would testify against her, if they paid him 40's'. 
In July examinations by midwives and surgeons (including the king's physician William Harvey) failed to find any witch's marks on the accused. George Long, a Middlesex magistrate acting on the instructions of the secretary of state, Windebank, twice examined separately both Edmund junior and senior. The boy retracted his allegations, admitting that 'the tale is false and feigned, and has no truth at all, but only as he has heard tales and reports made by women, so he framed the tale out of his own invention' ('CSP dom.', '1634-5', 141). Having heard tales of the great witch feast at Malkin Tower in the 1612 case, he had initially fabricated stories about people who had a reputation as witches to avoid a beating because he had been at play instead of bringing home his mother's cattle, 'but perceiving that many folks gave ear to him he grew confident in it more and more' (ibid., 153). 
Meanwhile Robinson's father denied accusation of blackmail, or that he had prosecuted or testified against Frances Dicconson or any of the witches. Indeed, he had never believed his son's story, only that the boy had had a vision which disturbed him. Now a prisoner in the Gatehouse gaol, he claimed that he was himself the victim of a vexatious prosecution. In July 1634 young Robinson denied that he had been put up by anyone to make his accusations, but he later admitted to John Webster that he had done so at his father's instigation. 
Margaret Johnson, a widow from Marsden aged sixty, had admitted her guilt to Bishop Bridgeman, and named others. Moreover, the convictions for 'maleficium' may have survived the utter discrediting of Edmund Robinson's tale of the great feast at Hoarstones and the failure of the London searchers to find witches' marks on those they had inspected. For whatever reason, ten of the convicted were still in Lancaster gaol in August 1636. Among them were three of the four brought to London two years earlier: Mary Spencer, Jennet Hargreaves, and Frances Dicconson herself. 
Robinson's accusations had quickly gained a notoriety wider than his corner of east Lancashire. In May Sir William Pelham from Lincolnshire wrote: 'The greatest news from the country is of a huge pack of witches which are lately discovered in Lancashire.' Echoing stories of the North Berwick witches and their supposed conjuring against James VI he reported: 'It is suspected that they had a great hand in raising the great storm wherein his Majesty was in so great danger at sea in Scotland' ('CSP dom.', '1634-5', 26). At The Hague in June the exiled Elizabeth of Bohemia quizzed her visitor, the Cheshire gentleman Sir William Brereton, about 'the discovery of our Lancashire witches' (Brereton, 33). Even while the decisions of the privy council were pending, Thomas Heywood and Richard Brome put on at the Globe their play, 'The Late Lancashire Witches', 'a well received Comedy' performed in July and published in October 1634 (title-page). This used the names of the witches who had been brought down to London and the playwrights clearly had access to copies of official papers: alongside their comic inventions they drew in some detail on the testimonies of Robinson and Margaret Johnson. Robinson's account is closely echoed in scenes which include the transformation of the greyhounds, the abduction, and the escape from the feast. 
In 1677 John Webster, in 'The Displaying of Supposed Witchcraft', cited Robinson's accusations to support his sceptical attitude towards demonological beliefs and towards accounts based on the evidence of at best fallible, at worst corrupt, eyewitnesses. At that time Robinson, by then known as Ned of Roughs, was still alive. It is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 67794


Allgood, Sara (1883-1950), actress, was born in Dublin on 31 October 1883, the second daughter of George Allgood (died in or before 1911), a printing compositor, and his wife, Margaret Harold, a second-hand furniture seller. 
Sara was educated at Marlborough Street Training College, Dublin, and was later apprenticed to an upholstery firm. Known as Sally, she joined Maude Gonne's revolutionary women's society, Inghinidhe na hEirean (the Daughters of Erin) about 1902 and became a member of the dramatic class. William Fay recruited her into the Irish National Theatre Society in 1903. Her first appearance was in Lady Gregory's 'Twenty-Five' (1904); her first speaking parts were as Princess Buan in 'The King's Threshold', by W. B. Yeats, and Cathleen in 'Riders to the Sea', by J. M. Synge. When the Abbey Theatre, Dublin, opened on 27 December 1904 she also revealed a talent for comedy, as Mrs Fallon in Lady Gregory's 'Spreading the News'. She became the undisputed leading lady of the company. Her glorious voice, her sheer stage presence, and the approach to acting that came to typify the Abbey were a marriage between her talent and the training that she received from the Fay brothers, William and Frank. Early exponents of naturalism, the Fays were influenced by Constant Coquelin's acting theories and Andre Antoine's production methods. 
Sara Allgood's performances for the Irish National Theatre Society at the Abbey and on their annual London visits from 1904 to 1913 won acclaim; they included the title role in W. B. Yeats's 'Deirdre', Maurya in 'Riders to the Sea', Mrs Delane in Lady Gregory's 'Hyacinth Halvey', Widow Quin in Synge's 'Playboy of the Western World', and Kathleen in Yeats's 'Cathleen ni Houlihan'. Lady Gregory became her ally and lifelong friend. She acted with Mrs Patrick Campbell in 'Deirdre' (1908) and 'Electra' (1909) in London. In 1908 she helped to open Miss Horniman's Gaiety Theatre, Manchester, and toured to Stratford in William Poel's production of 'Measure for Measure'. 'Miss Allgood's Isabella was magnificent -- rich, vehement, passionate', wrote Yeats (who earlier doubted her potential) to Synge (Saddlemyer, 277). She occasionally directed and she also taught acting. After a season at Liverpool Repertory Theatre in 1914 she made a hit as the unlikely comic lead in 'Peg o' my Heart', by J. Hartley Manners (1915). The play toured Australia in 1916, where she married Gerard Henson, her leading man. Her daughter, Mary, born 18 January 1918, lived for only an hour, and Henson himself died in the influenza epidemic in November 1918. 
Back in London, Sara Allgood played Mrs Geoghegan in 'The Whiteheaded Boy' by Lennox Robinson and Mrs O'Flaherty in 'O'Flaherty V.C.' by G. B. Shaw (1920). Formerly a key player for Yeats and Lady Gregory, her personal and artistic maturity was now equally important to Sean O'Casey; her Juno, in his 'Juno and the Paycock' on 3 March 1924, became part of Irish theatrical history. In two other O'Casey dramas, as Bessie Burgess in 'The Plough and the Stars' (1926) and Mrs Henderson in 'The Shadow of a Gunman' (1927), she was unforgettable; she brought poetry to realism. Before and after the First World War she toured with the Abbey Theatre and the Irish Players in the USA -- visits which affected the direction of American theatre. Other successes included Mrs Peachum in Sir Nigel Playfair's revival of John Gay's 'Beggar's Opera' (London, 1925), Julia Hardy in 'Things that are Caesar's' (London, 1933), Mme Raquin in 'Therese Raquin' (Dublin, 1934), an adaptation of the novel by Emile Zola, and Honoria Flanaghan in 'Storm in a Teacup' by James Bridie (London, 1936). However, she was never offered the great non-Irish classic roles. In 1940 she moved to Hollywood, and in 1945 became an American citizen. Among fifty films, she starred in Alfred Hitchcock's 'Blackmail' (1929) and 'Juno and the Paycock' (1930). Hollywood found her stage presence difficult, casting her in Irish character parts, but she was nominated for an Academy award as best supporting actress in John Ford's 'How Green was my Valley' (1941). She died in Woodlands Hills, California, on 13 September 1950. 
In Sara Allgood, seen as the Irish Eleonora Duse, critics praised the art that concealed art: simplicity, sincerity, depth of characterization, the haunting quality of her rich contralto voice, the ability to grip both audience and actors. Gabriel Fallon recalled that as she simply opened the door in act 3 of 'Juno', came in, and sat down, 'tragedy sat at the elbow of every member of the audience' (Coxhead, 212). 


By 1910 Molly had equal billing with Sara on Abbey summer tours. On 15 July 1911 she married George Herbert Mair (1887-1926), political writer and reviewer of the 'Manchester Guardian'; they had two children, Pegeen and John. Extending her range beyond Irish parts, she played Zerline in 'Turandot', adapted by Jethro Bethell (London, 1913). A season with Liverpool Repertory Company gave her the role of Mother in G. Hauptmann's 'Hannele', the title role in Shaw's 'Candida', and Nora Burke in Synge's 'The Shadow of the Glen'. In June 1913 she played Nerissa in 'The Merchant of Venice' in Tree's Shakespearian festival (London); she also played Mary Ellen in 'General John Regan', by G. A. Birmingham, in New York. 1914 saw her as Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', in Paris and London. At the Abbey in 1916 she created Aunt Helen in 'The Whiteheaded Boy', but the need for money to keep open house for artists and writers in Chelsea meant that her leads in the Shaw season in 1917 were her last at the Abbey. Her range in the 1920s encompassed Mrs Beetle in 'The Insect Play', by the brothers Capek, in New York (1921), Widow Quin, and Mrs Gogan in O'Casey's 'The Plough and the Stars' (1926). G. H. Mair died suddenly on 3 January 1926. On 22 June Molly married Arthur Sinclair (1883-1951), the Abbey's leading actor. They divorced after five years but remained friends and, with Sara, continued touring Irish plays to America. In later years O'Casey characters remained the staple of Molly's repertoire but she also played other roles, such as Aunt Judy in Shaw's 'John Bull's Other Island', in 1938. Her films included 'Love on the Dole' (1941) and, posthumously, 'The Horse's Mouth' (1953). 
Molly's son died in a plane crash in 1942. She herself died in Basingstoke on 2 November 1952, following a fire at her home, 40 Redcliffe Square, Chelsea. Her obituary in 'The Stage' (6 November 1952) praises her 'matchless interpretations of the Irish character' and 'the powerful impact of her personality in all the pathetic, bitter and humorous facets of these vivid characters'. Nobody who saw or worked with the Allgood sisters ever forgot them. Geniuses in a new theatre movement -- of idealism and art -- their acting was one definition of the Abbey's greatness. 


@@@@@


doc= 67798


Dence, Marjorie Lillian (1901-1966), actress and theatre manager, was born on 14 June 1901 at Fairhaven, Park Road, Teddington, Middlesex, the daughter of Ernest Martin Dence (died 1937), brass-founder and company director, and his wife, Annie Eleanor Searle. Dence studied for an arts degree at London University. Her love of drama drew her to the University Dramatic Society, where she met David Steuart who was to become a lifelong friend and artistic partner. 
After working as a theatre secretary and on the staff of a London theatre magazine, Marjorie Dence became an actress herself. In 1934 she joined the Greater London Theatre Company where she found David Steuart in the same cast. In the railway station, going home after a performance in Ilford, Steuart pointed to Perth on a large map, and suggested that it would be an ideal place to start a repertory theatre. By a strange coincidence, the following week the sale of Perth Theatre was advertised in 'The Stage'. Ernest Dence purchased it for $4000 and appointed his daughter as manager. 
Marjorie Dence and David Steuart set off for Perth and with $1000 of their own money and a great deal of hard work they refurbished the old theatre and assembled a company. On 23 September 1935 their first season began successfully with a performance of 'The Rose without a Thorn' by Clifford Bax. The audience response was most encouraging. A further eighteen plays were presented in weekly repertory. This exacting schedule took a lot of stamina. Marjorie herself acted in several productions and at one time a warming-pan, which she held in the character of an innkeeper's wife, was used to hide the script for the next play which she had been studying in the wings. As well as being artistic director, Steuart acted in most productions. 
Snow and icy roads during the first three months of 1936 resulted in depleted audiences and strained finances. The company gallantly accepted a cut in salaries and Dence tentatively asked the people of Perth for a guarantee of $500. Donations, to be no less than 2's'. 6died and no more than $10, flooded in. The sum was reached in a fortnight. Admirably the guarantee was never called upon. In October 1938 an invitation to give a command performance was received from Balmoral. The play chosen was a thriller, 'The Fourth Wall', by A. A. Milne and the actors played on a small stage specially erected in the ballroom. The audience included King George VI and Queen Elizabeth as well as members of the royal household, guests, and tenants from the estate. Supper and an overnight stay were enjoyed by the company. The resulting publicity was invaluable. 
In June 1939 the city of Perth provided a lovely setting for Scotland's first theatre festival. Marjorie Dence devised the programme and James Bridie not only agreed to be patron but contributed a new comedy, 'The Golden Legend of Shults'. The event was a huge success and there was even a small profit. Despite the outbreak of war in September Dence and Steuart kept the theatre going, realizing the importance of entertainment for the community. The actors got board and lodging; some slept in the theatre itself, and rations were pooled to make their evening meal, served well before the audience came in. Salaries came from equal division of any box-office profits. 
In 1941 the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts (CEMA) announced that grants would be made to any company prepared to take plays to remote areas of Scotland. As a result, Perth Theatre began annual tours of villages throughout Scotland, taking plays to the highlands and islands, the borders, and Orkney and Shetland. The company visited over 120 different venues from 1941 onwards as well as 20 in Northern Ireland, in addition to maintaining the regular season in Perth. In 1946 Perth and Kinross councils took on the financial responsibility, thus creating a civic theatre, putting Dence and Steuart on generous salaries as business manager and artistic director. 
The theatre established by Marjorie Dence has remained a distinguished centre for the arts in Scotland. Her work was first recognized by her appointment as MBE in 1952, and in 1957 the twenty-first anniversary of the theatre was commemorated with a presentation plaque from the Scottish Arts Council. During Marjorie's tenure in Perth Theatre many eminent artistes played there. These included such theatrical luminaries as Alec Guinness, James Cairncross, Sophie Stewart, Gordon Jackson, John Laurie, Russell Hunter, Una McLean, Walter Carr, Edith MacArthur, and Martyn James. Plays presented included works by Shakespeare, G. B. Shaw, J. M. Barrie, and James Bridie, as well as some culled from the current West End successes. Among the assistants who trained there was Joan Knight, who later became a distinguished incumbent of the director's post. 
Marjorie Dence was a highly respected figure in Perth, where she served as a JP. Her annual garden party, given at the beginning of each season, was a popular event with the Theatre Club. Just before the season began in August 1966 Marjorie hosted the party from a wheelchair because of a broken ankle. The next day she held a dinner party for some actors from the company. Sadly an unexpected complication set in and she died suddenly the following evening, 23 August 1966, at her home, Boatland, Isla Road, Perth. Her body was cremated on 26 August. Her will stated that the theatre was to be sold to the city of Perth for $5000, the exact initial outlay. The money she had lost throughout the years she dismissed with the typical remark, 'That money brought me much happiness' ('Perth Advertiser', 31 Aug 1966, 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 67799


Walton, Frederick Edward (bap. 1834, d. 1928), inventor of linoleum, was baptized on 19 May 1834 in Sowerby Bridge, near Halifax, Yorkshire, the second son and second child in the family of James Walton (1802/3-1883), engineer, and his wife, Ann Kenworthy. He was educated in Bradford and Wakefield, and spent some time in France and Belgium before entering into partnership with his father and elder brother in Haughton Dale, near Manchester, manufacturing India rubber wire cards for carding cotton. On 19 March 1867 he married Alice Ann (died 'c'.1886), daughter of Thomas Scruby, veterinary surgeon; they had one son and three daughters. 
For five years Walton was involved in many experiments, and it was while trying to make a quick-drying paint for use in oilcloth manufacture that he discovered oxidized linseed oil, a new elastic mass with a rubbery consistency, when he realized that an open tin of paint had developed a skin similar to rubber. He patented a process for exposing linseed oil to air, enabling it to absorb oxygen and solidify, in 1860. 
In 1860 Walton sold his partnership to his father, moved to London, and established his own works in Chiswick, where he continued his experiments. Many people had been trying to produce a durable floorcloth, and patents had been taken out for floor coverings containing India rubber, including Kamptulicon, patented in 1844, a thick floor covering made of rubber and cork. Walton worked on substituting oxidized oil for the rubber, and in 1863 he made the first piece of what he called linoleum (from the Latin 'linum', linen thread, and 'oleum', oil), from a mixture of oxidized linseed oil, gum, resin, and ground cork, rolled out on the back of a piece of hessian. This was patented in 1864. He moved to a larger factory in Staines, setting up a company which became the Linoleum Manufacturing Company. Although sales were slow at first, once he began advertising in London railway stations that linoleum was 'warm, soft, and durable', and opened a showroom at 67 Newgate Street, sales increased, and linoleum became a popular floor covering in the home, while its use gradually spread to offices and public buildings such as hospitals, because it was easy to clean and hard-wearing. In 1872 Walton went to New York to set up the American Linoleum Company on Staten Island, and he ran it for two years. His patents expired in 1877, but despite his attempt to retain the exclusive right to use the name linoleum, the High Court ruled in 1878 that linoleum was the name of a material, and not the name of the product of one company. This meant that leading floorcloth manufacturers such as Nairns of Kirkcaldy and Williamsons of Lancaster were able to use the name, and they contributed to the rapid growth of the British linoleum industry. 
Walton retired from active management of the company in 1878, although he remained the largest shareholder. In 1877 he patented a method for embossing fabrics suitable for wall and ceiling decoration. Production of Lincrusta-Walton began in Sunbury-on-Thames in 1878, and he also set up companies in Paris and Hanover. Inlaid or mosaic linoleum, patented in 1888 and 1890, was Walton's other major invention. The Greenwich Inlaid Linoleum Company, formed in 1894, was very profitable until 1914, but was taken over by Nairns in 1922. 
Walton was an inventor rather than a businessman. He took out eighty-eight British patents, the last in 1914, two-thirds of which concerned oxidized linseed oil. The others ranged from meat extracts and artificial ebonite to wheels for motor vehicles and aircraft components. His development of flexible metallic tubing proved important in oil extraction. About 1922 Walton moved to Nice, where he wrote 'The Infancy and Development of Linoleum Floorcloth' (1925), and pursued his hobbies of watercolour painting and reading poetry. He was killed in a car accident in Nice on 16 May 1928, and buried there at La Caucada cemetery in August. Picasso became interested in working in linoleum and admired Walton's invention. 


@@@@@


doc= 67800


Fraser, Winifred (1868-1951), actress, was born Agnes Catherine Mary Day at 59 City Road, London, on 29 February 1868 (though in theatrical directories she gave her birth date as February 1872). She was the only daughter (she had a younger brother) of Edward Day (1825-1870), who descended from an Irish gentry family, vicar of St Mark's, Old Street, Shoreditch, and his wife, Catherine Mary, 'nee' Pope. After her father's sudden death, her mother supported the family by teaching. Her mother married, in 1873, Edward Roger Cooper Hays, a schoolmaster, and settled in the Hampstead area, but they divorced in 1882. She was educated in Hampstead and made her professional acting debut in 1888 as Sophia in an adaptation of Oliver Goldsmith's 'The Vicar of Wakefield' alongside William Farren junior. Early in her career she adopted the stage name Winifred Fraser. After a period of touring, first in the classical repertory, in the company managed by Ben Greet, and later in more modern works, including 'Jim the Penman', by Sir Charles Young, and 'The New Magdalen', by Wilkie Collins, she made her first appearance in the West End in November 1889, as Alice Fairfax in 'Her Own Witness'. She then played several small roles in major London productions, including Rosie in Lady Bancroft's 'My Daughter' and Lucy in the same author's 'A Pair of Spectacles'. On 23 April 1892, at All Saints', Notting Hill, she married the actor and manager George Rose Foss (1859-1938), with whom she had a daughter, born in the following year. Within a decade they were separated, and were presumably later divorced, as her husband remarried. 
Winifred Fraser's first major success seems to have been as Hedvig in the first London production of Ibsen's 'The Wild Duck', at the Royalty Theatre in May 1894. The power of her acting at this period is well caught by a first-night review of this production: 'Miss Winnifred ['sic'] Fraser, who had the fascinating but extremely difficult part of Hedwig ['sic'] the fourteen-year-old girl, showed rare qualities in so young an actress. Though actually a woman, she had the charm of childhood, and yet power. She possesses the rare gift of holding a house when saying nothing, but merely thinking and wondering, yet there was no visible effort or pulling of faces. (Theatre Museum, London)' This role was one of many that she was offered in the late 1890s, a period in which she seems to have been in constant demand, working with many of the leading figures in the London theatre, including Olga Nethersole, Ben Greet, E. S. Willard, and Sir Augustus Harris, and doing much touring, notably in 'Under the Red Robe' (1897). 
By 1900 Winifred Fraser had been invited to become part of Mrs Patrick Campbell's company -- once more at the Royalty -- in, among others, the first London production of Edmond Rostand's 'Les Romanesques', '[f]reely done into English verse' (programme, Theatre Museum) as 'The Fantasticks', by George Fleming. She played Sylvette, the lover of Campbell's principal-boy hero Percinet, in a production also notable for the performance of the young George Du Maurier as the 'Bravo' Straforel, and according to a review she 'interpret[ed] the naive heroine's sentimental passages with exceptional charm and pathos' (Theatre Museum). In 1903 she made her first acquaintance with the title role of J. M. Barrie's 'Little Mary', understudying Nina Boucicault; she subsequently made the part her own, playing it in many revivals at Wyndham's Theatre, and in 1905-6 touring it, with other leading roles, around Australia. In 1907 she took part in another major tour, in the leading female roles of R. B. Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' and Oscar Wilde's 'The Importance of being Earnest'. This period of travel culminated, in 1910, in her first visit to the United States, where she played Barbara Pennymint in 'Pomander Walk', by Louis N. Parker, at Wallack's theater in New York, and in the following two years toured the role around the remainder of the country. 
From this point Winifred Fraser's career seems to have been entirely based in the United States. She returned to classical repertoire in 1913, taking the role of Good-Dedes in a production of 'Everyman' at the New York Children's Theater, and later in that year made her first appearance in Chicago -- as Nellie Heron in 'The Necessary Evil'. She remained in the USA for the duration of the First World War, and, by this time in her forties, carved out a niche for herself in New York playing the many middle-aged matrons who populate turn-of-the-century melodramas, among them Mrs Greville in 'Hush', at the Little Theater in October 1916; Mrs Torrance in 'The New Word', at the Empire in May 1917; and Mrs Martha Van Zile in 'Polly with a Past', by G. Middleton and G. Bolton, at the Belasco Theater in September 1917. She maintained her home in America -- as well as her penchant for these roles -- when the war ended, and spent the 1920s on Broadway playing -- among many other roles -- Mrs Morland in J. M. Barrie's 'Mary Rose' (at the Empire in December 1920), Mrs Smallwood in 'The Enchanted Cottage', by Sir Arthur Pinero (at the Ritz Theater in March 1923), and Mrs Considine in 'Mary, Mary, quite Contrary', by St John Ervine (at the Belasco in September 1923). From the late 1920s she had addresses in London, and was latterly resident in Eastbourne, Sussex, where she died on 25 November 1951. Her daughter Iris Fraser Foss (1893-1973), also an actress, survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 67806


Hunt, Martita (1900-1969), actress, was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on 30 January 1900, to Alfred Hunt and his wife, Marta, 'nee' Burnett. She came to England to attend Queenwood boarding-school, Eastbourne, and she then trained for a theatrical career under Dame Genevieve Ward and Lady Benson. After acting at Liverpool repertory theatre and with a touring company, she made her London debut for the Stage Society in Ernst Toller's 'The Machine Wreckers' at the Kingsway in May 1923. She spent the next six years working in the West End, giving performances as the Principessa della Cercola in W. Somerset Maugham's 'Our Betters' (Globe, 1924) and as Mrs Linden in Ibsen's 'A Doll's House' (Playhouse, 1925), interspersed with engagements at club theatres such as the Q and the Arts and, in 1926, a short season of Chekhov plays at the small Barnes Theatre, directed by Victor Komisarjevsky, who cast her as Charlotta Ivanovna, the eccentric governess in 'The Cherry Orchard' and as Olga in 'Three Sisters'. 
In September 1929 Hunt joined the Old Vic company under Harcourt Williams, and in the following eight months played a challenging succession of Shakespearian roles (the Nurse in 'Romeo and Juliet', Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', the Queen in 'Richard II', Helena in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', Portia in 'Julius Caesar', and, opposite John Gielgud, Rosalind in 'As You Like It', Lady Macbeth in 'Macbeth', and Queen Gertrude in 'Hamlet'), together with the parts of Beline in Moliere's 'The Imaginary Invalid', Queen Elizabeth in Shaw's 'The Dark Lady of the Sonnets', and Lavinia in his 'Androcles and the Lion'. With an arresting appearance and a dominant stage presence, she proved most effective as strong, tragic characters, her Gertrude in 'Hamlet' being accounted by some critics the finest they had seen. 
Returning to the West End, Hunt featured in an extraordinary range of productions in the 1930s and during the war years, notably as Edith Gunter in Dodie Smith's 'Autumn Crocus' (Lyric, 1931), the countess of Rousillon in 'All's Well that Ends Well' (Arts, 1932), Lady Strawholme in Ivor Novello's 'Fresh Fields' (Criterion, 1933), Liz Frobisher in John Van Druten's 'The Distaff Side' (Apollo, 1933), Barbara Dawe in Clemence Dane's 'Moonlight is Silver' (Queen's, 1934), Theodora in Elmer Rice's 'Not for Children' (Fortune, 1935), Masha in Chekhov's 'The Seagull' (New, 1936), Emilia in 'Othello' (when she rejoined the Old Vic briefly in 1938), the Mother in Garcia Lorca's 'Marriage of Blood' (Savoy, 1939), Miss Havisham in a dramatization of Dickens's 'Great Expectations' at the Rudolf Steiner Hall (1939), Leonie in Cocteau's 'Les parents terribles' (Gate, 1940), Mrs Cheveley in Wilde's 'An Ideal Husband' (Westminster, 1943), and Cornelia in Webster's 'The White Devil' (Duchess, 1947). During the same period Hunt made innumerable films, the majority unworthy of her talents, though some, like 'Good Morning, Boys' (1937), 'Trouble Brewing' (1939), 'The Man in Grey' (1943), and 'The Wicked Lady' (1945), achieved considerable popularity and enabled her to sparkle in supporting or cameo roles, and in David Lean's 'Great Expectations' (1946) she took the opportunity to develop her stage characterization of Miss Havisham into an unforgettable study in alienation. For all this resourcefulness, stardom continued to elude her until, in 1948, an American management hired her to play Countess Aurelia, the eponymous heroine of Giraudoux's 'The Madwoman of Chaillot', for its English-speaking premiere, a compelling performance which won her a Tony award on her Broadway debut, but sadly left London audiences relatively unmoved three years later. Ironically, this very success served only to typecast her as the 'grande dame' or patrician grotesque in a string of subsequent films, including 'Anna Karenina' (1948), 'Lady Windermere's Fan' (1949), 'Folly to be Wise' (1952), 'The March Hare' (1956), 'Anastasia' (1956), 'The Admirable Crichton' (1957), 'The Prince and the Showgirl' (1957) -- contributing a witty reprise of her stage performance as the Grand Duchess in its source, Rattigan's 'The Sleeping Prince' (Phoenix, 1953) -- 'The Brides of Dracula' (1960), 'Becket' (1964), and 'The Unsinkable Molly Brown' (1964). After 1950 her stage appearances became more infrequent and she made her last as Angelique Boniface in 'Hotel Paradiso', an adaptation from Feydeau, alongside Alec Guinness at the Winter Garden in May 1956. She died of bronchial asthma at her home, 7 Primrose Hill Studios, Fitzroy Road, Hampstead, London, on 13 June 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 67807


Michael Nairn (1804-1858), floorcloth manufacturer, was born on 4 April 1804, probably in Kirkcaldy, the son of James Nairn and his wife, Isabel, 'nee' Barker. He returned to Kirkcaldy after serving an apprenticeship to a weaver in Dundee. He set up in business at Coal Wynd, Kirkcaldy, in 1828, weaving sailmakers' canvas, and was soon exporting canvas all over the world. By the early 1840s he was supplying canvas backing material to many English floorcloth manufacturers, and in 1848 he opened his own floorcloth factory, the Scottish Floorcloth Manufactory. In the 1850s Nairn introduced a new method of printing designs on floorcloth, moving one reviewer of the floorcloth exhibits at the 1861 International Exhibition to write that floorcloth could now be produced with 'all the richness, the minuteness, and the finish of a velvet-pile carpet' ('Art Journal', 1 Dec 1862). He died suddenly on 18 January 1858, leaving his widow as sole owner of the business, and she created the new firm of Michael Nairn & Co. 


@@@@@


doc= 67808


Nairn, Sir Michael Barker, first baronet (1838-1915), floorcloth and linoleum manufacturer, was born on 29 May 1838, probably in Kirkcaldy, the second son in the family of six sons and two daughters of Michael Nairn and his wife, Catharine ('c'.1815- 'c'.1891), daughter of Alexander Ingram of Kirkcaldy, Fife, owner of a bleaching yard. 


Michael Barker Nairn was educated at the burgh school, Kirkcaldy, and apprenticed to a lawyer and writer to the signet in 1855, but on his father's death he joined the business, entering the partnership in 1861. In 1866 he married Emily Frances (died 1939), daughter of Alfred Rimington Spencer of Weybridge, Surrey. They had three sons and eight daughters: two of these children died in childhood. He quickly became the dominant force in the business, overshadowing his elder brother, Robert. A great innovator, he was responsible for the rapid expansion in the 1860s. With the help of John Wright, a Glasgow engineer, he speeded up the drying process for the floorcloth by installing steam power, and in 1869 he opened St Mary's canvas factory, installing power looms. He commissioned the interior decorator and author of 'The Grammar of Ornament' (1856), Owen Jones, to design an exhibit for the Paris Universal Exhibition in 1867, where Nairns' floorcloths were regarded as the most magnificent work of the kind ever produced. By then Nairns was supplying floorcloth to most of the royal families of Europe. The firm manufactured other goods, including waterproofed carriage roofing, staircloths, and bath mats, and in 1868 began to make table baize. A London warehouse was opened in 1873, followed by warehouses in Paris, Manchester, and Glasgow. 
When Frederick Walton's patents for linoleum expired in 1877, Nairn built a new linoleum manufacturing factory in Kirkcaldy, the first in Scotland, and made several improvements. From 1881 Nairns was able to make seamless linoleum 4 yards wide, and in 1895 began to manufacture inlaid linoleum. World sales grew: 'I have seen our floorcloth and linoleum beyond the first cataract of the Nile... and in the mosques of Constantinople', Nairn recorded (Muir, 96). To avoid high import tariffs, Nairn began to manufacture linoleum abroad, opening an American subsidiary at Kearny, New Jersey, in 1888, and factories in Choisy-le-Roi, near Paris, and Bietigheim, near Stuttgart, in the 1890s. The directors of these subsidiaries always included Nairn or members of his family, and Scots from the Kirkcaldy firm. In 1893 the business became a limited liability company with Michael Barker Nairn as chairman and joint managing director; he retired as managing director in 1909, but remained chairman until his death. 
Nairn left the Liberal Party over home rule, standing unsuccessfully as Unionist candidate for Kirkcaldy in the 1900 parliamentary election. He was created a baronet in 1904. A great benefactor of the town of Kirkcaldy, he built its hospital in 1890, financed the building of the new high school in 1894, and donated the sites for the YMCA building, opened in 1895, and for the Queen's Nurses' Home in 1897. He was a member of Kirkcaldy Free Church, and contributed to the cost of building St Brycedale Free Church, completed in 1881; he was an elder of the church from 1881 to 1910. He died on 24 November 1915 in Kirkcaldy, leaving Michael Nairn & Co. the largest linoleum and floorcloth manufacturing concern in Scotland. He was buried at Monimail churchyard on 27 November. 
His eldest surviving son, 
In 1922 Nairns took over Walton's firm in Greenwich, forming a holding company, Michael Nairn and Greenwich Ltd, to manufacture inlaid linoleum. Nairn became chairman of this company in 1924, and on the death of his uncle, John Nairn, in 1928, became chairman of Michael Nairn & Co. Ltd Kirkcaldy. Foreign production continued to grow with the formation of Michael Nairn & Co. (Australia) in 1927, and the first congoleum factory in Britain opened in Kirkcaldy in 1927. During the 1930s the warehouses were expanded, and new ones opened in Birmingham and Bristol. During the Second World War the Nairn factories made war materials, including clothing impervious to mustard gas for the armed forces, and fuel tanks for Halifax bombers. 
Like his father, Nairn was a benefactor, giving the grounds of Dysart House, including the ruins of Ravenscraig Castle, to the town of Kirkcaldy as a public park in 1929, and donating generously to Kirkcaldy General Hospital. He retired as chairman of both companies in January 1952, and died at his home, Elie House, Elie, Fife, on 24 September 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 67809


Sir Michael Nairn, second baronet (1874-1952), was born on 19 February 1874 in Kirkcaldy. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy, Sherborne School, and Marburg University before joining the firm in 1895. He became a director in 1899, and married Mildred Margaret (died 1953), daughter of George Watson Neish, in 1901. They had one son and four daughters. He became managing director of the company in 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 67810


Beeston, William (1610/11?-1682), theatre impresario and actor, was the son of the leading theatre manager Christopher Beeston (1579/80-1638) and his first wife, Jane Sands. Like his father, William sometimes appears in the records with the alternative surname of Hutchinson, and he seems to have inherited his family's Catholicism. William was presumably Jane's and Christopher's oldest surviving son, although he was not one of the three born in St Leonard, Shoreditch, between 1604 and 1610, when the family moved to Clerkenwell. It seems likely therefore that he was born in 1610 or 1611. In a lawsuit he described himself as 'bred up in the art of stage playing' (Bentley, 2.370), but nothing is known of his career before 1632, when he is noted in management with Richard Gunnell and William Blagrave at the Salisbury Court Theatre. 
William Beeston joined his highly successful father in running the Cockpit Theatre in Drury Lane in 1636-7, during a long closure because of the plague when companies, theatres, and loyalties all changed radically. During this period the two Beestons threw out the company that had run there for ten years and replaced them with a new company of mainly young players, who became known as Beeston's Boys. The older Beeston had been planning the change for some time. A privy council order of 12 May 1637 keeping the theatres closed names the responsible individuals at the Cockpit as 'Christopher and William Biston Theophilus Bird Ezech: Fenn & Michael Moone', the latter three senior 'boy' players ('Malone Society Collections', 1/5.392). Altogether there were at least twelve 'boys' beside the adults in the company. When Christopher died in October 1638 William inherited a thriving and well-supported business. By his father's will he received half a share (out of six) in the company, and in April 1639 he was duly sworn in as 'Governour & Instructer of the Kings and Queens young Company of Actors'. Richard Brome, once a 'servant' to Ben Jonson, wrote a note for the published text of 'The Antipodes' in 1640, which he had offered to the Cockpit Theatre before contractual obligations forced him to have it staged at the Salisbury Court, giving a plug for 'my most deserving friend Mr William Beeston, unto whom it properly appertained' (Brome, 120). 
The new company's plays included almost half of the cream of the time, rivalling those of the former Shakespeare company, the King's Men. They are known because of an order which forbade other companies to perform them issued by the lord chamberlain on the same day as his warrant for the players, 10 August 1639. It was prompted by William Beeston as 'governor' of the company and appears to be the list of the best playbooks he had inherited from his father. Some of them date back to the beginning of the century. The forty-five titles, almost all extant, exemplify the tradition of writing for the stage that followed Shakespeare, Beaumont's 'The Knight of the Burning Pestle', Beaumont's and Fletcher's 'Cupid's Revenge', Massinger's 'The Bondman' and 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts', Shirley's 'The Young Admiral' and 'Hyde Park', Middleton's and Rowley's 'The Changeling', and Ford's ''Tis Pity she's a Whore'. 
The younger Beeston proved rather less adroit than his father in managing company affairs in the four years before parliament in September 1642 banned the public staging of all plays. In May 1640 Beeston and two of his adult helpers were put in the Marshalsea for acting an unlicensed play. The master of the revels, official censor of plays, noted that: 'the play I calde for, and, forbiddinge the playeinge of it, keepe the booke, because it had relation to the passages of the K.s journey into the Northe, and was complayned of by his Majestye to mee, with commande to punishe the offenders. (Bawcutt, 208)' It was the king who in 1639 ordered the lord chamberlain to name the plays belonging to Beeston, but his interest in playgoing made him alert to hostile allusions. This offence appears to have cost Beeston his managerial role, and in his place the master of the revels made William Davenant the company's new 'governor'. Impresario control was still far from absolute, and government orders still largely directed what happened to the acting companies. An order dated 27 June 1640 told the Cockpit company that the lord chamberlain was giving control of the Beeston company to Davenant. Selling playgoing to the general public was not yet an entirely private enterprise: the government took over when the management stepped out of line. 
Davenant had been in the job less than a year when his entanglement in the army plot put him in prison. Beeston once again became 'Governor of the Cockpitt Players' (Bentley, 2.373), but by then there was barely a year before the closure of the theatres. On 15 July 1642 Beeston married Alice Bowen (died 1686) at St Giles-in-the-Fields (she was possibly not his first wife). A daughter was baptized in 1644 and they had at least two sons, George (who became an actor and died before his father) and Sackville. Through the years of closure Beeston remained in business of various kinds, evidently hoping that he could return to theatre work. He may have staged some of the surreptitious performances at Gibbons's Tennis Court and other places. In 1649 he tried to buy the empty Salisbury Court Theatre, a deal completed in 1652 for a lower price after it was damaged by a mob of soldiers and apprentices. In winter 1650 he started training a new boy company to play at the Cockpit, which he also tried to secure, unsuccessfully. There were various projects to revive theatre in the 1650s, but Beeston's name does not recur in them, apart from a recommendation by Richard Flecknoe, published at the end of 'Love's Dominion' in 1654, that he would be the most suitable man to manage 'the REFORMED Stage', 'his long Practice and Experience in this way, as also for having brought up most of the Actors extant' (Bentley, 2.373-4). But once again William Davenant intervened, and the first new stagings at the Cockpit in 1659 and 1660 were under his control, not Beeston's. Beeston did start a new company in 1660 at his other property, the Salisbury Court, and ran plays there until it burnt down in 1666. Subsequently he became an actor with the King's Company. Pepys saw him in 1668 in a comedy by Flecknoe, and the following year in 'The Heiress', a play part-authored by the duke of Newcastle. Beeston, standing in, had to read his part, 'and thereby spoils the part and almost the play, it being one of the best parts in it', though Pepys was amused by the sight of Beeston reading by candle-light in a scene meant to be in darkness (Pepys, 9.436). 
By then Beeston had other interests as property owner and property manager, and his name does not appear in further records of Restoration theatre management. In his later years, according to John Aubrey, 'he was not a company keeper; lived in Shoreditch; would not be debauched, and if invited to court, was in paine' ('Brief Lives', 1.97). Beeston's long career and long memory led Dryden to call him 'the chronicle of the stage', while he provided Aubrey with tales of Jonson and Shakespeare. He was charged with recusancy in 1680, like his mother before him. He died in 1682, about 24 August. He was then living in Bishopsgate Street in the parish of St Leonard, Shoreditch, and his will indicates that his estate consisted chiefly of properties including a 'house called the blacke Swanne' and tenements in King's Head Yard. His widow, Alice, and son Sackville survived him, while his son George had left a 'reputed sonne' Benaniah, whom William left to the care of his widow and who was to inherit the property in Shoreditch after her death (Honigmann and Brock, 219). 


@@@@@


doc= 67811


Mordaunt, Carey, countess of Peterborough and Monmouth (c.1658-1709), political wife, and correspondent of John Locke, was the daughter of Sir Alexander Fraizer, first baronet (1607?-1681), physician to Charles II, and his second wife, Mary Wylde, 'nee' Carey (died 1695), later woman of the bedchamber to Catherine of Braganza. She was named after her maternal grandfather, Sir Ferdinando Carey. The Fraizers had followed Charles II into exile and Carey may have been born in Europe. After 1660 the Fraizers lived in Scotland Yard, London. With both her parents holding court office it is not surprising that, on 7 May 1674, Carey was appointed maid of honour to Queen Catherine. She soon gained a reputation for pride and ostentation. Her appearance at the queen's birthday ball of 2 November 1676 in a dress reportedly worth $300 was said to have frightened her suitor, Sir Carr Scroope, who apparently claimed 'his estate will scarce maintaine her in clothes' (Wilson, 29). Called 'a haughty lass' and 'stately Carey' (ibid., 240-41) in court lampoons, in December 1677 and again in 1679 she was accused of trying to become the king's mistress. In 1679 or 1680 Carey was secretly engaged to Charles Mordaunt, second Viscount Mordaunt (1658?-1735), became pregnant and consequently, in May 1680, was 'marched off from court: how honorably time will try' (ibid., 241). On 22 May it was reported that 'the marriage between my Lord Mordaunt and Mrs Frazer will now be speedily consummated, the lady being discovered with child, and my lord seeming to own something of a contract' (ibid.). The marriage was, however, not publicly acknowledged until December 1681. 
The Mordaunts lived at Parson's Green, Fulham, and Turvey, Bedfordshire. Lady Mordaunt's first child, John, Lord Mordaunt, was probably born towards the end of 1680, and she had at least four other children in the 1680s, of whom a son, Henry Mordaunt (1681?-1710), and daughter survived. Charles Mordaunt was a supporter of the revolution and Lady Mordaunt was with him in The Hague in 1689, when she began a correspondence with John Locke. Welcoming Locke's friendship and commenting on the revolution, she wrote that James II had gone 'out like a farding candele: and has given us by this convension an occasion not of amending the government: but of melting it downe and make all new' ('Correspondence of John Locke', 3.538). Embarrassed by her writing, she added, 'i know my falts are so crose in wryting that tell i am convinct i hold you fast you shall have as feu of my Letters as is possibel' (ibid.). Locke sent her advice on the education of her eldest son in 1690 and also recommended books for her own reading. 
Countess of Monmouth from April 1689 and countess of Peterborough from June 1697, Carey was active in supporting her husband's political career, cultivating such friends as the earls of Shaftesbury and Sunderland, and the duke and duchess of Marlborough. She courted the Marlboroughs at first in hopes of a match for her son John, and later to help her husband, writing very complimentary letters to the duke and duchess, and encouraging the increasingly eccentric Lord Peterborough to remain on good terms with Marlborough. In 1707 Marlborough wrote to his wife that he had had an obliging letter from Lady Peterborough, which he would not send her 'since the hand is so ill it would hurt your eyes' ('Marlborough-Godolphin Correspondence', 780). When her son John eloped in 1705 Lady Peterborough was, ironically given the circumstances of her own marriage, highly displeased. She wrote to Shaftesbury asking for help and threatening to leave John nothing in her will. 'O that heaven had left him no hand to dispose of!' she complained (Hayton, 923). For some time she remained unforgiving, and forbade John to go to Lord Peterborough, who was then overseas, but they were apparently reconciled before her death on 13 May 1709. She was buried in the family tomb in the parish church of Turvey. 


@@@@@


doc= 67813


Loraine, Robert Bilcliffe (1876-1935), actor, was born on 14 January 1876 at 5 Mersey Terrace, New Brighton, Cheshire, the son of Henry Loraine (1819-1899), actor, and his wife, Mary Ellen, 'nee' Bayliss (1848-1895), an actress with the stage name of Edith Kingsley. Robert Loraine, who was educated privately, made his first appearance on the stage at the age of thirteen and was first seen in London in 1894 at the age of eighteen. He quickly became a leading player in both London and New York, appearing constantly in both cities: 'Who's Who in the Theatre' lists his roles in fifty-six London productions and twenty-seven New York productions between 1894 and 1932. In 1897 he married Julie Opp, an American actress, daughter of a Bavarian-horn New York saloon keeper. Following their divorce, in 1901 he married Winifred Lydia, daughter of Sir Robert Strangman; they had three daughters. 
A man of action, between 1899 and 1901 Loraine served as a volunteer in the South African War. He was a pioneer of aviation and made the first flight across the Irish Sea in 1910. During the First World War he distinguished himself in the Royal Flying Corps (RFC), winning the MC and the DSO b in 1917 and twice being seriously wounded. He retired from the army at the end of the war with the rank of lieutenant-general and immediately returned to the stage. 
Loraine's range as an actor was very wide and throughout his career he was just as ready to play in light, popular box-office successes as in plays of more substance. The remarkable fact was that he was equally adept in either. While he was still in his early twenties he established himself as a leading 'romantic' actor (a 'matinee idol', in fact) in such popular melodramas as 'The Prisoner of Zenda' by Anthony Hope and 'The Three Musketeers', in which he played D'Artagnan in 1899. Lightweight comedies were also Loraine's forte, and he starred in 'Frocks and Frills' (by S. Grundy), 'Pretty Peggy' (a musical play by A. Rose and C. Austin), and 'Dolly Reforming herself' (by H. A. Jones), as well as a number of others. 
In addition Loraine appeared in a number of major Shakespearian roles between 1896 and 1927. His Prince Hal impressed H. M. Walbrook, the critic of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' in 1909, who commented that his association with Falstaff 'was at least as much a matter of intellectual curiosity as of any particular partiality towards riot and dishonour' (Walbrook, 96). Loraine's other 'classical' parts included Young Marlow in Oliver Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer' (1909), Charles Surface in R. B. Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' (1909), Bob Acres in Sheridan's 'The Rivals' (1910), and Mirabell in W. Congreve's 'The Way of the World' (1924). He played the eponymous hero in two different productions of Rostand's 'Cyrano de Bergerac', one in 1919 in Edinburgh and the other in 1927 in London. 
Loraine was especially associated with Bernard Shaw: they once went for a balloon flight together, along with Harley Granville Barker, over London and almost drowned together on a seaside holiday in Wales. Loraine played Jack Tanner in 'Man and Superman' in 1907 (taking over the part from Granville Barker) and again under his own management in 1911 and on subsequent occasions in London and New York. His other Shavian parts included Bluntschli in 'Arms and the Man' in 1907 and again in 1919 and 1926, St John Hotchkiss in 'Getting Married' in 1908, and O'Flaherty in 'O'Flaherty VC' at an army camp in Belgium in February 1917 while he was a serving RFC officer. This being the first production of the play, Shaw himself attended the dress rehearsal, in spite of the curious location and the dangers of war. Shaw, in fact, was very fond of Loraine, whom he saw as a good example of the man of action who is also an artist, a type he greatly admired. On his army enlistment papers Loraine listed Shaw and Mrs Shaw as next of kin. In some ways Loraine stood in the same relationship to Shaw that Granville Barker had stood before him and T. E. Lawrence was to stand after him -- the ardent young man who became a surrogate son. 
Throughout his long career Loraine was an actor who was very popular with the general public. Yet a number of leading theatre critics commented favourably on the quality and depth of his work in serious drama. In 1907 Max Beerbohm considered he was excellent as Jack Tanner at the Court Theatre in the first production of Shaw's 'Don Juan in Hell' (derived from act III of 'Man and Superman'). Beerbohm wrote that 'He seems to be really thinking, really evolving the ideas he has to express, and really rejoicing, too, in his mastery of debate' ('Saturday Review', 8 June 1907). Shaw directed the play and, ten days before it opened, wrote to Granville Barker that Loraine 'who always starts a company by sacking at least three members of it after the first rehearsal to intimidate the rest' had 'got all the comedy side of the part capitally and does it quite in my old-fashioned way, with a relish and not under protest, like you' (Purdom, 85). Desmond MacCarthy, reviewing Loraine's performance of the title part in 'Deburau' (by Sacha Guitry, translated by Granville Barker) in May 1921 agreed that Loraine was 'a most accomplished elocutionist; indeed, about the best on the stage' (MacCarthy, 69). James Agate, the leading British theatre critic of his day, noted the excellent pairing of Loraine's Mirabell with the Millament of Edith Evans in 'The Way of the World' in 1924: 'The part was beautifully spoken and the actor used only the suavest and most gentle notes in his voice. He listened exquisitely' (Agate, 'Red Letter Nights', 35). 
Loraine's stature as an actor was perhaps shown to best effect in his Strindberg performances in the late 1920s: he got excellent notices for his major roles in 'The Father' (1927) and 'The Dance of Death' (1928). Agate, reporting in 1928 on Loraine's performance as Edgar in the latter play, considered that Loraine's acting was 'magnificent throughout, and as masterly in its implications as in its detailed craftsmanship. While fully satisfying the eye in the matter of the paralytic stroke and so forth, he kept our minds occupied not with the tricks of the crumbling body but with the cancerous sweep of evil imagination. (Agate, 'Red Letter Nights', 123)' Writing in 1951, J. C. Trewin got the measure of Robert Loraine when he described him as 'an actor never afraid of mountaineering' (Trewin, 194). Daring in his choice of roles, he refused to follow, unthinkingly, earlier and traditional interpretations. 
Loraine died in the Golden Square Hospital, Westminster, London, on 23 December 1935. In 1938 his widow published a popular biography of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 67815


Roettier family (per. c.1620-1784), die-engravers and medallists, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 67817


Murray, Alma (1854-1945), actress, was born on 21 November 1854 in London, the daughter of Leigh Murray (1825-1895), actor, and his wife, Sarah Mannering (1830-1872). She was educated privately. On 8 January 1870 she made her first appearance on the stage at the Olympic Theatre, London, in 'The Princess' by W. S. Gilbert. For the next nine years she was fairly regularly employed, sometimes in London, sometimes touring in the provinces. On 30 September 1876 she married Alfred William Forman (1840-1925), the first translator into English of Wagner's 'Der Ring des Nibelungen'. They had one child, Elsa (1878-1966). In 1879 she joined Henry Irving's company at the Lyceum, playing in 'The Iron Chest' (by George Colman the younger), 'The Merchant of Venice' (in which she played Jessica), 'The Corsican Brothers' (by Dion Boucicault), and a one-act curtain-raiser, called 'Bygones', by A. W. Pinero, who was, at the age of twenty-four, a minor actor in the Irving company. Clement Scott, the senior theatre critic of the day, in his review of 'The Merchant of Venice', referred to 'the silvery voice and intelligent utterance of Miss Alma Murray' (Scott, 169). 
During the 1880s Alma Murray began to establish a widespread reputation as a particularly fine speaker of verse plays, sometimes in London theatre productions but often in single performances in assembly halls in and around London. Thus in 1884 she appeared at Prince's Hall in Robert Browning's play 'The Balcony' and in 1885 at St George's Hall in Browning's 'Colombe's Birthday' (playing the title role). And in 1886 she 'secured a triumph' -- to quote the entry which she herself wrote for 'Who's Who in the Theatre' -- as Beatrice in a single performance of Shelley's 'The Cenci', a performance so much admired by George Bernard Shaw that he tried very hard, in collaboration with the Shelley Society, to create a suitable circumstance for a repetition of it, an effort in which he was finally foiled by the ridiculous censorship regulations under which the British theatre suffered at that time. (Shelley's play is about an incestuous rape and Lord Lathom, the reader of plays in the lord chamberlain's office, refused to grant it a performance licence.) In 1888 she played one more Browning play: 'A Blot in the `Scutcheon', at the Olympic Theatre. Somewhat later, in July 1911 she once again deserted the 'popular' theatre to appear in a 'poetic' play: she was the Queen Genevieve in M. Maeterlinck's 'Pelleas et Melisande' (played in English) at the Lyceum. (The play had been written in 1892, translated into English by Lawrence Alma-Tadema in 1895, and made into an opera by Debussy in 1902.) 
On the strength of her enhanced reputation after playing Beatrice in 'The Cenci', Shaw invited Alma Murray in 1894 to play Raina in the first production of 'Arms and the Man' which ran for fifty performances at the Avenue Theatre in London. The original plan had been for this part to be played by Florence Farr, the producer and the lessee of the theatre. Shaw had the tricky task of talking her out of the leading role and persuading her to play Louka, the self-willed servant girl. His guile succeeded and Alma Murray played Raina for the whole run. 'Miss Alma Murray lent her seriousness and charm (invaluable qualities both, as it happened) to the part of Raina; Miss Florence Farr made a memorable figure of the enigmatic Louka', said William Archer in 'The World' on 25 April 1894. 
Long before 'Arms and the Man' -- indeed, before Shaw had written any plays at all -- he had said in a letter to Alma Murray (24 February 1888), in which he praised her acting though he disliked the play she was in: 'I wish I could write you a real play myself, but unfortunately I have not the faculty' ('Collected Letters', 188). But he never did, even when he had discovered that he 'had' 'the faculty'. Though she lobbied him energetically for parts from time to time she played only once more in a Shaw play: she was the Mrs Eynesford-Hill in the first production of 'Pygmalion' in 1914. However, she became one of that seemingly endless procession of pretty women to whom Shaw paid court, at least in writing. He wrote to her on 1 June 1894: 'whenever any woman gives me the pleasure your playing [in 'Arms and the Man'] tonight did, I cannot help falling violently in love with her; and I can no longer support the spectacle of Forman's [her husband] domestic happiness. He is a most intolerable usurper and monopolist; and the advantage he has taken of the mere accident of his knowing you before I did appears to me altogether unjustifiable. (ibid., 437-8)' And as late as December 1904, when she was fifty, Shaw -- writing to tell her why he felt it would be inadvisable to try to revive 'Arms and the Man' and why he had not cast her as Nora in 'John Bull's other Island' at the Court Theatre, and why he was not going to cast her as Mrs Clandon in 'You Never can Tell' -- said, 'I can never think of you as middle-aged' ('Collected Plays', 473). 
Much earlier, in 1891, Alma Murray had made an attempt to challenge the supremacy (and near-monopoly) of Janet Achurch and Elizabeth Robins in the playing of those strange and powerful young women in the early productions in England of Ibsen's plays. She tentatively mooted a plan to present the first English production of 'Rosmersholm' with herself as Rebecca; but it was, again, Shaw, who stepped in to tell her, in a letter dated 25 November 1890, that he had already persuaded Florence Farr to undertake such a production. (It played briefly at the Vaudeville Theatre in February 1891.) 
Alma Murray appeared less and less frequently from 1915 onwards, and she retired completely from the stage shortly after the end of the First World War. She outlived her husband by twenty years and died in London on 3 July 1945 at the age of ninety. 


@@@@@


doc= 67820


Thesiger, Ernest Frederic Graham (1879-1961), actor, was born in London on 15 January 1879, third of the four children (three sons and one daughter) of the Hon. Sir Edward Peirson Thesiger (1842-1928) and his wife, Georgina Mary Stopford (died 1906). His father was a clerk assistant in the House of Lords and his grandfather Frederick Thesiger, first Baron Chelmsford (1794-1878), had been lord chancellor. He went to a private school at Weybridge, Surrey, and then to Marlborough College, where he professes to have been lonely and unhappy, and in 1896, at the age of seventeen, he persuaded his father to set aside his plans for his son to follow a conventional civil service career and allow to him to study at the Slade School of Fine Art. He trained there for four years: his fellow students included Augustus John (whom he thought conceited) and Wyndham Lewis. His father was a talented musician who became a friend of the composer Percy Grainger, and Thesiger himself attended some classes at the Guildhall School of Music. For ten years he followed the profession of painter, 'oblivious of the fact', as he writes in his memoirs, 'that my pictures were mostly bought out of kindness' (Thesiger, 40). He enjoyed travel in Europe and life in London, where his privileged family connections, combined with his own charm, courtesy, and ready wit, gave him access to a wide social circle. He married Janette Mary Fernie Ranken (died 1970) on 29 May 1917. They had no children. 
Thesiger's love of acting was fostered in amateur performances while he was still a student at the Slade, and he often took part in amateur theatricals at Christmas parties in his uncle's house in Knaresborough Place, London. Becoming aware that he would never make his fortune as a painter, and encouraged by his success on the amateur stage, in 1909 he arranged an introduction to the actor-manager Sir George Alexander, who gave him his first professional part and 'took the trouble to try to teach me to act' (Thesiger, 89). Engagements followed with Charles Hawtrey and Beerbohm Tree, who gave him his first Shakespearian role as Roderigo in 'Othello'. From the beginning he was happier in contemporary roles, confessing that he found ''tradition' very hampering' (ibid., 105). 
Thesiger was on holiday in France when the First World War broke out. Returning to England he joined the Queen Victoria rifles as a private soldier; he was injured in France before he reached the front line and he was discharged in 1915, resuming his acting career almost immediately. His first major success followed with his appearance as Bertram Tully in W. W. Ellis's farce 'A Little Bit of Fluff', which opened in October 1915 and ran for nearly three years. From then until shortly before his death Thesiger was in almost continuous employment as an actor, playing mostly on the West End stage, but appearing regularly at the Malvern Festival and, occasionally in the post-war years, in the Edinburgh Festival. In 1955 he visited Moscow, playing Polonius to Paul Scofield's Hamlet. His film career began in 1932 in 'The Old Dark House' and he subsequently appeared in numerous films. 
Although he appeared from time to time in works by Shakespeare and other Elizabethan and Restoration dramatists, he was most at home interpreting the characters created by contemporary English dramatists, and he created roles in plays by Arnold Bennett, Eden Philpotts, James Barrie, Somerset Maugham, George Bernard Shaw, John Galsworthy, and others. As in his personal life he preferred the deployment of reason, wit and intelligence to grand displays of passion, and in his memoir he comments on the difficulty of appearing to be natural on the stage (Thesiger, 97-8). He found Shaw the most congenial and helpful of the dramatists in whose plays he appeared; early in the rehearsals for 'Saint Joan' (1924), in which he was to play the Dauphin, he was told by Shaw, 'You already know as much about the part as I do' (ibid., 142). 
As well as painting and collecting Victorian glassware, he maintained a lifelong interest in embroidery and needlework. At the end of the First World War, with official encouragement, he set up a short-lived needlework school as an occupation for those who were physically or emotionally disabled by the war, and he published 'Adventures in Embroidery' in 1941. In the last year of his life, and the fiftieth year of his acting career, he was awarded the order of commander of the British empire. Thesiger died at his home, 8 St George's Court, Gloucester Road, London, on 14 January 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 67822


Ivie, Edward (d. 1698), informer and coiner, was the youngest son of Thomas Ivie of Wincanton, Somerset, where his father and elder brother served as parish officers. His uncle was the puritan activist and civic reformer John Ivie of Salisbury, who made his view of Edward absolutely clear when in April 1664 he left him just 6died in his will: three of Edward's brothers received 10's'. apiece. 
By Ivie's later accounts it was his ardent royalism that had isolated him within his family. He claimed to have taken part in Penruddock's rising in 1655 and Booth's in 1659, and to have been either imprisoned or forced to flee after the former. More certainly, by the summer of 1662 this very minor landed gentleman had robbed his own widowed sister, Joan Plympton, of $30. Peter Stone, Ivie's servant, carried out the robbery, but Ivie planned it and was actually carrying his sister's money when it was stolen. Convicted at the Somerset assizes, Ivie and Stone were reprieved from the gallows, but it took two years for them to receive a royal pardon. Twice, in October 1662 and February 1663, pardons for Ivie were granted only to be stopped. His forfeited estate, including a five-hearth house in Wincanton, was granted to his brother William, and his reported attempt to get this reversed by bribery came to nothing. Finally, on the first of many occasions, he turned informer. Having assisted in 'the discovery of severall Malefactors whoe are to bee tried the next Assizes', as was certified on 1 June 1664, he was awarded a pardon so that he could give essential testimony for the prosecution (TNA: PRO, SP 29/99, fol. 2'r'). 
Shortly after his release Ivie went to Ireland. By the late 1670s he held lands at Dunhill in co. Waterford, 8 miles from Waterford itself, where one Joseph Ivie was a leading merchant and alderman. In 1678-9 Edward Ivie was part of a conspiracy to exploit the panic raised by the Popish Plot. The conspirators, led by Hubert Bourke, accused Richard Power, earl of Tyrone, of accepting a commission from Louis XIV to raise a local rebel force to join a planned French invasion, and attempted unsuccessfully to bring Tyrone to trial at the Waterford assizes in August 1679 and March 1680. In November 1679 they appeared before the Irish council; a version of their testimony was published in London in 1680. According to this source Ivie reported suspicious armed gatherings at the house of tenants taken on at the request of his neighbour John Macnamara, and Macnamara's own collusion in the earl's attempts to silence Bourke. At Ivie's urging Macnamara was kept a close prisoner by the Irish council and finally made a full confession. 
In April 1680 Ivie and the other witnesses against Tyrone arrived in London in a larger group of false witnesses brought over to substantiate the warnings of an Irish threat made by Anthony Ashley Cooper, earl of Shaftesbury. In February 1681 Ivie testified before the Middlesex grand jury, which found a charge of treason against a number of Tyrone's followers and the Irish secretary of state, Sir John Davies. In the following months Ivie advanced Macnamara's cousin, Brian Haines, as a key witness against popish conspiracy. In March Ivie pointed Haines out to the poet and pamphleteer Stephen College as the discoverer of a plot to destroy the imminent Oxford parliament. In May, when the informer Edward Fitzharris claimed that the duke of York, the earl of Danby, and the queen had contrived the murder of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, Ivie proffered Haines to a suspicious Shaftesbury and to College as the witness who could confirm the story. Government spies informed on Ivie, then lodging at the Blue Anchor in Old Jewry, and his meetings with Shaftesbury. He is, one noted, 'a cunning fellow... & is believed did furnish & does stil Haines with monies'; 'hee is a very black man with Large black Eyebrows, & wears a short perriwigg', said another (TNA: PRO, SP 29/415/199, 200). 
Within weeks, like other Popish Plot informers, Ivie and Haines became witnesses against the whigs whom they had previously cultivated, a change of patrons urged on by self-interest and self-preservation, and encouraged by a government agent, David Fitzgerald. They provided information against Shaftesbury, College, William Hetherington (who had brought the Irish witnesses over), and John Rouse (who had acted as their paymaster). In August 1682 Ivie was being paid $1 10's'. 0died a week. When College was tried at Oxford on 17 August 1681, accused of planning a rebellion, one witness claimed that Ivie was 'the first that swore this Presbyterian plot' ('State trials', 8.636). College summoned Ivie as a witness, but cut his evidence short after a tense exchange. On the gallows College spoke bitterly of 'this Ivy... now... of another stamp' (ibid., 719). 
Despite rising doubts as to the usefulness of Irish witnesses Ivie was one of those sworn before London grand juries against John Rouse and Shaftesbury. In October 1681 Ivie accused Rouse of subornation. In November he testified that he had heard Shaftesbury declare that the king was unfit to reign and a secret papist, and should therefore be deposed. The witnesses against Shaftesbury faced the threat of crowd violence on the day and a counter suit from the earl the following year. Ivie was also harried with actions for debt by his former patrons. He petitioned the crown, seeking legal protection, an increased weekly allowance, and the return of his Wincanton estate from his brother (whom he claimed had framed him in 1662 and then packed the chief witness off to Tangier). 
Ivie remained in London, where on 14 March 1689 he married Elizabeth Jones (died 1699) at St James's, Duke's Place; at that date he was already a widower with a daughter, Mary Townshend (herself a widow by 1693). Within a few years he also had a mistress, Elizabeth Joars, who joined Ivie, his wife, and his daughter in their trade of clipping coins and counterfeiting, an activity made profitable by the increasing gap between the actual and face value of the silver content of the currency. Ivie's house in Berry Court, Liquorpond Street, near Gray's Inn, became a centre where associates like the highwayman Valentine Cogswell sometimes took lodgings. Ivie was a client of Jack Gibbons, who exploited his office as a messenger of the chamber to run a protection racket among the coiners whom he was meant to be policing. 
In September 1693, in return for the promise of a pardon, Ivie informed the secretary of state of a group of coiners centred around John Hickes. The plan backfired, as Gibbons chose to protect Hickes and his associates. The men who attempted to serve the secretary's warrant found themselves on trial for burglary and riot. Ivie was indicted for clipping on the evidence of Hickes's wife, while Gibbons forced Mary Townshend to testify against her mother and Elizabeth Joars. Outlawed, Ivie, his wife, and his mistress fled first to Wales and then to Ireland, where he adopted the alias of Jones. 
Ivie was arrested in Dublin in May 1698, along with two other counterfeiters, Edward Brady and John Jennings. He freely admitted his crimes in London, but denied that he had done any coining since he came to Ireland (although he had to explain away a trunk full of incriminating materials). As the three men had been arrested for offences committed in England, they were brought back to London. Ivie's wife and mistress followed him. 'En route', he escaped from Chester Castle with the help of his former washerwoman, to whom he mentioned his desire not to be forced into bearing witness against Brady and Jennings, and his fear of betrayal by his wife and mistress. He got some 30 miles before he was recaptured, and in August he was committed to Newgate. 
On 22 August, the day that the warden of the mint, Isaac Newton, interrogated him, Ivie moved with his wife and mistress into the Press Yard parlour, one of the most comfortable and expensive rooms in Newgate. Ivie was able to name names with particular resonance for the authorities: Gibbons (against whom the government had turned), Hickes (now keeper of the Gatehouse prison), and the sham plotter and coiner William Chaloner. Whatever his fears, Ivie could no doubt have expected to trade information for freedom. It was not to be. He died in Newgate on 9 September and was buried in Christ Church, Newgate, the following day. His wife and mistress remained in prison, where Elizabeth Ivie died on 21 March 1699; Elizabeth Joars was released on 21 April. 
Ivie's life shows the opportunities available to the unscrupulous provided by the fears of the rulers of late seventeenth-century England, and their urge to know the networks that they saw as threatening them. He was able to play the informer for self-preservation and profit, albeit not without danger, moving between the worlds of political and criminal conspiracy. Some of his targets existed in the same territory: both Gibbons and Jennings had been footmen to the duke of Monmouth. When Ivie's daughter later testified against his mistress she played upon the perceived (and to some degree real) linkages between coining and Jacobite conspiracy (and in the process incriminated her dead father). Elizabeth Joars, 'a great cheat and dangerous Enemey to the Governmt.', had been behind the theft of intelligence from a mail coach; when the government organized a search, she and Ivie had been terrified that 'if it were found it would ruin the French King's Interest here and King James besides endangering all their friends' (TNA: PRO, MINT 15/17/198). 


@@@@@


doc= 67824


Dresdel, Sonia (1909-1976), actress, was born on 5 May 1909 in Hornsea, East Riding of Yorkshire, the daughter of John Henry Obee ('b'. 1868/9), a music-seller, and his wife, Florence Binks. Shortly afterwards the family moved to Grimsby and thence, in 1915, to Aberdeen, where she was educated at the girls' high school, and in 1926-7 studied briefly at the university before opting for a stage career; she entered the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in 1930. Having completed her training and won the Kendal prize, she made her professional debut in 1931 as Rosalie Quilter in Walter Ellis's farce 'Almost a Honeymoon'. She subsequently worked in provincial repertory theatres, seen as the accredited apprenticeship for any aspiring performer, throughout the 1930s. She was engaged for the 1931-2 season at the New Theatre, Northampton, then spent five years with the White Rose Players at Harrogate, and finally acted in similar companies managed by H. M. Tennent in Edinburgh and Glasgow. In August 1939 she joined the Old Vic company, first appearing at the Buxton festival as Abigail in Norman Ginsbury's 'Viceroy Sarah' and reappearing with them in October at the Streatham Hill Theatre, London, and later on tour, in this and other parts, including Lady Capulet in 'Romeo and Juliet', Judith Anderson in G. B. Shaw's 'The Devil's Disciple', the Duchess de la Tremouille in his 'Saint Joan', and Olivia in Oliver Goldsmith's 'The Good-Natured Man'. She again toured with the Old Vic in 1940 and 1941, playing Viola in 'Twelfth Night', Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', Lady Faulconbridge in 'King John', and the eponymous heroine in an adaptation of Du Maurier's 'Trilby'. 
In September of the following year this early promise came to fruition with an outstanding interpretation of Hedda Gabler at the Mercury -- a sensitive, highly intelligent performance which drew rhapsodic praise from no less fastidious a critic than James Agate. Dresdel followed it in November with a shrewdly calculating Millamant in William Congreve's 'The Way of the World', also directed by Ashley Dukes at the Mercury, in 1943 with an exquisitely flirtatious Clotilde in his version of Henry Becque's 'La Parisienne' at the St James's, and in January 1944 scored an even more remarkable success, particularly in box-office terms, as Olivia Russell in Joan Morgan's 'The Dark Potential' at the Q. Retitled 'This was a Woman' for its transfer in March to the Comedy, this melodramatic story of a homicidally paranoid and manipulative suburban housewife ran in war-damaged London for almost a year. It was a success which proved a mixed blessing in that it identified Dresdel with the persona of the villainess or heartless conniver and initiated a strain of type-casting which never quite deserted her. It also created a pattern for the next phase of her working life, characterized by leading roles in a succession of unmemorable plays for West End commercial managements -- leavened by occasional revivals such as W. S. Maugham's 'The Sacred Flame' at the St Martin's in November 1945, in which she played the repressed Nurse Wayland, and Lev Tolstoy's 'The Power of Darkness' at the Lyric in April 1949, in which she was cast as the murderous, adulterous Anisya, and several productions at the Arts Theatre Club. Other highlights during this period were her appearances at two Edinburgh festivals -- in 1950 as Juno in the premiere of James Bridie's 'The Queen's Comedy' and in 1955, when she repeated her Hedda -- a tour of Australia with James Parish's 'Message for Margaret' in 1951, and in 1958 a further tour of South Africa and Kenya with 'Hedda Gabler' and Ugo Betti's 'The Queen and the Rebels'. 
The year 1959 signalled an exploratory change of direction, which in the event led nowhere, when Dresdel was appointed director of productions for a season at the Harrogate Theatre, presenting a weekly repertory of routine farces and thrillers interlarded with rather more ambitious fare in plays by John Osborne, Ugo Betti, Terence Rattigan, Noel Coward, Aldous Huxley, and Frederick Lonsdale. Returning to the Old Vic in November 1961 as Christine Mannon in Eugene O'Neill's 'Mourning Becomes Electra', she gave an electrifying performance which the 'Times' reviewer described as 'a bravura display of Christine's rattlesnake charms and quick threatening tensities' (22 Dec 1961) and which persuaded another commentator to designate her 'actress of the year'. Between October 1963 and August 1965 she appeared in five productions at the Mermaid, enabling her to demonstrate some of the versatility for which the majority of her stage work allowed little scope: as Varvara Stavrogin in Albert Camus's version of Dostoyevsky's 'The Possessed', Amalia in Luigi Pirandello's 'Right You Are! (If You Think So)', Jocasta in Sophocles' 'Oedipus the King', Queen Eleanor in John Arden's 'Left-Handed Liberty', and Georgina Tidman in Sir Arthur Wing Pinero's 'Dandy Dick'. In the last decade of her life her most notable performances were as the erupting woman spectator in Robert Shaw's 'The Man in the Glass Booth' at the St Martin's in July 1967 and Judith Bliss in Noel Coward's 'Hay Fever' at the Bristol Old Vic in August 1970. She also appeared frequently on television and rarely without distinction, whether in single plays, series, or classic adaptations, but was poorly served by the cinema, making only twelve films; only two, 'The Fallen Idol' (1948, as the evil Mrs Baines) and 'The Trials of Oscar Wilde' (1960, as Lady Wilde), offered her any creative stimulus. 
Sonia Dresdel's leisure time was spent gardening at her home, Ransley House, Mersham, Kent. She died in the Kent and Canterbury Hospital, Canterbury, on 18 January 1976. In reviewing her career it is difficult not to account her an unlucky actress who never fully realized her considerable potential. Despite her obvious gifts -- a riveting stage presence, a dynamic yet velvet-like voice, and a sustained emotional power which some thought excessive, but was eminently theatrical -- she found herself progressively under-employed and under-extended, denied the opportunity in her prime to measure herself against the great tragic roles, so that one can only speculate upon what she might have made of Lady Macbeth, Phedre, or Medea. Nevertheless, she remained an accomplished artiste, who set an example of professionalism and left behind a worthy record of achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 67825


Pujol, Juan Garcia (1912-1988), spy, was born in Barcelona on 14 February 1912, the third child of Juan Pujol (died 1931), a Catalan who owned a dye factory in Barcelona, and his wife, Mercedes Garcia. He was educated at the La Salle Brothers School, Barcelona, and the Royal School of Poultry. After compulsory military service, he was appointed manager of a chicken farm north of Barcelona. However, when the Spanish Civil War broke out Pujol was called up by the republicans as a reservist and, when he went into hiding, was listed as a deserter. He was arrested just before Christmas 1937 but managed to gain his release a week later, going straight back into hiding. Early the following year he managed a union farm in northern Catalonia until it failed, and he then joined an infantry battalion in the hope of deserting to the nationalists at the first opportunity. This he did, only to be imprisoned in northern Spain. There one of his father's friends, a priest, negotiated his release and he was commissioned in the nationalist army. By the time Madrid fell he had not fired a shot for either side, and had found a job managing the Hotel Majestic there. 
When the Second World War started Pujol had developed a hatred of political extremism, and in January 1941 he volunteered his services to the British embassy. Abruptly rejected, he decided to enhance his value before making a second approach, and accordingly contacted the German military attache, to whom he masqueraded as an enthusiastic fascist willing to work for the Nazis. 
Pujol's apparent willingness to undertake a secret mission to England evidently impressed the Germans, who trained him in wireless techniques and in July 1941 dispatched him to Portugal, 'en route' for London, with $3000. However, unable to obtain the necessary entry visa, Pujol started to manufacture reports for the 'Abwehr', and pretended that he had indeed succeeded in travelling to Britain. Once the Germans had accepted this ruse he visited the British embassy, only to be rebuffed for a second time. It was only after he had made another approach, this time to the Americans in February 1942, that an explanation was found for the mysterious messages from an elusive spy codenamed Arabel that had been intercepted by MI5. Security Service analysts had expressed considerable doubt about Arabel's veracity, his reports making bizarre claims for expenses and being full of patently untrue information. 
When MI5 realized that Arabel was nothing more than an enthusiastic amateur agent who had successfully duped his 'Abwehr' handler, the decision was taken to allow Pujol to come to London and operate under strict supervision. His assigned case officer was a brilliant half-Spanish artist, Tomas Harris, and together they were to form an astonishing partnership, inventing a completely notional network of twenty-six subagents, all of whom drew their expenses. MI5 were able to monitor the 'Abwehr''s growing admiration for their star agent, and when he correctly forecast the date of the allied invasion in Normandy, they rewarded him with an Iron Cross. However, Pujol, now codenamed Garbo by MI5 because he was considered such an inspired actor, had been authorized to tip off the enemy to the D-day landings, insisting that they were only a diversionary feint, the true assault being scheduled for the Pas-de-Calais a fortnight later. This key contribution to a carefully orchestrated deception campaign helped persuade the 'Wehrmacht' high command not to launch an immediate counter-attack, while the troops were at their most vulnerable, thus ensuring D-day's success. 
Pujol was made an MBE in September 1944, although the award was made in conditions of great secrecy by the director-general of the Security Service and the decoration was never officially gazetted. At the end of the war, the Germans never having discovered his true role as a double agent, he was given a new identity in Venezuela and worked as a language teacher for Shell oil. Eventually his wife tired of Maracaibo and returned to Madrid with their two children, and he remarried, fathering another two sons. Pujol died in Caracas, aged seventy-six, on 15 October 1988; he was undoubtedly the most successful double agent of the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 67827


Buck, Samuel (1696-1779), topographical draughtsman, engraver, and print publisher, is usually said to have been born in Richmond, Yorkshire, though firm evidence of his birth place is lacking. Hauxwell, 41/2 miles south of Richmond, has also been suggested. His father was living near Elvil Bridge, Durham, in 1722, but no other information about his parents is known. Although Buck's familiarity with shorthand could suggest an original intention to enter the legal profession, by 1719 he was known to the Leeds antiquary Ralph Thoresby as an amateur, though useful, artist. Thoresby introduced him to John Warburton, an antiquary then engaged in writing a county topography for Yorkshire. Sketches made by Samuel Buck in 1719 and 1720 for plates intended for this later abandoned topography can be found in the British Library. 
In 1720 Buck published proposals for two large engraved prospects of Leeds and Wakefield. These two prints proved to be the first in a series of town prospects. Eventually there were ten in the first series (1720-25), the others being of York, Newcastle upon Tyne, Durham, Stockton-on-Tees, Maidstone (two), Sunderland, and Lincoln. Measuring on average about 410 mm x 1000 mm, each was printed on two sheets, and no more were printed off than were subscribed for. Today they are extremely rare. 
By this time Buck had moved to London. The first address he gave for subscribers was the White Swan, Brownlow Street, off High Holborn. Later he operated from his brother's address at the Golden Buck, Warwick Street, near Golden Square, Soho, and also at the Golden Buck, Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, and at 1 Garden Court, Middle Temple. The Green Canister, next to the Crown and Anchor in the Strand, seems to have been his residence. From his arrival in London he worked closely with the fellows of the Society of Antiquaries, attending their meetings at The Mitre tavern in the Strand and showing them specimens of his town prospects. In 1724 and 1725 he accompanied the society's secretary, William Stukeley, on two of his antiquarian peregrinations. The resulting drawings are in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. A view of the gatehouse of Thornton College, Lincoln, carries a Stukeley inscription: 'Mr. Saml. Buck now with me whom I engaged to begin his drawings of Antiquitys' (Gough Top. 17512, fol. 56, Bodleian Library, Oxford). 
In January 1724 Buck issued proposals for publishing a collection of twenty-four perspective views ('antiquities') in the county of York. These views were published in 1726. A number of the prints were based on sketches he had made when with Warburton. Thanks largely to the fellows of the Society of Antiquities, who had encouraged its publication, it was a success. In proposals issued in May 1726 Buck announced that he was working on a second set of twenty-four antiquities, representing 'remarkable ruins' in Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire, places drawn when he accompanied William Stukeley. These were published in 1727, the same year he married Catherine Faussett, on 20 April. By this date Buck had developed a more ambitious plan. In November 1726 he announced his intention of systematically recording ruins throughout England. The castles, religious foundations, and other remains of antiquity throughout the kingdom, he argued, were in a lamentable condition. He would 'rescue the mangled remains' of 'these aged & venerable edifices from the inexorable jaws of time' (S. Buck, 'Proposals for the publication of... twenty-four views of castles... in the counties of Lincoln and Nottingham', 1 Nov 1726, copy in priv. coll.), by visiting and recording them. 
Samuel's brother, Nathaniel Buck (fl. 1724-1759), was associated with this project from the start, taking in subscriptions at the Golden Buck, Warwick Street, Soho. It is assumed that he was born in or near Richmond, Yorkshire, though the earliest mention of him is not until 1724. In the summer of 1727 Nathaniel accompanied Samuel on a peregrination of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Derbyshire. The third antiquities collection thus consists of ruins in those counties, and the views are signed either 'S. B. delin. N. B. sculp.' or vice versa. In 1728 the brothers announced their plan to undertake the remaining counties of northern England, but they discovered enough recordable ruins in Durham and Northumberland for the following year's set of twenty-four, and Cumberland and Westmorland had to wait. In 1729-31 they took their sketch-boards to the midlands, between 1732 and 1736 they covered the counties in the south of England and also in Monmouthshire, in 1737 they covered the counties of East Anglia, and in 1738 they completed England by dealing with Cumberland and Westmorland. Finally they produced sets for Wales, apparently touring the counties of Wales in 1739-41. With the publication in 1742 of Anglesey, Caernarvonshire, Denbighshire, Flintshire, Merioneth, Montgomeryshire, and Radnor, the antiquities project was completed. 
This project constituted only half of the Buck brothers' enterprise. From 1728 they had worked on a parallel project: producing and publishing a series of long prospects of English and Welsh 'Cities, Sea-ports, and Capital Towns'. In this second, 'principal' series of townscapes each prospect consisted of an image on a single sheet measuring 305 mm x 775 mm. They are taken in most cases from the nearby countryside, 1 or 2 miles from the town, and from an elevated spot where possible. In the cases of London and of Greenwich and Deptford (two views that abut to form one) they are taken from several viewpoints. All the town prospects carry a numbered key and most are accompanied by a diligently compiled panegyric. The Bucks' usual practice was to market the town prospects in sets of six. 
The drawings for the town prospects were usually made on the same peregrinations as those for the antiquities. After the completion of the antiquities, however, Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, and Leicestershire were revisited and their principal towns recorded. Because several towns in the north had been dealt with in the first series, the Bucks left that area of England until last. They then turned their attention to Wales in 1748, publishing prospects of the six principal Welsh towns. The set, which was supposed to conclude the project, consisting of London in five sheets plus a sheet for Portsmouth, appeared on 11 September 1749. However, on the same day the brothers issued the finest of all their town prospects -- two long views of Richmond, Yorkshire, the town with which they had been so closely associated. These were surely intended as the grand finale. Nevertheless, in 1752 they published second views of Birmingham and Oxford. Nathaniel died some time between 1759 and 14 May 1774, when Garden Court, Middle Temple, was to be disposed of on behalf of his executrix, Mrs Rebecca Buck. 
Samuel Buck continued to advertise and sell his antiquities and town prospects. He advertised that he would instruct young ladies and gentlemen in their own houses in the art of drawing and painting in oils and watercolours; he made flower drawings; he sold drawings specially designed for young beginners to copy and improve their skills; he offered to clean and mend pictures; and he exhibited at the Royal Academy, the Free Society, and the Society of Artists. Two years before he died he issued proposals for a set of four perspective views in Yorkshire from drawings made on the spot by himself. 
In their proposals for the Glamorgan, Brecknockshire, and Cardiganshire antiquities the Bucks firmly stated that they 'do design and draw the Views on the spot and engrave their own Copper-Plates' (copy inserted in collections for a third edition of Gough's 'British Topography', vol. 4, 161, in the Bodleian Library). These claims must be treated with caution. The Bucks were not the only people involved. Other artists were employed to strengthen their drawings, to draw the staffage, and generally to bring their awkward drawings to life. These artists included Thomas Rosse, Hubert-Francois Gravelot, Jean-Baptiste Claude Chatelain, Peter Monamy, and probably Samuel Scott. The style of engraving changes markedly from time to time. Engravers employed for the first series of town prospects included John Harris and Gerard Vandergucht. Chatelain may have been the engraver of the various towns that concluded the principal series. 
In his proposals for the prospects of Durham and Stockton in the first series Buck announced: 'Any Gentleman may have his Seat drawn and engraved by the same Hand at a reasonable Rate' ('Newcastle Weekly Courant', 15 Sept 1722). He made drawings of Bolton in Yorkshire, and prints of Chilham Castle in Kent, Powderham Castle in Devon, Melton Constable in Norfolk, Aston in Warwickshire, and Worksop Manor in Nottinghamshire. In Cornwall the Bucks produced four views of St Michael's Mount. 
Samuel Buck's final years were spent in poverty. Richard Gough supported him out of his own pocket and encouraged his friends to follow suit, publishing an appeal in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and elsewhere, and attempting to present it in the chamber of the Society of Antiquaries. It provoked a generous response, and in his last six months Buck was free from financial anxiety. He died at eighty-three on 17 August 1779, and was buried in the churchyard of St Clement Danes three days later. 
The copper plates for printing the antiquities and the principal series of town prospects were acquired by the Fleet Street printmaker Robert Sayer. Sayer reissued the prints in 1774, making them available in single sheets, or bound into three volumes with the comprehensive title 'Buck's Antiquities'. The Sayer impressions have the original imprints but can be distinguished from the impressions made by Buck by the plate numbers Sayer added at the top right corner. They are listed in print catalogues as late as 1813, by which date some of the prints had been on the market for eighty-seven years. Only the London prospect was updated, though not thoroughly. 
Large numbers of preparatory drawings for Buck's antiquities and town prospects survive in libraries, art galleries, museums, and record offices, drawn by the Bucks themselves or by the artists they employed. Some are inscribed with shorthand notes. Though the Buck brothers were not the only ones producing views of antiquities and town prospects in the eighteenth century they were much the most prolific. They published 428 engravings of monasteries, abbeys, castles, and other ruins, three unsigned engravings of Fountains Abbey, two town plans, an engraving of Bristol high cross, and eighty-seven long prospects of English and Welsh towns. Collectively their engravings constitute a national survey of ruins of the period, and provide us with an indispensable record of what English and Welsh towns looked like before the industrial revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 67828


Trevelyan, John (1903-1986), film censor, was born on 11 July 1903 at 10 Kemerton Road, Beckenham, Kent, the fourth child and elder son in the family of two sons and four daughters of George Philip Trevelyan (1858-1937), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Monica Evelyn Juliet (died 1962), daughter of Sidney Phillips, Church of England clergyman. His younger brother was Humphrey Trevelyan, Baron Trevelyan (1905-1985), diplomatist, and his eldest sister was Mary Trevelyan (1897-1983), founder of International Students' House, London. He was educated at Lancing College and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was awarded a third class in part one of the history tripos in 1924 and graduated BA in 1925. He was married four times. His first wife, whom he married on 18 September 1928, was Kathleen Margaret Pass ('b'. 1901/2), daughter of Charles Halle Pass, gentleman, of Barrow in Furness. They had one son, who was born and died in 1932. Following their divorce in 1949 he married, on 1 June that year, Dr Joan Frieda Scott ('b'. 1912), medical practitioner and daughter of Francis Clayton Scott, company director, son of Sir James William Schott, later Scott, of Yews in Westmorland, first baronet: they had one son and one daughter. His second divorce, in 1959, was followed by his third marriage, on 7 December that year, to Jean Metcher (1928/9-1972), daughter of Robert Mutch, a railway goods superintendent: they had twin sons. After the death of his third wife he married, in 1974, Rosalie Evelyn Camber (1924/5-1979), daughter of Joseph Lopez-Salzedo, company director. 
After teaching in the Gold Coast for a period, Trevelyan in 1929 became an educational administrator, working in Kent and Sussex until his appointment in 1938 as director of education for the county of Westmorland, where, during the Second World War, he had to cope with a huge influx of evacuees from the north-east coast. In 1946 he resigned to take up the post of first director of the British Families Education Service in Germany, where he was responsible for setting up schools for the children of allied servicemen. He left educational administration in 1949 (the year in which he was appointed OBE) to make a living as a freelance writer and lecturer. 
In 1951 Trevelyan was invited to join the British Board of Film Censors, which had been set up in 1912 by the film industry in an attempt to stave off interference by local authorities, which had been given legal responsibility for licensing cinemas. In time, the local authorities made it a condition of issuing a licence that the cinema should adopt the board's certificates, although they were able to reverse the decisions of the board, which had no statutory powers. In 1952 Trevelyan was appointed chairman of a new committee, the cinema advisory subcommittee, set up as a forum for discussions between representatives of the licensing authorities, the film industry, and welfare and educational organizations, and in 1958 he was appointed secretary to the board, chosen by representatives of the principal associations of the film industry. Until 1960 the president of the board had sole responsibility for censorship, but in that year the secretary was given joint responsibility with the president, whose role became consultative. Trevelyan served with two presidents: from 1960 to 1965 Lord Morrison of Lambeth held the office, but Trevelyan had a much more successful relationship with his successor, Lord Harlech. 
When Trevelyan became a film examiner in 1951, nudity was never allowed in a film: by 1971, when he retired, there were many films which contained material that he considered too pornographic even for adult audiences, and which were consequently refused an X certificate. One of the first films to come to the board after Trevelyan was appointed was 'Room at the Top' (1958), regarded as a milestone in the history of British film censorship: in contrast to most British and American films of the 1950s, it dealt with real people and real problems, and despite its explicit dialogue it was passed by the board. This was followed by 'Saturday Night and Sunday Morning' (1960), 'The L-Shaped Room' (1962), and 'A Kind of Loving' (1962), all passed because Trevelyan considered them to be made with good taste and sincerity. In the 1960s, a period of changing attitudes which saw the coming of the 'permissive society', he had to decide what his responsibilities were: he described himself as 'a censor who did not believe in censorship' ('The Times'). But as a former educator he was especially concerned with protecting children from unsuitable material, and he banned films he regarded as pornographic. He also tackled the increasing portrayal of violence on screen, which he thought justified if it was there to show that violence was inhuman. He believed in the importance of establishing good relations with film-makers and film-company executives, and he often visited studios to watch films being shot, encouraging producers to show him unfinished scripts so that he could advise on whether acceptance was likely. He managed to keep a balanced view, and was widely respected for his tolerant and reasonable approach. 
In his thirteen years as secretary Trevelyan was only involved in one 'cause celebre', in 1970, when the police raided the Open Space Theatre Club during a showing of Andy Warhol's 'Flesh', which did not have a certificate. Trevelyan, who had suggested the film be shown there as clubs could show films that did not have a certificate, intervened, and when the directors of the theatre were fined by Hampstead magistrates court, he arranged for Warhol to pay the fines. He subsequently gave 'Flesh' an X certificate. 
Trevelyan was appointed CBE on retirement in 1971. He published 'What the Censor Saw', his reflections on the changing role of censorship, in 1973. He died on 15 August 1986 at his home, 35 Braybrooke Gardens, Upper Norwood, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 67829


Miller, Ruby Laura Rose (1889-1976), actress, was born on 14 July 1889 at 64 Water Lane, Brixton, London, the daughter of Arthur Miller, a commercial traveller in the leather trade, and his wife, Augusta Catherine Leon. She was educated in London and at a convent in Amiens. Her first marriage, to Lieutenant Phillip Samson, ended when he was killed in action in 1918. Her second marriage in 1929, to her long-time sweetheart, the composer, conductor, and concert pianist Max Darewski, ended with his early death some five months later. 
Miller later claimed that her first professional stage appearance was in J. T. Tanner's musical play 'The Orchid' (music by I. Caryll and L. Monckton) alongside Gertie Millar and George Grossmith jun., at the Gaiety Theatre in 1903 at the age of thirteen, though she told those auditioning her that she was eighteen. When her parents found out about her lie some three months later, George Edwardes, the musical comedy impresario who produced the show, withdrew her from the production and told her to come back when she was eighteen. Other sources suggest that her debut was in 1906 as a dancer in 'Nero' by Stephen Philips at His Majesty's Theatre, which would have been after her time at the Academy of Dramatic Art. Miller spent a number of years as a Gaiety girl under the management of George Edwardes, but much of her early work was with Herbert Tree's company, taking small parts and understudying in Shakespearian and costume dramas. She also toured with Herbert Tree in Berlin in 1907. 
At nineteen Miller returned to the Gaiety and understudied both Gladys Cooper and Gertie Millar in J. T. Tanner's 'Our Miss Gibbs' (music again by Caryll and Monckton). The Gaiety girls were the toast of Edwardian London, courting the many aristocrats who frequented the shows. They led fashion trends and often ended up marrying into the aristocracy. Miller's time as a Gaiety girl provided the basis for one of the most long-lasting myths about her career -- that a Russian duke was so enamoured of her that he drank champagne out of her shoe; when she noted that the shoe was now ruined, he ordered numerous pairs of new shoes to be delivered to her rooms the next day. Such romantic stories abound in her autobiographical volumes, 'Believe me or not' (1934) and 'Champagne from my Slipper' (1962). However, Miller was more interested in her professional career than in marrying into the social elite. In 1910 she went to work with Charles Hawtrey at His Majesty's Theatre and in 1913 she was given a cameo role in the touring and London production of a farce, 'Oh! I Say!' by S. Blowe and D. Hoare. She then went on to one of her most famous roles, as Maimie Scott in the 1915 farce, 'A Little Bit of Fluff' by W. W. Ellis, in which she apparently shocked a generation by revealing glimpses of her knee; she played the role for a year. 
Miller also appeared in many early films, among them Bertie Samuelson's 'Little Women and Good Wives' and 'The Edge of Beyond' (1919), and Maurice Elvey's 'The Mystery of Bernard Brown'. She later produced a stage adaptation of 'The Edge of beyond' (1921) which she had co-written with with Roy Horniman. (Other co-authorships included her 'Big Ben' with Evadne Price in 1939.) At this point she went into management as well as playing the lead in the show. The mid-1920s took Miller to America in the hope of an extended contract with Cecil B. De Mille, but she was usurped by Pola Negri, also known for her portrayal of what Miller called 'lurid vamp parts'. On her return to England, Miller performed in the pre-London run of Arnold Ridley's long-running 'The Ghost Train' (1925) alongside a very young Laurence Olivier. During the 1930s and 1940s Miller worked on more British films, including 'Power of Attorney' (1942), 'Flying Fortress' (1942), and 'The Hundred Pound Widow' (1943), and during the Second World War she took part in concerts for the troops. In the 1950s she did a lot of radio and television work, also giving national and international lecture tours in which she talked about her days as a Gaiety girl and about her professional acquaintance with the leading performers of a bygone age, such as Marie Lloyd, Evelyn Laye, and Gladys Cooper. It was on these tours that she used to make such statements as, 'Women have lost the power to excite romance and mystery', or 'Remember, girls, men are the hunters. Don't try to compete with them'. Miller came from an age of heightened femininity, but chose to work rather than get remarried in the early 1920s. She sought a career which marked her out as a modern, liberated woman during an age when marriage and family was the destiny for most women. 
Ruby Miller died on 2 April 1976 at 8 Cawley Road, Chichester, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 67830


Roberts, Rachel (1927-1980), actress, was born on 20 September 1927, at Llanelli, the second daughter of the Baptist minister Richard Rhys Roberts (1894-1965) and his wife, Rachel Ann Jones (1894-1973). Rachel Roberts records that despite her childhood in a caring family she had little consciousness of being loved and she developed early a sense of inferiority, as the unwanted child of middle-aged parents, with a sister ten years older, more accomplished, and better looking. From 1932 Roberts lived in Swansea and attended Swansea high school from 1938 to 1945. She records systematic bullying at school. In compensation Roberts began to develop an interior erotic fantasy life and an exhibitionist, rebellious exterior. The combination of insecurity and flamboyant display, to the point of scandal, proved an unstable basis for the best of her work and provoked the gradual disintegration of her personal life. 
From 1945 Roberts studied at the University of Wales, Aberystwyth, and then went on to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (1948-1950), where she was awarded two student prizes. After a few years acquiring experience and moving from relationship to relationship she decided that the stability of marriage was what she wanted, and in 1955, after a deliberate pursuit, she married the actor Alan Dobie ('b'. 1932). From the start the marriage with a serious, introvert partner failed, and soon descended into long separations filled with promiscuous relations with other lovers. 
The year 1956 changed the face of British theatre and, subsequently, films. Alan Dobie became one of a generation of young, regional actors who found a wide range of work opening up for them. Roberts's Welsh background opened some doors, largely because there were few young English actresses equipped to play opposite the new actors. In 1960 she was cast to play opposite Albert Finney, in the film of Alan Sillitoe's novel 'Saturday Night and Sunday Morning' (1958), for which she received the British Film Academy award as best actress. She was to receive this award again in 1963 for her role opposite Richard Harris in 'This Sporting Life'. It might be considered strange that such a flamboyant, extrovert actress could score her triumphs playing working-class, sexually neglected women, used and abused by rough, extrovert, inconsiderate men; perhaps she tapped into the latent sense of inferiority which the display masked. Playing together again in 1972, in E. A. Whitehead's play 'Alpha beta', Roberts and Finney put together a coruscating revelation of the stages of the disintegration of a marriage as a descent into hell. 
Also, in 1960, the year of 'Saturday Night and Sunday Morning', Roberts joined the Royal Court Theatre to play Anna Petrovna in Anton Chekhov's 'Platonov' and found herself cast to play opposite Rex Harrison (1908-1990) ['see 'Harrison, Sir Reginald Carey]. For the role, she was awarded the Clarence Derwent award for the best supporting actress. The meeting with Harrison was to have a greater effect on her life and career. She began to live with him, and this ended the marriage with Alan Dobie. She and Harrison married on 11 March 1962. She records the security gained from mixing with 'stars' and living the luxurious life. Unfortunately it also increased her insecurity, as Harrison began a run of films culminating in 'My Fair Lady' (1964) and Roberts was in the wrong place for her line of acting. Her work in London and in British films such as 'This Sporting Life' (1963), 'O Lucky Man!' (1973), 'Our Man in Havana' (1959), and the Australian 'Picnic at Hanging Rock' (1975) continued to bring praise, and for John Schlesinger's film 'Yanks' (1979) she was awarded a British Academy award as best supporting actress. But the relationship with Harrison, with whom she was obsessed, was well on the way to disintegration by the mid-1960s, causing great suffering to both parties. Her drinking increased, her private and public behaviour became more outrageous, and in 1969 Harrison issued a statement saying they had separated. The marriage finally ended in 1971. The dissipation in her life began to affect her work. Her death, at 2620 Hutton Drive, Los Angeles, California, from a barbiturate overdose on 26 November 1980, was judged as suicide. 


@@@@@


doc= 67831


Ure, Mary Eileen (1933-1975), actress, was born on 18 February 1933 at 17 Kelvinside Terrace South, Glasgow, daughter of Colin McGregor Ure, engineer, and his wife, Edith Hannah Eileen Willis Swinburne. She was educated at the Mount School, York, and trained at the Central School of Speech Training and Dramatic Art, making her first stage appearance in 1954 in Alan Melville's 'Simon and Laura' at the Opera House, Manchester. She made her name as Amanda in Jean Anouilh's 'Time Remembered' in her London debut at the Lyric, Hammersmith, in December 1954, a production that included Paul Scofield, with whom she went on to play Ophelia to his Hamlet in Peter Brook's production. Before opening at the Phoenix Theatre in December 1955, the company took 'Hamlet' to the Moscow Art Theatre for two weeks: the nunnery scene was televised for Russian television, with Mary Ure playing opposite a Russian actor, each speaking in their own language. In 1956, at the Royal Court Theatre, she played Abigail Williams in the first London production of Arthur Miller's 'The Crucible'. 
Mary Ure was cast as Alison, opposite Kenneth Haigh playing Jimmy Porter, in the original production of John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger', put on by the English Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre in 1956, the play that established Osborne as the original 'angry young man', and started a vogue for 'kitchen sink' drama. She also starred in the film of the play, in 1957, opposite Richard Burton. In 1957 she married John Osborne (1929-1994), the second of his five wives: the marriage ended in divorce in 1963 and the relationship was chronicled by Osborne in the second volume of his autobiography, 'Almost a Gentleman' (1991). For Ure 'Look Back in Anger' was followed by a part in Arthur Miller's 'A View from the Bridge' at the Comedy Theatre, a very successful production that ran from October 1956 until April 1957, directed by Peter Brook. After starring in the 1957 Broadway production of 'Look Back in Anger', she did a season at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford upon Avon, in 1959, playing Titania to Robert Hardy's Oberon in Peter Hall's production of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', and Desdemona to Paul Robeson's Othello. Following this, in 1960 she replaced Claire Bloom in Jean Giradoux's 'Duel of Angels' in Boston, playing opposite Vivien Leigh, before touring the United States. Back in London in 1960, at the Royal Court, she again took the part of Abigail Williams in 'The Crucible', and Beatrice in Thomas Middleton's 'The Changeling' in 1961. The cast of 'The Changeling' included Robert Shaw (1927-1978), whom she married in 1963: it was his second marriage also. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Although Ure left the stage in 1961 for several years, by then she was an established film actress, after roles in 'Storm over the Nile' (1955), 'Windom's Way' (1957), and 'Sons and Lovers' (1960), and her film career continued with 'The Mind Benders' (1963), 'The Luck of Ginger Coffey' (1964), 'Custer of the West' (1966), 'Where Eagles Dare' (1968), and 'A Reflection of Fear' (1973). She returned to the stage briefly in 1967 in Tennessee Williams's 'Two Character Play', and was in the cast of the Broadway production of Harold Pinter's 'Old Times' (1971-2). 
Blonde and beautiful, Mary Ure was often cast in the role of an innocent victim. She returned to the London stage on 2 April 1975 in 'The Exorcism' at the Comedy Theatre, but died from a fatal overdose on 3 April after celebrating the successful opening of the play. 


@@@@@


doc= 67832


Urquhart, Mary Sinclair (1906-1977), actress, was born in Glasgow on 21 January 1906, the eldest of the family of three daughters and a son of William Urquhart (1875-1956), ship's engineer, and his wife, Ann McCallum ('b'. 1874), a Post Office clerk. Both parents had moved from the highlands to work in Glasgow, where they married. The family lived at 27 Caird Drive, Dowanhill, and attended Gardner Street Presbyterian Church. 
Mary was a lively child who took delight in singing round the piano and learning highland dancing to her father's chanter. Her party piece was 'Cockles and mussels', telling the sad tale of Molly Malone, and she became known as Molly from then on. She attended Dowanhill primary school and Church Street School, leaving at fourteen to work in the civil service in the telephone exchange. Her abiding passion was still acting and she saved her money to pay for elocution lessons from a renowned teacher, Percival Steeds at the Athenaeum in Glasgow. At sixteen she joined a local drama club and by her twenties she had become an accomplished amateur. Her work attracted the attention of R. F. Pollock, a Glasgow businessman with a real passion for theatre. Inspired by Theodore Komisarjevsky's Chekhov season in London in 1926, he chose a group of players, gave each actor a meticulously annotated script of 'The Three Sisters', and rehearsed them for ten weeks. Urquhart played the part of Irena. The play was presented for a week's private performances and received admiring reviews. 
In 1934 Urquhart made her professional debut in Glasgow's Theatre Royal, playing Effie Deans in a roistering stage version of Sir Walter Scott's 'Heart of Midlothian', directed by Millard Shevlin. She used her full name, Mary S. Urquhart. During this time she became engaged to William McIntosh (1900-1959) from Inverness-shire, a member of the Glasgow police force. He totally understood that acting was essential to her happiness, and they married on 1 August 1934. In 1935-6 Molly worked with the Cambridge Festival Theatre, then in 1936-7 with the Sheldon-Browne company in Gourock. She gained valuable experience from these engagements but realized that in order to work in Scotland she would have to find a theatre space and form her own company. 
Urquhart found a suitable building in Rutherglen, a small royal burgh outside Glasgow. A disused church, it had a square interior with pews seating about 250 people. John Paterson, founder of a famous oatcake firm, was the owner. Impressed that Urquhart had saved $300 towards the venture, more than he had when he started, he rented the building to her for a nominal figure. The theatre was to be called the MSU (after her initials). She saw this as a place where young amateur actors who wanted to become professional could gain experience. She planned a season of weekly repertory, and all of her company rehearsed in the evenings after their day's work was done. Her family and friends helped in every way, adapting the building and making scenery and costumes. One day, as she took off her overalls and put on some make-up to meet the press, someone quipped, 'Star by night, char by day' (Murdoch, 65). The play chosen for the opening was Merton Hodge's 'The Wind and the Rain', an entertaining story of student life. The leading roles were played by Eileen Herlie, Andrew Crawford, and Archie Duncan, with Molly directing and playing the landlady. 
The people of Rutherglen rallied round the theatre and after a successful opening night on 2 May 1939, audiences grew steadily. Her husband took the accounts in hand, and with the support of the company on stage, backstage, and in the box office, Urquhart ran the theatre until 1944, in spite of the war, the black-out, and the lack of any public subsidy. However, she did allow herself a few weeks off in September 1943 for the birth of her son, James Urquhart McIntosh. Over 100 plays were presented in the theatre, from G. B. Shaw to James Bridie, and with several modern comedies, pantomimes, and new plays by Scottish dramatists. Actors who gained experience on that little stage included Duncan Macrae, Gordon Jackson, and the young Nicholas Parsons, who said of Molly: 'She gave us real experience of walking the boards, learning one's job the hard, the only way' (Murdoch, 122-3). 
In 1944 when the Paterson family decided to sell the building for $2000 Molly had to accept that the price was beyond her means. The little theatre in its five brief years had been an important chapter in Scottish dramatic history. However, Molly Urquhart was invited to join a new venture, the Citizens' Theatre, established in Glasgow by James Bridie. Her first part was the lead in J. B. Priestley's 'Bull Market', a comedy about a chambermaid who became a millionaire. Translating the dialogue from Yorkshire to Scots she gave a triumphant performance, in the central role, described by the author as 'truly magnificent and vital' (Murdoch, 130). Urquhart became a permanent member of the Citizens' Company and worked there, on and off, from 1944 to 1957. She was supremely happy, especially when she got parts that allowed her to give full rein to her very Scottish style of acting. These included Mrs Grant in Bridie's 'The Forrigan Reel', Mary Paterson in 'The Anatomist' (also by Bridie), and Dame Sensualitie in David Lindsay's 'The Thrie Estaitis' at the Edinburgh festival. In this last she was magnificent: beautifully gowned, she advanced into the assembly halls and made the old Scots words ring out with warmth and humour. In Bridie's pantomime 'The Tintock Cup' she played a redoubtable principal boy, stopping the show with a song written by Stanley Baxter, 'Tatty Bacchante -- I'm everyone's auntie'. 
In 1945 Molly Urquhart's first London appearance was in James Bridie's 'The Forrigan Reel' in Sadler's Wells. The company was headed by Alistair Sim, with whom she again appeared in Bridie's 'Dr. Angelus' (Phoenix Theatre, 1947) and 'The Anatomist' (Westminster Theatre, 1948). Her inclusion in 'Who's Who in the Theatre' followed in 1951. 
In 1957 Molly Urquhart appeared in 'The Nun's Story', a film by Fred Zinnemann; she also had roles in several of his later films, including 'A Man for All Seasons' (1966). She had made the acquaintance of Dame Peggy Ashcroft in 'The Nun's Story' and she was invited to join her in a play called 'The Coast of Coromandel'. During rehearsals she got word, on 9 January 1959, that her husband had suffered an aneurism while at the wheel of his car and had died instantly. Now a widow with a sixteen-year-old son, Molly Urquhart subsequently undertook television and film work whenever possible. She played in 'The Flying Swan', a television series with Margaret Lockwood, and 'The Very Merry Widow' with Moira Lister, taking the part of a Scottish housekeeper in both series. In 1962 she appeared in the Sean O'Casey season at the Mermaid Theatre and also worked in a series of Scottish comedies with Jimmy Logan in his New Metropole Theatre in Glasgow. 
In her latter years Molly Urquhart continued her lifelong residence in Glasgow, and spent as much time as possible with her family in Wester Ross and on Loch Lomondside. Shortly after she made her final appearance in Fred Zinnemann's film of 'Julia' in 1977, she became ill and, following an operation for cancer, died in the Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, on 5 October 1977. She was buried in Arrochar churchyard, Loch Long. She was a lady at the heart of Scottish theatre and an inspiration to many young actors. Perhaps Dame Peggy Ashcroft summed up her essential spirit: 'She was like the sun coming into the room' (Murdoch, 243). 


@@@@@


doc= 67833


Baillie, Alexander (c.1590-1655), abbot of Regensburg, of the family of Carnbroe, Lanarkshire, went to school in Scotland, then in August 1612 was enrolled at the protestant University of Helmstedt. Having become a Catholic he entered the Scots College, Rome, that same year. He is said to have also studied at Heidelberg and travelled in France and Italy. 
On 25 November 1615 Baillie received the habit at the Scots Benedictine monastery in Regensburg and made his vows at the sister abbey in Wurzburg on 30 November 1617. In 1622 he was prior there under Abbot William Ogilvie. He travelled to Scotland and, having returned, was in early 1623 made prior and cellarer at Regensburg. In 1628 he published at Wurzburg a polemical work, 'A True Information of the Unhallowed Offspring... of our Scottish-Calvinian Gospel', which despite much tedious invective gives interesting glimpses of contemporary Scotland. 
Invasion by the Swedish protestant forces in the 1630s caused immense disruption to the three Scots abbeys, scattering the monks and devastating their economy. Baillie escaped before Wurzburg was captured in October 1631 and in January 1633 is found as cellarer at Regensburg. He again had to flee when that town was captured in November, then, returning after its recapture, was in December 1634 made administrator. On 13 November 1636 he was elected abbot of Erfurt but could not take possession because of enemy occupation and again administered the Regensburg abbey until finally, on 18 January 1646, he was elected its abbot. 
Clearly a competent administrator Baillie restored its economy, though greatly hampered by a lack of monks and harassment from various quarters. In 1641 an attempt to oust the Scots was thwarted but in 1653, apparently worn out by poor health and troubles, he made an Irish monk his coadjutor and successor. This prospective takeover was, however, vetoed by Rome. 
At Regensburg Baillie had a cartulary of the monastery compiled, personally checking the transcripts and adding his own chronicle; although the latter is somewhat subjective, both are valuable sources. Some historical work by him has survived in later compilations. He died at St Jakob, Regensburg, on 7 April 1655, having played a key role in preserving the three Scots monasteries. 


@@@@@


doc= 67834


Barclay, Robert (1611/12-1682), Roman Catholic priest and college head, was born probably in Kincardineshire, the youngest of the four sons of David Barclay (1580-1660) of Mathers and Elizabeth Livingston, daughter of Sir John Livingston of Dunnipace. He graduated MA from Aberdeen University in 1633. After conversion to Roman Catholicism, Barclay studied at the Scots College, Paris, and the College of St Nicolas du Chardonnet. He was probably one of the group of students from the former who mustered at the Paris residence of John Clerk of Penicuik in 1638 to protest that Clerk had called them all beggars and poor men's sons. After ordination to the priesthood he taught in St Nicolas du Chardonnet for six years and became prefect of studies in the Scots College, Paris. In 1650 he was one of a group of Scottish priests involved in negotiations with the Congregatio de Propaganda Fide in Rome which led to the establishment of a prefecture apostolic in Scotland, and he was appointed agent in Paris for the secular clergy. 
Barclay became principal of the Scots College, Paris, about 1655. He restored the discipline of the college, and provided it with a grand new building which was ready for use in 1665, and to which a chapel and north wing were added in 1672. In addition, he purchased several properties in Paris which yielded rents for the benefit of the college. Some critics said that he built for his own glory. The indications are that Barclay was a stern disciplinarian and that he was inclined to quarrel. He had many wrangles with the Jesuits in Paris, mainly on account of their attempts to wean his ecclesiastical students into their own order. By stringent measures, such as forbidding his students to visit the Jesuit college, he was often successful in dissuading students from taking such a course, but failed in the case of his own kinsman, John Strachan, who joined the Jesuits at Naples. The principal also failed to convert permanently to Catholicism his nephew and namesake who became the famous Quaker apologist. There were also tensions between Barclay and two priests who had been educated in Rome, William Leslie, the Scots agent in Rome, and Alexander Dunbar, prefect of the Scottish mission. Nevertheless Barclay was successful in producing fine priests, and his students included Thomas Placid Fleming, later abbot of Regensburg, Louis Innes, Thomas Innes, Richard Augustine Hay, and Robert Munro, the intrepid missionary martyr. 
Barclay also helped to get Irish missionaries for the Scottish mission, and took part in the missionary conferences in Paris that were organized by the Vincentians. During Barclay's time the college in Paris became a pastoral training centre for Scottish priests who had been trained in Rome. Barclay also gave refuge to priests who were exiled from Scotland for religious reasons, including John Walker and William Ballantine, prefect apostolic of the Scottish mission, both of whom wrote religious works in their sojourn at the college. Robert Barclay died on 7 February 1682, and was buried in the college chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 67835


Canaries, James (1653/4-1698), episcopalian minister, was the son of Thomas Canaries ('c'.1615-1677), minister of Kinnaird, Perthshire, and his wife, Margaret Leighton. After attending St Andrews University he began trials before the presbytery of Perth in January 1671. His ministerial training ended when he and two other students were allegedly involved in a drunken escapade, after which he is reported to have gone to serve in Dunbarton's regiment in France. In order to train for the Roman Catholic priesthood he entered Douai College on 27 March 1678, aged twenty-four, but, after a period in Rome, left in March 1681 and returned to Scotland. 
During 1681-2 Canaries held a bursary in the presbytery of Dunkeld, and taught in that of St Andrews, which admitted him into communion in January 1682, and licensed him to preach on 24 October 1683. In addition to unpublished attacks on Roman Catholicism, in 1684 the ambitious convert proclaimed his renewed protestantism in 'A Discourse Representing the Sufficient Manifestation of the Will of God to his Church', a lengthy work dedicated to the chancellor, the earl of Perth. It perhaps helped him to obtain the parish of Selkirk, to which he was licensed in February 1685. Another fulsome dedication to Perth accompanied 'A Sermon Preacht at Selkirk upon the 29th of May 1685', in which he celebrated the Restoration and strongly upheld the doctrine of non-resistance. In February 1686 Canaries controversially preached against his erstwhile faith, later claiming that far from stirring up sedition, he espoused loyalty to the crown and the protestant religion, and sought to persuade his hearers to trust King James's assurances to the church. Alexander Cairncross, archbishop of Glasgow, was obliged to suspend him, but was said to have given him $20 towards his journey to London, where the bishop of Ely and others approved his sermon. In 1686 it was printed as 'Rome's Additions to Christianity', and he was made DD at St Andrews. Cairncross was deprived for failing to silence him but Canaries's suspension ended in December 1687. 
On 30 January 1689 Canaries's 'A Sermon Preached at Edinburgh, in the East Church of St Giles', on the anniversary of Charles I's martyrdom, attacked rebellion against a lawful king, but remarkably proposed that when a ruler acted arbitrarily his subjects might judge his conduct. Although such contractual arguments generally failed to loosen his brethren's allegiance to James VII during the revolution settlement, Canaries duly acknowledged William and Mary as sovereigns. Surviving accusations before the privy council and attacks on his manse during September 1689, he endured the odium of lobbying for the Williamite episcopalians who struggled to secure themselves in their parishes without being subject to presbyterian church government. He officially remained parish minister at Selkirk until October 1691, when the presbytery declared the charge vacant on the grounds of desertion. Canaries had followed William to The Hague early that year, and was appointed his chaplain and clerk of the closet. Despite having access to the king, who desired an accommodation in church government, his vital role in consolidating episcopalian support failed when the general assembly of 1692 refused to receive the majority of episcopalian applicants. In addition to his personal kindness towards Canaries and his wife, Lady Anne Erskine, daughter of the earl of Buchan, the king rewarded the exhausted agent in March 1692 with the vicarage of St Helen's, Abingdon, Berkshire. There he compiled the main text of 'The Epitome of Scotch-Presbytery' (1692) and clashed with a Quaker parishioner, Oliver Sansom, who recorded their disputes. He died in May 1698; administration of his estate was granted to his widow on 27 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 67836


Chambers, David (d. 1641), Roman Catholic priest and college head, was the son of Patrick Chambers of Fintray. After studying at Aberdeen University he converted to Roman Catholicism and was ordained priest in Rome on 21 August 1612. From 1610 until 1623 Chambers was entrusted by the Holy See with various diplomatic missions which took him to Italy and Spain. It was during this period that he wrote to Rome from Paris requesting permission for a chapel in the Scots College, and for the privilege of ordaining students without dimissorial letters, both requests being granted by Pope Paul V on 27 May 1617. Chambers was the author of a doctrinal work, 'De statu hominis veteris' (Chalons, 1627), and a historical work dedicated to Charles I of Great Britain, 'De Scotorum fortitudine' (Paris, 1631), both of which contained comprehensive but inventive martyrologies of Scottish saints. 
In 1631 Chambers went to work as a missionary in Scotland, whence he sent a report in 1633 to the 'propaganda fide', describing the state of the mission, and asking for the appointment of a bishop. On his return to France he was presented by Cardinal Richelieu to a French benefice, and on 9 September 1637 he was appointed principal of the Scots College, Paris. For the better management of the college he got the archbishop of Paris to amalgamate the foundation of David of Moray (1325) with that of Archbishop Beaton (1603), an action ratified by act of the Paris 'parlement' in 1639. Chambers was notable in having remarkably good students. He died in office on 17 or 18 January 1641. 


@@@@@


doc= 67837


Fleming, Thomas (1642-1720), abbot of Regensburg, descendant of the earls of Wigtown, was born on 5 October 1642 at Kirkoswald, Ayrshire. He was educated in Edinburgh as a protege of Sir George Lockhart until, in 1662 or 1663, he joined the navy. About 1665, when he was in Dublin, he became a Catholic. Subsequently, on his way to France he was captured by Moorish pirates but after a month was freed by Spaniards. He was in the Scots College, Paris, for a time in 1667 and 1668 and from there went to the Scots Benedictine abbey at Regensburg. 
Fleming received the monastic habit on 21 November 1668, taking the religious name Placid, and a year later, on 21 November 1669, made his vows. On 28 March 1671 he was ordained priest. On 5 December 1672, when just turned thirty, he was elected abbot of Regensburg, which also brought him control of the sister house at Erfurt. He was to hold the office for forty-seven years, working ceaselessly and single-mindedly, and transforming the entire situation of his community. 
In 1672 the monastery was in a lamentable state, with an absentee abbot, the coffers empty, and only three professed monks in residence. Fleming began at once to improve the finances, tackling problems and defaulters with energy. At once he established relations with rulers and officials in church and state who could help him and protect the abbey. The British and French envoys to the imperial diet in Regensburg relied on his help and advice. 
At Erfurt, where he appointed a prior answerable to himself, Fleming repaired and extended the buildings and secured two chairs of philosophy in the university to be held always by Scots monks. His greatest achievement, however, was to establish a seminary for Scots students in his own abbey. Finally opened in 1718 after thirty years of tireless lobbying and begging, it ensured a supply of novices and thus of missionary priests for Scotland. 
In 1686 Fleming was the prime candidate to be bishop in Scotland but he firmly declined, seeing the Regensburg abbey as his life's work. He died on 8 January 1720 at the abbey and was buried in the abbey church or cloister. When he died the monastic community and the Erfurt house were flourishing and twenty-eight students had entered the seminary. The results of his work endured: Scottish monks of Regensburg and Erfurt during the eighteenth century contributed significantly to the Scottish mission and to the cultural life of Germany. 


@@@@@


doc= 67838


Hepburn, John (d. 1723), Church of Scotland minister, was the son of Major James Hepburn of Balnageith, Moray. He was educated at King's College, Aberdeen, graduating as master of arts in 1669. Hepburn became a preacher to presbyterian dissidents in Scotland, being ordained by exiled Scots ministers in London in 1678. After working in Ross-shire, in 1680 he was called to become preacher to the parish of Urr, Kirkcudbrightshire, though he continued also to preach widely in both the north and the south-west. His arrest was ordered in 1680, and in 1683 he was captured in London and sent back to Scotland for trial. 
After the restoration of presbyterianism in 1690 he was accepted as parish minister of Urr by the church, though with reluctance as he was strongly influenced by the 'society people', the presbyterian groups who refused to recognize the legitimacy of the Church of Scotland through its abandonment of the covenants. Hepburn combined his work as parish minister with encouraging the formation of prayer societies among his supporters, avoiding giving either wholehearted recognition to the Church of Scotland, or rejecting it completely like the more extreme dissidents of the Cameronian societies. Hepburn was suspended from the ministry in 1696 and, on refusing to take the oath of allegiance, he was briefly imprisoned before being exiled to Brechin. 
Hepburn was allowed back to his parish in 1699. By 1700 his first wife, a Leslie from the 'North' (McMillan, 230-31), had died, and on 20 April 1701 he married Emilia, daughter of Alexander Nisbet of Craigentinny in Urr. Although the rest of Hepburn's personal life is obscure, he is known to have had two children. Hepburn was again suspended in 1704, and was deposed on 9 April 1705. Though he fiercely attacked the union of parliaments of 1707 he opposed armed resistance to it, and this may have contributed to the decision to restore him to Urr on 12 August 1707, at the desire of his parishioners. 
In 1715 Hepburn, seeing the Jacobite rebels as a greater threat to the truly godly than the existing regime, raised his supporters in arms to oppose them. Though he died on 20 March 1723 the strength of the dissident tradition he and others had established helped to inspire the 'Levellers of Galloway', whose forcible resistance in 1724 to agricultural improvements involving evictions was suppressed by the army. The Hebronites never numbered more than a few thousand people, and most joined the Secession church after 1733. 


@@@@@


doc= 67840


Howie, Robert (d. 1641x7), theologian and college head, was born in Aberdeen, the son of Thomas Howie, a merchant burgess. After early education at the grammar school of New Aberdeen he entered King's College, University of Aberdeen, from which he graduated MA, probably in 1584. Along with his fellow student John Johnston ('c'.1565-1611) he matriculated at the University of Rostock, in what is now Germany, in August 1584. A year later Howie went to the newly founded 'Hochschule', or 'Gymnasium Illustre', in Herborn to study theology under the reformed theologian Caspar Olivian, and biblical languages and exegesis under Johannes Piscator. Both scholars made a profound impression on the young man, which was most evident in his adoption and subsequent exposition of covenant or federal theology. With the help of Johannes Pincier, professor of medicine, he also edited from the manuscript, which he had brought with him from Aberdeen, George Buchanan's unfinished 'Sphaera', published in Herborn in 1586 by Corvinus. 
In May 1588 Howie matriculated at the University of Basel, where before the end of the month he was exhibiting his ability in theology by publicly defending theses set out by J. J. Grynaeus. In subsequent years he did so regularly. In addition, in 1590 he provided theses for disputations in which others were the respondents. In the following year he published a short but important tractate entitled 'De reconciliatione hominis cum Deo', his only printed theological work. Early in 1591 Howie, reunited with his friend Johnston, set out for Scotland. On 31 October Howie was appointed assistant to David Cunningham, the senior minister of Aberdeen, and in 1592 he became one of the ministers of the city. At this time Howie supported the officially recognized presbyterian form of church government set out in the act of parliament of June 1592. In 1593 he was the obvious local choice for the principalship of the newly founded Marischal College in New Aberdeen, and to him must be given much of the credit for the successful launching of this new academic venture, which mirrored so much that had happened in Germany and in protestant areas of France. Along with his teaching responsibilities in philosophy -- not theology, which he would have preferred -- he continued to exercise his pastoral ministry and to take his place in the courts of the church. Both his ministry and his diligence on behalf of the college won him popular public and civic recognition and in 1597 he was so highly thought of that he was invited to become one of the ministers of Edinburgh. He declined, but in 1598 accepted election by the general assembly as minister of Dundee. 
By 1597, however, Howie had begun to change his views on church government, in particular on what he had previously branded, when writing of the Church of England to friends on the continent, as 'the tyranny of pseudo-bishops' ('Letters of Johnston and Howie', 310, l. 24). From 1598 to 1605 he aligned himself with the royal policy of extending episcopal power in the church. At the same time he began to take a leading part, if not, according to his opponents, the leading part, on behalf of the city's guilds, in an attempt to reform the civic administration of Dundee. His opponents declared him to be a man of a hot and vehement humour and of a contentious disposition who had put himself at the head of a faction. In 1604 he resisted attempts of the ecclesiastical provincial synod to discipline him for his political activity, or, as many supposed, to depose him from the ministry. Disregarding prohibitions from the privy council, he travelled widely, even to London, on behalf of the reform party among the citizens. Finally the privy council, maintaining him to be the author and fountain of the disordered state of the burgh, in July 1605 forbade him from performing any public function and excluded him from living in Dundee for the rest of his life. 
Howie was translated to the parish of Keith in Banffshire in 1606, and was appointed constant moderator of the local presbytery. Removal from Dundee did not, however, lead to his exclusion from ecclesiastical events: within a year he had recovered favour. In September 1606 he attended a meeting in Hampton Court summoned by the king to discuss the ecclesiastical affairs of Scotland. Howie was now unmistakably on the side of the bishops and had no hesitation in condemning those presbyterian ministers who had attempted to thwart royal policy. On 9 March 1607 the king chose Howie, 'a most meitt and sufficient person, both in respect of his lyf and literature' ('Letters of Johnston and Howie', 352, l. 13f.), as a permanent replacement for the ejected presbyterian leader Andrew Melville, as principal of St Mary's College, St Andrews. At first Howie refused to accept the office, concerned that the royal commissioners visiting the university had, contrary to the king's instructions, made the appointment dependent on the king's pleasure. The privy council peremptorily ordered him to accept, which he was obliged to do. However, he petitioned the king in August and craved full and formal confirmation. He claimed that he was devoted to the task set before him, but acknowledged that it was 'a wark full of difficultie and invy' and that he had been committed to 'the hazard of most violent tempestis' ('Letters of Johnston and Howie', 326f.). 
Howie, inducted on 27 July 1607, could not have relished being made the successor to Andrew Melville in what had been one of the bulwarks of the presbyterian polity, nor could he have found much satisfaction in being placed over the head of his former close friend and student companion John Johnston, who since 1591 had been second master in the college and had expected to succeed Melville. However, Howie did not take the oath of office until 15 March 1611, by which time Johnston was terminally ill. Howie's open defence of the superiority of bishops over presbyteries was resented by many in St Andrews, but he was not deterred from supporting the royal ecclesiastical policy. In 1610 he was appointed to the court of high commission and was in that year a member of the general assembly held in Glasgow at which the presbyterian polity of the church was effectively curtailed and the episcopal office restored. 
From 1610 to 1638 Howie regularly attended the courts of the church and was frequently made a member of commissions charged with carrying through a variety of matters furthering the royal policy. Such action displeased many. At the general assembly in Montrose in 1616 he was appointed one of the revisers, and has subsequently been regarded as one of the principal authors of a new confession of faith, which reflects the contemporary reformed orthodoxy and in its teaching on the sacrament of the Lord's supper is in line with Howie's manuscript work, 'Accuratus de coenae domini tractatus' (St Andrews University Library, MSS BV 8 24 H7). 
Howie also took a prominent part in both the general administration of St Andrews University, for a time as rector, and in furthering a number of changes which the new chancellor, Archbishop George Gledstanes, pandering to the king, wished to bring about. One of the most significant of these was the creation of a common university library, another was the revival of formal graduation ceremonies, and in particular the awarding of doctorates in divinity 'to encourage our ignorant cleargie in learning' (Cant, 68f.). As dean of the faculty of divinity and principal of the theological college, Howie, along with the heads of the other two colleges, was made a DD at a ceremony held on 29 July 1616 directed by the king's emissary, John Young, dean of Winchester. The royal confidence in Howie was reflected in the king's plans to have St Andrews as 'the principall fountayne of religion and good letters in Scotland' (Cant, 70f.). On demitting office as rector he delivered an 'oratio', 'De fundatoribus academiae et collegiorum in universitate Andreapolitana' (1617), which has to be seen as the earliest attempt to sketch the history and development of the university. For King James's visit to St Andrews in July of that year Howie's primary official duty was to act as the president at a theological disputation held in the king's honour, for which he provided theses setting out the royal power in matters ecclesiastical. 
Howie's success as principal is reflected in steady matriculations and significant numbers of visiting students from the continent. His level of commitment, to St Mary's College in particular, is seen in the administrative documents in his own hand. To Howie must also be given full credit for gracefully remodelling the buildings of his college to which he added an 'attractively arcaded north building' (Cant, 77). Although this was removed in the nineteenth century there is built into the east frontage of the west building a fine carving of Howie's coat of arms, his monogram, and the date 1621, when the rebuilding took place. 
In 1618 Howie was one of a royal commission appointed to carry out a visitation of the Aberdeen colleges, which led to the revitalization of university education there by Bishop Patrick Forbes. In 1624 provision for a chair of divinity at Marischal College was offered by Patrick Copland, one of Howie's former students there and a staunch upholder of reformed orthodoxy. Efforts were made at this time both by Copland and the town council to recall Howie to Aberdeen, but he decided to remain in St Andrews. 
As Charles I's ecclesiastical policy in Scotland unfolded Howie's ardour for episcopacy began to cool, as did that of his three university colleagues. He went along with the decision of the general assembly in Glasgow in 1638 to rid the church of bishops and he himself signed the covenant and remained in his office as principal of St Mary's College, but following complaints in 1641 from Samuel Rutherford, then professor of divinity, over misappropriation of funds, Howie was forced to resign. When Howie's demission came before the general assembly for confirmation, Alexander Henderson, the prime architect of the national covenant and one of the leaders of the presbyterian cause, described as Howie's 'good friend', acted with commendable charity. He so guided the matter that 'with ane great deall of commendation to the old man,... it was voyced that his dismission should be rendered to him [and] that he should all his life tyme enjoy his full rent and honour, without any diminution' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.361). 
Howie died without leaving a will some time between 1641 and 1647. The disposal of his 'guids and geir' was registered on 25 September 1652. He had married, probably while he was still in Aberdeen at Marischal College, Jean Skene, daughter of Andrew Skene of Anchorie, a burgess of Aberdeen in 1598, who predeceased him. He was survived by his eldest son, Robert, who had been made a burgess of Aberdeen on 11 August 1624, and a daughter, Margaret, who married Andrew Lamont, a former St Andrews student and subsequently minister at Markinch, Fife. 


@@@@@


doc= 67841


Wood, Noel Charles Victor Mewton- (1922-1953), concert pianist and composer, was born in the suburb of Hawthorn, Melbourne, Australia, on 20 November 1922, the only child of Frederick William Myles Wood ('b'. 1882/3), secretary, born in England, and his Australian-born wife, Dulcie Maie, 'nee' Mewton (1888-1973). His father, imprisoned for embezzlement when his son was young, appears to have been quickly and quietly forgotten by a mother who was initially dominating, certainly 'crafty [and] bossy' according to John Amis, with ambitions for her son (Amis, 'Amiscellany', 210). 
Mewton-Wood (as he was always known) received piano lessons from his mother, the fourth generation of musician in the family, then studied at the University Conservatorium of Music in Melbourne from the age of nine, making his first public appearance at twelve. He received his formal education at Carey Baptist Grammar School, Kew, but sailed for England in July 1937 with his mother and funds raised from a public appeal, to study at the Royal Academy of Music. There his tutor for performance was Harold Craxton, and for composition he had Frank Bridge, who had also tutored Benjamin Britten. Connections led to advancement: Mewton-Wood's cousin W. J. R. Turner, critic for the 'New Statesman' and 'Spectator', provided an introduction to Artur Schnabel, and lessons followed with Schnabel in Italy in 1938. After his successful London debut playing Beethoven's third piano concerto with Sir Thomas Beecham in the Queen's Hall in March 1940, Beecham reported: 'The best talent I've discovered in the British Empire for years: he is exceptional and his technique superb' ('Sydney Morning Herald', 25 Jan 1941). 
After Mewton-Wood was launched into the musical world with such an endorsement his career steadily advanced, despite the range of his other interests. During the war he lived with Nancy and Roger Eckersley (a former BBC controller) in Sussex, helping Nancy to breed geese and Alsatian dogs, memorizing scores, and studying medicine and physics. Turner's earlier daily tutoring had widened Mewton-Wood's grasp of literature, equipping him to recite from memory large amounts of text and poetry. He was interested in clocks and antique furniture, built a marionette theatre, repaired strings in a piano, played tennis, and was a good cook. The conductor Walter Goehr, collaborator in recordings, observed that he spent a great proportion of his later income on modern paintings, adding to the collection bequeathed by Turner. Meanwhile Mewton-Wood spent two years in the Ministry of Information, gave BBC broadcast recitals, and scored two films by his friend Bernard Miles, 'Tawny Pipit' (1944) and 'Chance of a Lifetime' (1950). Mother and son sailed to Australia in April 1945 for his only tour there, where he gave the Australian premieres of Bartok's sonata for two pianos and percussion and Stravinsky's concerto for two pianos. By the time he was in his early twenties the Australian boy had been transformed into an inquisitive and cultured European man, with little of his native accent intact. 
Although the war somewhat restricted his career advancement Mewton-Wood toured throughout Britain, performing as a soloist and accompanist, in chamber groups and with orchestras, and playing at nineteen Proms between 1942 and 1953. Myra Hess and Howard Ferguson invited him to participate in the lunchtime National Gallery concerts, Hess observing that 'his versatility was staggering. He could dazzle one with sheer brilliance and move one deeply by his sensitive poetical qualities' ('Yorkshire Post and Leeds Mercury', 7 Dec 1953). His performing repertoire was wide, including championing then unfashionable works (Weber, Schubert, Tchaikovsky) and -- to a greater extent than most of his contemporaries -- 'modern' composers, from Europe (Prokofiev, Hindemith, Hans Werner Henze) and Britain (Walton, Rawthorne, Lambert, Gerhard, Searle), with many works performed as premieres. He formed close creative relationships with Arthur Bliss and Michael Tippett. Britten entrusted him with performing the revised version of his own piano concerto at the 1946 Cheltenham Festival; and first performances of works by Tippett and Alan Bush featured outstanding collaborations with Dennis Brain and Peter Pears. In 1952-3, when Britten's focus was on composing 'Gloriana', Mewton-Wood became Pears's 'second accompanist' after Britten: his sensitivity and interpretative powers were given a further stamp of approval by inclusion in Britten's Aldeburgh 'court' and participation in the Aldeburgh Festivals of 1948 and 1951 to 1953. 
Approval and inclusion in these social circles were also facilitated by Mewton-Wood's homosexuality. Amis saw little flamboyance in his manner, apart from a later trait of wearing medallions on chains. He was tall, 'godlike', with an 'energetic aplomb [that] distinguished everything he said or did' (Sackville-West). George Harwood thought him kind and sympathetic, with a driving ambition and an enthusiasm and instinct to bring people to the music he loved. But 'the jokes, the friendliness, the high spirits' masked a 'profound melancholy he was too unselfish to inflict on his friends' (ibid.). The reasons for these feelings of inadequacy were complex: partly innate self-doubt, and partly not being selected more frequently for high-profile concerts, and not having a significant recording contract. Amis believed that performing 'modern' works perhaps lessened Mewton-Wood's appeal as a performer. Perhaps he was psychologically affected -- or felt socially compromised -- by the anti-homosexual climate in Britain: he was certainly known to the police for his public sexual improprieties. By the early 1950s, however, he had set up a London home with William Lang Fedrick, his partner from approximately 1946, an exhibitions officer at the British Council. 
Self-doubt and a highly strung emotional nature were aspects of Mewton-Wood's personality that influenced his actions: self-harm was clearly a feature of his psychological make-up. In Germany after the war, believing he had lost the ability to memorize scores, he cut his wrists. In November 1953 Fedrick, who might have had traits of hypochondria, developed appendicitis, was hospitalized too late, and died on Mewton-Wood's thirty-first birthday. Mewton-Wood, blaming himself for not acting quickly enough to prevent his partner's death, took an overdose of aspirin -- then appealed for help to his doctor, Patrick Trevor-Roper. In spite of care and monitoring by Trevor-Roper and others, including psychiatric treatment in hospital, on 5 December 1953 Mewton-Wood ingested alcohol and prussic acid and died immediately. Strewn around the music room where he lay were forty or so notes to friends. A coroner's inquest and a funeral at Golders Green crematorium were both held on 11 December 1953. 
With his death Mewton-Wood provided an important catalyst: composers wrote in his memory, and unusually for a classical musician a novel (Sonia Orchard's 'The Virtuoso', 2009) was based closely on his life. Amis requested compositions for a concert marking the first anniversary of the death: Bliss's 'Elegiac Sonnet' (with Cecil Day Lewis's specially written words) and works by Bush were played, together with a song by Mewton-Wood; but the most significant piece dedicated and performed was from Britten, the 'Canticle III: Still Falls the Rain', with a text by Edith Sitwell, elegiac and subdued in mood, for tenor voice (Pears), French horn (Brain), and piano (Britten). Thereafter works written for or dedicated to Mewton-Wood followed from Tippett, Werner Henze, Anthony Hopkins, and others, and Amis consistently kept alive Mewton-Wood's art, in writings and in BBC radio programmes in the 1980s and 1990s. 


@@@@@


doc= 67842


Mitchelson, Margaret (fl. 1638), prophetess, is said to have been the daughter of a parish minister, possibly James Mitchelson (1585-1625), minister of Yester. She achieved fame in September 1638 through having fits during which she prophesied success for the national covenant and denounced the rival king's covenant. Henry Rollock, an Edinburgh minister, proclaimed his belief that she spoke with the voice of God, and many flocked to hear her words. 'Great numbers of all rankes of people wer her dayly hearers; and many of the devouter sexe, the women, prayed, and wept with joy and wonder, to heare her speacke', while her words were taken down in 'brachgraphy' (shorthand) and distributed in manuscript. Opponents suggested that 'the Shee Prophetesse' was mad or an impostor (Gordon, 1.131-2), while Gilbert Burnet took her to be 'a devout person... troubled with Vapours' whose illness caused her to 'speak as one transported' (Burnet, 83). On 13 September Rollock took Archibald Johnston of Wariston to hear the 'poor damsel', and he was much impressed by 'the wonderful work' of one whose 'saule was full to the brim and to the overflouing of the most sensible conceptions and expressions'. On 2 October Johnston recorded that she was 'transported in heavinly raptures' to the astonishment of 'many thousand' including doubting nobles who were converted to the cause of the covenant ('Diary of Sir Archibald Johnston', 385, 393). 'But this blazing starr quickly vanished, and her prophecyes wer never printed' (Gordon, 1.132). After the end of 1638 Mitchelson vanished back into obscurity, but her brief career as a prophetess had been influential in stirring up zeal for the covenanters. 


@@@@@


doc= 67843


Nash, (William) Heddle (1894-1961), singer, was born on 14 June 1894 at 62 Amersham Vale, Greenwich, London, the son of William Nash, master builder, and his wife, Harriet Emma Carr. His father was also a talented singer. After studying at Blackheath Conservatory he served with the 20th London regiment during the First World War in France, Salonika, and Palestine. After the war he got a job singing in the pit for a marionette company giving puppet performances of opera. On 7 April 1923 he married Florence Emily Violet, daughter of Henry James Pearce, a sign manufacturer. Nash subsequently went to Milan to study with Giuseppe Borgatti. He made his debut in Milan in 1924, singing Almaviva in Rossini's 'The Barber of Seville', and sang in the opera houses of Genoa, Bologna, and Turin, developing an Italianate style of singing that remained with him: it was said of him that he sang everything as though it were by Verdi. He returned to London in 1925, and was engaged by Lilian Baylis to perform with the Old Vic Company, appearing as the Duke of Mantua in Verdi's 'Rigoletto', Tonio in Donizetti's 'The Daughter of the Regiment', and Tamino in Mozart's 'The Magic Flute'. He toured with the British National Opera Company in a number of roles until its collapse in 1929, when he made his debut at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, as Don Ottavio in Mozart's 'Don Giovanni'. 
As well as singing the leading tenor roles in Italian and French operas at Covent Garden until the Second World War, Nash was also noted for his David in Wagner's 'Die Meistersinger'. He sang in the first Glyndebourne season, in 1934, taking the role of Don Basilio in Mozart's 'The Marriage of Figaro' at the inaugural performance of the Glyndebourne Festival Opera, and Pedrillo in Mozart's 'Die Entfuhrung aus dem Serail'. He also sang Ferrando in Mozart's 'Cosi fan tutte', although, as was usual at the time, the company performed a cut version, leaving Nash with only one aria. He sang these three roles every year until 1938, and Don Ottavio in 1937. 
During the Second World War Nash toured with the Carl Rosa Opera Company, often singing opposite the Australian soprano Joan Hammond, in roles including Faust in Gounod's 'Faust', Pinkerton in Puccini's 'Madama Butterfly', and Rodolfo in Puccini's 'La Boheme'. After the war he sang Des Grieux in Massenet's 'Manon' in the first post-war season at Covent Garden (1947-8), and continued to appear on stage until 1957, when he created the minor character Dr Manette in Arthur Benjamin's 'A Tale of Two Cities' with the New Opera Company at Sadler's Wells. 
Heddle Nash was also much in demand as a singer of oratorio. Asked by Elgar to sing the part of Gerontius in 'The Dream of Gerontius' at the Worcester festival in 1932, he sang the part for many years -- singing it at every Three Choirs festival from 1934 to 1950; and he appeared with Kathleen Ferrier (who sang the role of the Angel) and Sir John Barbirolli and the Halle Orchestra from 1948. He took part in the first complete recording in 1945, with Gladys Ripley as the Angel, conducted by Malcolm Sargent. His song recitals often included songs by Liszt, and Handel arias. Nash performed in some of the recitals of English song given at the Wigmore Hall in May and June 1951 as part of the Festival of Britain, with pieces including Edmund Rubbra's 'Amoretti', and settings of sonnets by Edmund Spenser, with the New London Quartet. He made many recordings, the most famous of which was the serenade 'A la voix d'un amant fidele' from Bizet's 'The Fair Maid of Perth', recorded in 1932. His first recording was in Gounod's 'Faust', conducted by Sir Thomas Beecham in 1929, and other early recordings include arias from Handel's 'Jephtha', recorded in 1931; act IV of Puccini's 'La Boheme', recorded with Beecham in 1935; and Beethoven's 'Missa solemnis', live from the Leeds festival in 1937. He sang in the Glyndebourne recordings of 'The Marriage of Figaro' in 1934, and 'Cosi fan tutte' in 1935, conducted by Fritz Busch. He also made a famous BBC broadcast in 1938 with Maggie Teyte in excerpts from 'Manon'. 
Nash was the leading British lyric tenor in the period from the late 1920s until the early 1950s. With his sweetness and beauty of tone, the naturalness of his diction, and his charm, he had the power to move his audiences. A cheerful and direct person, he never lost his south London accent, and according to the accompanist Gerald Moore (1899-1987) in his autobiography 'Am I Too Loud?' (1962), there were as many Heddle stories as there were stories about Beecham. Heddle Nash died on 13 August 1961 in Brook Hospital, Greenwich. He was survived by his wife, Violet, and two sons, one of them the baritone John Heddle Nash. 


@@@@@


doc= 67844


Munro, Robert (c.1645-1704), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Ross-shire, the son of George Munro. After conversion to Roman Catholicism he entered the Scots College, Douai, on 17 May 1663, was at the Scots College, Paris, from February 1666 until February 1668, took the missionary oath at the Scots College, Rome, on 6 June 1668, and left Rome as a missionary priest in 1671. 
Munro's priestly work was mainly in Strathglass and Glengarry, but missionary journeys took him to Moidart (1678), to the isles (1679), and to Knoydart (1688). His success at winning converts earned him criticism from the presbyteries of Dingwall and Inverness. In 1678 he accompanied Alexander Leslie on a visitation of the highlands and islands ordered in Rome by the Congregatio de Propaganda Fide. In the following year, against the wishes of Alexander Dunbar, prefect apostolic for Scotland, Munro joined the army of Lord MacDonnell of Glengarry against the earl of Argyll, who had been ordered to disarm papists, especially in the highlands. In 1688 Munro joined the Jacobite army as chaplain and was present at the battle of the Boyne. In 1696 he was arrested, imprisoned, and banished. 
On his arrival on the continent Munro was imprisoned again, in Ghent, but was released through the efforts of Louis Innes and the Jesuits, and stayed for a short time at the Scots College, Paris. On his return to Scotland he was captured at sea, imprisoned at Plymouth and London, and banished again. Nevertheless he was soon back at his priestly labours in the Scottish highlands. In 1702 he subscribed to a letter of appeal against the Jesuits who had been accusing secular priests of Jansenism. In 1704 he was arrested, thrown across a horse as he was too ill to ride, and taken to Glengarry Castle where, left unattended for two days, he died on 17 January 1704, regarded as a martyr. 


@@@@@


doc= 67845


Woodhouse, Violet Kate Eglinton Gordon (1871-1948), keyboard player, was born on 23 April 1871 at 97 Harley Street, St Marylebone, London, the second daughter and fourth of seven children of James Eglinton Anderson Gwynne (1832-1915), engineer, inventor, and landowner, and his wife, Mary Earle (1841-1923), known as May, daughter of William and Cornelia Purvis. Violet's musical gifts were inherited from her mother's side of the family. Her mother, herself a fine singer and an intimate of the great soprano Adelina Patti, fostered her prodigious talent from childhood. By sixteen she was among the most promising pupils of the country's leading piano teacher, the German emigre Oscar Beringer. 
Violet was determined to be a full-time musician. Her authoritarian father was equally determined that she should not be a professional. The solution was a husband with the means to indulge her ambition. Her engagement in 1893 to Lord Gage, a rich Sussex neighbour, was, however, broken off after her mother explained the facts of life to her. Two years later Violet married John Gordon Woodhouse (1870-1951), the shy heir to Sicilian Marsala estates. It was mutually understood that the marriage would be childless, if by no means loveless. 
Dissatisfied with the narrow range of the conventional turn-of-the-century repertory, Violet was fascinated by the lecture-recitals of Arnold Dolmetsch, whose early music revival was beginning to gain critical attention. Under Dolmetsch's guidance she gradually transferred her affections to the harpsichord and clavichord. Another important influence on her at this time was the Spanish cellist Agustin Rubio, an inspirational teacher and one of the many emigres who contributed to London's importance as a cosmopolitan musical capital. 
In 1899 the Hon. William Reginald Shute Barrington (1873-1960) fell in love with Violet and went to live with her and Gordon. Barrington was the love of Violet's life, although it was never clear how far their relationship was consummated. In 1933 Bill, as he was known, succeeded his father, becoming tenth Viscount Barrington. A gentle and handsome man, he was completely uninterested in music, but had a watercolourist's eye and created three beautiful gardens for her. As the reputation of her musical salon grew, so also did her reputation for unorthodox -- some said scandalous -- living. In 1901 the Hon. Denis Tollemache (1884-1942), soldier and musician, and Maxwell Labouchere (1871-1918), known as Max, barrister, wit, and intellectual, joined the household, creating a surprisingly harmonious 'menage a cinq'. 
Nor was it men alone who were drawn to Violet. Her dark looks (attributable to her grandmother's secret descent from an Indonesian rani), her vivacity and natural intelligence, her resolution and generosity of spirit, allied with her artistic genius, attracted the devotion, sometimes the infatuation, of many women, including the composer Dame Ethel Smyth, the music critic Christabel Marshall, and the novelist Radclyffe Hall. 
The shock of the First World War destroyed Violet's idyll. All her men except Gordon, who was unfit, went to the front. Barrington contracted dysentery in Mesopotamia. Tollemache was twice wounded and was later captured after being listed missing presumed dead. Labouchere was fatally wounded in 1918. Both Tollemache and Labouchere won decorations for valour. 
The aftermath of war left Gordon financially diminished, and Violet was now obliged to turn professional. In 1923 she became the first performer to record (for HMV) on the harpsichord. In 1926, however, the finances of the household took an extraordinary turn for the better when Gordon's two spinster sisters were simultaneously murdered by their butler. They had intended to leave their fortune to a cousin, but their wills were unsigned. As next of kin, Gordon was the sole inheritor. With her independence thus restored, Violet reverted to playing in her own salon, an ambience perfectly suited to early music and her chosen instruments. For the remainder of her life, with the rarest exceptions, she played to private audiences at Nether Lypiatt Manor, her beautiful Carolean chateau above Stroud, in Gloucestershire. A period of mellow happiness was broken by the outbreak of the Second World War, in which Violet, with her love of German culture and her painful earlier memories of war, found herself quite unable to share in popular patriotic sentiments. Tollemache died in 1942. Violet died at 11 Mount Street, Mayfair, London, on 9 January 1948 and was buried in Folkington churchyard, Folkington, Sussex, on 14 January. Gordon Woodhouse and Barrington continued to live at Nether Lypiatt until their own deaths, in 1951 and 1960 respectively. 
Originally known as a pianist, Violet became the foremost clavichord player of her day and, with Wanda Landowska, the foremost harpsichordist. On these instruments contemporary reviewers ranked her with Pablo Casals on the cello, Lionel Tertis on the viola, and Andres Segovia on the guitar. Her magnetism evoked comparison to the powers of a magician. In the words of her 'Times' obituary, 'the subtlety of her playing was infinite and her clarity perfection... when she began to play, one became... entangled in a golden web of purest sound' (Douglas-Home, 306). 
Perfectionist, scholarly, and a mistress of stylish showmanship, Violet cast her spell over the most discerning observers, including Bernard Shaw, Frederick Delius, Ralph Vaughan Williams, the Sitwells, and the music critic K. S. Sorabji. Among the admiring visitors to her salon were Lawrence of Arabia, T. S. Eliot, Wilfred Owen, Siegfried Sassoon, Pablo Picasso, Serge Diaghilev, Auguste Rodin, and the cream of Europe's musicians. 
The most important part of Violet's legacy was her role in the revival of pre-Romantic music, especially of early music played on appropriate instruments. She shared with Sacheverell Sitwell credit for rediscovering Domenico Scarlatti and made extensive use of the Fitzwilliam virginal book (containing music by William Byrd, John Bull, and Giles Farnaby), a source then almost unknown to the music-going public, although recognized by scholars as representing the genesis of modern European keyboard music. 
In 1996 most of Violet's extant recordings were collected into a CD under the Pearl imprint. In his foreword Richard Luckett noted her 'scrupulous fidelity to the texts', adding that she played Scarlatti straight at a time when Wanda Landowska was adding, subtracting, and modifying 'almost as though he was in competition with Stravinsky'. Luckett contrasted Landowska's 'metronomic' playing with Violet's 'no less virtuosic, but infinitely more relaxed' style. An unusual feature of her playing was her use of the accelerando, with the result that 'her 'rubato' effects are produced by a return to the initial tempo, rather than by slowing it -- at odds with modern performance practice but historically justifiable'. 
Some of the works that Violet admired were not deemed commercial propositions for recording. But perhaps the biggest loss to posterity is that wartime restrictions on materials prevented her from fulfilling her plan to record the whole of Bach's 'Das wohltemperierte Klavier'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67846


Spang, William (1607-1664), Presbyterian minister in the Netherlands, was born in Glasgow, the son of Andrew Spang (died 1638), merchant burgess of the city, and his wife (died in or after 1638). He graduated MA from the University of Glasgow in 1625 and studied divinity in Edinburgh. Spang then taught at Edinburgh high school until 27 January 1630, when the convention of royal burghs appointed him minister of the Scottish church in the staple town of Veere, in the south-west corner of the Netherlands. 
Spang is best-known as a correspondent of his cousin, the well-known Glasgow University principal Robert Baillie (1602-1662), and their exchange contributes much to what is known of the latter. Baillie wrote regularly, keeping his cousin informed of affairs in his homeland, while in return Spang wrote about European news and sent over books. Both men were committed presbyterians and Baillie was keen for Spang to obtain the assistance of the Dutch in the name of the cause. In 1641 Veere was the first foreign congregation to be recognized by the general assembly as a component part of the Church of Scotland and the following year Spang was persuaded to attend the assembly. During the 1640s fasts and days of prayer were held in support of Scottish success and on 29 May 1644 the solemn league and covenant was subscribed by members of the congregation in the church. 
In turn Spang did much to promote Scottish presbyterianism in the Netherlands. He was involved in the publication of Scottish works, including Baillie's 'Operis historici et chronologici libri duo' (1668) and an edition of Arthur Johnstoun's poems. He himself publicized the history of the Scottish church with 'Brevis et fidelis narratio in regno et ecclesia Scotica' (1640, reprinted as 'Rerum nuper in regno Scotiae gestarum historia' in 1641), and published 'Motuum Britannicorum verax Cushi ex ipsis Joabi et oculati testis prototypis totus translatus' in 1647. Spang's relationship with Dutch theologians was of most interest to his cousin. He distributed copies of Baillie's works, constantly reminded his peers of Scottish affairs, and undertook propaganda work which persuaded the local 'classis' to commission a book in aid of presbyterianism against English Independency during the deliberations of the Westminster assembly in 1644. 
Spang's attachment to the covenanting movement probably contributed to the major dispute of his Veere incumbency. In July 1643 Elizabeth Cant, mother-in-law of the Scots conservator Sir Patrick Drummond, died, and her relatives announced the intention (in accordance with Dutch practice) of placing a memorial stone with her coat of arms in the church. The memorial was erected, notwithstanding the dissent of the kirk session, led by Spang, which argued that the house of God should not have its walls covered with such badges of pride. In an escalation of the dispute, Cant's two sons then accused the minister of persecuting their mother to death. The issue was referred to the general assembly, which in October backed the view of the kirk session. The memorial was removed and in 1644 the pro-covenanting merchant Thomas Cuningham replaced Drummond as conservator. Spang's first wife, whose name is unknown, died in 1647. He then married Anna Meese; they were to have two sons and three daughters. 
In 1649 Spang was involved in the ultimately successful negotiations to persuade Charles II to sign up to the covenants and return to Scotland. After serving the Veere congregation for twenty-three years, Spang was appointed minister at Middelburg, on 10 November 1652 (though he did not move to his new charge until May 1653). Here he seems to have upset some of the English members of his church by referring to it as a British or Scottish church. He also had to contend with English Quakers who interrupted his sermons in 1655 and 1657, the latter resulting in a Quaker's being sentenced to two years' hard labour by the magistrates. Spang was appointed 'classis' scribe in 1657, and remained at Middelburg until his death there on 17 June 1664. His son William ('c'.1658-1683) followed in his father's footsteps, as minister of Middelburg between 1682 and 1683. 


@@@@@


doc= 67847


Strachan, George (fl. 1592-1634), traveller and orientalist, was born the younger son of a noble family in the Mearns (he later used the toponymic 'Merniensis'), perhaps of Thornton, Kincardineshire; nothing else is known of his early life. He was a student in Paris by 1592, at Pont-a-Mousson in Lorraine in 1593, and next at the University of Bearn, in Navarre. The autograph book ('Album amicorum') he began there discloses his travels between 1599 and 1609, first via several universities, Catholic and protestant, to Carpentras (1600-01) and then briefly to the new Scots College in Rome. Scots Catholics in exile are prominent among the album's contributors. 
Strachan returned to Scotland in 1602, recalled by his family, who had turned protestant and hoped to win him too. But he was fulfilling a mission as a courier between the Jesuit leadership in Rome and Scotland. Although accused as a traitor before James VI he remained steadfast and made his escape. He reached Rome by early 1604, having perhaps reported 'en route', in Paris and elsewhere, on Catholic fortunes in Scotland. He soon departed, via the Schottenkloster at Regensburg, to Paris, where he taught classics at the College du Mans from 1604 for some years. The translations of Greek writers attributed to him by Thomas Dempster were perhaps produced for his teaching. Apart from epigrams, tributes, and a noble elegy for Patrick Seton, Strachan published only a congratulation on the election of Pope Paul V (1605) and a translation of Lucian of Samosata on calumny (1607). During these Paris years he also served the duke of Guise, did private tutoring, and continued to advocate the Catholic mission to Scotland. In letters of 1609 and 1610 to Cardinal Maffeo Barberini, protector of the Scots at Rome (later Urban VIII), Strachan unsuccessfully sought appointment as a papal agent in Paris on behalf of Scottish Catholicism. 
Strachan left Paris, probably in 1613, for Constantinople, from where, by 1615, he had moved on through Syria, Lebanon, and the Holy Land to Aleppo. Wanderlust combined with the lure of oriental languages, perhaps intended for the service of Eastern missions. His travels over a decade are documented chiefly by the 'Viaggi' of the like-minded Italian Pietro della Valle, who first met him in Esfahan in 1619. Strachan mastered Persian and Arabic, in which he was as fluent as any Western scholar of his age, and perhaps also Turkish and Hebrew. He collected valuable manuscripts, some forty of which survive, mostly in the Vatican and Naples libraries. His mobility limited the accomplishments that his learning promised, but his genial humanity was recognized on all sides. 
From Aleppo, Strachan got employment between 1616 and 1618 as physician to Emir Feyyad, ruler of the Arabs between Syria and the Euphrates. Favours from Feyyad included marriage to his widowed sister-in-law, which supports evidence that Strachan became known as a Muslim. The conversion, if such it was, can have been only temporary: the threat of enforced circumcision provoked flight to Baghdad, which presumably also involved repudiation of the marriage. After setting out across Persia towards India he was persuaded in Esfahan to enter service, in 1619, with the East India Company. His language skills and contacts with Aleppo and Baghdad made him invaluable. After two years personal animosities forced him out in 1621. He then lived with the Carmelites in Esfahan and taught Arabic. His will of 26 September 1621, witnessed by Pietro della Valle, bequeathed his books to the Discalced Carmelites of Rome. His own return to Europe as he intended lacks evidence: he seems instead to have rejoined the East India Company for a year. His Persian manuscripts place him in Esfahan in 1624 and still in the East in 1634, although in 1630 della Valle reported his death some time earlier while returning from India to Persia. A case has been made that Strachan was active as late as 1655, but the date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 67848


Welsh, John (d. 1681), covenanter field preacher, was the son of Josiah Welsh (died 1634), minister at Temple-Kirkpatrick, co. Antrim, Ireland, and the grandson of John Welsh (1568/9-1622), Church of Scotland and French reformed minister, and the great-grandson of the illustrious Scottish reformer, John Knox (d. 1572). Little is known about his early years. He graduated MA from the University of Glasgow in 1647, and was admitted and ordained minister of the parish of Kirkpatrick-Irongray, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 21 January 1653 at the instigation of David M'Brear of Newark and Almagill (MP for the stewarty of Kirkcudbright and patron of that charge). On 18 February the same year he married Elizabeth Somerville (died before 1674), at Holyrood, Edinburgh. 
Welsh vehemently opposed the reimposition of Erastian episcopacy at the Restoration and was ejected from his incumbency and deprived of his living in 1662. Notwithstanding repeated and sustained attempts by the state to have him apprehended and silenced, Welsh sustained a long and popular itinerant ministry throughout the south-west of Scotland, the Lothians, and into Fife and Perthshire, preaching in vacant pulpits and in the open air for some nineteen years. The civil authorities forfeited him in 1667 for having been present at the Pentland rising the previous November. By 1674 the government was offering a reward of 2000 merks for his apprehension. The intensity of the campaign to eradicate conventicling was such that by August he was forced to seek refuge over the border in Northumberland. His first wife having died, Welsh was able to remarry, and did so probably in that year; his second wife's name is unknown. 
Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, the king's advocate in Scotland, who earned the infamous sobriquet Bloody Mackenzie for his severe persecution of the covenanters, described Welsh as a 'person of much courage, but no parts' (Wodrow, 2.244n.). It was testimony to his indefatigable courage and commitment to presbyterian principles that Welsh was back preaching and serving those who shared his beliefs in the south-west early in 1675. On account of his appeal and influence right across the social spectrum throughout lowland Scotland, Charles II, in his determination to have Welsh detained and prosecuted, ordered that the sum on his head be raised to a staggering 9000 merks in February 1679. Welsh continued to serve the covenanters in the wake of Drumclog and Bothwell Bridge, but he championed moderation and cautioned Richard Cameron and those of like conviction against separation from those ministers who had accepted the indulgence. 
Some time after Bothwell Bridge, in defiance of the price on his head Welsh went to London, where he died on 9 January 1681. He was buried in the churchyard of St Botolph without Bishopsgate. A number of his sermons were published posthumously. These include: 'A Preface, Lecture, and a Sermon' (1686); 'Fifty and Two Directions to his Parish of Irongray' (1703); 'A Sermon Preached at Nemphlar Brae in Clidsdale' (1703); and 'An Alarm to the Impenitent: the Great Gospel Sumonds to Close with Christ' and 'The Church's Paradox' in 1710. 


@@@@@


doc= 67849


Richard Beauvoir (1730-1780), painter, whose work has only recently surfaced. Born in London on 27 May 1730, he was a younger son of the wealthy East India merchant Osmond Richard Beauvoir (1680-1757) of Downham Hall, Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Beard (1700-1772). After a brief career in the East India trade, he dedicated himself to artistic pursuits, largely, it seems, under the tutelage of Lambert. From 1757 onwards his cash book records regular payments to Lambert, along with purchases of Lambert's paintings ($27 for 'View of Cheddar Cliffs' in 1758), prints, artist's materials, and subscriptions to the Society of Arts and Sciences from 1759 to 1764 (Berkshire MRO, Reading, Benyon MSS). A group of twenty-four landscape watercolours of some quality, dated between 1759 and 1778, by Beauvoir and three oil paintings, dated between 1770 and 1776, have descended in the Benyon collection at Englefield House, Berkshire, together with five oils by Lambert. Beauvoir's technique, especially in watercolours, is very close to Lambert and many of his drawings are clearly copies of pictures by his teacher, thus recording some which are now lost. A watercolour of unidentified ruins was acquired in 1992 by the British Museum, London. Beauvoir's last entry in his cash book regarding Lambert is a consignment to him of two dozen bottles of claret on 19 January 1765, presumably to celebrate his becoming the first president of the incorporated Society of Artists of Great Britain. In 1763 Beauvoir, as 'An Honorary Exhibitor', showed 'Four landskip drawings; stained from nature' at the society (Graves, 'Soc. Artists', 28). He died, unmarried, on 20 August 1780 at his home in Hill Street, Berkeley Square, London, and was buried on 26 August at St Margaret's, Downham, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 67850


Cardew, (Brian) Cornelius McDonough (1936-1981), composer, was born on 7 May 1936 at 413 The Pottery, Greet, near Winchcombe, Gloucestershire, the second of three sons of Michael Ambrose Cardew (1901-1983) and his wife, Mariel Russell. Both his parents worked in the arts and crafts: his mother was an artist and his father was a master potter. After the family moved from Gloucestershire to Cornwall, Cardew attended the Canterbury Cathedral choir school, where he had music lessons and sang as a chorister between 1943 and 1950, and was a pupil at King's School, Canterbury, from 1950 to 1953. He entered the Royal Academy of Music, London, in 1953, and studied with Howard Ferguson (composition) and Percy Waller (piano). In 1957 he left the academy, played the guitar in the first British performance of Boulez's 'Le marteau sans maitre', and won a scholarship to attend Karlheinz Stockhausen's electronic music studio in Cologne. After impressing Stockhausen with his outstanding musicianship, his abilities as a pianist, and his skills as an improviser, Cardew acted as his assistant between 1958 and 1960, and later collaborated on the composition of 'Carre'. He was married, but the name of his wife is not known. 
Cardew returned to Britain in 1961. There he organized concerts devoted to experimental music and undertook a course in graphic design, a skill that he practised intermittently until his death. But composition was his passion, and the music that he wrote in the late 1950s already showed talent and potential. While the Second Viennese School influenced some of his early works, the ideas of John Cage and David Tudor dominated his approach from 1959. In 'February Pieces' for piano (1959-61), 'Autumn '60' (1960), and 'Octet '61' (1961), he applied their principles and created material that could be arranged variously by performers. 'Treatise' (1963-7) also is an aleatoric work. Influenced by the philosophy of Frege and Wittgenstein, it juxtaposes graphic symbols with some standard music notation, a technique that encouraged some commentators to describe the score as a piece of abstract visual art. In 1964 the Italian government awarded Cardew a bursary to study with Goffredo Petrassi in Rome, and in 1966 he became involved with the free improvisation group AMM. The group's musicians responded freely to each other in performance and developed their ideas according to each other's needs and responses. Along with conventional instruments, which they used in unorthodox ways, they also experimented with portable radios and electronic amplification equipment. Cardew continued to perform with AMM until 1972. 
The late 1960s was a busy period for Cardew: in 1966 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Academy of Music; in 1967 he was appointed professor of composition at the academy; between 1966 and 1971 he worked at Morley College, London, teaching experimental music; and in 1968 he composed 'Paragraph 1' of 'The Great Learning'. Drawing upon Ezra Pound's translations of Confucius, the work uses a mixture of graphic notation, musical symbols, and verbal instructions. It was performed for the first time at the Cheltenham Festival in 1968, and over the next two years Cardew completed six more 'Paragraphs'. As a direct result of his work at Morley College he became a founder member of the Scratch Orchestra in 1969. A confirmed socialist, he applied his political principles when managing and directing the orchestra. The group was an amalgam of professional and amateur musicians whose reputation for innovative programmes spread quickly. It performed extensively in Britain and abroad and was invited to perform the new version of 'The Great Learning' at the BBC Promenade Concerts in August 1972. 
In 1971 Cardew repudiated 'The Great Learning', arguing that avant-garde music had failed to reach the masses. Influenced by the teachings of Mao Zedong, he began to compose music that was populist and politically didactic. In 1974 he famously attacked Stockhausen in 'Stockhausen Serves Imperialism' (1974), and later he was involved in street protests against reactionary politics that culminated in arrest and imprisonment. After a North American tour early in 1975 he became involved with the Progressive Cultural Association, and in 1979 he was a founder member of the Revolutionary Communist Party of Britain. Two years later he composed his last work: 'Boolavogue', for two pianos. 
Cardew's apologists have argued that he was a leading figure in late twentieth-century music, and that performers and administrators have largely ignored his works. But recordings of his compositions have been made, and his articles and books are readily available. That said, his works are performed rarely, and he no longer holds the iconic status that he enjoyed during the 1960s and the 1970s; his ideas and music have become an anachronism. He was the product of an age that believed passionately in ideas and their execution. He never compromised his beliefs and, as Kurt Schwertsik noted poignantly in 1982, 'He never tried... to reconcile the demands of 'The New' with the desire to change them; he just wasn't concerned to please respected authorities as well as pleasing, and being, himself. He was free.' Cornelius Cardew was the victim of a hit-and-run road accident on 19 December 1981 and was dead on arrival at Whipps Cross Hospital, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 67851


Dieren, Bernard Helene Joseph van (1887-1936), composer and writer, was born on 27 December 1887 at 51a Coolsingel, Rotterdam, of Dutch/French ancestry, the last of five children of Bernard Joseph van Dieren (died 1904), wine merchant, and his second wife, Julie Francoise Adelle Labbe ('b'. 1852), a dressmaker. Although details of his education are shrouded in mystery, it would seem that his initial training was as a scientist, since his first post was that of a research assistant in a laboratory. Highly intelligent and with a phenomenal memory, he was also talented not only in the scientific and literary fields but also at drawing and at playing the violin, which he learned as a boy at school. He began to compose at the age of twenty, and some of his early works (a number of songs and a violin piece) were published locally. By this time he had made up his mind to study composition and music history seriously. 
At the end of 1909 van Dieren moved to London together with Frida Kindler (1879-1964), one of a talented musical family, whom he married on 1 January 1910. A son, Hans Jean Jules Maximilian Navarre Benvenuto Bernard van Dieren (1910-1974), was born later that year. In Britain van Dieren carried on composing and, although largely self-taught, spent a year travelling about Europe in 1912, studying for a time in Germany and having contact with composers such as Ferruccio Busoni and Arnold Schoenberg. Strongly influenced by these early twentieth-century atonal composers, his music is highly complex, with counterpoint one of its most important components: the often unexpected resultant harmonic effect gives his work its very distinctive flavour. 
Apart from six string quartets and a large corpus of songs, van Dieren's works do not fall easily into any specific categories. Rather, his output encompasses a wide variety of highly complex and often enigmatic compositions that make very considerable demands on the performers and listeners alike. His influence was restricted to a comparatively small band of loyal admirers, of whom Philip Heseltine (Peter Warlock) was the most vociferous, though composers of the stature of William Walton moved briefly into his orbit. Despite various attempts to resuscitate his music, he has not received any notable acclaim or widespread recognition. Finding it difficult to earn a living and to devote time to composing, van Dieren acted for some years as musical correspondent for a number of European newspapers and periodicals, including the 'Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant'. For a brief part of the First World War he was involved in secret service in the Netherlands, employed as a cipher expert by the intelligence department. 
Van Dieren spent most of his life troubled by ill health as a result of an operation in 1912 which left him a chronic sufferer from a kidney complaint; this plagued him for the rest of his life, and necessitated numerous operations in Britain, Germany, and the Netherlands. Because of often constant pain he had recourse to morphine, to which he is believed later to have become addicted. These frequent bouts of ill health forced him to spend a great deal of time as an invalid; his wife, Frida, a fine pianist and one-time pupil of Busoni, supported the family by teaching and performing. For much of his life the couple had often to rely on the support and goodwill of their friends. Van Dieren's charismatic, powerful personality and strong intellect drew around him a number of devoted and loyal admirers which included the Sitwell brothers (Osbert and Sacheverell), the sculptor Jacob Epstein (who used him as a model for one of his bronzes, 'The Risen Christ', now in the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art), the painter Augustus John, the composer Philip Heseltine, and the critic Cecil Gray. He was fortunate in having this duo of musical supporters, who not only assisted him materially, but also did their utmost to promote performances of his works and to secure for him the place they felt he deserved in English music. In February 1917 Heseltine (aided financially by Gray) organized a concert of his music in the Wigmore Hall in London. The occasion was, in almost every respect, a disaster. Heseltine's and Gray's overblown pre-concert publicity made wild claims about van Dieren's genius, and the critics, finding the music largely inaccessible, were extremely hostile in their reviews. In many ways this occasion did more harm than good, and for a long time a veil of suspicion hung over both the man and his music. 
At the end of the war the van Dierens returned to the Netherlands, where they lived in The Hague until March 1921, when the need for further medical treatment necessitated a return to London. Limited and brief success followed: the six 'Sketches' for piano were published by Universal Edition in 1921, some of van Dieren's works were performed in London, and, in July 1922, the Donaueschingen festival programmed his second string quartet. In 1925 the Oxford University Press published a dozen of his songs, and in the same year a number of his works were performed in a concert conducted by the young John Barbirolli. In 1925 van Dieren briefly went into the world of business, working for the Philips Electrical Company; a return of his illness, however, forced him to resign the post the following year. More works were published in 1927, and in the same year his fourth string quartet was performed at the Frankfurt festival. Although 1929 found him recuperating in Paris from yet another bout of illness, the following year he completed his opera 'The Tailor' (begun in 1916 with the encouragement of Heseltine and Gray). In addition he wrote the first book on Epstein (1920) as well as a collection of wide-ranging and fascinating essays entitled 'Down among the Dead Men' (1935). More of his music was heard when the BBC programmed performances of his works: 'Diaphony' in 1934 and the 'Chinese Symphony' in 1935. Van Dieren eventually succumbed to the illness that had dogged him for so long and died on 24 April 1936, at home at 68 Clifton Hill, St John's Wood, London. He was buried on the edge of the graveyard of St Laurence's Church, West Wycombe. 


@@@@@


doc= 67852


Frederick Norgate (1817-1908), born at Hethersett on 20 or 21 November 1817, was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1835, moved to Clare College the next year, and graduated BA in 1839. Intended for the church, in 1843 he became a bookseller and a partner in the publishing firm of Williams and Norgate. After two decades he retired to devote himself to his scholarly interests, especially the poetry of William Caxton. In 1850 he married Fanny, daughter of John Athow, stonemason and surveyor of the Norwich city pavements; their only child was the historian Kate Norgate (1853-1935). Frederick Norgate died at his home in Ashchurch Grove, Shepherd's Bush, London, on 10 August 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 67854


Whittle, Sir Frank (1907-1996), aeronautical engineer and inventor of the jet engine, was born on 1 June 1907 at 72 Newcombe Road, Earlsdon, Coventry, the eldest of the three children of Moses Whittle (1882-1965), engineer and inventor, and his wife, Sara Alice, 'nee' Garlick (1882-1976). Both his parents had working-class backgrounds in the cotton industry of Lancashire, but his father had moved to Coventry where he expected to find greater scope for his inventive gifts. In 1916 Moses Whittle bought a small engineering business in Leamington Spa, and the young Frank learned the rudiments of engineering manufacture by working in the factory when he was ten years old. At eleven he won a scholarship to Leamington College. After a bad start he won another scholarship. Rather than doing homework he pored over texts on the theory of flight and practical flying in the public library. At the third attempt he was accepted by the Royal Air Force, and in September 1923 entered the apprentice wing of the RAF College, Cranwell. So outstanding was his ability that he was selected as one of the 1 per cent promoted to the officer training course. For his obligatory thesis at the end of the course, Whittle chose 'Future developments in aircraft design', concluding that for high speed and long range it would be necessary to fly very high. He was thinking of 500 m.p.h., when the top speed of RAF fighters was only about 150 m.p.h. He concluded that a new type of power plant would be required and examined rocket propulsion and a gas turbine driving a propeller, but the scheme of a gas turbine providing jet propulsion directly occurred to him only later. 
Whittle passed out second from Cranwell in July 1928 and was posted to 111 fighter squadron at Hornchurch. The following year he was attached to the Central Flying School at Wittering, as a pupil on the flying instructor's course. There he had the idea of a gas turbine producing a propelling jet directly, which was far superior to any of his earlier proposals. One of the Central Flying School instructors, Flying Officer W. E. P. (Pat) Johnson, had trained as a patent agent and helped Whittle to draft a patent, for which the provisional specification was published on 16 January 1930. The Air Ministry showed no interest in this, and it was not placed on the secret list. With a view to exploiting his invention Whittle visited the British Thomson-Houston (BT-H) turbine factory, Armstrong Siddeley, and the engine division of the Bristol Aeroplane Company. On grounds of cost and the absence of suitable materials, all three companies declined to have any part in the development of Whittle's ideas, so he continued his service career, which included test-pilot duties and stunt-flying demonstrations at the RAF's annual Hendon air displays. 
In 1932 Whittle was posted to the RAF officers' engineering course at Henlow, where he obtained outstanding results. This led him to apply to the Air Ministry to be sent to Cambridge University to take the mechanical sciences tripos. He was successful and was posted to Cambridge in July 1934. He rented a small house in Trumpington where he established his family, which now consisted of his wife, Dorothy Mary, 'nee' Lee (1904-1996), an artist, whom he had married in 1930, and two small sons. He kept up his flying through the Cambridge University air squadron, and it was there that he received a letter from Rolf Dudley-Williams, who had been a fellow cadet at Cranwell and had retained his interest in Whittle's turbo jet idea. Williams said that he and his partner, J. C. B. Tinling, thought that they might have a source of funding for developing Whittle's jet engine. When they met at Whittle's Trumpington house, it transpired that the proposed backer was the investment bank O. T. Falk & Partners, who had enlisted M. L. Bramson as a consultant. After meetings with Whittle, Bramson wrote a report which fully vindicated Whittle's proposals. Falk & Partners agreed to advance $2000 for the setting up of a company to be called Power Jets Ltd, to develop the Whittle jet engine. Without waiting for the incorporation of the company, Falks placed a contract with the BT-H Company in Rugby for the design drawings of an experimental engine to Whittle's requirements. The engine was to power a small 500 m.p.h. mailplane and was to consist of a single-stage centrifugal compressor driven by a single-stage turbine at up to 17,750 r.p.m. This concept was far in advance of anything that had been proposed previously. 
A tentative assembly drawing of the engine was produced by BT-H in March 1936. Whittle was very dissatisfied with this, but by the end of the month he had completed a revised drawing which he sent to BT-H, where work on the detailed drawings of the prototype engine started in April 1936. Meanwhile, in Cambridge, Whittle's tripos examinations were looming very near. Work on the engine had seriously interfered with his studies, but for five weeks he concentrated entirely on preparation for the tripos, leaving Bramson to deputize for him. Rather to his surprise, he obtained first-class honours. This led his tutor to bring Whittle's achievement to the notice of the director of education of the Air Ministry, who obtained permission for Whittle to do a postgraduate year on research work, so that he was able to devote the greater part of his time to work on the engine. 
The first test run of Whittle's prototype engine took place in the gallery of the BT-H turbine factory on 12 April 1937, with Whittle at the controls. After a normal light-up of the combustion chamber, there was a sudden acceleration from 2500 r.p.m. to about 8000 r.p.m., after which the speed began to drop. The following day a second runaway took place and the cause was identified as fuel leakage from the main burner whenever the fuel pump was run. The fault was rectified, but the BT-H management decided that Whittle's operations could not continue in the main turbine shop. Instead they offered him their disused foundry at Ladywood works, Lutterworth, some 7 miles from Rugby. The site had lain empty for some time and contained a vacant plot on which test houses and engine assembly bays were subsequently built. 
Power Jets faced a financial crisis in the summer of 1937. The chairman of the Aeronautical Research Committee had commented favourably on Whittle's work, leading the Air Ministry to propose a contract worth $10,000 for further development. This was reduced to $5000 by officials and was signed only the following March. BT-H also invested $2500 in January 1938. Meanwhile Whittle's postgraduate year at Cambridge expired in the summer of 1937, but he was then transferred to the special duty list of the RAF to continue work on the engine full time. He moved his family to Rugby early in October, which made his life very much easier owing to the great reduction in travelling time. In December 1937 he was promoted to squadron leader, notwithstanding his transfer to the special duty list. Running of the engine at Lutterworth was resumed on 29 April 1938 and on 6 May a run of 1 hr 45 min. was achieved, although it was terminated by a disastrous turbine failure at 13,000 r.p.m. Thrust readings showed that 480 lb was being developed at 13,000 r.p.m. compared with an expected 550 lb. The engine was rebuilt with ten separate combustion chambers instead of the single chamber hitherto used, and was ready for test running in the autumn of 1938. 
A critical stage in the development was reached on 30 June 1939 when the director of scientific research of the Air Ministry visited Lutterworth and witnessed a test run of 28 minutes' duration up to a maximum speed of 16,000 r.p.m. Confidence in the development had increased to the point where, two weeks later, Power Jets received a contract for a flight engine and BT-H accepted a subcontract for its manufacture. Simultaneously a contract for an experimental aeroplane, the E28/39, was placed with the Gloster Aircraft Company. The design of the flight engine was carried out by BT-H and was based on the ten combustion chamber layout. Initially a vaporizer combustion system was used, but this proved to be temperamental and was replaced by a pressure-jet system proposed by I. Lubbock of the Shell Petroleum Company. The final design was developed at Power Jets by the team of young engineers recruited by Whittle. 
During the manufacture of the W1 engine a number of non-airworthy components had been produced and it was decided to assemble these into a second engine known as the W1X. Much valuable test running was done on this engine in the new test houses at Lutterworth, and at the end of March 1941 the engine was dispatched to the Gloster Aircraft Company for installation in the E28/39 airframe for taxiing trials. Installation was completed on 7 April 1941 and the engine was given its first run in the aircraft. Whittle made some taxiing runs, reaching a speed of about 60 m.p.h. The Gloster chief test pilot, P. E. G. Sayer, then took the controls and after some preliminary runs took the aircraft to the downwind end of the airfield, and on the run back the aircraft was airborne for a short time. Sayer repeated the performance twice more, the final 'hop' being very smooth. 
The first flight of the E28/39 aircraft took place on the evening of 15 May 1941 at RAF Cranwell. The ten hours' flight trials were completed rapidly without any problems developing in either the engine or the airframe, which was a great tribute to the ability of all concerned. Interest in jet propulsion developed rapidly in Britain, and under an agreement at the highest government level the W1X engine, a complete set of drawings, and a team of three from Power Jets went to the General Electric Company's turbine factory at Lynn, Massachusetts, in the latter half of 1941. From this start, the development of jet propulsion proceeded apace in the USA. 
As a development of the successful W1 flight engine, Whittle had conceived his W2 series which would have higher thrust and lower frontal area. The Ministry of Aircraft Production had been established in 1940 and involved both the Rover Company and BT-H in the manufacture of W2 engines. The first engine was delivered by Rover for testing by Power Jets in May 1941 but its performance was very poor. A complete revision of the design, known as the W2B, was instituted, and this was developed into the Welland engine after Rolls-Royce had taken over Rover's jet-engine activities in January 1943. By intensive development the performance was raised to an acceptable level, and the first Meteor I aircraft were delivered to the RAF in May 1944, and saw service against the German V-1 flying bomb. Meanwhile Power Jets had continued with engine development, producing the W2/500 and W2/700 designs, which showed greatly improved performance. The aerodynamic design of the W2/700 was adopted by Rolls-Royce for their very successful Derwent V engine, which won a world airspeed record of 606 m.p.h. in a Meteor in 1945. 
At Power Jets, Whittle had ambitious plans for new engines, including a fan jet, based upon axial flow compressors, together with a supersonic aircraft project with the Miles Aircraft Company. In April 1944 the government nationalized Power Jets, the private shareholders accepting the sum of $135,563 10's'. for the company's assets. A new company, Power Jets (Research and Development) Ltd, was established, the gas turbine division of the Royal Aircraft Establishment being amalgamated with it. The engine and supersonic aircraft projects were cancelled, and the key members of the Power Jets team resigned and were snapped up by industry. The remaining Power Jets offices and workshops became part of the National Gas Turbine establishment, and Whittle was no longer connected with them. He became increasingly involved in a taxing programme of lectures in both Britain and the United States. He retired from the RAF on 26 August 1948 with the substantive rank of air commodore; he had been made a KBE in the birthday honours list, had received a $100,000 award from the Royal Commission on Awards to Inventors, and had been elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society. 
For the next thirty years Whittle continued to receive national, industrial, and academic awards, culminating in the Charles Stark Draper prize of $375,000, which he shared with Dr Hans von Ohain, the pioneer of jet propulsion in Germany. From 1948 to 1952 he was honorary technical adviser to the British Overseas Airways Corporation and travelled extensively. In the intervals between his travels he worked on the text of 'Jet -- the Story of a Pioneer', which was published in 1953. This aroused great interest and was subsequently reprinted in paperback. He had an assignment as technical adviser to Shell Research, which led to his conceiving a novel type of oil-well drill. This was developed in conjunction with Bristol Siddeley Engines (later Rolls-Royce Bristol engine division) but had to be shelved in 1970 owing to the financial crisis at Rolls-Royce. From 1963 until 1976 he lived at Chagford in Devon, where he was looked after by his devoted secretary, Margaret Lawrence. 
In 1976 Whittle was divorced from his first wife, from whom he had been separated since 1952. He emigrated to the USA and in the same year married Hazel S. Hall, a nurse and air hostess. They made their home in Columbia, Maryland, and Whittle held a research appointment at the US Naval Academy at Annapolis. His second book, 'Gas Turbine Aero-Thermodynamics, with Special Reference to Aircraft Propulsion' (1981), was based upon his lectures there. He was awarded the Order of Merit in 1986 and in his last years was actively developing schemes for large supersonic passenger aircraft. He died of lung cancer at his home, Apartment 707, 10001 Windstream Drive, Columbia, Maryland, on 9 August 1996. He was survived by his second wife, and by the two sons of his first marriage. His ashes were interred at the RAF College, Cranwell, on 10 September 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 67856


Drake, Richard (1609-1681), Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of St Peter Westcheap, London, on 21 April 1609, the second son of Roger Drake (died 1650/51), a London mercer, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Allyn of Uttoxeter. He was educated at Eppingham from 1616 to 1624, until in June that year he was admitted to Pembroke College, Cambridge. He was elected Greek scholar in 1626, and graduated BA in 1627, MA in 1631, BD in 1639, and DD in 1661. In 1631 he was elected a fellow of his college, which had become well known for espousing anti-Calvinistic beliefs and practices. Drake was one of several younger scholars closely associated with and profoundly influenced by Lancelot Andrewes and Matthew Wren. In 1635 he contributed Latin verses to the preface of Robert Shelford's 'Five Pious and Learned Discourses', a tract whose arguments for free will and Laudian ceremonial made it notorious. In 1640 a report for the House of Commons on religious innovation at the university described Drake as an 'active and forward man to promote the new practises' and listed him among those who 'gave great offence in theire sermons' (BL, Harley MS 7019, fol. 63). In 1639 Drake had preached on 'Romans' 2: 22 on the provocative theme that those who abhor idols commit sacrilege. 
Drake was ordained in 1635, and was licensed to preach in Norwich diocese by Matthew Wren in 1636. In 1638 he became rector of the Essex parish of Radwinter, a living to which his father had purchased the right of presentation. Drake set about repairing and decorating the church in accordance with his advanced ceremonialist beliefs. This deeply offended the puritans among his parishioners and precipitated a violent conflict. Drake's manuscript account of that conflict, 'Affronts and insolencies com[m]itted in the parish of Radwinter, against the divine service, and the ministers therof', provides one of the most detailed accounts of the troubles suffered by a royalist clergyman in the prelude to, and during, the English civil war. Trouble began in 1640 when the images erected by Drake were destroyed by a group of soldiers who, finding Drake absent from the parish, were reported to have thrown the head of a duck into the church, saying, 'they would serve the Drake so if they could Catch him' (BL, Add. MS 21935, fol. 89'r'). Drake's response, repeating for the benefit of his parishioners the provocative sermon he gave in 1639, betrays something of the combative character which contributed to his problems. 
After a series of clashes with his parishioners Drake was forced to flee Radwinter in 1643. Following his ejection he lived in London, where he met and on 29 May 1654 married Jane Lambert (died 1662), a widow; shortly thereafter he moved to Richmond, Surrey. His Latin autobiography, covering his life to 1658, detailed what he saw as his continuing political persecution at the hands of parliament and its committees. His elder brother, Roger Drake, a physician and later a presbyterian minister, was able to use his good offices to offer him some protection. But in 1651 both brothers were arrested and briefly imprisoned for their supposed part in the conspiracy to help the Scots bring Charles II to the throne of England. The plot, in which their brother William Drake was a ringleader, became known as Love's plot -- after the principal victim of official retribution, Christopher Love. Drake's autobiography also offers valuable evidence of the successful attempt of loyalists in the revolution to continue to live their lives by the rites of the Anglican church. In 1647 Drake had an audience with the king, and in 1648 he dedicated to the future Charles II his translation of Andrewes's Greek prayers -- 'A Manual of the Private Devotions and Meditations of the Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot Andrews' -- Andrewes's great testament to prayer-centred piety. 
After the Restoration Drake came into his own. Restored to his living of Radwinter, he became a chaplain to Charles II. In September 1662, shortly after the death of his wife, he was collated prebendary of Alton Borealis in Salisbury Cathedral. He was chancellor from 1663 until his death. Drake resigned at Radwinter in 1667, and when he died on 16 October 1681 he was also rector of Wyke Regis, Dorset. He was buried in Salisbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 67857


Sampson, William (bap. 1635, d. 1702), Church of England clergyman, was born at South Leverton, Nottinghamshire, where he was baptized on 14 June 1635, a younger son of William Sampson ('c'.1590- 'c'.1636) and his wife, Helen (1603-1687), daughter of Gregory Vicars (in December 1637 she married the puritan minister Obadiah Grew). The family were Nottinghamshire yeomanry who achieved literary and academic success. The younger William's brother was the eminent dissenting minister and medical lecturer Henry Sampson, his stepbrother Nehemiah Grew, FRS, the celebrated botanist. At the age of eighteen William Sampson went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in the Lent term 1654; he graduated BA in 1657, and proceeded MA in 1660, in which year he became a fellow of the college. As treasurer Sampson was an able administrator at Pembroke, and his financial accounting system instituted in 1667-8 lasted until the nineteenth century. 
Sampson was presented to the rectory of Tilney, Norfolk, in 1669, and subsequently to the rectory of Clayworth, Nottinghamshire, in 1672. He was a prebendary of Lincoln for Clifton from the same year. Sampson was appointed president of Pembroke College in 1672 (the second most senior position), and left Clayworth in the hands of a curate for the next three years before returning to Nottinghamshire, in a final protest against the validity of the fellowship of Nathaniel Coga, who had been elected in 1658 and confirmed by royal mandate after the Restoration. Coga was elected master of Pembroke in 1677, and Sampson had little more to do with the college although he was one of the subscribers to the work on the new library in 1690. When Sampson was himself brought news in January 1694 by two fellows that he had been elected master of Pembroke following Coga's death, he declined the office and stayed in Clayworth. 
Sampson continued as rector and prebendary until his own death on 30 October 1702. He was buried in Clayworth nine days later. He bequeathed to Pembroke the advowson of Earl Stonham, Suffolk. Meanwhile Henry Sampson had left his Clapham, Surrey, home a sick man in mid-July 1700 to stay with his brother at Clayworth, and died there later that month; William's nephew and intended heir Nathaniel, who lived with him, had died the previous year. 
One of Sampson's early acts at Clayworth was to purchase a vellum book as his parish and personal record, for 'A Register is so useful and necessary a thing that the places of learning, wisdom and business could never be without one.' This earns Sampson his particular place in posterity: most aspects of parish life and work are reflected in it. Sampson recorded his own farming account and profit, with frequent disputes about tithes and piecemeal enclosure of the former common fields. He noted extreme weather conditions, pursued attempts to educate and reform the manners of the poor, was pleased by the extent of religious conformity in the parish, and recorded reactions to the extraordinary political and religious events of the revolution of 1688-9. In 1676 and again in 1688 he listed the population of the parish, household by household -- on the former occasion alphabetically, on the latter topographically beneath the principal household of Mr Thomas Wawen, 'Lord of the Soil'. 
Sampson's 'Rector's Book', published in 1910, has been used to illustrate many aspects of parochial life, religious conformity, and agricultural history. In 1963 it formed a building block of the new social history pioneered by Peter Laslett, who used Sampson's population counts in 1676 and 1688 to measure turnover of population. Far from being rooted to the soil the inhabitants were mobile; twenty-three of the ninety-one households in the later year were new formations, ten households were 'entirely novel'. Yet population size changed little overall, at a shade over 400, and the family structure -- small, nuclear, two-generational households with servants living in -- remained identical. Study since has served to underline rather than undermine the broad picture of village family and social structure Laslett painted using this almost unique source. 


@@@@@


doc= 67858


Simson, Patrick (1628-1715), Church of Scotland minister, was born in New Abbey manse, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 2 October 1628, the second son and sixth child of Adam Simson (1594-1642), the minister there, and his wife, Margaret Spens. His early years are obscure. He may not have accompanied his parents when they went about 1632 to Ireland, where his father died ten years later, leaving his wife in penury; he may instead have been brought up by his cousin George Gillespie. He matriculated in arts at Edinburgh in 1643 and was a member of the class of James Wiseman (died 1655), professor of philosophy, but did not graduate. Once licensed (date unknown), he served between 1649 and 1653 as chaplain and tutor to the marquess of Argyll at Inveraray. 
Having already been an observer at six general assemblies of the kirk on 11 November 1653 Simson was ordained and inducted to Renfrew. On 30 August 1654 he married Elizabeth Hay, daughter of his predecessor (and successor); they had five children. Little is seen of Simson's Renfrew ministry before his ejection on 1 October 1662. Following the death of his wife on 31 March 1662, on 30 June 1664 he married Janet Peadie ('bap'. 1635, died 1714), widow of Robert Cullen, a Glasgow merchant. Of their seven children, John Simson became a Glasgow professor of dubious orthodoxy. 
After accepting the second 'Act of Indulgence', Simson was appointed to Kilmacolm in 1672, but the family's unsettled life was not at an end. In 1674 he was charged with ministering outside his parish. He supported the covenanter preacher Alexander Peden during the latter's imprisonment on the Bass Rock in 1677, and, having refused the privy council's summons in 1678-9 to answer for 'keeping of conventicles', was deposed, but the sentence was not enforced for some years. The 1687 declaration of indulgence allowed his reappointment to Renfrew, but this was not implemented until 1690. 
In his later years Simson proved a valued counsellor in ecclesiastical business, for example, during the restoration of presbyterianism in 1690 and the union debates of 1707. He served in 1695-6 as moderator at a general assembly which moved towards realizing the Scottish reformation's aim of a school in every parish, was involved in witch trials in 1697, and was dean of the faculties in Glasgow University from 1690 to 1701. The communion cups presented on his ministerial jubilee in 1703 were still in use at the end of the twentieth century, but although plans to authorize for congregational use his 'Spiritual Songs, or, Holy Poems' (1685-6), drawn from the 'Bible', came close to fruition in 1708, they lapsed thereafter. Simson retained a sharp mind and memory, being father of the kirk at the end of his life. His wife having died on 19 September 1714, Simson himself died on 24 October 1715. Robert Wodrow, who knew him well, paid him a glowing tribute. Three of his writings on church controversies survive in manuscript (NL Scot., Wodrow MSS). 


@@@@@


doc= 67859


Leslie, William (1621/2-1707), Roman Catholic priest and missioner, was born between October 1621 and April 1622, the son of Alexander Leslie of Conrack, Moray, and his wife, Agnes Gordon of Cormellat. He entered the Scots College, Douai, in September 1636. In October 1640 he went to the Scots College, Rome, was ordained priest on 15 June 1647 after seven years' study, and in September 1647 proceeded to Paris to prepare for mission work in Scotland. In the winter of 1649 to 1650, however, six Scottish secular priests meeting in Paris, having decided to petition Rome to give them a superior and financial support, agreed that Will Leslie should remain in Rome as their agent. 
Leslie's single-minded and lifelong aim was to establish a body of secular priests, with one of them as bishop, controlling the Roman Catholic church in Scotland. Most mission work in Scotland was being done by Jesuits; the rectors of all Scots colleges except that in Paris were Jesuits, and students of the Scots College, Rome, became Jesuits rather than secular priests. Although the Roman Congregatio de Propaganda Fide existed to oversee all missionary work, Jesuits were not responsible to it but directly to the pope. Leslie worked tirelessly to increase 'propaganda''s influence and in autumn 1661 was appointed its archivist. 
Leslie's influence was increasingly powerful, not only with 'propaganda' but also with other church dignitaries and even with popes -- of whom he served under eight -- and after 1688 with the Jacobite court in exile. Everything affecting the Scottish mission became his concern. He kept a close watch on the Scots College in Rome, sending complaints, memos, and petitions about its rectors and their administration, particularly to 'propaganda', and was in constant touch with the Paris college, which acted as a staging post and sent students to Rome. Though he declined to assist the missionary plans of the Scottish Benedictines in Germany, he welcomed their assistance to the mission superior in Scotland. 
Leslie's life's work was successful. In 1694 Rome appointed a vicar apostolic, Thomas Nicolson, to whom the Jesuit missioners submitted in 1701. When Leslie died on 23 April 1707, having been enfeebled from the 1690s by kidney stones, the Scottish clergy comprised two bishops, Nicolson and a coadjutor, and a majority of secular priests. Leslie's countless lengthy letters (which gained him the sobriquet the Homilist) were long-winded, moralizing, but also outspoken. His consistent opposition, and indeed antipathy, to the Jesuits is plain to see, though his alleged plotting to have their missionary practices in China condemned is at least not proven. 


@@@@@


doc= 67860


Mary Stonehouse (1722-1751)], who was born on 14 February 1722 in Islington, the second of two children of Sir John Crispe, bt ('c'.1676-1728), and his wife, Elizabeth 'nee' Sayer (died 1741). In September 1741 the Moravian leader Count Zinzendorf adopted her, naming her Maria Theresa after his own deceased daughter. In October she became a member of the Moravians' new English conference, and when their first English congregation was established in May 1742 she was received into membership and confirmed as a 'labouress' (church worker), serving in Yorkshire from August 1742. On moving to Germany in 1743, she became eldress of the Married Sisters in the leading Moravian community of Herrnhaag. Back in London from 1745, she was eldress of the London congregation from November 1746 until 1748, when she again visited Germany. She was ordained deaconess in London in September 1749, and in 1750 occupied a leading position in Zinzendorf's household. 


@@@@@


doc= 67861


Benson, Henry Alexander, Baron Benson (1909-1995), accountant, was born in Johannesburg on 2 August 1909, the son of Alexander Stanley Benson, solicitor, and his wife, Florence Mary, 'nee' Cooper. He was educated at St John's College preparatory school in Johannesburg before being moved (Benson believes because of a shortage of cash for school fees) to Parktown high school. The strongest influences on his early life seem to have been his preparatory school teacher, Miss Thomas, a firm disciplinarian who drummed into the young Henry the need always to attain the highest possible standard, and his mother, who seems to have shared similar priorities. The lasting contribution of his father, a warm but at times irascible character, arose from a passionate belief in the proper use and elocution of the English language. 
Benson's mother was the daughter of Francis Cooper who joined his two elder brothers as a partner in Cooper Brothers & Co. about 1871 ['see 'Cooper family]. She brought her son to England when he was fourteen years old for a family visit. With time on their hands, they visited the office of Cooper Brothers for what turned out to be a rather sticky meeting, with nobody having much to say. In desperation, the senior partner, his mother's cousin (son of the youngest of the four initial Cooper brothers) Stuart Cooper, said 'Well, Florence, if you want this lad to come here when he has finished school, we will take him.' Florence thought this a capital idea and Henry commenced articles in London a couple of months after his seventeenth birthday in October 1926. The usual premium of 500 guineas was waived because of the family connection and his uncle, Sir Francis D'Arcy Cooper, made Henry an allowance of $250 a year during his training. Benson passed eleventh in the intermediate examination and fourth (out of 1088 candidates) in the final examination of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), and qualified as a chartered accountant in 1932. Continuing nepotism, coupled with fierce ambition and ability, produced an annual salary of $250 ($25 more than was paid to other newly qualified staff) and accelerated promotion to salaried partner two years later at the age of twenty-five, on $1000 a year. 
Following the outbreak of war, Benson obtained a commission as second lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards through the good offices of his uncle and Viscount Trenchard. The guards' rigid, unswerving discipline, attention to detail, and determination that anything undertaken should be as good as human endeavour could make it, made an impression on Benson which remained with him throughout his life. One of his early duties was to patrol the terrace on the side of Windsor Castle where the two princesses slept. In 1942 he was promoted to major and moved to the Special Operations Executive, a branch of the services engaged in all kinds of undercover work. He was promoted to colonel in 1944 and, a year earlier, plucked temporarily from his battalion and seconded to the Ministry of Supply to advise on the reorganization of the accounts of the Royal Ordnance factories. These were found to be in a chaotic state and Benson accepted the appointment of director of factories (accounts) giving him executive authority over a staff of about 10,000. In a successful endeavour to inculcate the need for order and discipline, Benson toured the factories in battledress tapping the floor with his swagger stick for emphasis or using it to point out anything he did not like. He admits to being tough with staff; anyone who did not pull his weight was replaced by some means or another, and everyone who seemed capable of doing the job and complying strictly with the manuals was promoted. 
Leaving the army as an acting brigadier, Benson returned to Coopers on 1 January 1946 full of enthusiasm to expand the firm rapidly, partly through the application of military-type disciplines. This determination was shared by another relatively young partner, Sydney John Pears, but not the still senior partner, Stuart Cooper. Following the resignation of Francis D'Arcy Cooper as senior partner in 1923 to become vice-chairman (later chairman) of Lever Brothers, Coopers had gone through a fairly quiet period. Stuart Cooper's health was patchy and, in Benson's and Pears's estimation, he failed to put into the firm the required work and energy. After some difficult meetings in 1946, Stuart Cooper agreed to retire. Pears and Benson immediately undertook a radical overhaul of the organizational framework, with separate departments established to deal with audit, tax, executorship work, liquidation and receivership, registration and share-transfer work, costing and organization, secretarial work, and investigations. Another key initiative was for Benson, drawing on his experience in the ordnance factories, to write an audit manual setting out precisely the procedures for all audit work carried out for clients, for use within the firm. 
There then began a period of rapid growth which gave rise to tinges of jealousy among some of Coopers' more staid competitors. Benson later admitted that the firm was partly to blame, being insufficiently sensitive to the attitude of colleagues within the profession. Hostility was to some extent ameliorated by the decision of Coopers to share with the rest of the profession their experience in the development of improved auditing standards through the publication, in 1966, of 'Cooper's Manual of Auditing', drawn from the original audit manual Benson had written for internal use. This became the standard work used by students and practitioners in the UK and overseas. Another major step in the early 1960s, again under the direction of Benson and Pears, which significantly enhanced the growth of the firm, was the establishment of a management consultancy arm, Coopers being the first of the major accounting firms to branch out into this field. The UK firm grew from 173 staff in 1945 to 2207 staff when Benson retired thirty years later. The numbers in the international firm rose from 239 to 18,386 over the same period, and offices worldwide increased more than forty-fold from 8 to 332. A key trigger for international growth was a chance telephone call from the senior partner of Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery, in 1956. It seems that this American firm was keen to divest itself of its London and Paris offices, thereby gifting Coopers $40,000 worth of work. While more than pleased to take on these activities, Benson and Pears pressed Lybrand for, and achieved agreement to, the establishment of an international network of firms practising under a common agreement and to common standards. The international firm of Coopers and Lybrand was launched on 1 January 1957 and, from 1973, all firms within its network practised worldwide under this new label until the merger with Price Waterhouse in 1998. 
Benson also became heavily involved in running the accountancy profession following election to the ICAEW council in 1956. He was the third member of his family to hold the office of president in 1966, following in the shoes of great-uncles Arthur Cooper (1883-4) and Ernest Cooper (1899-1901) ['see under 'Cooper family]. A presidential speech implored members of the Chartered Accountants' Students Society 'to remember that we have the privilege of belonging to a private organisation which serves the public interest'. Probably his most significant contribution as president was in the creation of the Accountants' International Study Group -- a collaboration between the ICAEW, the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants -- with the remit to study major accounting problems and issue an agreed statement upon each of them. This initiative was a further manifestation of his developing belief of the value of uniformity in accounting matters, growing out of his wartime experiences in the ordnance factories and in recognition of the increasingly international nature of large accounting firms. Leading from this, as the need for more rigorous, worldwide accounting standards and procedures became accepted, Benson was the driving force in the formation of the International Accounting Standards Committee in 1973. As chairman from 1973 to 1976, he oversaw the issuing of standards designed to improve the quality and comparability of corporate disclosures through harmonizing financial reporting requirements throughout the world. 
Following the Second World War, Coopers made the policy decision that its senior partners should set aside a part of their time for government work. It is unlikely that the firm was behaving in a purely altruistic manner, and there is no doubt that Cooper Brothers & Co. and its partners obtained significant financial benefits both directly in the form of government engagements and indirectly in the high public profile that they enjoyed. Benson's appointments to a bewildering variety of committees and public bodies are summarized in six pages of an appendix to his autobiography, 'Accounting for Life'. His achievements caused the obituary correspondent to 'The Times' to conclude that 'Few men outside Whitehall can have had more influence on public affairs in postwar Britain'. Immediately after the war he was invited to advise the new Labour government on housing production while, in 1953, he was made deputy chairman of the Fleck committee on the organization of the National Coal Board, later becoming deputy chairman of the NCB. Many other appointments quickly followed, including studies of Northern Ireland's railways, the New Zealand fruit trade, and the transformation of coal into oil, chemicals, and gas (the Wilson committee). In 1963 he was invited by the chancellor of the exchequer to examine the impact of tax on companies' turnover, in effect the precursor to the introduction of VAT. Immediately following his retirement from Coopers, he was invited by his friend Gordon Richardson, the governor of the Bank of England, to serve as his industrial adviser (1975-83). Between 1976 and 1979, Benson chaired the royal commission on legal services, whose mammoth report included the recommendations that individual solicitors or firms should be permitted a restricted right to advertise, and that the Law Society should be responsible for taking action in cases of sub-standard professional work. From 1974 to 1979 he also served as a director of the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation. 
Benson was appointed CBE in 1946 in recognition of his work at the Ministry of Supply, with his further government service producing a knighthood in 1964, appointment as GBE in 1971, and a life peerage in the 1981 new year's honours list. He subsequently sat in the House of Lords as a cross-bencher, speaking frequently on industrial issues and on the incidence of fraud in the European Union. In 1983 he was elected an honorary master of the bench at Inner Temple. In the following year he was made an honorary freeman of the Worshipful Company of the Chartered Accountants in England and Wales. In 1985 he was elected to the Accounting Hall of Fame by Ohio State University, USA, and in 1986 he was made a freeman of the City of London. 
Benson appears to have had a miserable time when, 'raw and unsophisticated, [he] first came to wet and foggy London from warm and sunny South Africa'. That apart, his entire life was happy, exciting, and enjoyed to the full. His explanation for his enjoyment as well as his success was a willingness to work hard. Indeed, he became restive and uncomfortable when not fully occupied. His history of the firm (1954) noted that the original Cooper brothers were not easy taskmasters; he was no different. The level of commitment which he expected at the Ministry of Supply was carried over into his professional life. He once observed that, to find out what a man could do, you put him under strain. His address to the Chartered Accountants' Students Society in 1966 stressed, in addition to hard work, the virtues of single-mindedness, independence, humility, loyalty, and trustworthiness. His stern demeanour cloaked both a keen sense of humour and a deeply seated concern for humanity. The latter was well illustrated at the end of the Second World War when he was sent to Cairo by the Special Operations Executive in order to close down force 133, which controlled the under-cover and resistance operations in Greece and the Balkans. Concerned about the families of Greek patriots who had died helping force 133, Benson successfully negotiated a fund of $200,000 from the Treasury, in those days a substantial amount of money, to ease their burden. 
The limited amount of time Benson devoted to recreation was also exploited to the full. His hobbies were gardening, tennis, sailing, golf, and shooting, inheriting from Sir Francis D'Arcy Cooper the shooting rights of the Drovers estate near Chichester, Sussex. He was also sufficiently interested in racing to work closely with the sixteenth duke of Norfolk, a personal friend, to put up a new stand at Ascot in the 1960s, thereafter becoming a member of the Jockey Club. 
Benson married Anne Virginia, daughter of Charles Macleod, a tea planter, on 2 September 1939. They had three children: Peter ('b'. 1940) and twins Michael and Phyllida ('b'. 1943). In the family tradition, Peter Benson became a partner in Coopers and Lybrand in 1971. Benson's wife, Ginny, accompanied her husband on many of his trips and described herself, in a paper written at the time of Henry's retirement, as his 'bag and baggage'; also 'as a Cooper's wife and latterly a C & L wife'. This lifestyle did not come as a surprise; her future husband's proposal for marriage, offered in a taxi cab bound for King's Cross Station, was accompanied by a stated list of priorities among which the firm came first. She seemed entirely comfortable with this arrangement, which did not preclude the existence of strong family ties, as reflected in the continuance of family holidays with their children, after they had grown up, and their grandchildren. Lord Benson died on 5 March 1995 at Chichester in Sussex; he was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 67862


Hardman family (per. c.1820-1935), manufacturers of ecclesiastical furnishings, came to prominence via the family firm's association with the architect, designer, and pioneer of the Gothic revival, Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin (1812-1852), for whom it executed designs for metalwork, stained glass, and decorative painting. The firm's founder was 


@@@@@


doc= 67863


John Hardman (1767-1844), button maker and medallist, and his second wife, Lydia Wareing (died 1816). His father, who later became known as John Hardman senior in order to differentiate him from his son, was a stalwart of the Roman Catholic community in Birmingham. He made significant contributions to the building of St Chad's Cathedral and founded the Convent of Mercy in Handsworth, Birmingham (three of his daughters entered the religious life), as well as a number of Catholic charitable organizations. Educated at Stonyhurst College (1824-7) John Hardman became a partner in his father's thriving button making business (Hardman and Lewis, later Hardman and Iliffe) at Paradise Street, Birmingham. The Hardmans probably met Pugin when he later was working at St Mary's, Oscott: according to Pugin's diary he was invited to dine with the Hardmans on 29 May 1837 (V&A, L 5158-1969). While there is no doubt that he admired the elder Hardman it was with the younger man that Pugin formed a close and lasting friendship. Pugin, who always experienced difficulty in finding manufacturers who met his exacting standards of craftsmanship, was evidently delighted to make the acquaintance of someone with expertise in metalwork who in addition shared his deep religious and moral convictions and interest in the Roman Catholic revival. This shared commitment to the revival of their religion and its practice evolved into a new manufacturing venture to provide furnishings mainly for churches but also for domestic use. Describing themselves as the first of the medieval metalworkers, Pugin and Hardman were supplying a modest range of articles from June 1838, including book clasps, silver mounted cruets, and ciboria designed by Pugin and manufactured by Hardman. In 1841 production was expanded to include monumental brasses. The two men were guided by Pugin's belief that the Gothic was the only appropriate Christian style. They benefited from the increasing demand for truly Gothic products from newly constructed Catholic churches as well as from new Anglican churches and those undergoing restoration. Turnover of the firm was $1000 in 1841. 
Hardman had married Anne ('c'.1809-1880), daughter of George Gibson of Manchester, probably on 23 August 1832 in Manchester, and on 5 May 1843 their first son, John Bernard Hardman, was born at the family home, St John's, Hunter's Lane, Handsworth. They had two surviving sons and five daughters in all. 
In 1845 Hardman's increasingly diverse enterprise moved from the premises of the button making firm into its own workshops at Great Charles Street (the button business continued to thrive and won a prize medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851.) At the new premises Hardman had a number of workshops, but he continued to employ outworkers and also used subcontractors, often local firms. The business expanded from producing church furnishings, such as candlesticks, chalices, pyxes, and thuribles in precious and base metal, to producing stained glass (from 1845) and undertaking decorative painting in addition. To the growing ecclesiastical orders from Great Britain, Europe, and Australia were added numerous and valuable requests for fitting out the Palace of Westminster, the largest secular commission that Hardmans undertook. It accounted for the rapid rise in business which saw turnover exceed $12,000 in 1848. 
Pugin provided the inspiration for the astonishing quantity and range of individual designs, but without the manufacturing acumen, organizational skills, and commitment of Hardman the project could not have succeeded. From the surviving ledgers, letters, and workbooks it is clear that Hardman's role involved liaison with clients and designer, interpreting Pugin's designs for the workmen, overseeing production, and managing the accounts. 
Pugin claimed to be reviving traditional working methods, and Hardman was credited with having done so, but an examination of the surviving objects reveals a more pragmatic approach. Most of the Hardman production in Pugin's lifetime was in base metal and nearly all was machine made, using the most sophisticated modern methods available in a nineteenth-century metal foundry. Objects were cast or die-stamped, bowls of chalices spun, and full use was made of electroforming. More emphasis was placed on traditional silversmithing skills in the manufacture of items in precious metal, although raising and chasing were often used in conjunction with more industrial practices. It would appear from correspondence between Pugin and Hardman that both were satisfied with an impressive finish rather than the exclusive use of medieval methods of manufacture. 
The enormous orders for the Palace of Westminster (for which it supplied all the metalwork and all the stained glass except for one set of windows in the Lords' chamber), continuing important commissions, and the preparations for the Great Exhibition of 1851 must have stretched the capacity of the business to its limit. The firm's work for Pugin's medieval court at the Great Exhibition won the highest accolade, a council medal, in the general hardware class and a prize medal for church articles. Every aspect of church furnishings was shown, with the Hardmans' exhibits covering an impressive area, 560 square feet of floor space and 1360 square feet of wall space. From the unlikely formula of the strongest of religious, moral, and artistic convictions Pugin and Hardman had found a market for the products that they wanted to supply and had succeeded in making a profitable business from it. John Hardman had sacrificed his health for the business, financial strain, hard work, and anxiety all contributing to his decline. He retired from an active role in the firm in 1857 and retired completely in the summer of 1863, when he moved with his wife to Pemberton Villa, 3 Clifton Park, Bristol. He died there on 29 May 1867, his body being brought back to Birmingham for burial on 18 June in the crypt of St Chad's Cathedral in a chantry that had been presented to his father as a gift in recognition of his benefactions. Hardman himself had been instrumental in founding a choir at St Chad's for the performance of Gregorian chant and had personally managed the choir until his departure from Birmingham. He had performed as a baritone in the choir, as had a number of his exclusively Catholic workforce. In appearance he was the archetypal middle-class Victorian gentleman, complete with goatee beard and spectacles. He was a leading figure in the establishment of a Catholic reformatory for boys at Mount St Bernard's in Charnwood Forest, Leicestershire, in 1855. For a short time he served on Birmingham town council and on one of the committees of the Great Exhibition. Above all though, as his obituary in 'The Builder' (25, 1867, 408) claimed, he gave Birmingham a new industry. Hardman was succeeded as senior partner in Hardmans by his elder son, John Bernard Hardman (1843-1903); his younger son, Mary George Edward Hardman (1844-1904), was also involved in the firm. 
Following Pugin's death in 1852 Hardman's nephew 


@@@@@


doc= 67865


Seddon family (per. c.1750-1864), furniture makers, apparently hailed from Lancashire. According to his great-grandson the architect John Pollard Seddon, 


@@@@@


doc= 67867


Godolphin, Sir William (b. in or before 1518, d. 1570), soldier, was the eldest son of Sir William Godolphin (died 'c'.1547), landowner, of Godolphin, Cornwall, and his first wife, Margaret, daughter of John Glynn of Morval, Cornwall. The family may reliably be connected with the parish of Breage in Cornwall from the late thirteenth century. The existing house at Godolphin was begun by John Godolghan about 1475. His son and namesake, the elder Sir William Godolphin's father, served as sheriff of Cornwall in 1504 and 1508, and the next reign saw the family consolidate its social and economic dominance over the county's remote western hundreds. Its wealth was industrial rather than agricultural, based chiefly on the extraction and smelting of tin: John Leland observed that there were 'no greater tynne workes yn al Cornwal then be on Sir Wylliam Godolcan's ground' ('Itinerary', 1.191). Sir William Godolphin senior was pricked sheriff in 1533 and ingratiated himself with Thomas Cromwell, principal secretary, throughout the 1530s, forwarding information on the state of the peace and sending him Cornish wrestlers and tin miners. The principal secretary responded by taking the younger William Godolphin and two brothers into his own household. Possibly Godolphin had some legal training, since a William Godolphin was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in November 1537. In 1539, the year in which his father was appointed to the council of the west, he was nominated by Cromwell as knight of the shire for Cornwall. 
In 1544 Godolphin was in northern France, serving as master of the mines at the sieges of Montreuil and Boulogne. Cornish tinners were highly prized as sappers, and he commanded the company that successfully undermined the walls of Boulogne. In August he was wounded in action, 'no less to the beautifying of his fame than the disfiguring of his face', as noted by Richard Carew of Antony, Cornwall (Carew, 133-4). He was rewarded with the bailiwick of the town, and sat on its council until Boulogne was returned to the French in 1550. He was also knighted, apparently in 1546, at which point it becomes even more difficult to separate father and son in the records. The problem is compounded by the lack of firm evidence for the year of his father's death; 1547 seems the best estimate. 
In April 1548 Godolphin led his fellow magistrates in pacifying west Cornwall following the murder of the avaricious archdeacon, William Body, during a riot in defence of the traditional liturgy in Helston. He had little sympathy for the protesters, and in July he organized a band of mounted gentlemen and parish constables against any resurgence of sedition. He also assisted in surveying the revenues of the dissolved chantries in Cornwall and Devon. When a far more serious religious insurrection erupted in 1549 an informer sent him secret information on one of the rebel leaders, Humphrey Arundell. On 22 July Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and lord protector, and the privy council wrote to John Russell, first Baron Russell, lord privy seal, about a proclamation confiscating rebel property: 'a better personage to execute it can not be devised then Sir William Godolphin, who hath bene a frontier man' (Pocock, 33). Godolphin was chosen sheriff of Cornwall later in the year. In December 1549 he was bound over to keep the peace with Sir John Arundell of Lanherne. In 1551 he served as vice-admiral of Cornwall, and in March 1553 he was again elected knight of the shire. 
Godolphin had cleaved to the protestant military establishment under Edward VI, and the accession of Mary I left him in an uncomfortable position. A William Godolphin was reported as present in the entourage of Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, in Venice in the summer of 1555. The exile is unlikely to be the head of the family, since Sir William Godolphin was still listed as a JP in 1555, when he was included among the magistrates detailed to intervene in a dispute in Launceston. But his reformed religion may help to explain a challenge to the controllership of tin coinage in Cornwall that Godolphin had enjoyed since 1545. In 1555 the crown apparently granted William Isham the same lucrative office, resulting in an unseemly riot between the servants of the two parties in Truro coinage hall. Godolphin recovered his local position under Elizabeth I, serving as sheriff of Cornwall in 1568 and as deputy lieutenant in 1569. 
The interest of the Godolphins in the Isles of Scilly dates from the mid-sixteenth century. Lying 28 miles off Land's End, this sparsely populated territory was vulnerable to French attack. Thomas Godolphin became the military captain of Scilly during Edward's reign, directing the fortification and provisioning of the islands. In August 1556 the privy council thanked Sir William Godolphin for apprehending the pirate Jacob Thomson at Scilly, though it subsequently rebuked him for acquitting several of Thomson's compatriots. In summer 1558 Godolphin petitioned the crown to farm the islands for $20, Bedford acting as mediator. One of the first tasks carried out by the Elizabethan privy council was to draw up Godolphin's lease of the islands. Thus began an association between the Godolphins and Scilly that would endure until the nineteenth century. 
Godolphin married Blanche, daughter of Robert Langdon of the parish of St Martin, Cornwall; they had two daughters. He died in 1570 and was buried at Breage on 30 July. The house and estate then passed to his nephew 
Invasion was a perennial fear in later Elizabethan Cornwall, and Godolphin was variously responsible for musters, the fortification of ports, and the early-warning system of beacon fires. In July 1595 he directed the defence of Penzance against a Spanish raiding party that had burned Paul church and the village of Mousehole. His greatest achievement, however, lay even further west. The lease of Scilly had been regranted in 1570, and in 1593 he was commanded to build a fort on St Mary's. His collaborator in the initial stages of construction was the architect and engineer Robert Adams, who may also be responsible for the fine symmetrical stables at Godolphin. The queen granted a miserly $400 for the works, leaving Godolphin to advance $600 of his own money and to use his soldiers for labour. The result was Star Castle, an eight-pointed fortification commanding the peninsula above Hugh Town and the sheltered harbour between the islands. Provision was made for a permanent garrison, with additional gun platforms, blockhouses, windmills, and a beacon pit to alert the mainland in case of attack. Finance, however, was a continuing problem. In 1600 Godolphin petitioned the privy council to replace the badly rusted and outdated ordnance brought to the islands some fifty years before. He also argued the case for outer earthworks, essential to protect the fort from enemy artillery, but in vain: they were never built. Carew praised Godolphin's castle as 'a sure hold and a commodious dwelling' (Carew, 156), but Sir Francis had a more sophisticated comprehension of military architecture and was all too aware of the weakness of his design in the absence of additional fortification. His letters to Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary, speak of his deep anxiety about the depleted state of the Scilly garrison and the threat of Spanish assault and occupation. Star Castle still stands, a tribute to Godolphin's energy and administrative acumen in the remotest of locations. 
In 1552 Francis Godolphin married Margaret, daughter of John Killigrew of Arwenack, Falmouth. They had three sons and six daughters; the eldest son, another William Godolphin (died 1613), served with courage in Robert Devereux, earl of Essex's army in Ireland. Sir Francis's second wife was Alice, 'nee' Skerret, widow of John Glanville. They had no children and she outlived him. He died in 1608 and was buried at Breage on 23 April. His will of 1606 testifies to a strong belief in godly charity. He bequeathed the large sum of $200 to be distributed in Penwith and Kerrier hundreds 'towardes the relief and settinge their poore to worke and for restrayninge them from ydle loyteringe and wandringe abroade'. He reserved $40 for a local 'howse of correction', should one be established within ten years of his death, and left 20 marks to build lodgings on Godolphin Hill for four 'poore decayed tynners' in his service (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/111, sig. 46). He also bequeathed money to support weekly preaching in Helston church. The Godolphin estate was inherited by his eldest son, who replaced him as receiver of the duchy of Cornwall. 


@@@@@


doc= 67868


Chittick, (Hubert) Neville (1923-1984), archaeologist, was born at 31 Brunswick Road, Hove, Sussex, on 18 September 1923, the son of Hubert Stanley Chittick (died 1963/4), mechanical engineer, and his wife, Rosemary ('nee' Manson). He was educated at Rottingdean School and Rugby School, intending to proceed to Peterhouse, Cambridge (his father's college). But, because of the war and service in the army intelligence corps (in Austria and Italy), he was delayed until 1947, when, finding the college's quota for his preferred subject, history, fully subscribed, he read law instead. This (according to his contemporary, George Gale) he studied 'without enthusiasm'. He completed his course in two years with adequate but not distinguished marks, but these were compensated for by the college's prize in law. He was remembered more for his eccentric appearance and loud conversation. 
Despite following up his degree with the bar examinations (at Lincoln's Inn) in 1950, Chittick never practised law, being determined to pursue archaeology. For this purpose he stayed in Cambridge a further year for the diploma course, under Glyn Daniel in particular, and spent the next two years in Egypt and the Near East, travelling and excavating -- at Nimrud under Sir Max Mallowan, at Jericho under Kathleen Kenyon, at Mycenae under A. J. B. Wace, and in Cyprus. Then, in 1952, he was appointed curator of museums in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, his knowledge of Arabic being an asset. But that job was 'Sudanized' in 1955, and he had to wait two years for a suitable opportunity when the post of conservator of antiquities in Tanganyika was created. 
Though Neville Chittick did not intend it at the time, he was to spend the rest of his career in east Africa and to become during the 1960s the leading authority on the later archaeology of the region, and in particular of the medieval Swahili coast and its overseas contacts with the Islamic world. While his responsibilities, as government conservator from 1957 to 1961, covered the whole of Tanganyika, his taste was for the town sites of the coast and islands and their place in world history, their dating being established by architectural styles, by imported ceramics (from the Persian Gulf and indirectly from China), and by Arabic texts. This research was complementary to that which James Kirkman had been pursuing since 1948 on the adjacent Kenyan coast, and followed broadly the precepts established by Sir Mortimer Wheeler for British archaeology overseas at that period. 
In 1961 Chittick was appointed director of the British Institute of History and Archaeology in East Africa, a research body newly founded by the British Academy, through the initiative of Wheeler among others, with the intention of developing historical knowledge of the region as Tanganyika, Uganda, Kenya, and Zanzibar were about to achieve their independence. The institute's early headquarters were in Dar es Salaam, convenient for Chittick's continuing excavation of Kilwa on the southern coast; this medieval harbour town had handled the gold from Zimbabwe and had been graced by the largest stone-built mosques and palaces in east Africa. In the mid-1960s the institute moved its base to Nairobi, that being more central for field research throughout the region. Although his own concentration remained on the coast -- of Kenya as well as Tanganyika/Tanzania -- Chittick followed closely the exploratory work of his assistants and students on up-country archaeology. He also assimilated the research of associated scholars from numerous countries who were at that period inspired to take up African history and archaeology; they found the British Institute and its unparalleled library, which Chittick was assembling at Chiromo in Nairobi, the obvious meeting place -- the more so because of Chittick's intellectual conviviality. Moreover, his initiative in founding and editing from 1966 an annual journal, 'Azania', for research in eastern African history and archaeology, confirmed the institute's leading role in this nascent subject. 
This reputation occasioned a measure of envy in the emergent University of East Africa, with which the British Institute in Eastern Africa (as it was called from 1970) was affiliated, and particularly in the university's branch in Nairobi. Understandably, certain African scholars felt that the initiative in researching into the history of the region and its peoples should rest with themselves. Chittick was apt to exacerbate delicate feelings by his argumentative manner, which some found patronizing, so that what were at heart his liberal inclinations were often mistaken for an outmoded 'colonial' attitude. Moreover, his research concentration on coastal history and overseas connections was interpreted in some quarters as a 'reactionary' outsider line which failed to appreciate the achievements of African peoples. In this he may have been misunderstood, but he did not endear himself to critics or to students, least of all local ones, since he lacked the sensitivity and patience of a supervisor. He could be equally exasperating to his staff and excavation assistants. Nevertheless, he inspired loyalty, and those who knew him recognized his underlying warmth of character as well as charitable concern for individuals and just causes. He had an admiring circle, of women especially. His sociability (aided by an aptitude for languages) and his hospitality in Nairobi, both during and after his marriage to Helen Jane Wilson ('b'. 1933/4, whom he married on 6 September 1958), became legendary. Separation from his wife in 1969 was followed by divorce a few years later; he did not remarry, though he had an informal but stable relationship with Helen Morrison through the 1970s. 
Chittick's coastal research was published in several British and international archaeological journals, as well as 'Azania'. The full excavation report on Kilwa appeared in two substantial volumes as a memoir of the British Institute in 1974; a further volume on the excavations at Manda, on the northern Kenya coast, followed in 1984. As the leading authority on the subject, he contributed chapters to collaborative works, including the 'Cambridge History of Africa' in the 1970s. Together with an American colleague, Robert Rotberg, he edited a volume entitled 'East Africa and the Orient' (1975); this derived from a memorable conference in Nairobi in 1967. 
The last work illustrated Chittick's abiding interest in the Indian Ocean and maritime trade in the Islamic period, and especially contacts with Arabia and the Persian Gulf. For he saw himself as an archaeologist of the old tradition, rather than as an Africanist, and, according to colleagues, he yearned to return to the Near East. That was not to be, but it was notable how from the late 1960s his activities edged northwards, first by extending his coastal explorations into Somalia. Apart from documenting the continuation of medieval Swahili relics there, a significant achievement was to locate sites of the Roman period at the Horn of Africa, notably Ras Hafun (thus confirming the testimony of the important Greek text of the first century AD, 'The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea'). 
Moreover, in 1972 the opportunity arose to investigate the ancient northern Ethiopian capital of Aksum, which had been an ally of the later Roman empire. With encouragement from the council of the British Institute (which was now extending its geographical interests), two major seasons of excavations were undertaken; these focused on the prominent monuments of Aksum, notably great stone tombs and the famous carved monolithic steles, the largest of which are believed to represent the successive kings of the third and fourth centuries (prior to the adoption of Christianity). This work was cut short by the Ethiopian revolution of 1974, and during the subsequent years of insecurity it proved impossible to resume the excavations, a predicament which Chittick found especially frustrating. He died suddenly from a heart attack at his temporary abode, 49 Grange Road, Cambridge, on 27 July 1984 (almost a year after the institute's council had insisted on his retiring), and was cremated in Cambridge on 3 August, after a funeral at Peterhouse. Arrangements were made to have his important, albeit incomplete, Aksum research written up for the British Institute's memoir series (mainly by Stuart Munro-Hay, who had been Chittick's student at Aksum). 
Neville Chittick's achievements were recognized when he was appointed OBE in 1984, one month before his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 67869


Fagg, Bernard Evelyn Buller (1915-1987), archaeologist and museum curator, was born on 8 December 1915 in Upper Norwood, London, the son of William Percy Fagg, antiquarian bookseller, and his wife, Lilian ('nee' Buller). His brother was William Buller Fagg. He went to school at Woodford and at Dulwich College, and then entered Downing College, Cambridge, where he read classics in part one of the tripos and archaeology and anthropology in part two (in those days archaeology and anthropology could be read only in part two). He became one of that band of Cambridge undergraduates who 'took archaeology to Africa'. 
After taking his degree at Cambridge, Fagg was accepted as a cadet for the colonial administrative service and did his colonial service training course at Oxford. In July 1939 he was posted to the provincial administration of Plateau province in Nigeria, stationed at Jos. On the outbreak of war he enlisted in the 1st field company of the west African engineers, and served in east Africa. He used his army leave there to work with Louis and Mary Leakey. Through them he met Mary Catherine Davidson ('b'. 1915), a teacher, whom he married in 1942. He was recalled in 1943 to Nigeria, where he was assigned to an administrative department in Jos formed to promote the production of tin, which the allies urgently needed following the occupation of the Malayan tin sources by the Japanese. 
At Jos, Fagg devoted all his spare time to field research into the prehistoric remains of the area in the form of finds and field monuments, and in this was ably assisted by his wife, who had been trained by working with Mary Leakey in east Africa. His first preliminary excavation was at the Ropp rock shelter, where he discovered a late Stone Age occupation containing microliths. 
It was fortunate that Fagg's job kept him closely in touch with tin production, because it was from the diggings for this mineral that a remarkable series of terracotta figurines was being unearthed. As soon as one of these terracotta figurines came to Fagg's notice in 1943, he recognized its importance and uniqueness, and its similarity to one found in 1928 near the village of Nok. Following the archaeological practice of the time, Fagg assigned the name of this first find place to the culture which had produced the figurines. In subsequent years many more figurines in the same style came to light and Fagg was responsible for their preservation. He subsequently wrote more than a dozen articles about them in scientific and art journals, and in 1977 a beautifully illustrated book, 'Nok Terracottas', was published by Ethnographica and the National Museum, Lagos, which enabled the public to appreciate their beauty and significance. Fagg succeeded in dating the Nok figurines to the last centuries BC, which greatly added to their interest. He also discovered and excavated the site of Taruga, where figurine material was associated with iron smelting furnaces. These were dated to the last half of the first millennium BC and were at the time the earliest such known from sub-Saharan Africa. 
Soon after the end of the Second World War, Kenneth Murray had persuaded the Nigerian government of the importance of preserving the country's rich heritage of material culture, and he was appointed to the newly created post of surveyor of antiquities. In 1947 Fagg was appointed his number two as assistant surveyor of antiquities. When Murray retired in 1957 Fagg was appointed director of the new department of antiquities, covering the whole of Nigeria. He appreciated the urgent need to house the growing collections of traditional material culture and prehistoric remains, and to provide facilities for their study, conservation, and display. He himself designed, and built with direct labour, the Jos Museum, opened in 1952, only the second public museum in British West Africa. It was soon to be followed by the establishment of the Ife Museum (1954), the Nigerian Museum in Lagos, the Oron Museum, the Gidan Makama Museum in Kano, and the Museum Gallery in Kaduna in 1959. Fagg realized the need for trained staff for museums throughout tropical Africa, and in collaboration with UNESCO and with the support of the federal government of Nigeria he established at Jos a bilingual (English-French) training centre for museum technicians. In 1961 he was elected president of the Museums Association of Tropical Africa, and in 1962 he was made an MBE. 
In 1963 Fagg was appointed curator of the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford. The university recognized that the museum, although having unique collections, was seriously overcrowded and suffered the constraints of the provisions of its founder. Fagg was chosen to overcome these difficulties and to create a worthy modern museum. He came up with a clever design to reconcile Pitt Rivers's testamentary request for the continuation of his typological principles with the advantages of geographical arrangement. This innovative idea was given effect in Pier Luigi Nervi's design for a new museum to be located on a site on the Banbury Road. Unfortunately the university lacked the necessary money. During this period Fagg spent most of his energies trying to reconcile the dissensions the plan had aroused and to raise the necessary funds, but no wealthy benefactor was found to solve the financial problem within the time limit set by the university. The strain told on Fagg and in May 1968 he suffered a severe stroke which confined him thereafter to a wheelchair. So, sadly, Nervi's plans became a historical relic of a noble plan that failed. Bernard Fagg retired in 1975; he died at his home, 45 Woodstock Road, Oxford, on 14 August 1987 and was cremated at Oxford crematorium. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 67870


Grimes, William Francis (1905-1988), archaeologist, was born on 31 October 1905 at Glyn House, Woodbine Terrace, Pembroke, the eldest son of four children of Thomas George Grimes, a draughtsman who worked for the Pembroke Docks Board, and his wife, Edith May Williams. His parents were both Welsh. Grimes was educated at Pembroke county school -- where apparently his love for archaeology was first kindled by a teacher -- and, after his father moved to Bedford to work on airships, subsequently at Bedford modern school. 
Grimes returned to Wales to read Latin at the University College of Wales, Cardiff, graduating in 1926 with first-class honours. Characteristically he went straight from his graduation ceremony to the National Museum of Wales, where he took up office as assistant keeper of archaeology. He worked under the newly appointed keeper of archaeology, V. E. Nash-Williams, who had himself just replaced Cyril Fox, who had been appointed director to succeed Mortimer Wheeler after his move to the London Museum. At the National Museum Grimes studied the material from the Roman pottery works at Holt, Denbighshire. For this work he was awarded the degree of MA by the University of Wales in 1930; it was published as 'Holt, Denbighshire: the Works Depot of the Twentieth Legion at Castle Lyons' (1930). In spite of this research, stemming in part from his classical training, Grimes's main interest was in the prehistory of Wales and he regularly published on this topic in 'Archaeologia Cambrensis' and the 'Bulletin of the Board of Celtic Studies'; he also provided summaries for the 'Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society'. 
In recognition of this work Grimes was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on St David's day 1934, and was admitted the following week when he travelled to London to hear the Wheelers give a lecture on their excavations at Verulamium. In 1939 the National Museum of Wales published Grimes's 'Guide to the Collection Illustrating the Prehistory of Wales'. In 1949 this was to win him the G. T. Clark prize, awarded for research on the archaeology of Wales and the marches; Professor V. Gordon Childe was the assessor for the prehistory section. This work was republished in 1951, with a second edition in 1959, as 'The Prehistory of Wales'. 
In 1928 Grimes married Barbara Lilian Morgan (1905- 'c'.1961), whom he had known in his boyhood in Pembroke. There were two children, Rosemary and Roger. In 1935, to celebrate the centenary of the Royal Institution of South Wales in Swansea, Grimes helped to mount a special exhibition in the antiquities department. It was during these visits that he met his future wife, Mrs Audrey Williams (1902-1978), who had read English at Somerville College in Oxford, and who was then honorary assistant and later honorary secretary and curator of the Royal Institution. Audrey, who was active in excavating a number of prehistoric sites on the Gower peninsula, was to become a close family friend, and she was to work with Grimes on a number of excavations including those at the Dan-yr-Ogof caves at the head of the Swansea valley. Grimes always acknowledged Audrey as the better excavator. 
It was Grimes's skill as an excavator that led to his appointment as an assistant archaeology officer to the Ordnance Survey in Southampton. He took up the position in October 1938, and was to work alongside O. G. S. Crawford. Grimes edited a collection of essays, 'Aspects of Archaeology in Britain and Beyond', in Crawford's honour (1951). Both Crawford and Grimes responded to the call for help when the Sutton Hoo ship burial was discovered in Suffolk in the early summer of 1939. A contemporary report noted that Grimes's 'work in dissecting and removing the majority of the buried deposits was invaluable' ('Antiquaries Journal', 20, 1940, 192). 
With the outbreak of war, Grimes was seconded to the Ministry of Works to excavate in advance of the construction of defence sites. Audrey Williams was one of his colleagues through the war years. This 'rescue' archaeological fieldwork took Grimes round Britain, and it was noted that he was 'continuously in the field without more than one week free at any time between excavations' (B. H. St J. O'Neil, 'War and archaeology in Britain', 'Antiquaries Journal', 28, 1948, 23). One of these wartime excavations was at Heathrow, where he uncovered an Iron Age religious site. 
Grimes had a strong vision of the role of museums in post-war Britain, presenting his views in 'Antiquity' (1944). In 1945 he was appointed director of the London Museum, succeeding Mortimer Wheeler. The blitz had wrought considerable damage to the heart of the capital, and in 1946 Grimes was appointed honorary director of excavations for the Roman and Medieval London excavation council. As a result of this work, Grimes was granted freedom of the City of London in 1952, and was made a CBE in 1955. The excavation which captured the public's imagination was the discovery of a Roman temple of Mithras at Walbrook in 1954. This work had been conducted with Audrey Williams, who had joined the staff of the Verulamium Museum after the war. Grimes also excavated on the site of a number of City churches including St Bride's, Fleet Street. 
In 1956 Grimes was appointed director of the Institute of Archaeology and professor of archaeology in the University of London as successor to V. Gordon Childe. Childe vacated the chair early to allow his successor to oversee the move of the institute to Gordon Square; he had in fact revealed to Grimes his intention to commit suicide. In 1959 Grimes's marriage was dissolved, and he married Audrey Williams, who had in the mean time remarried and become divorced. 
In spite of his move to London, Grimes retained strong links with Wales, serving as president of the Cambrian Archaeological Association in 1963-4. In 1961 he was awarded an honorary degree of DLitt from the University of Wales, based on a portfolio of published work on the archaeology of Wales with special reference to prehistoric burial monuments. Further recognition was made by his appointment as an honorary professorial fellow of the University College of Swansea (1975), and his election as fellow of the University College of Cardiff (1981). Grimes was a member of the royal commissions on the ancient monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire (1948-78), and on historical monuments (England) (1964-78). He was also actively involved with numerous national archaeological societies and organizations, such as the Society of Antiquaries, the Royal Archaeological Institute, and the Council for British Archaeology. On Grimes's retirement, Lord Fletcher commented, 'it has become almost trite to observe that no committee on an archaeological subject is complete unless graced with the presence of Professor Grimes' (D. E. Strong, ed., 'Archaeological Theory and Practice: Essays Presented to Professor William Francis Grimes', 1973, x). This was especially true of his commitment to amateur local societies; particular mention should be made of his work with the field studies centre at Dale in Pembrokeshire. 
Grimes was a skilled artist and draughtsman. He was an accomplished violinist as a student at Cardiff, although he ceased to play upon graduation in case it distracted him from his archaeology. He was known by his nickname, Peter, which had been applied to him by Audrey. As a young man he had flaming red hair, and in later life he invariably sported a red carnation in the lapel of his jacket. Ralph Merrifield remembered Grimes as 'single-minded and conscientious in his pursuit of truth, with a preference for solving problems by orderly, logical steps, and a distrust of hypotheses that had not been thoroughly tested' (Merrifield, 278). 
Grimes retired in 1973 to Swansea, living in Audrey's house in Brynmill. Audrey died in Aberystwyth in 1978, immediately prior to the presentation to Grimes on his retirement from the royal commission. In 1980 Grimes married his third wife, Mrs Molly Waverley Sholto Douglas ('b'. 1926), a friend since his retirement to Swansea. In the final two years of his life he became increasingly disabled by Parkinson's disease, dying at his home, 29 Bryn Road, Brynmill, Swansea, on Christmas day 1988. He was cremated and his ashes were scattered, like those of his beloved Audrey's, at Pwlldu Bay at the foot of the Bishopston valley on the Gower peninsula. 


@@@@@


doc= 67871


Higgs, Eric Sidney (1908-1976), sheep farmer and archaeologist, was born on 26 November 1908 in Oldbury Wells, near Bridgnorth in Shropshire, the elder son of Sidney Higgs, carpet designer, and his wife, Florence Annie Price, whose family ran a building and haulage firm. He was educated at Bridgnorth grammar school, and took a BComm at the London School of Economics. After periods of unemployment and a spell as a professional card player, he worked in London as a specialist in the waterproofing of buildings and railway tunnels. During this period he lived in Kent and kept horses. After his first marriage, on 29 May 1936 to Marion Bett ('b'. 1900/01), daughter of William Edward Bett, a Russian jute merchant, and the birth of their only daughter, he returned to Shropshire at the outbreak of the Second World War to take up sheep farming at Clee St Margaret. His farming was largely self-taught and during the war years the government compelled him to grow food crops. He founded the Brown Clee Club, a local discussion group for politics, drama, and poetry reading, travelled with the French agronomist Rene Dumont throughout France and Spain, and later with his farmer friend and neighbour Michael Osler visited Yugoslavia and Greece, where he first encountered the transhumant Vlachs of the Pindus Mountains. 
In 1954 Higgs moved to Cambridge to read the two-year postgraduate diploma in prehistoric archaeology under Charles McBurney and Grahame Clark. In 1956 he was appointed assistant in research in the department of archaeology and anthropology, and his new home at 35 Panton Street became the focus of undergraduate supervisions and the plotting of summer fieldwork campaigns. Shortly afterwards, in 1958, he suffered the first of a series of heart attacks. So began the longest period of his adult career at an age and in conditions of health when others would have put their feet up in early retirement. In 1963 he became senior assistant in research, and assistant director of research in 1968. 
As a late entrant to the academic profession Higgs brought fresh thinking to a discipline that he felt had become over-obsessed with studying the minutiae of artefact form, and which relied on other scientific disciplines with little interest in the human factor to supply information on the environmental background. He was convinced that the archaeological record could not be properly understood without a better understanding of the basic economy. He also believed that archaeology should address a wider public and the more general threats to human survival in the modern world. He lectured to the Workers' Educational Association, gave radio and television broadcasts, and advocated the importance of an archaeological perspective in distinguishing factors of long-term importance from the short-term noise of cultural choice. 
Higgs became an expert on the study of animal bones from archaeological sites and pioneered an approach that is now a cornerstone of professional practice. Animal bones should not be thrown away or handed over to some scientific specialist but studied by archaeologists as primary data capable of yielding as much information about human activities as conventional artefacts. He founded the Cambridge 'Bone Room', and with his assistant, Don Allen, taught generations of students the rudiments of animal-bone identification. 
In 1962 Higgs launched a field project in northern Greece to search for palaeolithic sites in a country where almost none were then known. Discovery of the enigmatic 'red beds' of Kokkinopilos in Epirus and subsequent excavations at the rock shelters of Asprochaliko and Kastritsa opened up a rich prehistoric record. This work stimulated new ideas about prehistoric economy, the study of site locations in relation to local landscape settings, and the importance of mobility as a primary human adaptation to regional and seasonal variations in food supply. In 1968 he was awarded the Rivers medal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, and in 1994 a square in the old part of the city of Ioannina was named after him. 
From 1967 to 1976 Higgs directed the British Academy major research project on the early history of agriculture. Teams of research assistants and students were dispatched to collect animal bones and plant remains from ongoing excavations throughout Europe and the Near East and to conduct site catchment walks in the surrounding landscape. The results, published in a series of edited volumes -- 'Papers in Economic Prehistory' (1972), 'Palaeoeconomy' (1975), and 'Early European Agriculture' (1982) -- documented the novel view that plant and animal domestication were not discoveries of recent millennia diffusing out from a revolutionary centre of origin in the Near East. Rather they were part of a continuing process of worldwide economic adaptation, which extended from earliest prehistory up to the modern period under the impetus of inexorable population growth and technological change. 
In Higgs's archaeological years, his hunched back and balding, domed head belied a youthful approach to life allied with an impish sense of humour. He encouraged his students to challenge established orthodoxy and inspired them with confidence to venture into new territory. Fieldwork was carried out every summer in nomadic style from an operational base in the family Land Rover with his second wife, Helen Pauline Tippett ('b'. 1936), whom he married in 1964, a chemist by training who had first analysed the red sediments of Kokkinopilos, and their children, all three of whom were brought up on the experience of fieldwork. Spartan living conditions and long hours in the field taxed those much younger and fitter than him. Students and younger colleagues alike were charmed and challenged into feats of unaccustomed accomplishment or endurance, lightened by his tales of a wider world beyond academe and by a farmer's insights into past and present land use. By 1975 his chronic heart condition worsened and after a slow decline he died at his home, 35 Panton Street, on 23 September 1976, his wife surviving him. He was buried at Clee St Margaret. 


@@@@@


doc= 67872


Lamb, Winifred (1894-1963), archaeologist and museum curator, was born on 3 November 1894 at Holly Lodge, Campden Hill, London, the only child of Edmund George Lamb (1863-1925), landowner, colliery proprietor, and former Liberal MP for North Herefordshire (1906-10), and his wife, Mabel (1862-1941), daughter of Stephen Winkworth, a Manchester cotton mill owner, and his wife, Emma. Her father educated her at home, at Borden Wood in Sussex (near Liphook), and at Holly Lodge, the home of her maternal grandparents and previously that also of Lord Macaulay, who had purchased it in 1856. In 1913 she was admitted to Newnham College, Cambridge, which her mother had also attended, to read classics; Winifred's maternal grandparents had been early benefactors of the college. Winifred became interested in classical archaeology, partly through the endeavours of Jane E. Harrison. 
Lamb completed the classical tripos with a double first in 1917, and joined the naval intelligence department (Room 40) at the Admiralty, where the classical archaeologist John D. Beazley worked. Beazley's help is detected in Lamb's first published article in the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' (1918) which discussed seven Greek pots that she had acquired at the sale of the Hope antiquities at Christies in July 1917. Lamb was clearly influenced by the new 'science of vases', the attribution of works to largely anonymous Athenian pot-painters; Beazley was later to name one of these painters, 'the Lamb painter' ('der Lamb Maler'), in her honour. 
After the war, Lamb decided to pursue her interests in classical archaeology. In 1919 Sydney Cockerell invited her to become honorary keeper of Greek and Roman antiquities at the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge in succession to F. H. Marshall of Emmanuel College; she accepted, and held the position until 1958. Lamb was able to bring order to this significant collection, which contained antiquities presented to Cambridge University by Professor E. D. Clarke and Dr John Disney. One of the significant developments was the creation of a prehistoric gallery, which was to display material obtained through the fieldwork of members of the British School at Athens. Sadly, one of Lamb's key acquisitions of a marble figure of a Cretan goddess, made with the support of Sir Arthur Evans, turned out to be a forgery. 
In October 1920 Lamb was admitted as a student of the British School at Athens; one of her fellow students was Bernard Ashmole. In May 1921 Lamb joined the British excavations at Mycenae, and in the 1922 season acted as second in command to the director, A. J. B. Wace; her parents were financial supporters of the excavation. She was to publish a series of studies on the palace at Mycenae in the 'Annual of the British School at Athens' (1921-3). 
Lamb's interests lay in the field of prehistoric Greece, and by early 1924 she was excavating with W. A. Heurtley, the assistant director of the British School, at Vardaroftsa in Macedonia. However, in March 1924 she joined the British School's major excavations at the classical site of Sparta under A. M. Woodward. Lamb was responsible for the publication of the bronze finds, in the 'Annual of the British School at Athens' (1926-7). Despite the frustrations of the excavation, Lamb wrote home to her mother, 'Archaeology is a wonderful life', and expressed the view that she was now ready to start excavating on her own. 
Lamb's father died in January 1925, and it was not until the autumn of 1928 that she opened a trial excavation at Methymna on the island of Lesbos, although the lack of stratigraphy meant that she abandoned future plans to work there. Frustrated, she resumed field walking the island with R. W. Hutchinson on the look-out for a suitable place to excavate. At Thermi they recognized a prehistoric site which had been partly eroded by the sea, and in April of the following year a series of excavations was started, largely at Lamb's own expense; they continued until 1933. The site was to be published in the monograph 'Excavations at Thermi in Lesbos' (1936). In 1940 Lamb was awarded a ScD by the University of Cambridge on the basis of the volume; it was examined by Professor Gordon Childe of Edinburgh and Carl Blegen of the American School at Athens, who had respectively reviewed the book for the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' (1937) and the 'American Journal of Archaeology' (1938). 
During the excavations of Thermi, Lamb conducted minor excavations at Antissa on Lesbos, in part to look for evidence of the Late Bronze Age and archaic period. With the Thermi excavations complete, she initiated the excavation of the archaic temple of Apollo at Kato Phana on the island of Chios. Lamb had visited Troy in 1929, and her excavations at Thermi had raised certain key questions about the contact between the Aegean and mainland Anatolia. In the spring of 1935 she selected the site of Kusura near Afyon as a possible site for excavation. Three seasons of work were carried out and published in 'Archaeologia' (1936, 1937). 
In spite of this busy excavating programme, Lamb continued to develop the Greek collections of the Fitzwilliam, in part through the donation of objects that she had obtained on her travels. She was later to be recognized as one of the most significant benefactors to the classical collections. This museum work allowed Lamb to concentrate on ancient bronzes, and which was to culminate in 'Greek and Roman Bronzes' (1929). Her earlier interest in Greek pottery also led her to prepare the two Cambridge fascicles of the 'Corpus vasorum antiquorum' (1930, 1936), which replaced Ernest Gardner's 'Catalogue of Vases' (1897). 
With the outbreak of the Second World War, Lamb settled at the family home of Borden Wood to look after her now frail mother, who died in August 1941. This freed her to accept the post of Greek language supervisor at the BBC, and in 1942 she transferred to the Turkish section of the Near Eastern department of the BBC, where she worked until 1946. During the final stages of the war, Lamb was badly injured when a German V2 rocket hit her lodgings in north London; her housemates were killed. 
Lamb's pre-war fieldwork in Turkey led her to join in the creation of the British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara under the initiative of John Garstang. Lamb was to serve as the institute's honorary secretary from 1948 to 1957, and subsequently as a vice-president. Although her excavating days were over, she made a number of trips to eastern Anatolia which resulted in papers for 'Anatolian Studies' (1954, 1956). 
Lamb became an associate of Newnham College in 1926, was awarded a life studentship of the British School at Athens in 1931, and was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1932. In 1958 Lamb's health started to fail her. She resigned from her honorary keepership at the Fitzwilliam Museum and retired to Borden Wood; she never married and died at the Cottage Hospital, Easebourne, Sussex, of a stroke on 16 September 1963. Her funeral took place in the Roman Catholic church at Midhurst in Sussex, and she was buried in the Midhurst cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 67873


McBurney, Charles Brian Montagu (1914-1979), prehistoric archaeologist, was born on 18 June 1914 at Stockbridge, Massachusetts, USA, the only son of Henry McBurney (1875-1956), engineer and farmer, and his wife Dorothy Lilian Rundall (died 1958), daughter of Colonel Montagu Rundall and his wife, Margaret Willoughby Weston. His father was American and his mother English. Charles was the younger of two children, having an elder sister. His early life was divided between the family farm in Massachusetts and western Europe, where his parents, nervous of the fact that he suffered from colitis, arranged private education by a succession of tutors, mainly in Switzerland. He settled permanently in England in 1930, not however becoming a British citizen until 1950. 
In 1933 McBurney entered King's College, Cambridge, as an undergraduate, recommended by one of his former tutors: he initially read modern languages, but transferred in his third year to archaeology and anthropology. This proved a defining moment, for he encountered Miles Burkitt and subsequently Dorothy Garrod as teachers of palaeolithic archaeology at a time of many exciting discoveries in that discipline: he never relinquished his sense of debt to these two scholars for his own subsequent achievements. After his finals, King's awarded him a graduate studentship in 1937, and a research fellowship in 1940, which he held until 1953. The Second World War profoundly affected McBurney's graduate career, though not entirely adversely, as it turned out. He joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve (USA), training first in air photographic interpretation, on which several distinguished Cambridge archaeologists worked in the 1940s, before a Royal Air Force posting to north Africa. Here he evidently kept his eyes on the ground as well as the skies, discovering several important palaeolithic sites, and planning to return in more peaceful times. 
In 1948 McBurney completed his doctoral thesis, entitled 'The prelude to the upper palaeolithic in western Europe: a comparative study of the earlier industries from cave deposits' -- a first embodiment of the major interests that would dominate his subsequent research and writing, including stone artefacts, the peculiar art and special rewards of excavating caves, and the relationship between Neanderthals and modern humans. By then, he was energetically following up his north African wartime reconnaissance, initially with the geologist Richard Hey: their joint book 'Prehistory and Pleistocene Geology in Cyrenaican Libya' was published in 1955, and McBurney's admirable Pelican book 'The Stone Age of Northern Africa' followed in 1960. His greatest Libyan site was the vast Haua Fteah Cave, where excavations in 1951, 1952, and 1955 yielded a deep stratified sequence from the end of the local lower palaeolithic through middle palaeolithic, early and late upper palaeolithic to the neolithic. Painstaking study of the extremely prolific finds by McBurney and many generations of Cambridge students culminated in his important monograph 'The Haua Fteah (Cyrenaica) and the Stone Age of the South-East Mediterranean' (1967). 
From the outset, McBurney recognized the close link at various stages of the palaeolithic between north Africa and the Near East: he was particularly interested, like his mentor Dorothy Garrod, in the origins and spread of the first blade-using industries of the upper palaeolithic. In the 1960s and early 1970s he led several expeditions to find new cave sites and conduct trial excavations in what seemed a key area, Iran and Afghanistan. Surprisingly, no early upper palaeolithic material was found, though some important middle palaeolithic and epi-palaeolithic sites were examined, the latter including the cave of Ali Tappeh I at the south end of the Caspian Sea. 
Concurrently, McBurney actively pursued his interests in the European middle and upper palaeolithic, following up new ideas and rapidly assimilating new discoveries or methodological advances. A visiting fellowship at the Soviet Academy of Sciences in 1975 greatly enhanced his overview of the west European sites, as expounded in his Albert Reckitt lecture that year to the British Academy -- he had been elected FBA in 1966. In Britain he excavated at upper palaeolithic cave sites in Somerset, south Wales, and Derbyshire (1958-60), and at the important middle palaeolithic site of La Cotte de St Brelade, Jersey, from 1961 to 1978, the results from the latter site being published in 1986 in a volume edited by his colleagues Paul Callow and Jean Cornford. 
McBurney's excavations enabled generations of Cambridge students to participate in important current research: since he taught worldwide palaeolithic archaeology, he viewed each site in the broadest context. The inspiration and stimulation he transmitted to his brightest students, in the field, lecture room, and laboratory, were extraordinary and many subsequently had distinguished careers in archaeology. The abundant time and trouble he devoted to them was often reflected in their own care of undergraduate and research students. Most could also imitate affectionately his distinctive high-pitched voice and mannerisms, but none ever attained his sublime level of absent-mindedness, simultaneously lovable and lethal. 
In 1962 McBurney became a fellow of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, to which he gave devoted service. He received his Cambridge ScD in 1968, and a personal chair in Quaternary prehistory in 1977. His many other achievements and honours are recorded by Desmond Clark and Patrick Wilkinson in their sensitive appreciation written for the memorial volume 'Stone Age Prehistory' (1986), edited by G. N. Bailey and P. Callow. He married his second cousin, Anne Frances Edmonstone Charles (died 2002), on 21 March 1953; they had three children. The marriage was idyllically happy, with the family home a welcoming place, where domestic and academic endeavours seemed to merge inextricably. McBurney was only sixty-five, and had suffered from diabetes for some years, when cancer was diagnosed in 1979. He died on 14 December 1979 at his home, 5 Grange Road, Cambridge: his ashes were interred five days later in the garden of remembrance next to Corpus Christi College. 


@@@@@


doc= 67874


Taylour, Lord William Desmond (1904-1989), archaeologist, was born at Pennington House, Milford Road, Lymington, Hampshire, on 3 January 1904, the younger son of Geoffrey Thomas Taylour, fourth marquess of Headfort (1878-1943), a landowner, later senator of the Irish Free State, and fellow of the Linnean Society, and his wife, Rose 
(Rosie; died 1958)
, an actress ('a teacher of music') at the Gaiety Theatre, London, daughter of Charles Chamberlain Boote, a comedian, of Luton, Bedfordshire, and his wife, Marie. Taylour was brought up at Headfort, co. Meath, and then followed his elder brother, Terence Geoffrey Thomas, who later succeeded as fifth marquess, to Harrow School (1917-21). However, while his brother went up to Oxford, Lord William Taylour, as he was styled, though passionate about archaeology, was encouraged to pursue a career, first in the diplomatic service (1921-2), and then in banking on Wall Street, New York. He returned to London where he was the business manager of the interior design company belonging to Maria Louisa Arnold. 
During the Second World War Taylour served in the North African campaign, reaching the rank of captain in the 2nd Derbyshire yeomanry (TA). At the end of hostilities he was a member of the Allied Control Commission for Germany until 1947. Taylour then turned to archaeology; he described himself as 'a latecomer in the field' (W. D. Taylour, 'The Mycenaeans', rev. edn, 1983, 6). He was admitted to read archaeology and anthropology at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1947; he achieved a first class in part one (1949), and an upper second in part two (1950). Among the archaeological influences on him were Grahame Clark, the then Disney professor, and Glyn Daniel, then lecturer in archaeology. 
Taylour had been brought up as a Roman Catholic, like his mother. While he was at Cambridge, his sister, Lady Millicent, introduced him to Father Gilbey, the Roman Catholic chaplain in the University of Cambridge. Gilbey's talks at Fisher House were to influence Taylour's thinking. A contemporary at St Edmund House, a Roman Catholic residence, recalled Taylour as 'A very good Catholic in a balanced kind of way... he would attend Mass in the Chapel not every day, but every other day' (Stewart). Taylour served as treasurer to the Cambridge University Catholic Association, and was later made a knight commander of the order of St Gregory the Great. 
Taylour's earliest archaeological work in the Mediterranean was in 1948 at Sabrathah in Tripolitania working under Kathleen Kenyon and J. B. Ward-Perkins, the director of the British School at Rome. After graduating Taylour wrote a doctoral dissertation on Mycenaean pottery in Italy (doctorate awarded 1955). He took part in the joint Ashmolean Museum and Sydney University excavation of Myrtou-Pighades on Cyprus under the direction of Joan Du Plat Taylor (1950-51); he was responsible for the publication of the Iron Age pottery. 
Taylour visited Greece in 1949. After the completion of the work on Cyprus, Taylour worked on the renewed British excavations at Mycenae in 1952 and 1953 under the direction of Alan John Bayard Wace, publishing the work in the area round the Perseia spring in the 'Annual of the British School at Athens' (1955). Taylour's interest in the links between Greece and Italy during the Late Bronze Age brought an opportunity to work with Carl William Blegen (1887-1971) of the University of Cincinnati on the Bronze Age site at the 'palace of Nestor' (Ano Englianos) in western Messenia. Taylour joined the excavations for six seasons (1953-5, 1957-9), and was responsible for the excavation of some of the more significant tombs; his findings were published in 'The Palace of Nestor at Pylos in Western Messenia', volume 3 (1973). 
Recognition of Taylour's contribution to Late Bronze Age Greece was confirmed by his election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London (1958). His doctoral dissertation was published as 'Mycenean Pottery in Italy, and Adjacent Areas' (1958). Taylour's archaeological career then took a dramatic turn. British involvement with the excavation of Mycenae had drawn to a close with Wace's death in 1957 as well as the uneasy political situation over Cyprus. A committee (consisting of C. Martin Robertson, the chairman of the British School at Athens, Elisabeth B. Wace, and Taylour) was established to supervise the work at Mycenae, and in 1959 Taylour resumed the excavations in conjunction with the Greek Archaeological Society, working first with John Papademetriou, and then, after his death in 1963, with George E. Mylonas (1964, 1966, 1968, 1969). 
The discovery of further Linear B tablets was announced promptly in 'Antiquity' (1961), and Taylour contributed to J. Chadwick, ed., 'The Mycenae Tablets, III' (1963). Among the other finds was what was later recognized as a cult site within the walls of the acropolis, promptly announced in the 'Illustrated London News' (1969-70) and 'Antiquity' (1969-70). The clay figures from this complex were described by him as 'perfectly hideous' ('Daily Telegraph'). The complexity of the site at Mycenae, and the protracted excavations, called for a new approach to the publication of the finds, announced in the 'Annual of the British School at Athens' (1969). In fact the first volume, prepared by Taylour, in the monograph series 'Well built Mycenae: Helleno-British Excavations within the Citadel at Mycenae, 1959-1969', did not appear until 1981. Further volumes in the series, with Taylour acknowledged as co-author, include 'The South House and Annexe' (vol. 9), 'The Temple' (vol. 10; 1999), and 'The Room with the Fresco' (vol. 11). The research for this ongoing work is supported by the Mediterranean Archaeological Trust, established by Taylour. Taylour's research trips included driving groups of students to Greece and showing them various sites along the way. 
Taylour also directed the excavation, over six seasons, of the Bronze Age site of Hagios Stephanos in southern Laconia (1959 to 1977). The preliminary results were published in the 'Annual of the British School at Athens' (1972). The finds from the site demonstrated the link between Crete and the Greek mainland. Taylour's love of Late Bronze Age Greece is revealed in 'The Mycenaeans' (1964), a book Glyn Daniel had to persuade him to write. A revised second edition appeared in 1983 which took account of the cult site at Mycenae. The volume was translated into Italian (1966). 
In his later years Taylour continued to work on the publication of the Mycenae excavations, and his last research trip to Greece was made in 1988. The development of lung cancer took its toll, and Taylour died at his home, St Aubyns, Woodlands Road, Great Shelford, Cambridgeshire, on 2 December 1989. He never married. Ironically, Taylour's death coincided with a conference in Athens on the archaeological work of Wace and Blegen; the subsequent volume, Carol Zerner, ed., 'Wace and Blegen: Pottery as Evidence for Trade in the Aegean Bronze Age, 1939-1989' (1993), was dedicated to Taylour, acknowledging his work establishing links between mainland Greece and Italy. 
As a field archaeologist Taylour was 'a striking figure with his distinctive Egyptianizing headdress (to protect his bald head), shorts, and bush shirt (with the contents of the pockets carefully organized)' ('Annual Report of the British School at Athens', 1988-9, 41). He has been described as 'an aristocratic scholar of the old school... something of Lord Peter Wimsey in Lord William Taylour' ('Daily Telegraph'). 


@@@@@


doc= 67875


Bonde, William (d. 1530), Bridgettine monk and author, came from Northumberland and was educated at Cambridge University, where he taught before entering the Bridgettine monastery of Syon Abbey, Middlesex. At Cambridge he obtained his BA in 1500-01 and MA in 1503-4. In that year he became a fellow of Queens' College, and also 'lector philosophiae'. In 1506-7 he transferred to Pembroke College, where he was junior treasurer in 1507-9. A contemporary fellow was John Fewterer, who later became confessor-general at Syon. In 1509-10 Bonde was appointed university preacher while studying for a higher degree, which was unfinished when he entered religion. 
Syon Abbey, the only English house of the order founded by St Bridget of Sweden in 1370, was a centre of religious reform from its foundation in 1415, and later of orthodox opposition to the Reformation. Bonde joined a dynamic group of highly educated priest brethren dedicated to serving the sacramental needs of a larger body of sisters, and to evangelizing through preaching and spiritual direction. Their aims were furthered by the use of the new medium of printing to disseminate a range of devotional books and pamphlets. Written in English, not Latin, these were aimed at an audience of educated lay people, and the religious, especially women. Bonde's two books contributed to the collective reputation of the house. The first, 'The Directory of Conscience' (1527; 'A Devote Treatyse', 1534), was aimed at those in the early stages of religious life, and was also suitable for devout lay people. It addressed the problem of scrupulosity, over-anxious adherence to regulations through fear of God, common among the religious, and also melancholy, or depression. It offered clear guidance and practical remedies. The use of the holy name of Jesus, simple prayers, and meditations on his passion, were characteristic of the 'devotio moderna'. The skill with which information was structured, the use of standard frames of reference, such as the seven deadly sins and examples from scripture and saints' lives, made it suitable for oral transmission, as well as private reading. The text itself contained numerous references to the 'Bible' and writings of the doctors of the church, including more recent authorities Gerson and Nidar. 
Bonde's 'The Pylgrimage of Perfection' (1526; 2nd edn, 1531) was likewise heavily referenced and illustrated with devotional woodcuts. A far more complex work, it was written primarily for those with pastoral responsibility for others. It covered the same topics as elementary catechisms, but in great detail, including expositions of basic prayers, the mass, and the passion of Christ. In anticipation of St Ignatius, the Christian journey was divided into seven days, symbolic of spiritual progression. Bonde was concerned to describe methodically the path from the active religious life to the contemplative, which was reached on the sixth day. On the seventh day extracts from St Bernard and Herphius conveyed something of the joy of contemplation. In its orthodoxy and lack of innovation it refuted Lutheran heresies, and has been described as a ''summa' of late medieval teachings on the religious life' (Rhodes, 22). 
Bonde's written works contain all that is known of him as a personality. They reveal a man of great intellectual ability and deep knowledge of the 'Bible' and church doctors, an advanced spiritual practitioner, compassionate, and with an astute understanding of human psychology. The clarity with which he conveyed information attests to his vocation as preacher and teacher. Most of the twenty-nine works he bequeathed to the Syon brothers' library were by Thomas Aquinas, or were bibles and 'Bible' commentaries. They show a somewhat old-fashioned orthodoxy, although the emphasis on biblical scholarship, advocated by St Bridget, was also fundamental to protestant Christianity. Bonde died at Syon Abbey on 18 July 1530 (and was buried there), before the abbey's stand against the English Reformation. 


@@@@@


doc= 67876


Fewterer, John (d. 1536), Bridgettine monk and author, was the son of Thomas Fewterer and his wife, Margaret; nothing else is known of his origins or early life. In 1501-2 he supplicated for a grace at Cambridge, graduating BA in 1502-3 and MA on 9 May 1506; he supplicated for graces in 1514-15 but never took the degree of BTh. Elected to a fellowship at Pembroke College in 1505 he held various university and college offices over the next ten years: keeper of the Neel and Wythorn chest in 1507-8, junior college treasurer in 1509, senior college treasurer in 1513 and 1515, and university preacher in 1510-11. He was ordained deacon in February 1507 and priested on 3 April that year. 
About 1517 Fewterer became a Bridgettine monk of Syon Abbey, Middlesex, where his administrative experience, preaching ability, and scholarship would have been appreciated. His was the second largest donation to the brethren's library and the seventy-seven volumes included recent patristic editions, humanist authors, and spiritual writers such as Bonaventure, Gerson, the Victorines, and Ludolphus. He began an English translation (from Latin) of John Climacus's 'De triginta gradibus' which was completed by Richard Whitford (not apparently extant), but his most substantial and significant work was 'The Myrrour or Glasse of Christes Passion' (1534). This made considerable use of Bonaventure, Ludolphus, and Jordanus and gave English readers the kind of doctrinal teaching and structured devotional application previously restricted to Latin readers. The prayers which ended each of the sixty-five sections were reprinted anonymously as 'Devoute Prayers in Englysshe of Thactes of our Redemption' ('c'.1535), and an abbreviated version was written out mid-century (London, St Paul's Cathedral, MS 52.B.22). 
In 1523 Fewterer was elected seventh confessor-general of Syon, making him responsible for the spiritual guidance and priestly duties of the whole community. Together with the lady abbess he was executor of the will of Sir Richard Sutton (died 1524), steward of Syon and co-founder of Brasenose College; together they also saw into print 'The Myrrour of Oure Lady' (1530), a translation and rationale of Syon's masses and offices. In 1526 and again in 1532 he gave vestments and chapel furnishings to his old college, Pembroke. 
Fewterer apparently accepted the 'Acts of Succession and Supremacy' of 1534, preaching twice in support of the king's title; Fisher, More, and the London Carthusians refused with fatal consequences. In July 1534 he was examined by Thomas Bedyll, Cromwell's agent, and admitted that he had seen Fisher's correspondence and possessed a book by him which he surrendered to the commissioner; he also put his name to a letter urging the London Carthusians to conform. In August Bedyll described him as 'a sad man, bothe tractable and comformable to do everything according to his dutie'. Was he trying to buy time, or did he, like many other devout souls, persuade himself that obedience to his monarch really was his religious duty? He died on 26 September 1536 at Syon, where he was also buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 67877


Baxter, Richard (1615-1691), ejected minister and religious writer, was born in the village of Rowton, Shropshire, on 12 November 1615, the son of Richard Baxter (died 1663) of Eaton Constantine, Shropshire, and his wife, Beatrice Adeney (died 1635). He was baptized in the parish church at High Ercall the following Sunday, 19 November. 
Baxter described his father as 'a mean Freeholder (called a Gentleman for his Ancestors sake, but of small Estate)' and 'entangled by Debts' as a result, at least in part, of his 'having been addicted to Gaming in his Youth, and his Father [also Richard] before him' (Baxter, 'Breviate', 1; 'Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.1). These impoverished circumstances may help to explain why Baxter was brought up until the age of ten or eleven not at Eaton Constantine but by his maternal grandparents in their home at Rowton. 'The bare reading of the Scriptures in private', however, led his father to reform his manner of life so thoroughly that he came to be 'reviled commonly by the Name of 'Puritan', 'Precisian' and 'Hypocrite''. Even before he moved to his parents' home, Baxter was deeply affected by his father's 'serious speeches of God and the Life to come'. He afterwards acknowledged his father as 'the Instrument of my first Convictions, and Approbation of a Holy Life'. That his father, who 'never scrupled Common-Prayer or Ceremonies, nor spake against Bishops', was reviled merely 'for reading Scripture... and for praying... in his House, and for reproving Drunkards and Swearers, and for talking sometimes a few words of Scripture and the Life to come', persuaded the young Baxter that hostility to puritanism was bred of 'mere Malice' and that 'Godly People were the best' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.2-3). 
Baxter gives a dismal account of his education. At Rowton, each of a succession of four 'readers' at the chapel was ignorant, and two led immoral lives. At Eaton Constantine the school was taught by ill-educated, dissolute, and uninterested curates, one of them holding forged orders. However, when Baxter transferred to Wroxeter (afterwards Donnington) grammar school, then only recently founded in 1627, he at last received some regular tuition from the schoolmaster John Owen. His fellow pupils included Richard Allestree, afterwards regius professor of divinity at Oxford and provost of Eton College, and Francis and Andrew Newport, sons of the school's patron Sir Richard Newport, afterwards first Baron Newport of Eyton-on-Severn, Shropshire. At the age of sixteen Baxter was persuaded by Owen not to pursue his studies at university but instead to put himself under the instruction of Owen's friend Richard Wickstead at Ludlow, where Wickstead was chaplain to the council in the marches of Wales. The arrangement was not a success. Baxter found Wickstead negligent and ill-equipped for advanced tuition, and he did not care for the town, 'full of Temptations, through the multitude of Persons, (Counsellors, Attorneys, Officers, and Clerks), and much given to tipling and excess' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.4). When after eighteen months Baxter returned home, he for three months supplied as schoolmaster the place of Wickstead, sick with what proved to be a fatal consumption, and then, perhaps at Sir Richard Newport's suggestion, he journeyed to London and was introduced to society and to court life by Sir Henry Herbert, the 'de facto' master of the revels, a first cousin of Newport. Baxter found London no more congenial than Ludlow and returned to the midlands after only a month to attend his mother during the winter of 1634-5 in what proved to be her final illness. She died on 10 May 1635. 
After the death of Baxter's mother his father married in 1636 Mary Huncks, daughter of Sir Thomas Huncks and sister of Sir Fulke and Sir Henry Huncks, respectively royalist governors of Shrewsbury and of Banbury during the civil war, and a first cousin of Edward, second Viscount Conway (died 1655), and his sister, Brilliana Harley. Baxter regarded his stepmother with great affection and admiration, speaking of her as 'a Special Blessing to our Family' and a woman of 'extraordinary holiness' who lived 'in the greatest Mortification, Austerity to her Body, and constancy of Prayer and all Devotion, of any one that ever I knew' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.12, 3.189). In the later 1650s she and his father lived with Baxter for a time at Kidderminster when the house at Eaton Constantine was let to a tenant. As a widow she lived in the house at Eaton Constantine, and then, in the 1670s, with Baxter in Totteridge and in London; she died of cancer in August 1680 at the age of ninety-six. 
Baxter's own 'vehement desires' had been to proceed from school to university to achieve 'Academick Glory', and throughout his life he regretted his lack of a university education and pointed to his 'wanting Academical Honours' as a mark of his insufficiency as a minister (Baxter, 'Poetical Fragments', 42; 'Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.85). In 1681 he wrote in reply to an enquiry from Anthony Wood that his 'faults are no disgrace to any University; for I was of none, & have little but what I had out of books, & inconsiderable helpes of Country tutors' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.225). Nevertheless, though lacking in formal qualifications and without the benefit of educational supervision, through omnivorous reading Baxter became one of the most learned of seventeenth-century divines. As a youth it was through books that he realized his vocation. Baxter underwent no single life-transforming moment of spiritual regeneration. In such later writings as 'The Right Method for a Settled Peace of Conscience' (1653) he was to caution against depending for evidence of election upon a profound conversion experience, such as many contemporary guides to godliness held to be an essential mark of grace. As a young man he was himself troubled that he could not 'distinctly trace the Workings of the Spirit upon my heart in that method which Mr. [Robert] 'Bolton', Mr. [Thomas] 'Hooker', Mr. [John] 'Rogers', and other Divines describe nor knew the Time of my Conversion, being wrought on by... Degrees'. This experience convinced him that ''Education' is God's ordinary way for the Conveyance of his Grace' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.6-7). For Baxter, reading was the means of conveyance. His father encouraged him as a child to read the historical books of the 'Bible', and, when at school, it was through 'an old torn' copy of Edmund Bunny's protestant revision of the Jesuit Robert Parsons's 'A Booke of Christian Exercise Appertayning to Resolution' (1584), which was lent to his father by 'a poor Day-Labourer', through 'The Bruised Reede and Smoaking Flax' (1630) by Richard Sibbes, which his father purchased from 'a poor Pedlar', and through a servant's copy of 'a little Piece of Mr. [William] 'Perkins's' Works' that 'without any means but Books' God was 'pleased to resolve me for himself' (ibid., 1.3-4). Subsequently Ezekiel Culverwell's 'Treatise of Faith' (1623): 'did me much good, and many other excellent Books, were made my Teachers and Comforters: And the use that God made of Books, above Ministers, to the benefit of my Soul, made me somewhat excessively in love with good Books. (ibid., 1.5)' The excitement of reading and of intellectual discovery led Baxter to engross himself in the medieval schoolmen and in contemporary doctrinal debate: 'I was quickly past my Fundamentals, and was running up into a multitude of Controversies, and greatly delighted with metaphysical and scholastick Writings' because 'I thought they narrowly searched after Truth, and brought Things out of the darkness of Confusion'. Subsequently, however, he came to lay 'smaller stress... upon these Controversies and Curiosities' and to value most highly 'the fundamental Doctrines of the Catechism' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.126). He always afterwards maintained that a person of true devotion and practical faith who 'yet never heard of most of the Questions in 'Scotus', or 'Ockham' or 'Aquinas''s sums, is far richer in knowledg, and a much wiser man, than he that hath those Controversies at his fingers ends' (Baxter, 'Directions', 1.106-7). And yet, though he felt himself 'much better in [George] 'Herberts' Temple: Or in a heavenly Treatise of 'faith' and 'Love'' than engaged in controversial divinity, he was repeatedly drawn into disputation and he retained all his life a good deal of the schoolman's fondness for nice distinctions and multiplying subdivisions: 'I could never from my first Studies endure Confusion!', he wrote (Baxter, 'Knowledge and Love Compared', 9). One side of him remained inveterately bookish. His recommendations of particular titles often developed into extended reading lists. In 'A Christian Directory' (1673) he lists somewhere in the region of 1000 authors and works to make up 'The 'Poor mans Library', which... cometh short of a Rich and Sumptuous Library' (Baxter, 'Christian Directory', bk 3, question 174, pp. 921-8). As might be expected, he himself assembled an extensive and dearly prized collection which, even after losses due to removals and distraints, still numbered more than 1400 volumes at his death. 
Though books played such a large part in his early life, Baxter does acknowledge also the influence upon him in these formative years of four local Shropshire ministers: Humphrey Barnet, curate of Uppington; George Baxter (no relation), rector of Little Wenlock; Francis Garbett, vicar of Wroxeter; and 'especially old Mr. 'Samuel Smith'', curate of Cressage ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.9). The churchmanship of these men was subsequently of a presbyterian temper, but, with the exception of Barnet, they conformed in the 1630s to the ceremonies of the established episcopal church. At Shrewsbury, however, Baxter, now in his early twenties, encountered men far less willing to tolerate the 'Book of Common Prayer': they included Walter Cradock; George Fawler, in 1643 appointed chaplain of Bridewell Hospital, London; Michael Old, whose house at Sheriffhales, on the Shropshire-Staffordshire border, was licensed for nonconformist worship in 1672; and the schoolmaster Richard Symonds. Baxter was not convinced by their arguments against conformity, and he came to disapprove strongly of enthusiasm such as Cradock's ('a gross Antinomian', he afterwards called him), but the 'fervent Prayers and savoury Conference and Holy Lives' of these 'very zealous godly Nonconformists' greatly inspired him (Baxter, 'Catholick Communion Defended', 'Account', 28; 'Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.13), and his confidence in episcopal authority was shaken by its opposition to such Christian commitment and its determination to pursue, and to silence, such devout men. He was struck, too, by the fact that, like himself, both Fawler and Old had been first 'awakened... to a serious resolved care of their Salvation' by reading Bunny (Baxter, 'Against the Revolt', 540). 
Having, then, 'no Scruple at all against Subscription' and thinking 'the Conformists had the better Cause' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.13), Baxter was ordained deacon at Worcester on 23 December 1638 by John Thornborough, the elderly bishop of the diocese. (That, by the late 1630s, it was highly unusual to be ordained without a university training in part explains Baxter's sensitivity on this point.) There is no record of a subsequent ordination, though the probability is that Baxter did proceed to the priesthood. It was, by Baxter's own account, his friend James Berry, afterwards one of Cromwell's major-generals, who persuaded him to enter the ministry. Baxter came to disapprove strongly of Berry's Cromwellian sympathies and of his patronage of sectaries and Quakers, but in the late 1630s the two men were very close: Berry lived with Baxter, he may have been one of the Shrewsbury nonconformists who so impressed him, and he secured Baxter's appointment as master of the school founded at Dudley, Worcestershire, by the ironmaster Richard Foley (died 1657) of Stourbridge. Though Baxter held this position only briefly, he lived with Richard Foley and his wife, 'a Gentlewoman of... extraordinary Meekness and Patience, with sincere Piety', who was to die two years later (ibid., 1.14), and thereafter he enjoyed a lifelong connection with the Foley family: he had a high regard for all three of Foley's sons, and was in particular to enjoy the friendship and patronage of Thomas Foley until his death in 1677. 
Baxter was nine months at Dudley, during which he preached his first public sermon at the parish church of St Edmund, before moving in the autumn of 1639 to Bridgnorth, Shropshire, where he lived in the house of the schoolmaster, Richard Swaine, and served as assistant to the vicar, William Madstard, 'very honest and conscionable, and an excellent Preacher'. He found the parishioners there 'a very ignorant, dead-hearted People', unlike the 'poor Tractable people' of Dudley, and he was to leave deeply disappointed by his inability to penetrate their 'obdurateness' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.15). By then Baxter's churchmanship had assumed a distinctively puritan character, but, because Bridgnorth was exempt from episcopal jurisdiction as a royal peculiar, this led to no confrontation with ecclesiastical authority. At Dudley he had begun 'a serious impartial Trial of the whole Cause' of nonconformity by undertaking a sustained course of reading. His conclusion was that a prescribed liturgy was lawful and that, though the 'Book of Common Prayer' had 'much 'disorder' and 'defectiveness' in it', it might be used. However, to subscribe that it contained nothing contrary to the word of God 'was that, which if it had been to do again, I durst not do'. Though he did not object to the use of a ring in marriage, nor to kneeling to receive the sacrament, he never wore a surplice, or made the sign of the cross in baptism. At this time he had grave misgivings about the sacrament of baptism itself, only resolved (in favour of paedobaptism) five or six years later. Above all, he regretted the lack of church discipline and was opposed to the ''promiscuous giving of the Lord's Supper to all Drunkards, Swearers, Fornicators, Scorners at Godliness &c.'' (ibid., 1.13). His resolution, and his sympathies, were sufficiently declared when in 1639 he refused to pray against the invading Scots. And it was at Bridgnorth that he made his first public stand on a matter of ecclesiastical policy when, at a meeting of ministers in 1640, he spoke against the 'et cetera' oath. Its notoriously loose wording and apparently limitless applicability hardened opposition to episcopacy, and to the ecclesiastical policy of William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury, in Baxter, as it did in many throughout the country. At Dudley he had read books on ecclesiology lent to him by 'godly honest' nonconformists and he continued to be troubled by the 'Sufferings from the Bishops' which they endured. He pursued his reading at Bridgnorth, and his growing disquiet at 'the English Diocesan frame' was further sharpened by what appeared to him to be this act of ecclesiastical tyranny (ibid., 1.13-14, 1.15-16). 
In March 1641 Baxter was invited to Kidderminster, Worcestershire, as a preacher or 'lecturer'. Having grown deeply dissatisfied with the conduct and ministry of their vicar, George Dance, and his curates, the parishioners of Kidderminster had resolved to report them to the committee for scandalous ministers, to prevent which Dance agreed to allow $60 p.a. from his stipend to provide for a preacher (formally his assistant or curate), chosen by fourteen representatives of the parishioners, in the place of one of his curates, John Dide. This arrangement, reached through the mediation of Sir Henry Herbert, now MP for neighbouring Bewdley, was sealed with a bond for $500 signed by Dance on 26 February 1641. The fourteen feoffees first approached Anthony Lapthorne, afterwards rector of Sedgefield, co. Durham, but they were dissatisfied with his preaching. They then invited Baxter to visit Kidderminster to deliver a sermon, which he did on Sunday 4 April 1641. A certificate electing him to the position was signed the next day and Baxter moved shortly thereafter. 
There is no doubt that Baxter was relieved to leave Bridgnorth, but his initial experiences at Kidderminster were not wholly encouraging. Many were offended by the forcefulness of his preaching and by his insistence on the need for church discipline and controlled admission to the Lord's supper. When in 1642 the churchwarden sought to implement a parliamentary order for the destruction of any remaining images of the persons of the Trinity or of the Virgin Mary, Baxter, whom they supposed responsible, became the target of 'a Crew of the drunken riotous Party of the Town', putting him in fear for his life ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.40). The tensions and hostilities surrounding the outbreak of civil war further heightened feelings: 'a violent Country Gentleman' passing Baxter in the street 'stopt and said, 'There goeth a Traitor''; 'if a Stranger past... that had short Hair and a Civil Habit, the Rabble presently cried, ['Down with the Round-heads']' (ibid.). In these circumstances Baxter decided it would be prudent to withdraw from Kidderminster for a while. He went for a month in early 1642 to Gloucester, where he stayed with 'Mr. 'Darney' the Town Clark' and first met his lifelong friend John Corbet. After his return to Kidderminster 'the Fury of the Rabble was so hot' that he withdrew again, and, being 'with one Mr. 'Hunt' near Inkborough' (Inkberrow, Worcestershire), he witnessed the first engagement of the war, at Powick Bridge, near Worcester, on 23 September 1642. During a sermon he was delivering the next Sunday at the parish church of Alcester for the rector, his friend Samuel Clarke, 'the People heard the Cannon play' at the battle of Edgehill, the scene of which he and Clarke visited the next day (ibid., 1.42-3). With the outbreak of hostilities, Baxter, with no close friends in Kidderminster and feeling still more vulnerable, decided to stay with his friend Simon King, Swaine's successor as schoolmaster at Bridgnorth in 1640-41 but now curate at Trinity Church, Coventry. 
Baxter expected the war to end within a few weeks, but he did not in fact return to Kidderminster until 1647. Coventry was a parliamentarian garrison, and there he was joined by 'the Religious part of my Neighbours... that would fain have lived quietly at home' but who were 'forced... to be gone' from Kidderminster and by those he describes as 'the most religious Men of the Parts round about' more generally. A number of puritan ministers from the central counties of England also sought safety in the town. These included men already known to Baxter, such as Cradock; men who would become his firm friends, such as Obadiah Grew, Richard Vines, and 'my special Friend' Robert Morton, curate of Bewdley, the father of Richard Morton; and men whom he admired but with whom he afterwards engaged in theological controversy, such as Anthony Burgess ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.44, 1.45). After a month with King, Baxter, though he did not become chaplain to the garrison regiment, accepted an invitation to lodge in the house of the governor, John Barker, and to preach weekly to the soldiers of the garrison and once every Sunday to the people at large, 'not taking of any of them a Penny for either, save my Diet only'. He found there 'a very Judicious Auditory' containing 'many very godly... Gentlemen', including Sir Richard Skeffington, fourth baronet, 'a most noble, holy Man', and the writer George Abbot (ibid., 1.44). 
In autumn 1643 Baxter accompanied a party to establish a parliamentarian garrison at Wem, Shropshire, in order that he might visit his father, who had been plundered by royalist soldiers and imprisoned at Lilleshall Abbey. Baxter succeeded in securing his father's release. When Shrewsbury was captured by the royalists, Baxter's father enjoyed the protection of the new governor, his brother-in-law Sir Fulke Huncks, though he was again to be imprisoned before the town was recaptured by the parliamentarians. When Sir Fulke left upon the appointment of Sir Francis Ottley as governor in 1643, his mother remained behind, living with Baxter's father and her daughter, Mary, Baxter's stepmother, in whose house she died in 1645 or 1646, aged between eighty and 100 years. (Her bequest to Baxter's stepmother of $50 led to a protracted dispute between the Baxters and her executor, Edward, second Viscount Conway, and his successor, Edward, third viscount, afterwards first earl of Conway; it was still occasioning correspondence in 1680.) Baxter himself continued undisturbed at Coventry until summer 1645, living 'in safety in a City of defence... seeing no enemy while the Kingdom was in Wars and Flames' (Baxter, 'Dying Thoughts', 224-5). However, when after the battle of Naseby he visited the parliamentarian army quarters at Leicester, he was appalled to discover 'a new face of things which I never dreamt of'. While 'We that lived quietly in 'Coventry' did keep to our old Principles, and... were unfeignedly for King and Parliament', anticipating that the king would be brought to a reconciliation with his parliament and to consent to a reformation of the national church, Baxter now encountered in the New Model Army a body of men among whom radical and enthusiastic ideas were eagerly embraced and officers among whom 'hot-headed Sectaries had got into the highest places' and were Cromwell's 'chief Favourites'. Their intentions Baxter took to be no less than 'to subvert both Church and State': they 'were far from thinking of... any healing way between the Episcopal and the Presbyterians'; 'they took the King for a Tyrant and an Enemy, and really intended absolutely to master him, or ruine him'. Baxter's puritanism valued order, tradition, and authority; the revolutionary and radical wing of the movement, as represented by Anabaptists and, later, Quakers, disclosed to him a prospect of anarchy. Though he had encountered Anabaptists at Coventry, disputing with Benjamin Cox, he had given no credence to the reports that there were 'Swarms of Anabaptists' in the army. He now realized how far prevailing opinion had moved during his secure residence at Coventry and he reproached himself for having in 1642 or 1643 declined an invitation from Cromwell to act as chaplain 'with that famous Troop which he began his Army with', an invitation perhaps initiated by Berry: 'These very men that then invited me to be their Pastor, were the Men that afterwards headed much of the Army... which made me wish that I had gone among them... for then all the Fire was in one Spark. ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.50-51)' Realizing his mistake, Baxter now agreed to act as chaplain in the regiment commanded by Edward Whalley, but with the express intention of countering the spread of radical ideas among the troops, which, not surprisingly, drew upon him 'the discountenance of 'Cromwell' and the chief Officers of his Mind' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.56). Baxter deplored the influence of such Independent ministers as Hugh Peters and, among Cromwell's officers, of sectaries and enthusiasts such as Thomas Rainborow. Levellers and Diggers he regarded as the tools of 'Anabaptists', a term by which he encompassed all shades of enthusiastic opinion. It was, it may be supposed, his experiences in the army which resolved those early doubts about the sacrament of baptism. Similarly, his army experiences gave to Baxter's theology its characteristic emphasis upon continuing moral commitment, growth in grace, and the conditionality of justification. He became convinced that the antinomian emphasis which resulted from the exclusive stress upon free grace characteristic of Ranters and other radicals, and which Baxter detected also in the Calvinist theology of such Independents as John Owen, far from exalting divine mercy or constituting Christian liberation, was antithetical to the moral life. In his first publication, 'Aphorismes of Justification' (1649), Baxter argued for a process of justification involving human co-operation with grace. This apparent retreat from predestinarian orthodoxy embroiled Baxter in prolonged controversy, with Owen among others, but he would maintain his position throughout his life, repeatedly drawing upon himself charges of Arminianism, popery, and even Pelagianism. 
With Whalley's regiment Baxter followed the New Model Army westwards as it successively reduced the royalist strongholds of Bridgwater, Sherborne, Bristol, and Exeter, and then, in 1646, Banbury and Worcester. On the advice of the physician Sir Theodore Mayerne, whom he consulted in London, Baxter took the waters at Tunbridge Wells for three weeks in the later summer of 1646, but later that year his health declined until, in February 1647, having caught a chill riding in snowy weather, and having suffered for a week from constant bleeding from the nose, he was compelled to remain in his quarters with Sir John Coke of Melbourne Hall, Derbyshire. He then went for three weeks to the house of Verney Noel of Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, and then for three months to Rous Lench Court, the Worcestershire home of Sir Thomas and Lady Rous. It was at Kirkby Mallory that he began the composition of perhaps his most famous book, 'The Saints Everlasting Rest' (1650), and he continued it at Rous Lench. 
Poor health was a permanent feature of Baxter's life. As a child he suffered from catarrh, colds, and a prolonged cough. In the early 1630s he was 'in expectation of Death, by a violent Cough, with Spitting of Blood, '&c.' of two years continuance'; 'From the Age of 21 till near 23, my Weakness was so great, that I expected not to live above a year' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.5, 1.12). He did not expect to survive the publication of 'Aphorismes of Justification' long enough to produce another book; when 'The Saints Everlasting Rest' appeared, it was addressed to its reader as the legacy of a dying man. The thirty or more different physicians Baxter was to consult during his life were unable to prescribe any sustained relief from 'the same Symptoms as most men have about Fourscore years of Age'. Baxter suffered chronically from flatulency and gastric problems, 'incredible Inflammations of Stomach, Bowels, Back, Sides, Head, Thighs, as if I had been daily fill'd with Wind'; from scurvy and from repeated haemorrhaging from 'Eyes, and Teeth, and Jaws, and Joynts, so that I had scarce rest night or day'; he was prone to catch colds and chills, and he suffered regularly from headaches, from 'terrible Toothach', and from gallstones, in later life the severity of the pain leaving 'scarce any part or hour... free' (ibid., 1.9-10, 1.80-83, 3.173-4, where he also details the various remedies he tried). If there was something of the hypochondriac in his disposition (one diagnosis he was given was 'that my Disease was the Hypocondriack Melancholy', another that it was 'nothing but Hypochondriack Flatulency, and somewhat of a Scorbutical Malady'), he had good cause anxiously to attend to his bodily condition: physical indisposition at best, pain at worst, were his constant experience. This, coupled with his lifelong expectation that death was imminent, led him to value time intensely and to expatiate on the traditional puritan theme of the sinfulness of time-wasting with particular forcefulness; as he wrote in the autobiographical poem 'Love Breathing Thanks and Praise': '

'A Life still near to Death', did me possess 

With a deep sense of Time's great Preciousness. 

' To this preoccupation with the efficient management of time may be attributed Baxter's quite extraordinary industry and voluminous literary output: '
The frequent sight of Death's most awful face, 

Rebuk'd my sloth, and bid me mend my pace. 

' 'Expecting to be so quickly in another World' also lent urgency to Baxter's evangelistic and pastoral ministry: as he aphoristically put it: '
I Preach'd, as never sure to Preach again 

And as a dying man to dying men! 
(Baxter, 'Poetical Fragments', 38-40; 'Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.86)' 

It was five months before Baxter was sufficiently recovered to visit Kidderminster in the summer of 1647. In May, while still at Rous Lench Court, he had received an invitation to return to Kidderminster. Its 265 signatories (including a number who had fought for parliament) are evidence that, despite the hostility Baxter had experienced in 1641-2, he had made his mark with many of the parishioners. While with the army Baxter had considered himself committed to his position at Kidderminster and had not entertained any other pastoral appointment. During his absence, however, the parish had reinstituted its proceedings against Dance and the living had been sequestered by the committee for plundered ministers. What Baxter was now offered was consequently the position of vicar. This he declined, agreeing only to take up his old lectureship for a salary of $80-90 per annum. The parishioners then offered the position to Oliver Bromskill, curate at Sheriffhales, whom Baxter had known at Coventry, but he declined the invitation, as did Baxter again when, soon after his return to Kidderminster, he was 'vehemently urged... to take the Vicaridge' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.79). However, unbeknown to Baxter, in March 1648 the parishioners proceeded to secure his appointment as vicar. Only in 1651 did they disclose what they had done. Baxter nevertheless allowed Dance to continue living in the vicarage, on an allowance of $40 per annum from the parish revenue, while he himself lodged in rooms on the upper floor of a house in the High Street; and he raised no objection to Dance conducting prayer book services for the lord of the manor, Sir Ralph Clare. He similarly took no steps to prevent the remaining curate from reading the common prayer to adherents of the episcopal church at the chapelry at Mitton. 
Many of those who had opposed Baxter in 1641 and 1642 had fought and died for the royalist cause, which, together with the changed political situation, prevented any recurrence of the earlier hostility upon his return. It was during the ensuing years at Kidderminster that Baxter became a figure of national renown and it is upon his pastorate there that his enduring reputation in part rests. During the 1650s he effected a remarkable transformation: 'When I came thither first, there was about one Family in a Street that worshipped God and called on his name', but 'when I came away there were some Streets where there was not past one Family in the Side of a Street that did not so'; 'on the Lord's Day... you might hear an hundred Families singing Psalms and repeating Sermons, as you passed through the Streets'. The parish of Kidderminster then comprised the market town and twenty surrounding villages, some 800 families in all, or 3000-4000 inhabitants, of whom rather more than 1800 were adults. Of these, about 600 were full communicants under Baxter's ministry, 'of whom there was not twelve that I had not good hopes of, as to their sincerity'. Those who were not full church members, among whom Baxter believed were many of sincere faith 'kept off by Husbands, by Parents, by Masters, and some dissuaded by Men that differed from us', did not oppose or obstruct Baxter's ministry ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.84-5). 
The church order and worship at Kidderminster followed a moderate line between the enthusiasm of radical puritanism and the prescriptiveness of both strict presbyterianism and prayer book worship. Baxter was not opposed to a written liturgy or to forms of prayer, though he himself used extempore prayers. He administered the sacrament to seated communicants, but would refuse it to none who wished to kneel. He administered infant baptism (though with parents, not godparents, taking the vows), and engaged in oral and written disputation with the famed Baptist John Tombes, curate at neighbouring Bewdley, Worcestershire. 'Plain Scripture Proof of Infants Church Membership and Baptism' (1651) arose out of these debates and was the first of several titles on this subject. Baxter did not observe Christmas, regarding it as a spurious festival of late institution, but he was far from the (false) stereotype of the puritan killjoy. He delighted in the singing of psalms, and, himself the author of poems which have since become such well-known hymns as 'Ye holy angels bright' (from 'A Psalm of Praise' in 'Poetical Fragments', 84-8), he advocated the composition of hymns for congregational singing at a time when praise in worship was limited to the words of the psalms. He was similarly a keen advocate of aesthetic and sensory aids to devotion: 'God would not have given us, either our Senses themselves, or their usual objects, if they might not have been serviceable to his own praise'; hence, it is 'a point of our Spiritual Prudence, and a singular help to the furthering of the work of Faith, to call in our Sense to its assistance' (Baxter, 'Saints Everlasting Rest', 757). 
Baxter held that church discipline and controlled admission to the Lord's supper were fundamental to the being of a true church, but he did not conceive of this in rigid or mechanistic terms. His own conditions for church membership were liberal. In 'Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments' (1657) he argued that a credible ''Profession' of a 'Saving Faith'', with which the quality of their lives is consistent, is a sufficient condition 'of Mens title to Church-Communion' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.113). Recognizing that 'God breaketh not all Mens hearts alike', Baxter did not ask potential church members for a rehearsal of spiritual experience such as was required by many Independent and separatist churches. He was hostile to their prescriptiveness and, as one committed to a parochially organized national church, to their exclusivity. However, although he rejected the Independents' strictness (he would not 'with Independants, un-church the Parish-Church, and gather a Church out of them anew'), Baxter was equally dissatisfied with episcopal laxity and its 'meer Mock-shew of Discipline'; the outward holiness of church society must be maintained if it is to be recognizable as a church (ibid., 1.91, 1.7). Full communicants were therefore required to submit to church discipline, accepting admonishment for sins in private or, in extreme cases, public confession of wrongdoing and resolution to reform at a parish meeting for discipline held every first Wednesday of the month. Excommunication was the ultimate sanction. Baxter recognized that such discipline is mere tyranny unless it is accompanied by a commitment to instruction and pastoral oversight. Parishioners were given the opportunity to understand Christian duties and obligations, and encouragement to fulfil them. It was Baxter's promotion of catechetical instruction which was the truly distinctive feature of his Kidderminster ministry and at the root of his success. He devoted the afternoons of every Monday and Tuesday, and his assistant the mornings, to an hour's 'private Catechising and Conference (he going through the Parish, and the Town coming to me)' with fourteen families each week until they had seen every family in the town and its environs. The rota then began again. (Baxter's assistants in this work, of whose 'honesty and diligence' he speaks very highly, included Thomas Baldwin, Joseph Read, Richard Sargeant, and Humphrey Waldron, all of them nonconformist ministers following the Restoration.) Only a half-dozen families refused to participate; 'And few Families went from us without some tears, or seemingly serious promises for a Godly Life' (ibid., 1.83, 1.85, 1.88). 
In 'Gildas Salvianus: the Reformed Pastor' (1656), a book which, either as a full text or in abridged form, has been available ever since its first publication, Baxter gave impassioned expression to both his pastoral ideals and his pastoral zeal. 'The Reformed Pastor' arose out of Baxter's dismay at, and determination to rectify, pastoral neglect in the west midlands such as he had experienced as a young man. It is a permanent contribution to the literature of pastoral theology and perhaps the finest product of the practical concern of puritanism for the well-being of souls. Despite its emphasis on catechizing, the book is instinct with the awesome seriousness of the preacher's office. Baxter himself was a powerful and committed evangelistic preacher, with a puritan's characteristically clear-sighted grasp of the needs of his hearers. He set himself firmly in the line of puritan plain preaching addressed to the needs of a 'popular auditory': he had no patience with such preaching as that of Lancelot Andrewes, which 'did but play with holy things'; 'it was the plain and pressing downright Preacher, that onely seemed to me to be in good sadness, and to make somewhat of it, and to speak with life, and light, and weight' (R. Baxter, 'Treatise of Conversion', 1657, epistle to the reader; Keeble and Nuttall, 1.255). His preaching enjoyed great success, both in Kidderminster, where five extra galleries had to be added to the parish church, St Mary's, and during a visit to London in the winter of 1654-5, when, on the occasion of his preaching at St Lawrence Jewry the sermon published as 'Making Light of Christ and Salvation' (1655), Roger Boyle, Lord Broghill, afterwards earl of Orrery, with whom Baxter lodged during his visit, and James Howard, earl of Suffolk, who had taken Baxter by coach, could not gain entrance to the church such was the crush, and the vicar, Richard Vines, Baxter's friend from Coventry days, 'was fain to get up into the Pulpit, and sit behind me, and I to stand between his Legs' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.112). 
Baxter was in London in the winter of 1654-5 at Broghill's instigation to serve as one of the divines charged to draw up a statement of religious fundamentals which the subcommittee set up to advise Cromwell and the grand committee on religion could put forward as a definition of tolerable religious orthodoxy under the 'Instrument of government', the protectorate's constitution. Broghill, a member of the committee, first nominated Archbishop James Ussher; when, because of advanced age, he declined to serve, Broghill named Baxter in his place. It was during this visit that Baxter met Ussher, the man whom, of all his contemporaries, he perhaps most admired. Ussher's 'Reduction of Episcopacie unto the Form of Synodicall Government used in the Antient Church', published anonymously in 1656 but circulating in the 1640s, shaped Baxter's thinking on episcopacy and church government throughout his life. In his 'Five Disputations of Church-Government and Worship' (1659) Baxter argued that 'the English Diocesane Prelacy is intollerable' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.117) and proposed a scheme of modified episcopacy, consisting essentially of parochial bishops, which, he maintained, was consistent with, and preserved the best aspects of, the church polities of presbyterians, Independents, and moderate episcopalians alike. 
Baxter's growing national reputation derived in part from the establishment during these years of the Worcestershire Voluntary Association of Ministers, a genuinely innovative movement initiated in 1652 which by 1659 had come to be imitated in many other counties. Its seventy or so members (from Staffordshire, Shropshire, Gloucestershire, and Oxfordshire, as well as Worcestershire) included some of Independent and episcopalian persuasion, but its membership was predominantly presbyterian, though not in a sense which implied commitment to the details of that church polity. Baxter consistently maintained that the term 'presbyterian' was in common usage merely a synonym for 'puritan' and that, while 'Presbytery generally took in 'Scotland', yet it was but a stranger here'; those in England known as presbyterians in fact 'addicted themselves to no Sect or Party at all'. He claimed to know only one presbyterian strictly so-called in all Worcestershire (Thomas Hall, curate of King's Norton). The members of the association he characterized as 'meer Catholicks; Men of no Faction, nor siding with any Party, but owning that which was good in all' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.97, 2.146). Just over half would conform at the Restoration. 
The association adopted the confession of faith published in 'Christian Concord, or, The Agreement of the Associated Pastors and Churches of Worcestershire' (1653). Its members agreed to pursue a regular programme of catechizing within their cures: 'The Reformed Pastor' was originally written to encourage members in this work and the association published its 'Agreement for Catechizing' in 1656. And they undertook to meet monthly, at Bromsgrove, Evesham, Kidderminster, Upton upon Severn, and Worcester, with quarterly meetings at Worcester. The monthly meetings at Evesham and Kidderminster were regularly held, on the first Thursday of every month at Kidderminster, where, after a meal, there was a disputation on a previously agreed topic, and on occasion discussion of cases of discipline. (Some members also attended Baxter's weekly Thursday lecture, joining him afterwards in his home.) A number of these disputations appeared in Baxter's publications, some are among extant Baxter papers, and correspondence on behalf of the association is among Baxter's surviving letters. These 'comfortable' meetings Baxter held among the most rewarding and enjoyable experiences of his life, and the work of the association in uniting men in pastoral commitment he regarded as a shining example of true Christian fellowship and charity. In 1660, when its day was done, 'Universal Concord' published to 'the World... what our Religion and our Terms of Communion were' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.85, 1.119). 
In the creation of the Worcestershire Association, Baxter's commitment to pastoral service combined with his passionate desire for unity among Christians of differing persuasions. 'God hath possessed my heart with such a burning desire after the peace & unity of the Churches that I cannot forget it, or lay it by. I feele a supernaturall power forceing my zeale, & thoughts that way', Baxter wrote in a letter of February 1652 (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.92). In addition to the formation of the association, throughout the 1650s this zeal inspired a number of attempts to secure national church unity. In 1652-4 Baxter was in correspondence with the international ecumenist John Durie, an admirer of the association project, seeking to convene, with parliamentary support, a conference of representatives from the main ecclesiastical parties to reach an agreement upon a comprehensive national church settlement. It was a scheme which, Durie reported, enjoyed the support of the lord protector, who was 'forward in the worke'. Baxter himself remarked that the protector 'is noted as a man of a Catholike spiritt, desirous of the unity & Peace of all the servants of Christ', and in April 1658 his friend John Howe, then Cromwell's chaplain, reported that the lord protector 'expressed great willingnesse' to promote the association movement throughout England (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.128, 300, 302). In 1652 Baxter was responsible for the publication of 'The Humble Petition of many Thousands... of the County of Worcester', presented to the Rump Parliament on 22 December 1652 by John Bridges, patron of the Kidderminster living, and Thomas Foley. It asked that 'godly, prudent, peaceable Divines of each party' might be summoned to a national conference to determine 'a meet way for accommodation and unity', as well as for financial support for the ministry and a university education for all ministers. Baxter's 'The Worcestershire-Petition Defended' (1653), written against the published objections of the Quaker Benjamin Nicholson to these petitions, was handed out to MPs at the door of the house, but the next day the Rump was turned out. In 1655, in the preface to 'True Christianity', Baxter urged the first protectorate parliament to pursue church unity. One of the sermons he preached during his visit to London in 1654-5 was published as 'Catholick Unity' (1660) and during that same visit, through the good offices of Broghill and Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick, he preached to Cromwell 'on 'I. Cor.' i.10 against the Divisions and Distractions of the Church'. Cromwell afterwards twice sent for Baxter for several hours' discussion, but to little avail: 'I saw that what he learned must be from himself; being more disposed to speak many hours, than to hear one', was Baxter's assessment ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.205). 
Baxter's experience at the 1654-5 London conference was itself equally disappointing. Owen, a leading member of the group, had been responsible for drawing up and publishing fifteen fundamentals of belief ('Proposals for the Furtherance and Propagation of the Gospel in this Nation', 1653). In contrast, Baxter, who 'knew how ticklish a Business the Enumeration of Fundamentals was', 'would have had the Brethren to have offered the Parliament the 'Creed', 'Lord's Prayer', and 'Decalogue' alone as our Essentials or Fundamentals', responding to the objection that papists or Socinians might subscribe these with the startling words 'So much the better, and so much the fitter it is to be the Matter of our Concord'. For Owen and the 'over-Orthodox Doctors' this was an unacceptably broad and loose formulation ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.197-9). Baxter's meetings with Ussher, however, were an inspiration: the two agreed 'in halfe an Hour' on a form of modified episcopacy sufficient for 'Concord... in matters of Church-Government' among 'moderate Men' of all ecclesiastical persuasions (ibid., 2.217). In 1655 Baxter reported this to Ralph Brownrig, deprived bishop of Exeter, when commending to him terms of reconciliation between episcopalians and presbyterians. In September 1656, when asked by Edward Harley, newly elected to the second protectorate parliament, how best to serve the interests of the 'distressed Church', Baxter, again referring to the ease with which he and Ussher had 'agreed in halfe an Hour', advised him, first, to 'take heed of being too forward in imposing on others' and to confine any required profession of faith to Scripture fundamentals, else it would merely exclude and divide; 'In a doubtful case, I had rather erre in grantinge too much liberty, than too little'. Second, he urged the calling of a conference of 'two of the most moderate & best esteemed' representatives of the episcopal, presbyterian, and Independent traditions. And third, he recommended that one version of the psalms should be authorized nationally for use in churches (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.222-6). In 1657 Baxter was recommending to the New England evangelist John Eliot as 'an excellent worke' a proposal that the Congregational New England churches should propound terms of reconciliation between Independents and presbyterian churches in England (ibid., 1.240). On this same business he corresponded also with such episcopalians as Thomas Good and Henry Hammond, with Independents such as Philip Nye, and, during the last years of the interregnum, with two former Independents, now Baptists, Thomas Lambe (or Lamb) and William Allen, whom he so effectively convinced of the lamentable consequences of disunity that after the Restoration he was to find them as hostile to nonconformity as once they had been committed to separatism. 
Looking back after the Restoration, Baxter was to acknowledge that, under 'an Usurper whom I opposed' he had enjoyed 'Liberty and Advantage to preach [the] Gospel with Success, which I cannot have under a King to whom I have sworn and performed true Subjection and Obedience'. He never modified his political opposition to Cromwell, and regretted what he took to be the corrupting effect of power upon him (his famous summary characterization is in 'Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.98-100). During the 1650s 'I did seasonably and moderately by Preaching and Printing condemn the Usurpation, and... in open Conference declare 'Cromwell' and his Adherents to be Guilty of Treason and Rebellion, aggravated with Perfidiousness and Hypocrisie'. Nevertheless, 'I perceived that it was his design to do good in the main, and to promote the Gospel and the Interest of Godliness, more than any had done before him', and, on the basis of his experience of that 'incredible Age', Baxter passionately rebutted the Restoration opinion that 'all Religion was then trodden down, and Heresy and Schism were the only Piety' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.71, 1.86-7). Baxter especially admired, and commended, the work of the Triers in approving ministers. 
Of Cromwell's son, Baxter had great hopes as a man who, having 'never had any hand in the War', nor having sought power, and who seemed 'to own the Sober Party', might 'be used in the healing of the Land'. Here was a godly magistrate under whom a national reformed church might flourish. In October and November 1658 Baxter dedicated to Richard Cromwell 'A Key for Catholicks' (1659) and 'Five Disputations of Church Government and Worship' (1659), in the second expressing the hope that the new protector might 'be the happy instrument of 'taking away' the divisions of the 'Godly'' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.100; Keeble and Nuttall, 1.358). Early in 1659 Baxter wrote his most controversial book, 'A Holy Commonwealth' (1659), a retort to the model of a ''Heathenish Commonwealth'' given in James Harrington's 'Oceana' (1659), broken off in despair when the army ousted the protector in April ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.118). It contains as an appendix Baxter's understanding of the issues which led to civil war and a justificatory account of his own actions and allegiance at that time. Following the Restoration, charges that Baxter (and nonconformists generally) were seditious repeatedly cited this text as evidence that, as a man who would not rule out resistance to the supreme governor, Baxter was a potential traitor and threat to the safety of the state. After ten years of this, in a statement dated 15 April 1670 published in the second edition of 'The Life of Faith' (1670, sigs. b3-b3'v'), Baxter withdrew the book and repented of having published it, though 'without recanting any particular Doctrine in it' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.71-2). In 1683 it was one of the books publicly burnt as seditious by a decree of 21 July of the University of Oxford. 
In the last years of the interregnum Baxter had had increasing contacts with men of royalist persuasion, including, rather unexpectedly, John Maitland, earl (afterwards duke) of Lauderdale, with whom he was in correspondence. In the summer of 1659 he was informed by Sir Ralph Clare of the impending rising of George Booth. Clare, who, through Hammond, claimed to know the mind of the king, assured Baxter that 'all Moderation was intended' were the monarchy to be restored ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.208). In March 1660 Baxter was invited by Lauderdale to London, where he arrived on 13 April, to receive from Lauderdale expressions of the king's 'Favour and Acceptance' (Baxter, 'Penitent Confession', 43). Having been identified as an opinion-maker whom it was well to secure for the cause of monarchy's restoration, Baxter was visited also by Sir William Morice, newly appointed secretary of state, and by James Sharpe, afterwards archbishop of St Andrews. Baxter's disappointment at the overthrow of Richard Cromwell, his bitterness at the peremptory actions of the army, and his dismay at the constitutional instability of 1659 all combined with his innate respect for tradition and order to confirm his support for the royalist cause. Though he was far from thinking Charles I a martyr, he certainly did not approve of the regicide and he had served with parliament not with a view to redrafting the constitution but in order to secure true religion. 
On 30 April Baxter preached before the Convention at St Margaret's, Westminster, 'A Sermon of Repentance' (1660), and, following the Convention's vote to recall Charles II on 1 May, on 10 May he preached at St Paul's before the lord mayor a sermon, 'Right Rejoycing' (1660). On 25 June he (with other presbyterians) was appointed a chaplain to the king, and on 22 July he preached before Charles 'The Life of Faith' (1660). His standing, and the anxiety of the restored regime to secure his unqualified allegiance, was evidenced further by the offer to him of the bishopric of Hereford made in October by Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon. This offer Baxter declined in a letter of 1 November, for the characteristic reason that to accept would inhibit him from promoting church unity. As this indicates, in the ecclesiastical negotiations which accompanied the Restoration, his aim remained what it had been during the interregnum. In his 'Sermon of Repentance' he had spoken of church unity and had again mentioned his agreement with Ussher. This prompted 'many moderate Episcopal Divines' to request further details from him and had led to a series of meetings. Reconciliation was the theme not only of 'Universal Concord' but, in that same year, 1660, also of both 'Catholick Unity' and 'The True Catholick and Catholic Church Described', written: 'for Catholicism against all 'Sects'; to shew the Sin and Folly and Mischief of all Sects that would appropriate the Church to themselves, and trouble the World with the Question, Which of all these Parties is the Church? as if they knew not that the Catholick Church is that which containeth all the Parts, though some more pure, and some less. ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.218, 1.112)' It was, he affirmed, never the intention of the so-called presbyterians to argue for a presbyterian system: rather, their aim was as comprehensive a national church settlement as possible.This Baxter and other presbyterian delegates, including Simeon Ashe, Edmund Calamy, Thomas Manton, Edward Reynolds, William Spurstowe, and John Wallis, pursued in the late summer at a meeting (or perhaps meetings) with the king at the London lodgings of Edward Montagu, second earl of Manchester, who, with Broghill, had been instrumental in securing Charles's participation. The king, professing 'his gladness to hear our Inclinations to Agreement, and his Resolution to do his part to bring us together', invited a written submission of the presbyterians' preferred terms. Drawn up chiefly by Calamy and Reynolds, this included Ussher's 'Reduction' as grounds for agreement. The presbyterians had hoped to discuss these terms with episcopalian divines but instead were advised that the king 'would put all that he thought meet to grant us' in a royal declaration ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.231, 2.259). When on 4 September the presbyterians received from Clarendon a draft 'Declaration on Ecclesiastical Affairs' they were disappointed to find that it 'would not serve to heal our Differences'. Consultation with Manchester, 'our sure Friend', Denzil, Lord Holles, and Arthur Annesley, first earl of Anglesey, persuaded Baxter to moderate the paper of criticisms he drew up, which was then submitted to Clarendon (ibid., 2.265), but at a meeting between, on the one side, Reynolds, Baxter, and Calamy, and, on the other, George Morley, John Cosin, and Humphrey Henchman, then all bishops elect, it nevertheless proved impossible to reach agreement. However, a further conference between presbyterian and episcopal representatives, held on 22 October at Worcester House, Clarendon's residence, in the presence of the king, led, three days later, to a far more conciliatory final 'Declaration' than Baxter had anticipated, 'such as any sober honest Ministers might submit to', as he gratefully told Clarendon. He told Clarendon also of his resolution to do all that he could to persuade all 'to Conform according to the Terms of this Declaration' and to 'promote our happy Concord', looking forward to 'the Day that Factions and Parties may all be swallowed up in Unity' (though he was not a named subscriber to the published address of thanks 'To the King's most Excellent Majesty', 1660). Unhappily, however, Baxter's fear that the 'Declaration' 'was but for present use, and that shortly it would be revok'd or nullified' was realized when, in a vote on 28 November, the Commons failed to pass the 'Declaration' into law (ibid., 2.279, 2.281). 
On 24 March of the following year, 1661, a conference was convened at Savoy House, in accordance with an undertaking in the 'Declaration', to discuss revisions of the prayer book. Baxter took a leading part in the proceedings. His position was that, though he himself could readily admit as lawful such practices as kneeling to receive the sacrament, he could not accept as lawful the imposition of such indifferent matters upon those who conscientiously judged them inadmissible; still less could acceptance of them be elevated into a condition of communion. He hence argued strenuously for extensive revision of the prayer book and for sufficient latitude to accommodate those who on conscientious grounds could not conform to some of its rites. Baxter's determination to debate every point in detail clearly exasperated episcopalian delegates. Izaak Walton reports that Robert Sanderson, bishop of Lincoln, exclaimed in exasperation that ''he had never met with a man of more pertinacious confidence, and less abilities in all his conversation'' (Walton, 404). Clarendon reproved Baxter for being 'severe and strict, like a Melancholy Man' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.365). Despite his tenacity, however, Baxter was in his own mind convinced that the case was now hopeless and that sincere intentions to accommodate tender consciences were wanting: 'we spoke to the Deaf', was his judgement; 'I perceived that they intended no Abatements' (ibid., 2.336, 2.345). Even so, he was determined that presbyterian arguments and aspirations should not go by default, and he was especially anxious that they should be available for the subsequent judgement of history. This led him to assemble a collection of papers presented to the conference, which, with his own proposed reformed liturgy, was published without his authorization as 'A Petition for Peace: with the Reformation of the Liturgy' (1661). It led him also to compile a detailed record of the conference's proceedings in the 'Reliquiae', with full documentation (ibid., 2.303-72). 
Baxter claimed that at the Savoy he 'foreknew and foretold them what they were about to do' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.345). This would not have required exceptional prescience. A bill for religious uniformity was making its way through the Commons even as the conference was in session. Ever since the Restoration, the episcopal church of England had been re-establishing itself at parochial level, and, from late 1660, its bench of bishops began to be replenished. And as its liturgy and practices were reintroduced, so the reaction against puritanism gathered apace. As a leading figure, Baxter attracted the hostile attention of such partisan episcopalians as Thomas Pierce and Thomas Tomkins and of such vitriolic royalist pamphleteers as Sir Roger L'Estrange. Informers attended his sermons and, so he believed, misreported them: 'I scarce ever preached a Sermon in the City, but I had News from 'Westminster' that I had preached seditiously, or against the Government'; 'the daily Clamours of Accusers even wearied me' (ibid., 2.301, 2.302). It was even rumoured that he was to lead a rebellion in the north. By the 'Act of Confirming and Restoring of Ministers' he was in the autumn of 1660 deprived of his Kidderminster living in favour of Dance, and George Morley, then bishop of Worcester, took strenuous measures to ensure that Baxter would neither return to the parish nor preach within his diocese, even as an unpaid lecturer, which he offered to do. Clare, whom Baxter saw as the chief opponent of his return to Kidderminster, stood ready to support Morley, with 'his Troop to apprehend me' if need be (ibid., 2.374). So far was he from reciprocating Baxter's consideration towards him that Dance would not tolerate Baxter's returning even to preach a farewell sermon at Kidderminster. (What he would have preached was published years later as 'Richard Baxter's Farewel Sermon', 1683). Baxter gave an account of these dealings in an epistle of 11 November 1661 to his Kidderminster people prefaced to 'The Mischiefs of Self-Ignorance' (1662), which led to a retort from Morley in 'The Bishop of Worcester's Letter to a Friend' (1662) and to a controversy involving, on Baxter's side though without his approval, Edward Bagshaw and, among others in defence of the bishop, L'Estrange. The increasing hostility Baxter experienced led him in 1662 to consider, as it did others, emigration 'to live and end my days in quietness, out of the noise of a Peace-hating Generation'. His want of languages, his ill health, and the possibility of future service in England, urged by friends, combined to dissuade him (ibid., 2.383). 
During these two years Baxter preached at several locations in London. For a year he preached as invited, his sermons including a series delivered at Westminster Abbey ('The Vain Religion of the Formal Hypocrite', 1660). He then joined with William Bates at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, preaching once a week, delivering there between May and August 1661 the sermons published as 'The Mischiefs of Self-Ignorance' (1662). He preached also at St Bride's, Fleet Street, and at St Anne Blackfriars, where John Herring and John Gibbons, both ejected in 1662, were respectively vicar and rector. The sermons published as 'A Saint or a Brute' (1662) and 'Now or Never' (1662), and in parts of 'The Divine Life' (1664), were preached at St Anne's. Concurrently, at St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, where Thomas Vincent was rector, he gave a lecture on weekdays, sponsored by his friend Henry Ashurst. On 19 May 1662 the 'Act of Uniformity' received the royal assent, and it became effective on St Bartholomew's day, 24 August 1662. From that date, only ministers who had received episcopal ordination, who had published their unfeigned assent and consent to all in the 'Book of Common Prayer', and who repudiated the solemn league and covenant, could hold benefices in the Church of England. None of these prescriptions necessarily excluded Baxter: he was episcopally ordained, he accepted the lawfulness of set forms of prayer, and he had never subscribed the solemn league and covenant. Nevertheless, the exclusivity of these terms was abhorrent to him. A church which insists upon compliance with a particular liturgical or ecclesiological form has elevated incidental matters of external performance above the essentials of Christian faith. Any church -- even the national church -- which demands the suppression of conscientious scruples as the price of membership is, he argued, sectarian: he would not subscribe to a church established on such divisive principles. He delivered his farewell sermon on 'Colossians' 2: 6-7 at St Anne Blackfriars on 25 May, well before the last Sunday before 24 August, in order to 'let all Ministers in 'England' understand in time, whether I intended to Conform or not' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.384). It was included in the various collections of farewell sermons published in 1662 and 1663, but without Baxter's authorization and in an imperfect text, 'mangled so both [in] Matter and Style, that I could not own it' (ibid., 2.303); Baxter himself published an authorized text in 'Directions for Weak Distempered Christians' (1669). 
During the years 1660-62 Baxter lodged first, for about a year, at Thomas Foley's house in Austin Friars, and then for another year in the house of Dr John Micklethwaite in Little Britain. Following his marriage on 10 September 1662 to Margaret Charlton ['see below'] he and his wife lived in a house in Moorfields until, 'All Publick Service being at an end', they moved on 14 July 1663 to a house in the country, at Acton, Middlesex, 'that I might set my self to writing, and do what Service I could for Posterity, and live as much as possibly I could out of the World' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.440). Among the works written during these years was the first part of the autobiographical narrative posthumously published by Matthew Sylvester as 'Reliquiae Baxterianae' (1696), and much of the massive work of casuistical divinity, 'A Christian Directory' (1673). At Acton he developed a close friendship with his neighbour, Sir Matthew Hale, afterwards lord chief justice, with whom he enjoyed long conversations on metaphysical divinity. Baxter's great admiration for this 'Pillar of Justice, the Refuge of the subject who feared Oppression, and one of the greatest Honours of His Majestie's Government' (ibid., 3.47) informs his 'Additional Notes on the Life and Death of Sir Matthew Hale' (1682), a companion piece to the biography of Hale by Gilbert Burnet. When the plague broke out in London, Baxter went to stay with his friend Richard Hampden, in Great Hampden, Buckinghamshire, where he completed the second part of the 'Reliquiae' (dated 28 September 1665). 
At Acton it was Baxter's habit, after joining in common prayer at the parish church on a Sunday, to preach in his home to his household and some neighbours. When the first 'Conventicle Act' expired on 1 March 1669, the numbers of those attending greatly increased until, at the instigation of the rector, Bruno Ryves, Baxter was arrested on 12 June 1669 under the 'Five Mile Act' of 1665 and imprisoned in Clerkenwell, though he was released within a few days on an error in the warrant. It is characteristic of Baxter to have continued his ministry despite the prescriptions of the Clarendon code, but equally characteristic was his determination to do so without disturbing parish worship. During the years 1660-63 he had attended parish churches in London, particularly those where John Wilkins and John Tillotson preached, and he regularly attended the parish church at Acton. Baxter was always a reluctant nonconformist, seeking ways to bridge the gulf between nonconformist and conformist and aspiring to the creation of a more liberally established national church which could comprehend within it a much broader range of ecclesiological and theological opinion. To this end he continued to argue for church unity in such books as 'The Cure of Church-Divisions' (1670) and 'The True and Only Way of Concord' (1680), to discountenance separatism in such works as the series of tracts against Edward Bagshaw beginning with 'A Defence of the Principles of Love' (1671), and to advocate occasional conformity to the Church of England in, for example, the series of tracts beginning with 'Catholick Communion Defended' (1684). He was also concerned in negotiations with latitudinarian episcopal divines aimed at effecting comprehension. In 1668 the lord keeper, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, instigated meetings between Baxter, William Bates, and Thomas Manton on the one side (Baxter also informally consulted Owen), and John Wilkins, now bishop of Chester, and his chaplain, Humphrey Burton, on the other. These discussions led to Hale's drawing up a comprehension bill which, however, the Commons refused to entertain. In 1670 Baxter had discussions with Lauderdale, who offered him, with the king's consent, whatever ecclesiastical or academic position in Scotland he might desire, even a bishopric. At the invitation of Broghill, now earl of Orrery, in December 1673 Baxter drew up a paper summarizing what would unite all English protestants against the papists, but the draft was much criticized by George Morley, now bishop of Winchester, to whom Orrery passed it. In 1675 there was a new round of negotiations between Baxter, Manton, Bates, and Matthew Poole and the episcopalians Tillotson and Edward Stillingfleet, encouraged, so it was reported, by Morley, Seth Ward, bishop of Salisbury, Charles Howard, first earl of Carlisle, and George Savile, then Viscount Halifax. These negotiations again came to nothing. 
After his brief imprisonment in 1669, Baxter and his wife moved to Totteridge, near Barnet in Hertfordshire. It was there, 'in a troublesome, poor, smoaky, suffocating Room, in the midst of daily pains of the Sciatica', that Baxter wrote his Latin work of systematic divinity, 'Methodus theologiae Christianae' (1681), intended to make up with 'A Christian Directory' 'one Compleat Body of 'Theologie', The 'Latin' one the Theory, and the 'English' one the Practical part' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.70, 3.190). There he enjoyed the companionship of John Corbet, his friend from the 1640s, who, with his wife, in the summer of 1670 went to live in the Baxters' house. When, in March 1672, Charles II's declaration of indulgence was issued, Baxter hesitated before applying for a licence to preach. In common with many, he suspected that the papists were the beneficiaries chiefly intended; he had misgivings about the legality of the indulgence and doubted it would be confirmed by parliament; he was chary of any expedient as arbitrary as the exercise of the royal prerogative; but above all, toleration of dissenting religious opinion and practice as a national policy would spell the end of his hopes of a comprehension which could accommodate that diversity within a national church: it would institute nonconformity within the religious life of the nation. Nevertheless, on 25 October Baxter did eventually apply for a licence, provided that it were issued to him as 'a mere Nonconformist', rather than in the name of a particular sect or denomination. The licence was issued to him as 'a Nonconforming Minister' on 27 October, and, unusually, it authorized him to preach 'in any licensed or allowed Place' (Turner, 1.575). He preached publicly for the first time since 1662 on 19 November 1672. 
Although parliament compelled the king to withdraw the indulgence on 7 March 1673 Baxter's period of retirement was over. For the rest of his life he preached and ministered as and where he could (though never gathering a congregation of his own and always with respect to parishioners' obligation to their parish church). He was first invited to become one of the Merchants' lecturers at Pinners' Hall, though after delivering four lectures claims that he opposed congregationalism and that he 'Preached up 'Arminianism', and Free-Will, and 'Man's Power'' led him to withdraw ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.103). At Easter 1673 he and his wife moved to a house in Southampton Square (now Bloomsbury Square). With her active and resourceful encouragement, rooms were hired over St James's market house in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields where Baxter preached each morning. He preached also, with the assistance of Joseph Read, in a meeting-house built at his wife's instigation in Dyott Street, Bloomsbury. On Thursdays he preached at a meeting-house in Fetter Lane, off Fleet Street in Holborn. These activities led to prosecutions under the second 'Conventicle Act', which were ineffective, but in June 1675 he had to submit to a warrant for the distraint of $50 worth of goods. He and his wife then moved from Southampton Square to a house in Oxendon Street, running parallel to Haymarket, where his wife built a meeting-house, but after Baxter had preached there only one day, Sir Henry Coventry, secretary of state, whose house was adjoining in what became Coventry Street, had a warrant issued for Baxter's arrest. Baxter eluded the officers and retired to the house of his friend Richard Beresford at Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire. During this visit in the second half of 1675 he engaged in a seven-hour public debate with the leading Quaker William Penn, followed by an exchange of letters. When he returned to London, Baxter refrained from public preaching, such was the closeness of the watch kept upon him by the authorities. On 16 April 1676 he began to preach again at a meeting-house hired by his wife in Swallow Street, off Piccadilly. On 9 November 1676, however, he had to desist since constables with a warrant set guard upon the door to the meeting-house. When, after this incident, Baxter, on the recommendation of Lauderdale, spoke to Henry Compton, bishop of London, about his situation, there was an outcry that the bishop, who 'spake very fairly, with peaceable words', 'was Treating of a Peace with the Presbyterians' (ibid., 3.178). Margaret Baxter then recommended that Baxter should preach each Sunday to a congregation in Globe Alley, Southwark, whose minister, Thomas Wadsworth, had died on 26 October 1676, which he was able to do throughout 1677 without disturbance by law officers. 
During the 1680s Baxter sustained a series of trials and adversities. The decade opened with a succession of bereavements, including, in 1680, the deaths of his friends John Corbet and Henry Ashurst, for both of whom Baxter preached and published funeral sermons (1681), and, most grievously, on 14 June 1681 of his wife, of whose life he published 'A Breviate' (1681). It was under the emotional pressure of his grief at her death that he published his 'Poetical Fragments' (1681). In October 1682 constables executed warrants to distrain goods to the value of $195 in fines for preaching, taking all his possessions, 'even the bed that I lay sick on', and 'threatned to com upon me again', so that Baxter had 'utterly to forsake my House and Goods and all, and take secret Lodgings distant in a stranger's House' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.191). In November 1684 he was again arrested, and bound over to good behaviour in the sum of $400. And then, at the instigation of L'Estrange, so Baxter believed, he was arrested on 28 February 1685 and imprisoned in the king's bench prison, Southwark, to be brought before Judge George Jeffreys to answer the charge that passages in his 'Paraphrase on the New Testament' (1685) were seditious. (To the second edition of 1695 is appended Baxter's own account of the cause of his imprisonment, with the accused passages (see Keeble and Nuttall, 2.283-4).) Even within the records of proceedings conducted by that intemperate and partisan judge, Jeffreys's behaviour towards Baxter was a scandal and a disgrace to his profession. Among the extant Baxter letters there is an eyewitness account, written ten years later, of Baxter being supported at the bar by Henry Ashurst (1645-1711), the son of Baxter's old friend, created a baronet in 1688, while Jeffreys was 'driveing on furiously, like that Great Hanebal, makeing his way over the alps with fire and vinegar, pouring all the contempt and scorn upon him, as if he had ben a link boy or rak kennel' (a rake-kennel was a scavenger) (ibid., 2.331). Baxter's bearing under this onslaught so impressed Tillotson that he later wrote to Sylvester 'Nothing more honourable than when the Reverend Baxter stood at bay, berogued, abused, despised -- Never more great than then' (ibid., 2.330). Baxter was found guilty, fined 500 marks, and imprisoned until it was paid. He returned to prison, though he passed at least some of his term of confinement in a nearby private house. During these eighteen months he devoted himself to sustained study of the book of 'Revelation', engaging in a correspondence with the millenarian Thomas Beverley, with whose confident predictions of the apocalypse he was to disagree in 'The Glorious Kingdom of Christ' (1691) and 'A Reply to Mr. Tho. Beverley's Answer' (1691). 
Through the good offices of William Herbert, then marquess of Powis, Baxter's fine was remitted on 24 November 1686 and he moved to a house in Charterhouse Yard (now Charterhouse Square) in Finsbury. There he assisted Sylvester to minister to his congregation in Rutland House, preaching, when his health allowed, every Sunday morning and alternate Thursdays. He welcomed the revolution of 1688 and the accession of William in an unpublished paper, 'King James his abdication of the crown plainly proved' (Thomas, 24b), and in 'R. Baxters Sence of the Subscribed Articles of Religion' (1689) gratefully accepted the provisions of the 'Act of Toleration'. He had not, however, abandoned his old hopes: in 'An End of Doctrinal Controversies' (1691) he published 'a Summary of 'Catholick' reconciling 'Theology'' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.182); in 'Church Concord' (1691) he supported the Happy Union of Presbyterians and Independents; and he looked still towards a comprehensive national protestant church, whose reformed character he defended 'Against the Revolt to a Foreign Jurisdiction' (1691), that is, of Rome. Still, too, he sought to safeguard protestant doctrine from antinomianism in 'The Scripture Gospel Defended' (1690), a piece provoked by the republication of the sermons of Tobias Crisp, though by so doing he exacerbated the doctrinal differences within nonconformity which were to lead to the breakup of the Happy Union in 1692. 
Baxter died on 8 December 1691, in Charterhouse Yard, after a steady decline during the previous months. He was buried, like his wife, in Christ Church Greyfriars. The funeral sermon was preached by William Bates and published in 1692. By his will of 27 July 1689, proved on 23 December 1691, Baxter left property in Eaton Constantine to William Baxter, his first cousin once removed. He left to Sylvester his books, with directions that they should be distributed among young students, and his manuscripts, with instructions that they were to be published only with the approval of William Lorimer, Thomas Doelittle, Roger Morrice, or Daniel Williams. Five works were posthumously published (most notably the autobiographical 'Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1696, edited by Sylvester), but a great mass of papers remains unpublished -- held, with Baxter's letters, in Dr Williams's Library, London. 
Even in the Kidderminster years, amid association and parochial business, Baxter's 'Writings were my chiefest daily Labour' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.84). He was a quite exceptionally prolific writer, the author of more than 130 books (the exact figure depends upon how works published in a variety of forms are counted), several of them folios over 1 million words in length, as well as of hundreds of letters and unpublished papers and treatises. The majority of his published works are exercises in homiletic, catechetical, practical, or controversial divinity, but he essayed also meditative works, biblical commentary and paraphrase, poetry, historiography, biography and autobiography, and, in 'The Poor Mans Family Book' (1674), a dialogic fiction in the manner of Arthur Dent. These works enjoyed an unprecedented popularity, many titles -- notably 'The Saints Everlasting Rest' and 'A Call to the Unconverted' (1658) -- going through repeated printings. Puritanism had always utilized the press, but there had never been a literary career like this, either in scale or in success: Baxter was the first author of a string of best-sellers in British literary history. 
Baxter received nothing for his publications. It was his custom to receive from his publisher copies of the published text in lieu of a fee; these he gave away (see Keeble and Nuttall, 2.287-8, for an account of these arrangements). Until 1681 his publisher was the Kidderminster bookseller Nevill Simmons; he was succeeded by B. Simmons, probably his widow, who had perhaps to give up the business as a consequence of having published the 'Paraphrase on the New Testament', her last known imprint. Thereafter Baxter used booksellers such as Thomas Parkhurst who specialized in nonconformist writing. After the Restoration he had the provisions of the 'Licensing Act' with which to contend. It was his rule not to evade the law by surreptitious printing without licence, but in order to procure licences he had several times to excise passages which offended the censor. Marvell's antagonist, Samuel Parker, refused to license the manuscript of 'The Cure of Church Divisions'. What was withheld as unpublishable became evident when, with the lapse of the act in 1679, Baxter published within two years a succession of defences of nonconformity, beginning with 'The Nonconformists Plea for Peace' (1679). There followed its 'Second Part' (1680), its 'Defence' (1680), 'An Apology for the Nonconformists Ministry' (1681), 'A Second True Defence of the Meer Nonconformists' (1681), and 'A Third Defence of the Cause of Peace' (1681). 
This literary career was not planned or premeditated. Baxter himself maintained that every one of his titles was ''extorted'' from him by ''sudden unexpected occasion'' and written 'by the unexpected conduct of Gods urgent Providence' ('Right Method for a Settled Peace of Conscience', 1653, prefatory epistle, sig. b2'v', and 'Paraphrase on the New Testament', 1685, sig. A3; Keeble and Nuttall, 1.97, 2.267), and many were addressed to a pressing need; but Baxter was ready with his pen upon even slight occasion. He wrote with extraordinary facility and at great speed. Tillotson 'oft pressed him to let his books lie by him some time, & to review them again & again, but could never prevail with him, who said, they must come forth so, or not at all' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.329). Baxter's wife was of a similar mind, believing he would have 'done better to have written fewer Books, and to have done those few better' (Baxter, 'Breviate', 9), and privately Baxter himself came to agree 'that fewer well studied and polished had been better'. Written 'in the crowd of my other Imployments, which would allow me no great Leisure for Polishing and Exactness, or any Ornament', they had no literary pretensions ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.124). Their business was pastoral: 'the Writings of Divines are nothing else but a preaching the Gospel to the eye, as the 'voice' preacheth it to the ear' (Baxter, 'Christian Directory', 1.2.60). Nevertheless, though he published too much, and can be both prolix and repetitive, Baxter is a very considerable writer, remarkable for the unaffected directness of his style, the intimacy of his address to the reader, the interest of his autobiographical and anecdotal digressions, the range of his curiosity, his gift for effective imagery, and his frequently moving homiletic rhetoric. 
Five works stand out from the mass of his publications: 'The Saints Everlasting Rest' has a permanent place within the canon of devotional literature; readers continue to be inspired by the pastoral fervour of 'The Reformed Pastor'; the 'Call to the Unconverted' (1658) is a classic of puritan evangelism; the 'Breviate' is one of the most affecting of seventeenth-century biographies, unique in its intimate record of a marital relationship; and, above all, the 'Reliquiae', which, despite the muddle of its organization, the inaccuracies of its text, and its omission of passages from Baxter's manuscript (much of which is still extant in Dr Williams's Library), is one of the outstanding achievements of early autobiographical writing and an indispensable historical source for the later seventeenth century. Although Sylvester's inadequacies as an editor have been frequently lamented, no one has yet undertaken a full scholarly edition of this work. It is known chiefly through the abridgement first published by J. M. Lloyd Thomas in 1925 which presents a coherent text but at the expense of the extraordinarily compendious character of the original, its comprehensive account of current affairs, its wide-ranging curiosity, and its vital engagement with contemporary controversies, political and ecclesiastical. It is both a greater and more idiosyncratic work than any abridgement could represent. 
Both that curiosity and that disputatiousness are much in evidence in Baxter's correspondence. He was an indefatigable and voluminous letter-writer, as willing to answer the least query from a troubled parishioner as to argue a theological case with a university professor, or to respond to an unsolicited enquiry from a reader of one of his books as to approaches from peers and politicians. The 1200 or so extant letters exchanged with some 350 correspondents afford a richly varied insight not only into Baxter's own thinking and relationships, but also into the culture of the times as it was lived and experienced at every level (or, at least, every literate level) of society. The largest single group among Baxter's correspondents consists of some seventy men who became nonconformist ministers at the Restoration, but the interest of the letters is not confined to the history of nonconformity, ecclesiastical affairs, or theological controversy. Baxter was an acute enquirer into matters arcane and mundane, inveterately interested in both public affairs and individuals' experience, encyclopaedically industrious in establishing the grounds for the opinions which, for over half a century, he freely discussed in letters with persons of every walk of life, from peers, the gentry, and members of the professions, to merchants, apprentices, farmers, and seamen. The result is not merely a rich historical archive: the range of this correspondence, the vitality of its engagement with a great variety of topics, the immediacy of its expression, and the unpredictabilities of its mood and tone make this collection a record of felt experience unique among early epistolary archives. 
Though he was very chary of prophetic radicalism, Baxter could respond to intimations of the divine as enthusiastically, even mystically, as any Quaker. He was equally sensitive to more disturbing supernatural phenomena, believing in witchcraft and in ghosts: one of his last works was a collection of evidences of 'The Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits' (1691). Nevertheless, and despite his inveterate disputatiousness and a temperament which could be impatient, irritated, and severe, Baxter valued reasonableness, good sense, and moderation. Works such as 'The Unreasonableness of Infidelity' (1655) and 'The Reasons of the Christian Religion' (1667) demonstrate affinities with the Cambridge Platonists and set Baxter in the line of developing rationalism which was to lead to John Locke and the deists. In all the century's ecclesiological and doctrinal disputes, he sought a middle way. On church order, 'You could not (except a Catholick Christian) have trulier called me, than an 'Episcopal-Presbyterian-Independent'' (Baxter, 'Third Defence', 'Answer to Hinckley', 110). In doctrine he followed Amyraldus (Moise Amyraut) in developing a mean between Calvinism and Arminianism which maintained the decree of election but rejected predestined reprobation and a limited atonement. 'Richard Baxter's Catholick Theologie' (1675) sought to reconcile the opposed doctrinal camps. Similarly, as a nonconformist Baxter refused to separate wholly from the established church and practised occasional conformity. 
This repeated transgression of partisan boundaries makes Baxter a subtle and elusive figure; but it also testifies to an almost visionary consistency and simplicity (in the best sense) in his thought. He declined to accept any denominational label, always describing himself as a 'meer Christian' (a term later taken up by C. S. Lewis), 'catholick Christian', or 'mere Catholick': 'the Church that I am of is the Christian Church, and hath been visible wherever the Christian Religion and Church hath been visible: But must you know what Sect or Party I am of? I am against all Sects and dividing Parties: But if any will call 'Meer Christians' by the name of a 'Party'... I am of that Party which is so against Parties: If the Name of CHRISTIAN be not enough, call me a CATHOLICK CHRISTIAN. (Baxter, 'Church-History', 'What history is credible', sig. b1)' To his application for a licence under the 1672 indulgence he appended a statement of 'My Case' which began: 'My Religion is meerly Christian... The Church which I am a member of is the universality of Christians; in conjunction with all particular Churches of Christians in England or elsewhere in the world, whose communion according to my capacity I desire. (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.140)' When asked to define this 'mere Christianity' he referred to the creed, decalogue, and Lord's prayer, refusing further elaboration. To his mind, confessions of faith were invariably divisive because invariably troubling to some sincere consciences. In any case, words are never adequate to express the divine will and nature. With remarkable boldness, at the meetings in London in 1654-5 he had argued that 'no particular Words in the World are 'Essentials' of our Religion' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.198). Such liberalism was at once infuriating in its vagueness and intolerable in its laxity to more doctrinaire contemporaries, be they Independent or episcopalian. 
Baxter might allow only that he adhered to the belief and practice of the primitive church, but within his own lifetime the emphases of his thought and ministry were recognized as constituting a distinctively Baxterian position. Baxter records having heard the adjective 'Baxterian' in 1680, but as early as 1653 it was used by John Crandon in the prefatory epistle of his 'Mr. Baxters Aphorismes Exorcized' and in 1659 by the Fifth Monarchist John Rogers (J. Rogers, 'A Christian Concertation with Mr. Prin', 1659, 6). For Baxter's critics the term denoted confused thinking: ''Baxterianism'... is a meer Gallimophery, Hodg-podg Divinity' ([S. Young], 'Vindiciae anti-Baxterianae', 1696, 111). By the end of the century, however, those sympathetic to Baxter's desire to moderate differences constituted a recognizable strand in dissent to which belonged, for example, Manton, Bates, Howe, and, in the next generation, Daniel Williams and Edmund Calamy. It was Calamy who, in his 1702 abridgement of the 'Reliquiae' and its successive enlargements, transformed Baxter's autobiographical papers into a history of nonconformity and a comprehensive record of the lives of ejected ministers; and in his 'Defence of Moderate Nonconformity' (1703-5) he passed the Baxterian tradition to the eighteenth century. 
Baxter was especially admired by Philip Doddridge and by John Wesley and he continued to be revered by nineteenth-century dissent for his combination of commitment with catholicity, of zeal with reasonableness, qualities which commended him to Church of England clergy quite as strongly as to nonconformists. The list of those who have written admiringly of him crosses all shades of ecclesiastical and theological opinion: William Blaikie, John Brown, Coleridge, Alexander Gordon, Hensley Henson, William Magee, Geoffrey F. Nuttall, John Ryle, Arthur Stanley, John Stoughton, Richard Trench, John Tulloch. In its interdenominational character this list (which could easily be extended) is a fine and fitting testimony to the genius of Baxterianism. 

Margaret Baxter (bap. 1636, d. 1681), religious nonconformist and wife of Richard Baxter, was born in Apley Castle, near Wellington, Shropshire, the second daughter of Francis Charlton (died 1642) and his wife, Mary (died 1661). She was baptized in Wellington parish church on 18 September 1636. The Charltons were long established gentry, 'one of the Chief Families in the county' (Baxter, 'Breviate', 1). After her husband's death on 22 November 1642, Mary Charlton married Thomas Hanmer, to protect her family in time of war and to prevent the estate's heir, Margaret's younger brother Francis (1639-1698), from becoming the ward of his uncle Robert Charlton, the 'next heir', whom she distrusted (ibid., 2). Hanmer was a royalist and in March 1643 he agreed to a demand from the lord lieutenant of Shropshire, Arthur Capel, first Baron Capel, that Apley Castle should be fortified and garrisoned, but in 1644 it was won by parliamentarian forces, plundered, and Hanmer taken prisoner. The children, including Margaret, witnessed this engagement. It appears that Robert Charlton then took charge of the children, but that some time later Mary Hanmer, 'by great wisdom and diligence, surprised them' and conveyed them 'to one Mr. 'Bernards' in 'Essex'' (ibid.). She then managed the estate until the marriage in 1655 or 1656 of Francis to Dorothy, daughter of Oliver St John. 
In 1655 or 1656 Mary Hanmer rented a house in Kidderminster and moved there in order, it appears, to be under Richard Baxter's ministry. Her son Francis Charlton believed that Baxter exerted an undue influence over his mother, turning her against him. Margaret Charlton stayed for a time in Oxford with her sister, Mary ('b'. 1631), wife of Ambrose Upton, canon of Christ Church, where a sermon by Henry Hickman 'much moved her' and induced 'serious thoughts on her present state, and her salvation' (Baxter, 'Breviate', 4). By early 1658 she had joined her mother in Kidderminster. The next year she endured a prolonged spiritual crisis and also a period of serious ill health. Passages she extracted from letters of counsel received from Baxter during this period, together with extracts from her own papers of self-analysis and meditation, which Baxter saw only after her death, were printed by him in the 'Breviate'. Her recovery of good health she attributed to Baxter's prayers, and of faith to his ministerial care. On 10 April 1660 a service of thanksgiving was held for her. The preceding night she reaffirmed her covenant with God in a paper (ibid., 10-21) which in 'Poetical Fragments' Baxter versified in a poem from which derives the hymn 'Lord, it belongs not to my care' (Baxter, 'Poetical Fragments', 81-3). 
Two days later Baxter set out for London, and, probably in the summer, Margaret Charlton and her mother followed, taking rooms in Sweetings Alley (now Aldersgate Street), off Threadneedle Street, close to Baxter's accommodation with his friend Thomas Foley in Austin Friars. In January 1661 Mary Hanmer died. Baxter preached her funeral sermon at St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, and, though no copy is known, apparently published it, since in 1682 it was 'reprinted at the desire of her Daughter, before her death' as 'The Last Work of a Believer'. A relationship between Baxter and Margaret Charlton was rumoured in London in 1661. On 29 April 1662 a licence was granted for their marriage, which took place on 10 September at St Benet Fink, performed by Baxter's old friend Samuel Clarke. The difference in bride and groom's ages and social status occasioned much comment (she brought a dowry of $1650). For the remainder of her life Margaret Baxter was to sustain her husband with emotional, spiritual, and material support without which, it may fairly be conjectured, he could hardly have survived the adversities of the years ahead. To his deep affection for her, and indebtedness to her, he gives moving testimony in the 'Breviate of the Life of Margaret Baxter' (1681). 
From the 'Breviate' it appears that Margaret Baxter, though a truly devout woman, remained prone to misgivings and doubts about her own sincerity. Her 'too timerous and tender a nature' and her vulnerability to 'a diseased fearfulness' her husband attributed in part to her childhood experience of the war (Baxter, 'Breviate', 9, 76). She was, nevertheless, of resolute character, full of initiative and resourcefulness, which, with her willingness to expend her estate on his behalf, enabled her repeatedly to secure London properties for her husband to preach in. She accompanied him to Clerkenwell prison in 1669 and 'was never so chearful a Companion' as then, having brought with her 'so many Necessaries, that we kept House as contentedly and comfortably as at home' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.50-51). He 'never knew her equal' in practical divinity: she was, in her husband's view, ''better at resolving a case of conscience than most Divines that ever I knew in all my life'', so that he came 'to put all, save secret cases, to her' (Baxter, 'Breviate', 67, 68); it may be conjectured that in its directions and resolutions 'A Christian Directory' preserves something of Margaret Baxter's advice. 
John Corbet's wife, Frances, who had returned to live with the Baxters after the death of her husband in December 1680, was with Margaret Baxter when she died on 14 June 1681. Margaret was buried on 17 June in her mother's grave in the chancel of Christ Church Greyfriars. John Howe, her husband's friend since the 1650s, preached and published the funeral sermon. From her will of 10 February 1670 it appears that prior to her marriage Thomas Foley, Richard Hampden, and John Swinfen had been appointed trustees of her estate; they were required after her death to disburse the (unspecified) remainder of her estate as she had signified to her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 67885


Crace family (per. c.1725-c.1900), interior decorators, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 67889


Common, John William (1903-1968), novelist and essayist, was born on 15 August 1903 at 44 Third Avenue, Heaton, Newcastle upon Tyne, the only son and second of the four children of John Common, engine driver, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Johnson. He had two younger sisters, Lilian and Jessie; his elder sister died young. After attending Chillingham Road School, Heaton, where he showed a talent for writing and developed a lifelong love of Shelley, he went on in 1917 to Skerry's Commercial College, Newcastle. This, however, led only to an unsatisfying job in a solicitor's office, followed by intermittent casual employment. By 1924 he was a vigorous debater at the Newcastle Socialist Society in the Royal Arcade, then the location of the pioneering People's Theatre, with its stimulating performances of Shaw, O'Casey, and Pirandello. Plans for a degree course at Durham University came to nothing, but Common was by now submitting articles (typed on his old Monarch) to the literary magazines. John Middleton Murry at 'The Adelphi' gave him encouragement, and in 1928 (against his father's wishes) Common made his way to London to earn a precarious living by freelancing in left-wing literary circles. He rose to be editor of 'The Adelphi' in 1935-6. 
Common's writing was warm, ironic, and intensely political in a non-abstract way, while being occasionally garrulous and couched in a quirky style which strove to combine proletarian directness with intellectual rumination. Without employing dialect, he conveyed something of the cadences of his local speech. He won admirers throughout the 1930s as a writer with a genuine proletarian viewpoint, as distinct from the purveyors of middle-class Marxist fiction. He inspired, prefaced, and edited the compilation 'Seven Shifts' (1938), in which seven working men told of their experience. In the same year he published a collection of his own essays, 'The Freedom of the Streets', which was a continual spur to thought with its wry humanity and subtle analysis of working-class attitudes. Common showed why a propensity for speculative thinking might be a profitable asset to a middle-class child, but led to endless friction at a lower level of society; or why a bright proletarian youth might wilfully fondle his inhibitions, loath to sully his innocence by joining the responsible decision-making class. V. S. Pritchett considered 'The Freedom of the Streets' to be the most influential book in his life, and George Orwell heard 'the authentic voice of the ordinary man, the man who might infuse a new decency into the control of affairs if only he could get there, but who in practice never seems to get much further than the trenches, the sweatshop and the jail. ('New English Weekly', 16 June 1938)' For his part, the clear-eyed Common saw Orwell, whom he had first met at the 'Adelphi' offices, as something of a sheep in wolf's clothing (in pubs the barmen always called Orwell 'sir'). The two remained friends, however, corresponding and occasionally meeting when Common was running the village shop in Datchworth, Hertfordshire, about 10 miles from Orwell's Wallington cottage. The impractical Orwell asked Common's advice on setting up his own shop. At this time Common and his partner, Mary Anderson (1901-1942), a childhood friend from Newcastle who went south to join him, had a son, Peter; another son, Robert, was born later. Though they never married, touching love letters survive from their courtship. Common was poor enough by now to be subsidized by Orwell on occasion, and when the latter was in Morocco in 1938 Common and Mary Anderson looked after the Wallington cottage. 
At some time during the Second World War Common moved to Frating Community Farm in Essex, where pacifists contributed to the war effort by farming. Mary died in 1942 from cancer, and Common began living with Constance Helena (Connie) McConnell-Wood, 'nee' Sambidge (1902-1979), another Newcastle friend of his youth. Their daughter Caroline Alison (Sally) was born in 1944 (she was sixteen when her parents eventually married, in 1961). Twin daughters, Mary and Charmian, were born in 1946. Meanwhile Common took part in a number of wartime radio broadcasts, including a lively debate, 'What Matters?', broadcast on 19 June 1942, which featured two opposing sets of speakers representing, roughly, suburbia and 'the streets'. Common remarked: 'I like a good argument' (BBC written archive). After the war he was engaged in writing film scripts including 'Good Neighbours' (1946), about a community scheme in a Scottish town; he also travelled to Newfoundland on another film assignment. The family changed residence several times, ending up in a council house at 32 Warren Hamlet, Storrington, Sussex, with Common trying to make ends meet by working at a mushroom nursery, while toiling over scripts and reviews at night, and writing for himself in between. He was acutely oppressed by financial insecurity -- and the lack of beer and tobacco. 
In 1951 Turnstile Press published Common's best-known book, the autobiographical 'Kiddar's Luck', in which he vividly described his childhood on the streets of Edwardian Tyneside, as seen through the lens of his adult socialism. There were four chapters on his life before five years of age -- a feat of detailed memory -- while his mother's alcoholism and the overbearing father whom he at length dramatically defied formed the dark background to the vigorous, at times bravura, narrative. The book found praise as a slice of Geordie naturalism, a convincing depiction of 'the other England', which so beguiled the imagination of contemporary intellectuals. On the other hand, its irony and subtly bitter universality went largely unrecognized. In 'The Ampersand' (1954) Common took the story further, but his publishers went into liquidation two years later. Neither book was a commercial success, and Common did not complete the trilogy with his long-promised 'Riches and Rare', a novel set in Newcastle at the time of the general strike. 
In 1956 Common embarked upon a two-year stint as guide to Chastleton House in the Cotswolds, a position obtained for him through Sir Richard Rees, a friend from 'Adelphi' days. Predictable disagreements with the owner, Alan Clutton-Brock, put an end to an arrangement whereby Common had been able to get some writing done in the winter months. In 1958 a friend from Frating days, Irene Palmer, was instrumental in obtaining a rented Georgian house at 14 St John Street, in the centre of Newport Pagnell. There Common spent hours working on books for film treatment reviews in the 'garden' (a cemetery), walking with Connie in the countryside they both loved, and reading to his children. His daughter Sally later recalled listening to Shelley and 'Umar Khayyam in the Fitzgerald translation, whose atheistic stance Common was at pains to emphasize. He had always been interested in astronomy (his Uncle Robin was a flat-earther), and Fred Hoyle's theory of an endlessly self-renewing universe, which dispensed with a creator, was attractive. 
Though not a tactile person, Common was not a stern parent and never struck his children. He had small, feminine hands, badly stained with nicotine, and, Geordie-fashion, left domestic work to his wife. He was not a joiner or an activist, nor did he encourage his children to be so. He did, however, blossom in the right setting, often in pubs (his favourite was The Bull in Newport Pagnell), where he enjoyed political arguments with self-taught thinkers like himself. Another favourite haunt was the nearby working men's club on Silver Street, where he took his slippered ease at the bar. He was a connoisseur of beer and was described by his friend Tommy McCulloch as 'fairly jolly' at this period, though he retained his hatred of the 'bulky bourgeoisie' -- and kept his Newcastle accent (private information). Laurence Bradshaw used Common's brow as a model for his bust of Karl Marx in Highgate cemetery, saying that he found there a similar patience and understanding. 
Too old to be an angry young man of the 1950s, Common could not sustain a career in writing. His political attitudes were by now out of fashion, and when he sent the manuscript of 'In Whitest Britain' (1961) to his friend Eric Warman, Warman replied in a letter of 7 June 1961 that he was sorry such a 'bloody good writer' could not achieve success. Nevertheless there was too much 'class distinction' in the book, and the downtrodden, golden-hearted workman was a dated 'leading cliche' (Jack Common MSS). Thus Common, perhaps the finest chronicler of the English working class to follow Robert Tressell, spent his last years in Newport Pagnell writing film treatments at poor rates. He died there of lung cancer on 20 January 1968 and was cremated at Bedford on 24 January. He was survived by his wife and children, and left a mass of unpublished material, now held in the Robinson Library of the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. 


@@@@@


doc= 67890


Laing, Andrew (1856-1931), marine engineer, was born in Edinburgh on 31 January 1856, the son of George Laing, a builder and contractor, and his wife, Janet Thomson. It was thought that he would enter his father's business, and he was educated with this in mind. After attending the Edinburgh normal school he went to James Baillie's private school in Morningside, where there was an emphasis on commercial education. Instead of entering the family firm he was apprenticed to Hogg and Walker, engineers and millwrights, in Edinburgh. In 1877 Laing entered the drawing office of the shipbuilders John Elder & Co. in Glasgow as an engineering draughtsman. During the early years he worked under Dr A. C. Kirk, the renowned developer of triple-expansion engines. His arrival coincided with the development of fast Atlantic liners, such as the Guion liner 'Arizona'. Laing was promoted rapidly, becoming chief draughtsman in 1881, assistant manager in 1885, and engine-works manager in 1887. Finally, in 1890, he was appointed a director of what had now become the Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company. He was responsible for the engining of a number of Cunard liners, as well as warships, Castle liners, and Norddeutscher Lloyd vessels. Under him the engine and boiler works were redeveloped, and the company he served remained at the forefront of technical innovation. 
It was therefore something of a surprise when Laing moved to Tyneside as the manager of the engine works of the Wallsend Slipway and Engineering Company in 1896. The move was apparently prompted by a dispute with his fellow directors over remuneration, a situation probably not helped by Laing's forceful manner, but for which he would probably have remained in Glasgow. Fairfield's loss was undoubtedly Wallsend's gain, as Laing's influence transformed a business hitherto devoted to the construction and repair of machinery for ordinary cargo vessels. Laing's first important design at Wallsend was the machinery for the Russian icebreaker 'Ermak', and in 1900 the company secured its first Admiralty contract. As the company history puts it: 'Andrew Laing was a man of outstanding energy and imagination, and his talents were exactly what the company needed at this period of rich possibilities in ship-propulsion technology. To his already considerable reputation, he was soon to add the title of the man who 'sold' the turbine engine to the sponsors of the 'Mauretania'. ('Launching Ways', 34)' The contract for the 'Mauretania' was of such a scale that it precipitated a reorganization of the industry on Tyneside. The merged company of Swan, Hunter, and Wigham Richardson Ltd took a controlling interest in the Wallsend Slipway and Engineering Company, who built the quadruple-screw turbine propelling machinery for the giant liner. During the First World War the company engined sixty-eight vessels of all types, including the battleships 'Queen Elizabeth' and 'Malaya'. The need to improve engine performance led Laing to develop the Wallsend-Howden system of oil firing, which began manufacture in 1909. Sir Reginald Skelton recalled Laing's 'vigour and independence of thought and his accurate judgment ever inclining towards prudence and caution, but well tempered by an appreciation of the necessity for continuous progress' (Skelton, 48). 
Laing, who had become a director at Wallsend in 1903, eventually became a director of Swan, Hunter as well as of the Newcastle and Gateshead Gas Company. He was appointed CBE in 1917 for his war work, and in 1930 the North-East Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders bestowed its highest distinction on him, an honorary fellowship. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, a vice-president of the Institution of Naval Architects, and a member of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland, the American Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers, and the American Society of Naval Engineers. He also served on a number of technical committees and research bodies. Although he was deeply interested in research, Laing's only publication was 'Fifty years of steamship machinery installations', which appeared in the 'Marine Engineer' in June 1929. 
A life of high achievement was lived with a narrow focus, for Laing was unmarried and had no interests outside marine engineering. At his death he and his close contemporary Sir Charles Parsons were considered to be on a par, 'as being the two greatest marine engineers in the world' ('Transactions of the North-East Coast Institution', 432), since when he has been comparatively overlooked. In his lifetime he was reckoned to have supervised the construction of engines amounting to 5 million horsepower. During a business trip to London, Laing caught a chill that developed into pneumonia. He died at his home, 15 Osborne Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 24 January 1931 and was buried in Morningside cemetery, Edinburgh, on 29 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 67893


Burn, William Laurence (1904-1966), historian and lawyer, was born on 15 October 1904 at Bombay House, Angate Street, Wolsingham, co. Durham, the only son of Laurence Burn (1864-1920) and his wife, Annie (1871-1931), daughter of William Coates of Oakcroft, Wolsingham. Burn's father was a minor landowner and tradesman, possessing a local quasi-patriarchal position which his son was to inherit. Burn was educated at Wolsingham grammar school (1914-19), Durham School (1919-22), and Merton College, Oxford (1922-5). He graduated with a second-class degree in modern history in 1925 and was appointed assistant in history at the University of St Andrews. In 1929 he became assistant lecturer in colonial and American history. While a Rockefeller fellow in America in 1932-3 he married (in the latter year) Alice (1902-1970), eldest daughter of John Proud of Wolsingham. Their son, Nicholas, was born in 1936. In 1932 Burn was called to the bar (Inner Temple), and for the remainder of his life historical scholarship and the law provided twin strands to his career. 
During his ten years at St Andrews, Burn established himself as a historian. His main achievement there was the publication in 1937 of 'Emancipation and Apprenticeship in the British West Indies'. Many years later this was still seen as 'a scholarly monograph and the definitive work on apprenticeship' (E. Williams, 'From Columbus to Castro', 1970, 545). Already a distinctive quality which combined his two main interests, history and law, was apparent, for his starting point was the act of 1833 which emancipated the slaves. He posed the questions, 'How does the statute emerge, in the end, from the mill of human obstinacy, apathy and selfishness? Are its results such that, had they been accurately foreseen, it would ever have been passed?' ('Emancipation and Apprenticeship', 7). 
Nevertheless, despite scholarly distinction, Burn's years at St Andrews were not entirely congenial. The role of junior staff at Scottish universities was distinctly subordinate. Initially he was essentially an assistant to the lecturer in modern history, and even after his position improved in 1929 he 'filled in the many gaps left by the Professor'. Moreover, that academic community was far from harmonious. Burn made many friends and earned a reputation as an excellent teacher, but he also experienced what he later described as 'old rancour' there (letter to Knox, 20 Dec 1938). In 1937 he resigned and returned home to practise as a barrister on the north-eastern circuit and in the Durham chancery court. This did not involve abandoning his historical interests, and he always envisaged a return to academic life. 
In the years immediately before the Second World War Burn clear-sightedly appreciated that war was coming, and enlisted in the army reserve. In 1940 he was called up as a second lieutenant in the Royal Army Service Corps, but his army service proved short-lived. Injured during a parachute descent early in 1941 he contracted phlebitis. He was invalided from the army but was seconded to work in the research department of the Foreign Office. He was one of several distinguished historians employed there, and late in 1943 some of them, including Arnold Toynbee, backed him strongly for a history chair at King's College, Newcastle, in the University of Durham. He hesitated before deciding to accept, but in 1944 took up the chair which he held for the rest of his life. 
Burn made a major contribution to what became, in 1963, the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, by his teaching, his research and publications, and his administrative services. He was largely responsible for the key decision to constitute the senate of the new university as a small body capable of effective executive action rather than as a large and unwieldy assembly. Perhaps even more important, he informally provided counsel to many colleagues. As head of department he was respected and liked by colleagues and students alike. His lectures were popular, interesting, and perceptive. He was a sought-after external examiner, and held visiting appointments at places as diverse as University College, Ibadan, and Johns Hopkins University. He served on the council of the Royal Historical Society from 1954 to 1957, and also on several government commissions. 
During his Newcastle tenure Burn consolidated a reputation as a distinguished scholar, although now his interests had moved to mainstream British history. He was in frequent demand as a reviewer and contributor to historical journals. In a review article in 1953 he wrote of Britain after 1832 that 'There was always plenty, perhaps a majority, of competent, business-like, not too sensitive or scrupulous persons, who took the world as they found it and set themselves to squeeze money or power or position out of it. They were not, perhaps, the most admirable of mankind but they conducted into safer channels feelings which, if left to themselves, might have disrupted society. ('Twentieth-Century', 144.127)' His most significant publication was 'The Age of Equipoise: a Study of the Mid-Victorian Generation' (1964), described by one scholar as 'full of learning, sympathy, insights and wisdom' (D. E. D. Beales, 'Historical Journal', 8, 1965, 418). Another distinguished writer commented: 'To capacious reading, wise discernment, and a scholar's handling of evidence, are added the less usual accompaniments of lightness of touch, visual imagination, and an occasional use of almost impressionistic technique which few professional historians could have devised and fewer would have attempted. (N. Gash, 'Alumnus Chronicle', St Andrews, June 1964, 24.5)' It was an idiosyncratic work, and the author's command of the law as well as of history was evident. The breadth of coverage involved reflected an immense amount of reading in primary sources (a personal affection for Surtees and Trollope was part of his make-up). The book's title was expanded by the appreciation that 'If there was equipoise it was not deliberately planned or contrived. It was the outcome of a temporary balance of forces, but of forces, struggling, pushing, shoving to better their positions' ('Age of Equipoise', 82). At the time the left-wing 'labour history' approach associated with authors like E. J. Hobsbawm and E. P. Thompson was at its height, and 'The Age of Equipoise', together with works by such historians as G. Kitson Clark, O. MacDonagh, and D. Roberts, provided useful balancing factors. Burn's sudden death in 1966 was a blow to historical scholarship, involving the loss of two important projects to which he had turned, one a replacement of the volume for 1870-1914 in the 'Oxford History of England' and the other a major study of Anglo-Irish relations. The president of the Royal Historical Society offered this tribute: 'He brought to his historical studies a first-hand knowledge and understanding of the law, of local government, of public administration, and of county or country society at all levels. He brought also a broad humanity, a sturdy common sense, an ironic wit, an aversion from humbug, and a profound insight into the complexities of human nature and of social and intellectual life. ('The Times', 19 July 1966)' Burn's university work was only part of a busy and varied life. Under the pen-name Richard Sheldon, he wrote two detective novels, 'Poor Prisoner's Defence' (1949) and 'Harsh Evidence' (1950). The latter is much the better of the pair, being written around an imaginary murder trial of 1874; suspense is skilfully built up and lasts until the final verdict at the end. In his early years at Newcastle University commitments still allowed a parallel part-time career as a judge. A Durham county magistrate from 1946, he became deputy chairman of quarter sessions in 1953 and chairman in 1958. This was an important part of his contribution to his home region, but he also served on a variety of local government, farming, and public service institutions. As time went by his commitments became increasingly onerous. The university needed more of his time, and judicial duties grew even more. An observer noted that 'He often looked exhausted, as he sat, by the hour, patiently listening to the crimes of the county paraded before him day by day' ('Northern Echo', 12 July 1966). His health was increasingly threatened, and on 11 July 1966 he died at Dryburn Hospital, Durham, following a sudden heart attack while on his way from his home to Newcastle. His funeral in Wolsingham parish church on 14 July was a most impressive demonstration of the respect and affection felt for him over a wide range of the region's society. He was buried in the churchyard. 
Burn was a devout Anglican, and a churchwarden for many years. In politics he was a staunch Conservative, resigning from a local hospital board after the minister of health, Aneurin Bevan, made a notorious speech describing Conservatives as 'vermin'. He distrusted the state, noting in 1938 that it was 'surely the proper initial step, to believe the government wrong and to resolve upon minimizing whatever amount of power over yourself you are obliged to hand over to them' (Burn to Knox, 13 March 1938). In late 1941 he wrote that 'One great fear that I have is the spread of what I call democratic totalitarianism -- the totalitarianism of Bevin and Morrison -- in this country after the war' (Burn to Knox, 22 Dec 1941). His writings and his conversation were spiced with a pleasing dry wit, and he was a very agreeable companion. 


@@@@@


doc= 67895


Kirkpatrick, John Simpson (1892-1915), war hero, was born at South Shields, co. Durham, on 6 July 1892, the son of Robert Kirkpatrick and his wife, Sarah Simpson. Robert Kirkpatrick was a merchant captain until in 1904 an accident ended his working life. His surviving children, one son baptized John Simpson and three daughters, were still young. Three other sons had died of scarlet fever. The boy attended two local state schools, Barnes Road School and Mortimer Road School in South Shields, but his surviving letters demonstrate that his education was severely limited. From the age of ten or eleven, John made some contribution to the family's small income. A surviving letter to his mother recalled an early escapade in which he had stolen a duck to add to the family's diet. He soon showed a gift for working with animals, first in helping with the riding donkeys on the local beach, and then with a horse-drawn milk cart. 
In 1909, aged seventeen, Kirkpatrick joined a local Territorial Army unit, but when his father died in October the same year he decided to emigrate to Australia. Unable to afford a passage, he joined a Tyne-based coaster and then enlisted on another ship at Leith, intending to desert when she reached Australia. In July 1910 he jumped ship at Newcastle, New South Wales. To avoid legal consequences he dropped his surname and took the name John Simpson. For the next few years he had various jobs, working in a colliery and a cane field, but mostly employed in local shipping. Whenever he could he sent money home to support his mother and sisters. By 1914 he was homesick and when the First World War began he enlisted in the Australian Army Medical Corps in the belief that this would lead to his being posted to Britain. Instead, the 3rd Australian field ambulance was sent to Egypt and then, in April 1915, to Gallipoli. While his transport was moored at Mudros, Simpson broke into the ship's stores to obtain extra food. 
As a medical orderly during the Gallipoli campaign, Simpson's main duty was to convey wounded soldiers (principally those suffering from leg wounds) from the immediate fighting area down to the field hospital in the area of the disembarkation beaches, often under enemy fire, along a route that included Sniper's Alley and Shrapnel Gully. Shortly after the landings he found a stray donkey in a nearby gully and appropriated it. For the next three weeks he continued his rescue work with the donkey, careless of danger and usually whistling cheerfully 'en route'. On 19 May 1915 he was shot by a Turkish sniper, the donkey continuing on its way to the field hospital with its mortally wounded patient. He was buried on the beach at Hell Spit, Gallipoli. 
Subsequently John Simpson Kirkpatrick became an important symbol of Anzac heroism at Gallipoli, his story much exploited for propaganda purposes during the First World War and even revived for similar purposes during the Vietnam war. He is much better known in Australia than in Britain, and Australian pride in his heroism is associated with resentment that it received such inadequate recognition -- only a mention in dispatches -- from the British military authorities. A modern monograph has discussed the mechanism whereby his last weeks acquired such significant and widespread symbolic importance in Australia. Attempts to argue that he was a convinced political radical and an enemy of imperialism, using some unsophisticated expressions attacking wealth and privilege in surviving letters, are less convincing (Cochrane). In Australia monuments to 'the Man with the Donkey' include a full-size bronze statue in the shrine of remembrance at Australia's national war memorial and other statues in at least five cities. A similar statue was erected in South Shields only in 1988, financed by public subscription after the local council refused any subsidy from public funds. Kirkpatrick also appears prominently in a memorial frieze at Gallipoli. In 1965 he was the centrepiece of three Australian postage stamps celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the Gallipoli landings. Annual celebrations in Australia still commemorate his last heroic weeks. 


@@@@@


doc= 67896


Harrison, Arthur (1868-1936), organ builder, was born on 21 February 1868 in College Street, Rochdale, Lancashire, the second of the seven children of Tom Hugh Harrison (1839-1912), organ builder, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' McDowell (died 1921). In 1872 the family moved to Durham, and in 1882, after attending Durham School, Harrison followed his father into the craft of organ building, serving as an apprentice and eventually, in 1893, becoming his partner. The firm's business took him to many parts of the British Isles, but Durham remained his base for the rest of his life. On 24 January 1895 he married Elizabeth Jane Henderson (1869-1946), daughter of the Revd James Henderson, rector of Wallsend. They had three daughters. 
Harrison's first notable instrument, the organ at St Nicholas's, Whitehaven, was completed in 1904 to a design influenced by Lieutenant-Colonel George Dixon, a wealthy amateur who became a close friend. Thanks partly to Dixon's influence, by the outbreak of the First World War Harrison had completed a series of instruments which, through their distinctive tonal qualities, mechanical reliability, and immaculate finish, established the firm of Harrison and Harrison as the foremost organ builder of the day. The organs at Durham and Ely cathedrals (1905, 1908), All Saints, Margaret Street, London (1911), and St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol (1912), were outstanding in the pre-war period. Outstanding in the post-war period was his work at the Caird Hall, Dundee (1923), the Royal Albert Hall, London (1925-33), and King's College, Cambridge (1934). Throughout his career he built small organs of distinction, too, such as those at St John's, Keswick (1912), and All Saints, Maidenhead (1931). 
Harrison's conception of the organ had crystallized by the time of the Ely contract, and there was little essential difference between his Edwardian organs and those he built in the 1920s and 1930s. A romantic conception, developed at a time when organists habitually played orchestral transcriptions, it was influenced by the work of Henry Willis and, in points of detail, by the work of continental builders such as Schulze and Cavaille-Coll, and progressive builders such as Casson and Hope-Jones. It was, moreover, a conception intense in its particularity, and every realization of it called for Harrison's personal involvement. The finishing of an organ was a task Harrison almost invariably undertook himself, to prevent the slightest departure from the proud, highly polished norm. His perfectionism must have made him a demanding colleague, and photographs of him suggest a stern outlook; but portraiture has its conventions, and neither his working practices nor the unsmiling features then demanded by the camera should be allowed to obscure his fine personal qualities. There is humility of a genuine and touching kind in the sentence with which in 1929 this master organ builder at the height of his powers concluded a letter to a small church in Berkshire: 'We should very much like to build this organ for your Church, and I promise you that I would give it my careful personal attention and do everything possible to make it successful. (Archive of Harrison and Harrison Ltd, Durham)' His final letter to George Dixon testifies to a capacity for warm and intimate friendship, and Elvin's account of the reaction to his death suggests that he was widely admired throughout the world of music. As one who enjoyed the patronage of the Church of England, the older universities, and a number of town and city councils, Harrison became something of an establishment figure himself, involved as he was with diocesan bodies and with the Federation of Master Organ Builders, of which he was for a time president. A diplomatic, socially sophisticated man, he moved easily among his clients. 
In November 1936 Harrison interrupted the finishing of the organ at Westminster Abbey in order to undergo an operation for a suspected ulcer. Inoperable cancer was discovered, and he died on 14 November at 16 Fitzroy Square, London. The funeral took place at St Margaret's, Durham, on 18 November, and in 1937 a memorial window was placed in the chapter house of Durham Cathedral. 
Harrison's style of organ building has withstood the twists and turns of fashion, so that instruments built under his auspices, especially those that survive unaltered, are highly regarded, both in Britain and abroad. That he was mainly concerned with tonal design and voicing has tended to obscure the vitally important contribution of his younger brother, Harry Shaw Harrison (1871-1957), who concentrated upon mechanical design. The battleship construction and consequent reliability of Harrison organs and their characteristically elegant, comfortable consoles were, however, an integral (and much appreciated) part of the overall concept, and it was for these things that Harry was responsible. His early career followed very closely that of Arthur; it fell to him to oversee the completion of the Westminster Abbey organ and steer the firm through the vicissitudes of the Second World War. He retired in 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 67899


Fall, James (1646/7-1711), university principal and Church of Scotland and Church of England clergyman, was born of unknown parents, who were related to merchants in Leith and Dunbar. He graduated MA at Edinburgh University in 1665. After serving as governor in the family of Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall he accompanied the sons of Sir George Mowat of Ingliston to France in 1672. Later he attended Lord Charles Bruce at Utrecht and Paris. The bishop of London ordained him deacon in 1678 and priest in 1679. From 1680 to 1683 Fall acted as governor to the earl of Queensberry's two eldest sons in France and Italy and left an account of their travels, eventually published as 'Memoires of my Lord Drumlangrig's... Travells Abroad' (1931). 
Fall's acquaintance with Catholic and protestant scholars and divines in France broadened his theological and ecclesiastical outlook, and reinforced the pietistic influence of Archbishop Robert Leighton. Scottish friends and patrons consulted him about their foreign book purchases. Thanks to Queensberry he became historiographer royal in 1682, but although he translated some Italian histories, he is not known to have written any historical work. 
Appointed principal of Glasgow University in June 1684 Fall was created doctor of theology at St Andrews on 6 August. As principal he made a lasting contribution by improvements to the buildings and precincts. Losing the favour of the duke of Perth in 1686 he was replaced as historiographer by Christopher Irvine. In 1689 he was an important agent representing the grievances of the rabbled and deprived episcopal clergy at court. Although a Williamite and generously latitudinarian, he could not conform to the re-established presbyterian system nor subscribe to the confession of faith. When reluctantly depriving Fall of office in September 1690 the commissioners of visitation of the university acknowledged his good management and his improvement of its revenues. 
It was owing to the archbishops of Canterbury and York, rather than to his old friend Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, that Fall was appointed precentor of York Minster in February 1692. In this refuge he gladly adapted to Anglican ways, leading the daily offices, modulating his accent, and becoming a respected member of the cathedral community and of antiquarian circles. His friend Sir Robert Sibbald described him as 'of great learning, of a penetrating mind, and of a solid judgement, one that knoweth the world, men and business well' (Maidment, 135). As executor of Robert Leighton, Fall edited and published his commentaries and discourses on the 'Psalms' and the first epistle of 'Peter' in 1693 and 1694. He maintained warm friendships across the confessional divide in Scotland, and revisited Scotland to help the trustees of Leighton's library at Dunblane. 
Appointed archdeacon of Cleveland in 1700 Fall also enjoyed the wealthy rectory of Londesborough, 1707-8. Having bequeathed his fine French and Italian books to the minster library, he died unmarried at his home in Minster Yard, York, on 12 June 1711, aged sixty-four, and was buried in the lady chapel of the minster. 


@@@@@


doc= 67900


Ogilvie, William (d. 1635), abbot of Wurzburg, was probably from north-east Scotland, for he used the arms of the Ogilvies of Deskford, Banffshire. Nothing is known of his parentage or early life, but the description 'senex' on his tombstone suggests he was probably born no later than 1575. Converted to Catholicism, he entered the Scots Benedictine monastery at Wurzburg, Germany, probably in 1598, at which time the mutual relationship of the three Scots monasteries in Regensburg, Wurzburg, and Erfurt was not defined. Ogilvie, elected abbot of Erfurt in the winter of 1611-12, was administrator of Regensburg the following winter and in 1613 returned to Wurzburg. 
On 22 January 1615 Ogilvie was elected abbot of Wurzburg. From the start he was subject only to the bishop. His firm and efficient rule led to growth in numbers and prestige, helped greatly by the recent discovery of the grave of St Macarius, its reputedly saintly founder, whose relics became the focus of growing devotion and visits by pilgrims. Prestige was also increased by associates of the Jesuit martyr John Ogilvie entering as novices. The arrival in particular of John Mayne (Silvanus in religion) led to plans for the Scots monks to undertake mission work in Scotland. When Mayne procrastinated William Ogilvie was, in 1629, put in charge of the enterprise by Rome. 
Ogilvie began his abbacy with six resident monks. By 1625 there were twelve and he built a residential block and a gatehouse. Four young monks matriculated at Wurzburg University, then in 1628 Ogilvie was elected its rector magnificus. The bishop made him judge in an ecclesiastical court and in 1627-8 appointed him administrator of Schwarzach Abbey nearby. 
The Thirty Years' War was raging and Swedish protestant forces came to Wurzburg in October 1631. This was Ogilvie's finest hour. As the notables fled he remained and was the town's delegate to treat with the Swedes. Exactly three years later he played a notable part in the recapture of the town. Both during and after the Swedish occupation he was an official for regulating church affairs. Within a year, however, on 17 September 1635, he died. 
The wars caused enormous destruction in south Germany. The Scots monks were scattered; Ogilvie's achievements were largely destroyed. It was, however, his monastic recruits, notably Alexander Baillie, who administered all three abbeys after the debacle and helped to rebuild their fortunes. Wurzburg monks continued to work in Scotland. Ogilvie, the greatest of the Wurzburg abbots, was described on his tombstone in the abbey church as 'de Franconia bene meritus' ('deserving of Franconia's gratitude'). 


@@@@@


doc= 67901


Godwin, Mary Jane (1768-1841), translator and bookseller, was probably the daughter of Peter de Vial, a merchant of Exeter, who apparently died bankrupt in 1791, and his first wife, Mary, 'nee' Tremlett (1740-1774). Her parents also had at least two other daughters and one son. Very little is known about her life until 1801, at which time, under the name Mary Jane Clairmont, she was a neighbour of the philosopher William Godwin (1756-1836), whom she married on 21 December of that year. At the time of her marriage to Godwin, Mary Jane Clairmont had two children, and called herself a widow, although it is unlikely that she had previously been married. The children believed their father to be Charles Gaulis (died 1796), a native of Switzerland who had supposedly changed his name to Clairmont, but while he might have been the father of the elder (Charles), the father of the younger, Clara (Claire) Mary Jane Clairmont (1798-1879), has been identified as Sir John Lethbridge, first baronet (Stafford). Mary Jane and William Godwin were to have one child of their own: William Godwin (1803-1832). 
While best known to literary history as the stepmother of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley (1797-1851), and also of Godwin's adopted daughter Fanny Godwin (1794-1816), Mary Jane Godwin was active in the literary society of her day, translating from French, in which she was fluent, and editing children's books. Her early employers included the publisher Benjamin Tabart, for whom she edited a three-volume 'Collection of Popular Stories for the Nursery', but in 1805 she and Godwin opened their own bookshop, which was formally established under the name M. J. Godwin & Co. in 1807. It specialized in children's literature, much of it commissioned by the Godwins, and their publications included such major successes as Charles and Mary Lamb's 'Tales from Shakespeare' and the first English translation of 'The Swiss Family Robinson'. William Godwin contributed educational work under the pseudonym Edward Baldwin, but it was Mary Jane Godwin who was responsible for running the business. In addition to her work for the bookshop, she published in 1835 an anonymous guidebook to Herne Bay, near Canterbury, a book which Claire Clairmont thought 'remarkably pretty' (Stocking, 2.344). The Godwins' bookshop was a profitable venture, at least initially, but it never earned enough money to clear the debts which harassed them all their married life, and which led to occasional temporary separations. They eventually lost the bookshop to bankruptcy, and until Godwin received a government pension three years before his death in 1836 their income was precarious. 
Money was not the only potential source of trouble in the Godwins' marriage; a number of William Godwin's literary friends disliked Mary Jane Godwin -- Charles Lamb was particularly unkind about her -- as did her stepdaughter. In 1817 Mary Shelley wrote that 'somthing ['sic'] very analogous to disgust arises whenever I mention her' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 1.43); earlier, she had complained that 'Mrs. G.... plagues my father out of his life' (ibid., 1.3). Yet despite their many financial problems and Mary Jane's unpopularity, the Godwins' marriage and business partnership both seem to have remained solid. According to Claire Clairmont, her mother's 'affection and devotion to Godwin were admirable and remained unalterable from the day of their marriage till his death' (Stocking, 2.618). And Mary Shelley's last references to her stepmother are in fact much less harsh than were her earlier comments. 'Poor Mrs. Godwin!' Shelley wrote shortly after Mary Jane's death. 'It seemed strange that so restless a spirit could be hushed, & all that remained pent up in a grave. I had done all I could to help her during life' ('Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley', 3.20). 
Mary Jane Godwin died at her home, 3 Golden Square, London, on 17 June 1841, cared for in her last illness by Claire Clairmont. She was buried in St Pancras churchyard, next to William Godwin and his more famous first wife, Mary Wollstonecraft, but when the remains of Godwin and Wollstonecraft were later moved to the Shelley family vault in Bournemouth as a result of the encroachments of railway developers, Mary Jane Godwin's body was not reinterred. 


@@@@@


doc= 67909


Johnson, Leonard Benker (1902-1974), boxer and political activist, was born at 12 Barnabas Street, Clayton, Manchester, on 22 October 1902, the first of three sons and a daughter of William Benker Johnson, mechanical engineer and booth boxer, and his wife, Margaret Maher. Early in his life Johnson moved to Leeds, where his father worked as a waiter. Here he attended both St Silas and Park Lane elementary schools in Hunslet before returning in 1914 to Manchester, where he was employed in a local gas engine makers. His first professional boxing contest was in Manchester in 1921. After two wins and two losses in his first four fights, he joined a travelling boxing booth, but this only lasted six months. With nine contests (seven wins and two losses) in 1922, a period when he combined his work on the boxing booth with his professional career, he established himself as a capable if inexperienced boxer. However, by the end of 1923 -- a year in which he had his first fight abroad (in Copenhagen) and his first fight in London -- he was good enough to be ranked among Britain's top six middleweights. 
Fourteen wins and a draw out of twenty-four fights followed in 1924. In the following year Johnson firmly established himself as one of the country's, and the continent's, leading boxers. In February and September 1925 he defeated Roland Todd, the reigning British middleweight champion: both fights took place in Manchester. Owing to the colour bar in operation in Britain at the time, however, black boxers could not contest British titles, and despite his achievements Johnson was not allowed to fight for the championship, even though Todd was willing to meet him a third time with the title at stake. As a result of his victories over Todd, opposition to the ban surfaced in the dedicated boxing press for the first time. In June 1925 Johnson also outpointed Herman Van't Hof of the Netherlands, who became European champion in 1926. 
Like most top boxers of the time, Johnson then travelled to Australia for a six-month tour, although in his case the disenchantment he felt at the lack of championship opportunities probably forced the trip. After eight contests (six victories) he returned to Manchester, where in his first contest he defeated George West, who had just lost to Tommy Milligan for the British title. When Johnson also won their rematch six weeks later, calls were again made in the national boxing press for Johnson to be allowed to fight for the title. However, the boxing authorities did not lift the ban until 1947 and Johnson, despite his undoubted skill, was destined never to fight for the British title. Over the next seven years he met most of the top British and European boxers, including two meetings with Len Harvey. Johnson outpointed Harvey in London in January 1927 but lost a rematch -- which many thought of as an 'unofficial' title match -- in May 1932, by which time Harvey was British champion. 
After retiring from the ring in 1933 Johnson ran a travelling boxing booth for a number of years, until he was forced to sell it in 1939 as the Second World War approached. After the war, during which he served in civil defence, Johnson drove buses and lorries for a living and he continued in this employment until 1972. He married on 17 November 1926 Annie Forshaw, a bookbinder. About 1945, however, their marriage broke down and Johnson settled with Marie Reid (who had three children of her own, and later adopted her sister's three children), with whom he remained until his death. 
Near the end of the Second World War, Johnson joined the Communist Party of Great Britain, of which he remained a member until his death. Along with C. L. R. James, George Padmore, and other black radicals such as Jomo Kenyatta, he was heavily involved in the Pan-African Congress held in Manchester in July 1945. Involvement here also led Johnson to establish the New International Society with Wilf Charles and Syd Booth. He also stood as a Communist Party member in the Manchester council elections in 1947, 1949 (when he spoke at various left-wing meetings with Paul Robeson), 1950, 1955, 1956, and 1962. During the 1950s he visited Russia. 
Although Johnson's communist affiliations make him almost unique among British sportsmen, it is his boxing career for which he is most famous. He was one of only a handful of highly talented black British boxers active before the Second World War, and was probably the most skilful black British boxer until the emergence of Randolph (Randy) Turpin in the early 1950s. He met all the leading British and European boxers of his day, and defeated most of them. However, owing to the colour bar in British boxing, which was lifted by the time Turpin came to the fore, he was unable to contest a British title, even though many contemporaries, including boxing journalists, rated him as the best middleweight in Europe about 1925-8. Johnson died in Oldham General Hospital on 28 September 1974 and was cremated at Manchester crematorium a few days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 67910


Broadhurst, Robert (1859/60-1948), pan-African nationalist leader, was born probably in Sierra Leone, the son of a Manchester merchant, John S. Broadhurst, who had a business there; his mother, whose name is unknown, was from Sierra Leone. He was sent to Britain to be educated at Nantwich, in Cheshire, about 1869; seven years later he returned to Sierra Leone. Back in England in 1905 he worked for the family firm, Broadhurst & Sons in Manchester, until 1909, when the company vanishes from the Manchester directories and Robert Broadhurst is no longer listed as residing at St Anne's-on-Sea, a salubrious area. In 1912 Broadhurst is reported in the 'Sierre Leone Weekly News' as a cocoa merchant. From 1916 to 1918 he worked as an agent for the Niger Company in Jos and Lokoja, and then as a general merchant in Freetown and Conakry. By 1936, when 'West Africa' noted him as a 'senior commercial agent', he had been a UK resident for some years, with offices in the City. 
In Britain Broadhurst became involved in black politics, and in 1911 he attended the Universal Races Congress, an apolitical gathering sponsored by philanthropists. He was a founder member of the African Progress Union (APU) and its first secretary from 1918 to 1921, and he remained on the union's executive committee until the APU's demise in 1927. The APU was a political organization formed to 'promote the social and economic welfare of Africans in the world' ('Gold Coast Leader'). It protested, for example, against the restoration of African colonies to Germany in 1918, and at the end of the First World War asked that the 'principle of self-determination for weaker races... will be applied to the African colonies' and that an 'African adviser' should be included in the British peace treaty delegation (Greene). The APU protested against the lack of protection offered by the police during the anti-black riots in Liverpool in 1919, against the 'flogging and shooting of natives in British East Africa' ('Manchester Guardian') in 1923, and in 1921 announced its intention to set up a hostel for Africans who were experiencing racial discrimination in their attempts to find lodgings. 
Broadhurst was also an active member of the West African Students Union and was involved in the many protests regarding the Italian invasion of Abyssinia in 1935. The breadth of his political involvement is demonstrated by his service with two organizations that were under the aegis of the socialist anti-imperialist activist George Padmore: he was treasurer of the International African Service Bureau from its formation in 1937 and president of the first Pan-African Federation. Broadhurst is noted in the press as attending a variety of political and welfare functions organized by black people; his lack of sectarianism and overwhelming desire to aid and support his people is also proved by his membership of the London branch of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, created by Marcus Garvey. 
Broadhurst was also involved internationally. Through the APU he was in contact with members of the National Congress of British West Africa, both by correspondence and also in person, when the congress delegates visited Britain in 1920-21 seeking constitutional and electoral reforms. Other delegations supported by Broadhurst in his capacity as APU secretary were those from South Africa in Britain in 1919, petitioning the king for 'Freedom, Liberty, Justice and Fairplay' and representation at the peace conference, and Nigerian nationalists Herbert Macaulay and Chief Oluwa, pressing land claims. He was also in touch with other west African nationalist and commercial interests: for example he was associated with the West African Co-Operative Producers Ltd, started by Gold Coaster W. Tete-Ansa, and with the delegates of the Aborigines' Rights Protection Society of the Gold Coast visiting Britain in 1935-6. Through letters to west African papers such as 'The Aurora' of Freetown he informed west Africans of events in Britain of relevance to them. 
In 1921 he was the 'English' secretary for the Pan-African Congress organized by W. E. B. DuBois, whom he had met at the 1911 congress in London; he is noted as attending with his daughter, who would have been one of the few women present. The congress's demands included an end to expropriation of land by 'the unrestrained greed of invested capital', and local government for 'backward groups, deliberately rising to complete self-government'. He also attended the Paris sessions of the 1921 congress. However, neither he nor other prominent west Africans in Britain attended the 1923 congress, which met in London and Lisbon, perhaps as a result of disagreements that had arisen in 1921 with the congress's organizer. 
From about 1939 until 1948 Broadhurst was vice-consul for the Republic of Liberia in London. How he obtained this position is not known. He was still active in his eighties, and was part of the delegation that in 1944 met Walter White, the American civil rights leader and official of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. In 1945 he attended the Pan-African Congress in Manchester as Liberia's representative. Robert Broadhurst died, aged eighty-eight, in Hackney Hospital on 10 December 1948. His funeral took place in Hampstead parish church; his son, also a merchant, is noted as having attended. 
Nnamdi Azikiwe, future president of Nigeria, recalled in his memoirs that in 1934, as he was about to leave London, Robert Broadhurst 'blessed me and wished me godspeed and prayed that God might guide me in my humble efforts to serve Africa' (Azikiwe, 212). He described Broadhurst as 'an elderly gentleman of African descent... mentally virile and very progressive in his ideas' (ibid.). That Broadhurst certainly was; some four years before his death his erstwhile colleague in 1930s London, I. T. A. Wallace Johnson, later a political leader in Sierra Leone, called him 'the Grand Old Man of African nationalism' ('African Standard'). 


@@@@@


doc= 67911


Robeson, Paul Leroy (1898-1976), actor, singer, and political activist, was born on 9 April 1898 in Princeton, New Jersey, USA. He was the youngest of five children and fourth son of William Drew Robeson (1845-1918), a former runaway slave and Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Maria Louisa Bustill (1853-1904), a former teacher. In 1915 he won a scholarship to Rutgers College, New Jersey, and was also educated at Columbia University law school, where he graduated in 1923. An outstanding athlete as well as scholar, Robeson was selected for the All-American college football team as the finest player in his position. For a short time thereafter he played professional football and semi-professional basketball. In 1921 he married his lifelong partner, Eslanda Cordozo Goode (1896-1965), an analytical chemist in a hospital pathology laboratory. She would later manage Robeson's career, and even though their relationship was often stormy and included periods of separation, she was initially a major influence in his life and the author of an early biography, 'Paul Robeson, Negro' (1930). 
Robeson began his acting career in 1920, appearing in 'Simon the Cyrenian' in Harlem, New York, and played his first professional part in 1922 in 'Taboo'. It was in 1922 as a member of the cast of this play, now renamed 'Voodoo', that Robeson made his debut in Britain. In later years he recalled that it was during his performances in 'Voodoo' at the Blackpool Opera House in 1922 that he first realized he had the talent to make a career as a singer. In 1923 he briefly worked at a law firm in New York, but his experiences of racism in the USA persuaded Robeson that he might have more success as an actor than by attempting to practise as a lawyer. 
In the United States, Robeson continued to develop his singing career, and with Lawrence Brown, who was to be his accompanist for many years, he performed the first ever concert comprising entirely African-American secular songs and spirituals in New York in 1925. Later that year he began his legendary recording career, and during the next thirty-five years made over 450 recordings, mainly in Britain and the United States. The previous year he had made his first film, 'Body and Soul', directed by Oscar Micheaux. During the next twenty-five years he starred in ten films and twelve plays and musicals. As an actor he always strove to break away from the demeaning roles often played by black actors. By 1947 he had decided to leave the professional stage in the United States altogether; he had already ended his film career because of his dissatisfaction with the roles he was offered. 
Robeson returned to Britain in 1925 to star in the play 'Emperor Jones', and three years later first sang 'Ol' Man River' on stage in the London production of 'Show Boat'. From 1928 and throughout the 1930s he and his family (his son Paul junior was born in 1928) made their home in London. He initially believed that racism was less of a problem in Britain than in the United States, but in 1929, in an infamous incident, he did become subject to the 'colour bar' operated by the Savoy Hotel in London. He toured the country several times making stage and concert appearances, including his first and much acclaimed performance in 'Othello' in 1930. Robeson made numerous recordings and some of his most memorable films in Britain, including 'Song of Freedom' (1936) and 'The Proud Valley' (1939). In the latter he played a black American stoker who helped Welsh unemployed miners reopen their pits. 
In retrospect Robeson believed that his time in Britain had a profound influence on his personal and political development. As a result of his many contacts with students and other African residents, his serious interest in African cultures and languages developed. It was during this period that Robeson became patron of the West African Students' Union and, as he put it, 'discovered Africa' in London. He also began his comparative study of African, African-American, and other folk cultures, and in 1934 enrolled as a student of linguistics and African languages at London University. He took a special interest in languages and mastered over twenty, including Russian and Chinese. In London, Robeson met those who were active in the anti-colonial struggle, such as Pandit Nehru, and those involved in the workers' movement. From this time he began to exhibit a growing interest in socialism, the international communist movement, and the Soviet Union, which he first visited in 1934. 
From that time onwards Robeson began to take an active interest in politics. He subsequently repudiated some of his films, such as 'Sanders of the River' (1934), which he viewed as glorifying British imperialism, and his search for more acceptable acting roles led him to the working-class Unity Theatre in London. He began to use his great talents to support political causes, including those of Jewish refugees from fascism and the International Brigades in the Spanish Civil War. By the late 1930s he had taken a clear political stand, as he stated in one of his most famous speeches made in London in 1937. 'The artist must take sides. He must elect to fight for freedom or for slavery. I have made my choice. I had no alternative' (Foner, 118-19). His close contact with the miners of south Wales and other working people in Britain confirmed his belief in the oneness of humanity and influenced his choice of repertory. Increasingly he included folk and political songs from around the world, frequently sung in Russian, Chinese, and other languages. He also made a conscious decision to leave the concert stage and instead to appear in the theatres and venues frequented by working people. In 1937 he was voted the most popular radio singer in Britain. 
During the Second World War and throughout most of the 1940s Robeson remained in the United States. By then world famous, he recorded his 'Ballad for Americans' in 1940. In 1943-4 he starred in the long-running Broadway production of 'Othello'. Despite temptations to abandon his political principles, Robeson maintained his refusal to perform before segregated audiences, and in this period stepped up his political activism. He became, among other things, chairman of the anti-colonial Council of African Affairs, co-chairman of the Progressive Party, and a leading figure in the American Crusade to End Lynching. He also played a prominent part in the attempts to free from prison Earl Browder, the leader of the American Communist Party. In addition Robeson performed in support of the allied war effort, and in 1945 took part in an extensive overseas tour to perform to American troops stationed in Europe. 
During the cold war Robeson continued to defend the Soviet Union and to condemn many aspects of American foreign policy including the war in Korea. At the same time he vigorously opposed racism in the United States, continued his support for anti-colonial and workers' struggles throughout the world, and made his contribution to the international peace movement. For this work he was awarded the international Stalin peace prize in 1952. His political stand led to increasing levels of FBI surveillance and attempts to stop him from speaking and performing. In 1949, following his remarks at the Congress of the World Partisans for Peace in Paris, he was subjected to organized attacks on his concerts at Peekskill, New York. He was eventually arraigned before the notorious House Un-American Activities Committee, and in 1950 the American state department confiscated his passport. Even during the period when he was unable to travel abroad and there were attempts to silence him, Robeson refused to be cowed or betray his political principles. He continued to speak out. In the 1950s, denied entry to Canada, he none the less sang at the famous Peace Arch concerts on the Canadian border and sent a telephone message to the 1955 Bandung conference. He also maintained his contact with friends and supporters in Britain who campaigned for the return of his passport. These included twenty-seven members of parliament, sections of the press, and leading musicians including Sir Adrian Boult. 
In Manchester, a National Paul Robeson Committee was established in 1954 and rapidly spread to other towns and cities. In 1956 a taped message from Robeson was played to a packed audience in Manchester. In 1957 he broadcast live via a telephone link to a vast gathering in St Pancras town hall, and sang a programme in the same way for the miners' eisteddfod at Porth-cawl in Glamorgan. In 1958 Robeson published 'Here I Stand', an autobiography and political testament, and in the same year, following a worldwide campaign, his passport was finally returned. 
Robeson returned to Britain in 1958 as soon as he could travel. In the next few years he gave many memorable performances, including those at St Paul's Cathedral and at the eisteddfod at Ebbw Vale in 1958, as Othello at Stratford in 1959, and his first television performance for Associated Television in 1958. He also appeared with some regularity at peace and disarmament rallies and at other political events in Britain. He continued to tour throughout Europe, the Soviet Union, and even in Australia and New Zealand. By the early 1960s Robeson's arduous life and effects of the persecution he had suffered began to take their toll. In 1963 he began a long period of semi-retirement in the United States. He died of a stroke on 23 January 1976 in Philadelphia, and was buried four days later in Ferncliff cemetery, Hartsdale, New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 67915


Dixon, Reginald Herbert (1904-1985), theatre organist, was born on 16 October 1904 at 18 Bowness Road, Eccleshill, Sheffield, the youngest of three children of Richard Dixon and his wife, Alice Helena, 'nee' Smith. His father was employed as a filecutter in the Sheffield steel industry and the unpredictability of his work meant that, after an elementary education at the city's central secondary school, Reginald's musical talent was diverted from his ambition to be a concert pianist into more immediately gainful employment. From fourteen he was employed as a church organist and also gave piano lessons before he obtained a post as a pianist accompanying silent films at Stocksbridge Palace cinema, Sheffield, where he was paid $3 per week. The manager of the cinema was particularly impressed by Dixon and pleaded on his behalf for a new piano when the old one succumbed to the wear and tear of the young pianist slamming down its lid to imitate gunfire and kicking the exposed strings to accompany stampeding horses. 
When the owners denied the request Dixon moved on to a better-paid position in Chesterfield. There followed a series of jobs in cinemas, progressing from the piano to the cinema organ, and from deputy to principal posts before a move in 1929 to the New Victoria cinema in Preston, Lancashire, on the higher salary of 8 guineas a week. This appointment required him to move further away from his teenage sweetheart, (Ethel) Vera Fidler (1907-1975), the 21-year-old daughter of Frederick Fidler, GPO civil servant, to whom he now proposed at the same location that his father had proposed to his mother, the balcony of the Tower Ballroom, Blackpool. The couple were married at Preston register office on 10 July 1929 and later had two daughters, Jacqueline and Angela. 
Dixon's new place of work, the New Victoria, was equipped with a two-manual (keyboard) Wurlitzer organ and it was on this instrument that the Tower Company manager, Harry Hall, heard Dixon play and invited him to audition at the Tower Ballroom, Blackpool. The Tower's Wurlitzer had been installed in 1929, the first in a ballroom in the United Kingdom, but had not proved a success, being difficult to play and unpopular with dancers. After a successful audition Dixon was told that both he and the Wurlitzer had one summer season to prove themselves -- failure would have meant the removal of the organ from the ballroom. Dixon was daunted by the task, having been paid off early from a previous spell playing for dancers in a Sheffield restaurant years before. It was, none the less, a brief experience that allowed him to answer positively, and truthfully, when asked if he had ever before played as an accompaniment for dancing. With the release of 'The Jazz Singer' in 1927, and the subsequent conversion of cinemas to show the new talking pictures, it was apparent to Dixon that his days as a cinema organist were numbered, and that the Tower job offered him a real alternative. 
In his new position Dixon was helped by the resident bandleader, Bertini 
(Bert Gutsell, 1896-1957)
, who encouraged him to develop a style in which the organist made full use of the instrument's manuals and pedal board to emphasize the rhythm of the music, enabling dancers at the back of the crowded ballroom dance floor to hear the beat. This evolved into a characteristic style known as the Blackpool sound. The bright, bouncy quality of the music appealed to dancers in the ballroom and also to radio listeners, for whom Dixon first performed in 1930, quickly becoming a popular and prolific broadcaster. Dixon's signature tune 'I Do Like to be Beside the Seaside' (composed in 1909 by John A. Glover-Kind) was played each time he performed on the radio and became indelibly associated with the organist, the Tower Wurlitzer, and with Blackpool. Dixon's success in the ballroom meant that he was able to persuade the Tower Company to replace the Wurlitzer with a more powerful version, so that all of the dancers could hear the music on a large dance floor measuring 120 feet square. The new instrument, known as the Wonder Wurlitzer, was installed to Dixon's specifications in 1935 and remains in regular use in the early twenty-first century. 
When Reginald Foort (1893-1980) resigned as the BBC's staff organist in 1938 Dixon topped a 'Daily Express' poll to replace him. Both Dixon and the Tower Company denied that he had been offered the appointment, though at the same time his weekly salary was increased from $15 2's'. (already making him the highest paid musician at the Tower Company) to $30. 
Reginald Dixon's forty years as organist at the Tower Ballroom were interrupted only during the Second World War, when he served as a musician in the RAF and rose to the rank of squadron leader, and from December 1956 when the ballroom was badly damaged by fire. In 1966 he was appointed MBE for services to music and remained at the Tower for a further four years. Following his retirement he continued to live at 3 Orchard Avenue, Poulton-le-Fylde, Lancashire, and also to tour until 1981, when he was in poor health and his final recording was released. He died of bronchopneumonia on 9 May 1985 at the Victoria Hospital, Blackpool, an institution for which he had been an enthusiastic fund-raiser throughout his career. He was cremated at the town's Carleton crematorium. 
Reginald Dixon is remembered as Mr Blackpool -- a quietly spoken, modest Yorkshireman, whose flamboyant musical style endeared him to millions of radio listeners the world over, for whom he gave more than 2000 broadcast performances. His adopted home of Blackpool was advertised to an international audience through the distinctive sound of Dixon at the keyboard. In 1956 the resort rewarded him with its highest accolade, an invitation to switch on the autumn illuminations. Today his signature tune endures as Blackpool's soundtrack. 


@@@@@


doc= 67922


Hartley, John (1839-1915), dialect poet and writer, was born on 19 October 1839 at 7 Bedford Street, Halifax, the youngest of the five children of John Hartley, tea dealer and travelling draper, and his wife, Rachel, 'nee' Riley. His paternal grandparents were members of the choir at St Mary's Church, Illingworth, and had 'more than ordinary musical talent' (Waddington, 4), but little is known about the cultural influences of his childhood. He received an elementary education at a local dame-school and at John Farrar's academy in Halifax before serving his apprenticeship as a textile designer at James Akroyd & Sons, worsted spinners, in 1851. In his early twenties he joined the Beacon Club, a young men's literary and musical club which met at the Corporation Arms inn, Gibbet Street, Halifax, where he found an audience for his developing literary aspirations. 
Hartley's first published poem, 'Bite Bigger', a poignant story of an encounter with two young street urchins in a Yorkshire mill town and issued as a penny broadsheet, was a phenomenal success, selling thousands of copies. It was directly influenced by Edwin Waugh's Lancashire dialect piece 'Come whoam to thi childer an me'. It resulted in Hartley's appointment in 1866 as editor of the 'Original Illuminated Clock Almanack', which provided a vehicle for his prolific output of dialect poetry and prose. Under his editorship, which extended over almost half a century, the almanac became Yorkshire's most popular and enduring dialect magazine, achieving annual sales of 80,000 by 1887 and continuing publication until 1957. A radical Liberal, Hartley combined in his writing sentimentality and social realism, spiced with an earthy Yorkshire humour and reflecting a strong sense of community. He also displayed an extraordinary versatility in his writing, choosing subjects ranging from simple tales to abstract philosophical themes, and utilizing a variety of forms of literary expression. Many of his stories were based on the fictional, semi-autobiographical character of Sammywell Grimes, and he was both a brilliant essayist and a master of the pithy aphorism. His homespun observations included such classics as 'A chap 'ats nivver had to struggle doesn't know his strength' and 'If yo say nowt, tho' yo know nowt, folk'll credit you wi' wisdom' (Waddington, 4). A contemporary bibliophile, J. Horsfall Turner, writing in 1906, concluded that 'undoubtedly' Hartley had 'the greatest popularity of any Yorkshire writer' (Turner, 134). 
Hartley supplemented his income from writing with a business dealing in and designing carpets and upholstery, but his career displayed some enigmatic twists and some imprudent commercial decisions. Having temporarily handed over responsibility for editing the almanac to others he made a disastrous trip to North America between 1872 and 1875. During this visit he invested most of his money in the hire of a public hall in Quebec for the purpose of giving a public recital; but he failed to attract an audience and he then moved up the St Lawrence to Montreal, where he tried his hand variously as a newspaper canvasser, painter and decorator, theatre manager, and even a circus acrobat. Moreover, in 1875, on his return to England, he foolishly sold the copyright of his 'Yorkshire Ditties' to his publisher. On a later, twelve-year sojourn in North America he enjoyed some success as a businessman in Philadelphia, but by the turn of the century he was poor, even though the 'Illuminated Clock Almanack' continued to record buoyant sales. In 1904 some of his readers petitioned for a civil-list pension for him, but without success, and in 1909 he was presented with a purse of 100 guineas at a seventieth birthday dinner at the Great Northern Hotel in Bradford. 
Hartley's often precarious financial situation failed to subdue his genial, optimistic, warm-hearted character. Photographs and sketches reveal a man of sturdy build, with dark hair combed back, sparkling eyes, an aquiline nose, and a patriarchal beard. He married three times. His first wife, Martha, whom he married at Halifax parish church on 23 May 1859, bore him five children, but died following the birth of the youngest, Percy, in 1878 or 1879. His second wife was Sophia Ann Wilson, the daughter of Alfred Wilson, a Halifax hatter and the originator and publisher of the 'Illuminated Clock Almanack'. They married in 1880 and she featured as Mally Grimes in many of his stories. After her death in January 1915 Hartley married, on 21 September 1915, a widow and former schoolteacher, Annie Spencer ('b'. 1859), daughter of Thomas McCandlish, a safe and bedstead salesman. Shortly after his third marriage Hartley died of a cerebral haemorrhage, pneumonia, and heart failure on 18 December 1915 at his home, 11 Seaview Avenue, Wallasey, Cheshire. He was survived by his wife. A small private funeral service was held in Wallasey on 23 December 1915, conducted by the Revd Dr Gasking of Walton. 


@@@@@


doc= 67941


Treacy, Eric (1907-1978), bishop of Wakefield and railway photographer, was born on 2 June 1907 at 63 Kings Road, Willesden, London, the surviving twin son of George Treacy (1866-1929), a furniture salesman, and his second wife, Annie Kate, daughter of Alfred Jopp of Aberdeen and his wife, Annie. A younger sister was born three years later. His father had been born in Burma, where his grandfather, an Irishman, had been a district commissioner. His paternal ancestors included William de Tracy, one of the knights responsible for the murder of Archbishop Thomas Becket. He attended a small private school in Willesden Green, and Haberdashers' Aske's School, Hampstead, from 1918 to 1925. He left school with below average matriculation results and remained acutely conscious throughout his life of his 'abysmal lack of education' (Peart-Binns, 8). However, he had excelled at sport, especially rugby and cricket, and had been heavyweight boxing champion for two successive years. Six feet tall and weighing over 14 stones, he was endowed with a burly physique and a craggy, florid complexion, enhanced by piercing blue eyes and well-groomed fair hair. He was mentally agile, genial, and personable and later maintained that he managed to hold his own wherever he found himself owing to 'a quick wit, a good memory, and more than a fair share of curiosity' (ibid.). 
Treacy's parents were not churchgoers during his childhood years, but he later dated the beginning of his Christian experience from family seaside holidays in Norfolk, where he attended children's special service missions and first learned 'to pray rather than say my prayers' (Peart-Binns, 11). He was confirmed on 6 July 1922 and subsequently became a server and Sunday school teacher, attending initially the church of St Jude on the Hill, Hampstead Garden Suburb, and subsequently St Anne's Church, Highgate, whose vicar, James Adderley, was a fervent Christian socialist. After leaving school Treacy sought employment as an insurance agent, but soon discovered that he hated office work. Having joined Toc H, he offered his services as a boxing instructor at a boys' club in Kentish Town, where he began to develop a vocation for the Anglican ministry. He entered King's College, London, as an evening student, but after three hopelessly unsuccessful attempts at the Latin examination moved north in 1929 to take charge of the Shrewsbury School mission, a large boys' club and residential home in the socially deprived dockland of Liverpool. There he developed communication and leadership skills that shaped the future course and style of his ministry, which was spent almost entirely in the industrial north. He completed his theological studies at St Aidan's College, Birkenhead, and was ordained deacon in 1932 and priest in 1933, serving as curate at Liverpool parish church from 1932 to 1934. 
Treacy married a voluntary social worker, Mary (May) Leyland Shone (1902-1985), the daughter of James Arthur Shone, a Methodist flour miller, magistrate, and member of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board, at St Luke's Wesleyan Methodist Church, Hoylake, on 16 June 1932. The marriage was one of total mutual dependence, strengthened by the early loss of a stillborn child and the lack of any other children. In 1936 Treacy was appointed vicar of St Mary's, Edgehill, where he remained until he became a chaplain to the forces in 1940. He proved an outstanding army padre, encouraging some 150 men and officers, nearly a quarter of the 59th medium regiment, to join his confirmation classes in 1944. Moreover, during the regiment's service in Normandy, Treacy was mentioned in dispatches for gallantry and subsequently appointed MBE. 
After the Second World War, Treacy moved across the Pennines to become successively rector of Keighley (1945-49), archdeacon and vicar of Halifax (1950-61), bishop-suffragan of Pontefract (1961-8), and bishop of Wakefield (1968-76). The translation of a non-graduate to a diocesan see at the age of sixty-one was testimony to the high regard in which he was held throughout the diocese of Wakefield, where he had served for nearly twenty years. A self-styled liberal evangelical, he was regarded widely as a cleric of middle ground views, and was seen by many as a stabilizing force within the Church of England. He was highly articulate, adept at using the media, forthright in his views, and not afraid to address controversial issues. 
Although some of Treacy's views were progressive, his instincts were basically conservative. He voted for reunion with the Methodists in 1969 and was willing to accept women priests, but described 'Honest to God' as 'a dangerous book likely to disturb the faith of more people than it will stimulate' (Peart-Binns, 164) and did not welcome new translations of the 'Bible'. He encouraged the Church of England to retain the rite of exorcism, but only within stringent safeguards, after a notorious exorcism in his own diocese had resulted in the killing of a young mother by her estranged husband. Similar paradoxes were evident in his pronouncements on social issues. He criticized legislation which allowed eighteen-year-olds to marry without parental consent, but was sympathetic to the remarriage of the innocent victims of broken marriages in church. He advocated the birching of young delinquents in the early years of his ministry at Liverpool, but later regularly visited prisoners serving life sentences at Wakefield and campaigned for penal reform. He condemned the blasphemous rantings of the television comedy character Alf Garnett, but refused to support campaigners trying to prevent a Scandinavian director from entering Britain to make a film purporting to portray the sex life of Christ. In his role as bishop he found it difficult to reconcile synodical government with episcopal authority and tended to act autocratically, but was widely respected for his pastoral concern, rushing to the pithead of Lofthouse colliery in March 1973 in the early hours of the morning when he heard that miners were trapped underground, and declining an increase in stipend in 1974 to empathize with his low-paid parochial clergy. 
Treacy's major recreation, railway photography, sprang from his rapport with railwaymen parishioners in Edgehill during the recession of the early 1930s. His photography earned him an unparalleled national reputation and the sobriquet of the 'footplate bishop'. By the late 1930s his technically accomplished style, with an artist's eye for portraying a locomotive in the landscape, had become instantly recognizable. 'I am wanting to do with my camera what I could only do with a box of watercolours', he once proclaimed, 'to catch that indefinable spell of railways, to make visual something that can only be felt' (Thomas, 7). He once perched on the girders of the Forth Bridge to capture the drama of steam locomotive traction crossing the estuary. He published the first of eight collections of railway photographs in 1946, including his finest book, 'Steam Up' in 1949, in which he emphasized that his approach was essentially 'emotional' (ibid., 11). As steam locomotion declined he began to photograph diesels, but less enthusiastically, and became a keen supporter of steam preservation societies. 
Following Treacy's retirement, on 31 October 1976, to his country retreat at The Ghyll, Applethwaite, on the lower slopes of Skiddaw, near Keswick, he frequently visited Appleby railway station, where he suffered a major coronary attack photographing the 'Evening Star', the last steam locomotive built for British Rail, and collapsed and died on 13 May 1978. His death was widely reported in the national news media and he was buried on 19 May at Crosthwaite parish church, near Kendal, Westmorland. In addition to a memorial service held at Wakefield Cathedral on 27 June 1978, some 4000 people gathered at Appleby Station on 30 September 1978 for an open-air memorial service. Subsequently a new community centre and meeting place for the diocese adjoining Wakefield Cathedral was named in his memory and a new electric railway locomotive was named the 'Bishop Eric Treacy' by his widow in May 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 67944


Whitley, Percival Nathan (1893-1956), cotton spinner and educationist, was born on 1 October 1893 at Brantwood, Stafford Road, Halifax, the eldest of the four children of John Henry (Harry) Whitley (1866-1935), cotton spinner and politician, and his first wife, Marguerita Virginia 
(Margaret; 1872-1925)
, daughter of Giulio Marchetti of Halifax and his wife, Anne. His maternal grandfather had fought with Garibaldi before settling in Halifax and marrying the daughter of the Halifax carpet manufacturer and philanthropist John Crossley. His paternal grandfather, Nathan Whitley, had acquired the cotton spinning firm of S. Whitley & Co., Hanson Lane Mills, Halifax, in 1881, and twice served as mayor of Halifax. His father in turn became managing director of S. Whitley & Co., served as Liberal (later Coalition Liberal) MP for Halifax from 1900 to 1928, and was speaker of the House of Commons from 1921 to 1928. He subsequently served as chairman of the board of governors of the BBC from 1931 until his death in 1935. 
Whitley was educated at Rugby School and New College, Oxford, where he graduated with a pass degree before entering the family cotton spinning firm on the eve of the outbreak of the First World War. He had been introduced at an early age during school and college vacations to the pioneering youth work initiated by his father in Halifax, and after his father's death assumed responsibility for the management of the recreational gymnasium and annual summer camp at Filey for socially deprived Halifax boys (and later girls), which his father had founded. In 1914 he suffered considerable personal abuse and narrowly avoided imprisonment as a conscientious objector, but was twice mentioned in dispatches during the First World War for his distinguished voluntary service with the YMCA. He travelled to France with the British expeditionary force in April 1915 and then to Salonika, where he remained until June 1919, apart from a period of convalescence from malaria in Halifax. 
After the war, Whitley returned to the family business and resumed his voluntary social work in Halifax. In 1921 he commenced a long period of office with the Boy Scout movement, ultimately serving as district commissioner from 1931 to 1943. He was also elected as a Liberal to the Halifax town council, following in his father's footsteps, and served on the borough's education committee for thirty years, becoming its youngest chairman in 1932. He shared both his father's preference for local rather than national politics and his unconventional disregard for the honours system. Indeed, his father's declining for personal reasons in 1928 of the hereditary viscountcy traditionally conferred on retiring speakers of the House of Commons was widely thought to have been out of sensitivity to his son's commitment to youth work in Halifax. Questioned by the press about how he felt about his father's unprecedented action, Whitley declared that he had 'never been more proud of his father than then' (Whitley, 10). As chairman of the Halifax education committee, he initiated a major school and college building programme following the recommendations of the Hadow Report and as a result of the need to provide new schools for the council estates created as a result of slum clearance schemes, and he was also responsible for the reorganization of secondary education under the 1944 'Education Act'. He became a magistrate in 1933, an alderman in 1934, and mayor of Halifax in 1941-2. During his mayoral year he wrote over a thousand letters to servicemen and servicewomen, and often used the civic car to ferry teams of young footballers across the town on Saturday afternoons. He also publicized the need to provide air raid precautions by plunging suitably attired into freezing cold water at the inauguration of a new static water tank as an emergency firefighting resource in April 1942. After the Second World War he led a party of young Halifax apprentices to Aachen to help repair bomb damage to the German city, laying the foundation for a highly successful programme of cultural exchanges between the twinned towns. 
Whitley had a lifelong association with Park Congregational Church, Halifax, becoming a member at the age of eighteen and later serving as a deacon. He never married, and combined his extensive public service with his role as managing director of the family business. Although often pressed to stand as a parliamentary candidate, he always declined because of his business responsibilities and his commitment to voluntary work in Halifax. Apart from his penchant for pipe tobacco, which ultimately had disastrous consequences for his health, he had an ascetic lifestyle. Fair-haired, with a neatly trimmed moustache, he displayed in photographs a kindly, relaxed countenance and a slim, athletic build, which prompted Mary Trevelyan, the daughter of the historian George Macaulay Trevelyan, to remark that he had 'much of the look of a mediaeval saint' (Mary Trevelyan to P. N. Whitley, 5 Jan 1955, Whitley family MSS). Despite an innate shyness, he displayed a ready wit in dealing with hecklers at political meetings and a great sense of fun within his family circle. After contracting cancer of the tongue and enduring uncomfortable radium treatment, he confided to a family friend shortly before his death that he 'still went to the mill and Town Hall' to reassure himself that he was 'still a little use to somebody' (Nora Dickin to Phyllis Bowman, 4 April 1956, Whitley family MSS). He died at his home, Brantwood, Rawson Avenue, Halifax, on 26 March 1956. Following a private cremation Eric Treacy, the archdeacon and vicar of Halifax, at a memorial service at Park Congregational Church, Halifax, on 29 March 1956, paid tribute to Whitley's 'gentle', good-humoured disposition, his 'outstanding ability', his 'strong convictions', and his decision 'to give himself without stint to the life of Halifax and to remain therefore comparatively unknown in the wider sphere' (Whitley, 11). His distinguished public service within the locality was recognized by his appointment as OBE, an honour which he was reluctantly persuaded to accept in the year before he died, and by the naming of extensions to the town's college of further education after him in 1957 and the construction of a new sports hall in his memory in 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 67946


Artari, Giuseppe (1692/1700-1769), stuccoist, was one of the most accomplished craftsmen to work in England in the early to mid-eighteenth century. Born at Arogno, near Lugano, Switzerland, he was probably the son of Giovanni Battista Artari ('b'. 1664), a stuccoist. The evidence of Giuseppe Artari's birth, and other details of his family, derived from the Arogno parish registers and from secondary literature, are confusing, and have been set out in detail (Beard, 243). In 1759 Horace Walpole noted Artari's first recorded commission in England of about 1715 at Duncombe Park, Yorkshire: 'The Stucco work there by one Vassalli & some better by Altari' (Walpole, 128). Moreover, the stuccoist Alfonso Oldelli ('fl'. 1696-1720) wrote on 2 July 1721, mentioning the 'Signori Artari' at work in England (presumably Giuseppe and possibly his brother Adalbertus (1693-1751)), stating that they were doing well, and that he had a mind to join them (Martinola, 117). 
Stucco-work in England from about 1710 to 1760 was usually a team effort, with different craftsmen contributing their talents. Apart from work with other members of his family, Giuseppe Artari's name is linked, usually, with that of the older stuccoist 
Artari's association with Bagutti was taken up again in 1730 in work at Moulsham Park, Essex, under the supervision of the architect Giacomo Leoni. The owner, Benjamin Mildmay, Earl Fitzwalter (died 1756), noted in his account book on 13 February 1731 that he had paid Bagutti (in two sums) $161 8's'. but that 'my agreamt. was only with Mr. Bagutti & Mr Altari who did the Bustos & Figures assisted him' (MS 15M50/31, Hants. RO). In the early 1730s Sir Edward Gascoigne (for whom both Giovanni and Giuseppe Artari were to work, 'c'.1735, at his Yorkshire house Parlington Hall, des. 'c'.1950), visited Moor Park, Hertfordshire. He noted that the stuccoes there, surrounding the paintings by Francesco Sleter (all of which survive), were by the Artaris. There is also a drawing annotated 'For Mr. Baguti att More Parke near Rikmonsworth in Hertfordshire', so Bagutti was there too (Gibbs drawings IV, 24, AM Oxf.). An interesting point about Artari's methods of work was his use of baked moulds of pipe clay, which gave the resulting stuccoes produced therein a sharpness and precision. In 1737, for his stuccoes at Trentham Hall, Staffordshire, the accounts record on 22 March 1738, 'Pipe-Clay for Moulds for Mr. Artari' (MS D 593/F/3/2/12, Staffs. RO). 
Artari worked at more than twenty commissions in England and abroad (see Beard, 243), and at least three are worth more than passing mention. In 1737 he signed a statue of Apollo (still 'in situ') at Upton House (now Quinton House School), Northamptonshire. The entrance hall there also contains four large medallions, which are presumably also the stuccoist's work. In 1744-5 Artari was the stuccoist for a James Gibbs commission, the Radcliffe Camera, Oxford, for which he received $981 6's'. 8died (Gilliam, 29-54). His last recorded work in England, in 1759-60, was also to a Gibbs design, although the architect had died in 1754. At Ragley Hall, Warwickshire, there is a fine baroque scheme in the hall with which Artari's name was associated by Horace Walpole, a friend of Ragley's owner, Lord Conway (BL, Add. MS 29218, 14 July, 3 Aug 1759, 1 Sept, 13 Dec 1760). 
Artari left England about 1760 to work for the elector of Cologne at Schloss Bruhl, and died at Cologne in 1769. 


@@@@@


doc= 67948


Willaume, David (1658-1741), goldsmith, was born on 7 June 1658 on the Pont des Morts, Metz, France, the third of the six children of Adam Willaume (died 1704), merchant goldsmith, and Anne, 'nee' Philippe (died 'c'.1706), who had married on 30 April 1651. Willaume was born into a family of goldsmiths and was probably apprenticed to his father; at least one brother, Adam, was a goldsmith and his three sisters, Marie, Susanne, and Elizabeth, also chose husbands linked to the profession. Willaume became a master goldsmith on 18 April 1680. There is no record of his having registered a hallmark in Metz, nor does his name appear in a list of the city's goldsmiths compiled in 1684, and any intention to work alongside his father would have been dashed by three significant events. The introduction of punitive taxes on the sale of plate in the 1670s was followed by the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685 and two years later by the prohibition of the manufacture of gold items and massive pieces of silver. Such constraints succeeded in emptying Metz, a protestant stronghold, of most of its goldsmiths. With both his religion and profession denied him, Willaume left France. 
The date of Willaume's arrival in England is uncertain. Some writers have deemed him to be the refugee Davidi Williamme denizened by act of parliament on 16 December 1687 (though this man arrived with a wife and children whose names do not appear in subsequent records), while others list him as a working goldsmith from 1686. Confirmation of his residence in London comes from the many appearances he makes in the registers of the various Huguenot chapels in London, the first being on 15 August 1688 as godfather to David Surel. These chapels acted as centres of support for the many refugees. Willaume's standing within the French protestant community was assured when on 9 October 1688 he married Marie Mettayer (1666-1710), daughter of Samuel Mettayer, minister of the French chapel of La Patente, Spitalfields, and Susanne Fremin. Marie had two brothers, Samuel and Lewis (the latter subsequently apprenticed to her husband), and two sisters, Ann, who married Simon Gribelin, engraver, and Rachel, who married Jean Rapilliard, also a goldsmith. David and Marie Willaume had four children of whom two survived: Anne born on 14 July 1691 and baptized on the 19th at La Patente in Berwick Street, Soho, who married one of her father's apprentices, David Tanqueray, great-grandfather of Charles Tanqueray (1810-1868), founder of Tanqueray Gin, and subsequently ran her own business until her death in 1733, and David Willaume the younger ['see below']. 
By 1691 Willaume, as a purveyor of jewels as well as silver, was flourishing at the sign of the Windsor Castle near Charing Cross. He was emboldened to take his first apprentice, Francis Vaillant, son of the bookseller Paul Vaillant, on 28 June 1693, despite not having been granted his freedom by the Company of Goldsmiths, which he did not gain until 27 September on the instructions of the lord mayor and City of London. His first confirmed hallmark, which harks back to the land of his birth with the inclusion of a fleur de lys, was registered about November 1698 with his address at the sign of the Golden Ball, Pall Mall (next door to Mary Beale, miniaturist). By 1714, while still using the same hallmark and shop sign, he had moved again to premises on the west side of St James's Street, Mayfair, where the business, which by then included banking, remained until 1746. Over a period of thirty years he trained nineteen apprentices, of whom twelve subsequently entered their own hallmark, the most notable being David Tanqueray, Lewis Mettayer, Charles Hatfield, Ayme Vedeau, and William Kidney. 
Willaume brought with him grand designs in French fashion, matched by the use of heavy gauge metal and fine casting techniques then greatly to the taste of the English. His acceptance as merchant goldsmith to the nobility was assured and the receipt of royal commissions established him as one of England's leading goldsmiths. Surviving pieces are engraved with armorials that record his eminent clients and patrons, many of whom were closely associated with the protestant cause. The earliest masterpieces are a pair of wine coolers made in 1698 for William Cavendish, first duke of Devonshire, one of the 'immortal seven' who had invited William of Orange to take the English throne. Although never appointed royal goldsmith (as were two of his apprentices, David Tanqueray and Charles Hatfield), he supplied a magnificent series of ewers and basins to the crown as ambassadorial plate, and to others including the second earl of Jersey and the first earl of Oxford. Other noteworthy objects are a wine fountain and cistern of 1701 made for Chambre Brabazon, fifth earl of Meath (now in the Museum of Fine Art, Boston, Massachusetts), and another of 1707 (Boughton House, Northamptonshire). As well as grand buffet plate his prodigious output included the supply of silver furniture such as the wall sconces of 1699 -- probably bought in the late eighteenth century from the royal goldsmiths Rundell, Bridge, and Rundell by Lord Brownlow for Belton House, Lincolnshire -- and items of pure display, including a pair of silver-gilt mounted carved ivory vases whose ownership before their appearance in the collection of William Beckford has not been traced, part of a set of six finely engraved covered cups and saucers of 1700, and an unusual group of items incorporating panels carved in Chinese taste made over a period of some fifteen years at the outset of the eighteenth century. 
Willaume's acceptance into the English establishment was confirmed on 11 October 1698 with his promotion to the livery of the Goldsmiths' Company, followed by that to the company's court of assistants in 1725, and the offices of touch warden in 1728 and third warden in 1735. This last accolade he declined on the grounds of age and infirmity. The date of his death is unknown but he was buried at St Nicholas's Church, Tingrith, Bedfordshire, on 27 April 1741. In his will, proved on 22 January 1742, he left $105 to be divided between his daughter, son-in-law, and the poor of St Martin-in-the-Fields, with all the unquantified goods and chattels and remainder of the estate passing to his son. While he is known to have received an inheritance from France, there is no doubt that in England he had prospered exceedingly; on the occasion of his daughter's marriage in 1717 he had made a settlement of $4000. 
The younger 
In 1730, as a man of significant wealth, he purchased Tingrith, Bedfordshire, a 750 acre manor and mansion house, from Sir Pynsent Chernocke, election agent to another of his clients, the duke of Bedford. By now a widower, in 1733 Willaume married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1708), daughter of Charles Dymoke of Ampthill, Bedfordshire, attorney. They had six children, the first-born, David, dying in infancy. Willaume's involvement in the affairs of the county grew with his appointment as high sheriff of Bedfordshire in 1737-8. His direct connection with the business lessened, and at the time of his last hallmark, entered in 1739 on his behalf by Edward Jordens, he described himself as a 'gent of Tingrith'. He took seven apprentices during his career of whom two, William Cripps and Thomas Pitts, became successful goldsmiths. Pitts, the Willaumes' last apprentice, gained his freedom in 1744 while the running of the business itself passed into the hands of Cripps in midsummer 1746. Both Willaume and his second wife were buried at Tingrith, she on 20 June 1746 and he on 26 January 1761. His will was proved on 21 February following. He was survived by four of his six children, Mary ('bap'. 1735), Edward ('bap'. 1736), Charles Dymoke ('bap'. 1739), and John Williams ('bap'. 1741). Tingrith remained in the family's possession, augmented by additional purchases of land by Willaume's eldest son, Edward, in 1767, until sold by his youngest son, John Williams Willaume, in 1810. 
The 1720s, the years when both David Willaumes worked together, saw them produce the remarkable silver-gilt toilet service (Ulster Museum) given by Robert Fitzgerald, nineteenth earl of Kildare, to his wife to celebrate the birth of a son. Although not as dynamic as his father, with fewer major commissions, the younger Willaume none the less enjoyed wide-ranging patronage, and noted extant items were made for the Tollemache family, particularly Lionel, fourth earl of Dysart, and also George Booth, second earl of Warrington, much of whose remarkable plate is still held at Dunham Massey, Cheshire. 


